

A distinctive group
Deuteronomy 7:6–11
Galatians 3:23–4:7
Whitestone
27th June 1993
Morning Prayer at 11am
A few weeks ago, I read a magazine article about what happened behind the scenes on one of television's popular programmes, ‘Jim'll fix it’.
A woman had an old camera film, probably forty years old, and she wanted to know what was on it.
So Jimmy Saville, with the help of his team on the programme, arranged for it to be developed by experts.
The article described some of the technical problems for Kodak as their staff produced prints for the TV show.
There is a huge audience for television programmes like that; people know that something needs to be done, either for themselves or for someone else.
They are powerless to do it themselves, and the media have the ability to do what an individual cannot do.
So you'll find a range of programmes which start with a problem (of one kind or another) and end with a solution which the audience finds — hopefully — more satisfactory.
And the bible is filled with stories like that.
St Paul is particularly fond of describing the contrast between the man or woman without God, and the state of a person who has become a Christian and has now found God.
Sometimes the contrast is not so clearly expressed for us in the twentieth century as it would have been in the first century, so we have to rely on commentaries to point out the way that the apostle was thinking.
Our reading from Galatians has an element of each in it.
There is a direct contrast:
Before faith came, we were confined under the law, kept under restraint until faith should be revealed.
…But now that faith has come, we are no longer under a custodian.
3:23, 25 
And there is an indirect contrast, whose significance would have been clear to the early Christian readers, but which loses a little of its impact two thousand years later:
There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither slave nor free, there is neither male nor female; for you are all one in Christ Jesus.
3:28 
St Paul, as a devout Jewish man, would have said his prayers every morning.
The form of those prayers was laid down in the teaching of the rabbis, and we can glimpse it in the story of the Pharisee and the Publican.
The Pharisee, Jesus said, thanked God that he was not like the Publican or any other lesser mortal.
St Paul's daily routine, as a law-abiding Jew, would have included a prayer to say thank you that God had not made him a Gentile, a slave or a woman — in that order!
So that second verse is one which takes up the traditional Jewish prejudices and turns them upside down, one by one.
And the new life, the Christian life, is described concisely and clearly as being different from the old way.
The old way of life is compared by Paul to one of slavery and imprisonment.
Two words are used; confinement and restraint.
Both give us the sense of oppression and lack of freedom; if you are confined to a region, you can only move around in that region.
If you are restrained from doing something, then there is often some force that prevents you.
Neither seems very attractive.
But that is the way that many people are living, says Paul, and that is the way that we were before we decided to follow Christ.
We lacked freedom to do what is right, because we were restrained and confined by the law, the law of Moses.
Not only did the law restrain us, it condemned us.
God's law in the Old Testament was a pointer to our sinfulness, and to our need for liberation.
Without Christ, Paul says, people are like fish in a net, confined and restrained, unable to live as they should.
But…‘now that faith has come, we are no longer under’ such a constraint.
And so he turns the Galatians to think about Jesus Christ.
As he does that, he is able to point out the way that Jesus is their liberator, from the limitations of being in such a net, to the freedom of a fish with a whole ocean to enjoy.
That's when he brings in that subtle verse about the oneness of the Christian church.
It's a place where there should be no human prejudices; no Jewish prejudices; no pagan prejudices.
There are three areas where Paul identifies that the church should be united; race, rank and sex.
The Jews divided the world into themselves and the Gentiles; the latter were the bad lot.
The Greeks divided the people of the world into themselves and the barbarians.
In the British Empire, people were divided into the British and the natives.
One group was considered superior to the other.
It's easy to see the same thing happening today; when the United States troops went to Somalia, earlier this year, their officers had hardly anything to do with the local experts, preferring to stick with their prejudices about the lack of intelligence of those whose skins were not the same colour as their own.
But, says St Paul, that is not the way it should be in the church.
The same is true about status.
In Paul's day, the most obvious form of status was whether you were a slave or a slave-owner.
There weren't the business organisations that we have today, which place those who work in a particular place in the structure, as employee or employer.
There weren't so many of the prejudices people have about education, or social status, or wealth.
Of course you and I are not snobs, are we?
Christ's church is to be a place free of feelings of social status.
It's been suggested that the church should be a place where people's titles are not used — just Christian names.
And then there's the question of sexual prejudices.
There is neither male nor female.
Writing that meant that Paul had changed a tremendous amount since he became a Christian.
Women had been at the lowest end of Paul's spectrum of the human race.
Now, he was a member of a church where Christ had liberated everyone, to be equal in His sight.
And if you look at Paul's letters, he refers to many of his sisters in Christ with glowing words
a:
The church is to be free of prejudices; everyone is accepted as they are, as individuals who are following Jesus as their Lord.
b:
The church is to be distinctive from the rest of the world; people around us are familiar with a way of life where rank and wealth matter, and people want to achieve what they think matters — only to find that it doesn't satisfy them; God's people are to have a way of life which is based on equality in God's sight, and not be measured in terms of social standing.
c:
God's people are to be practical in their love, because we realise that we were once restrained and confined, unable to live as God intended us to live.
With His love in our hearts, we can help others to find their freedom in Jesus, so that There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither slave nor free, there is neither male nor female; for you are all one in Christ Jesus.
3:28 
May God help us to be thoroughly like that, this week and for ever;
Amen
‘I did my work…’
Jeremiah 20:1–11a
Acts 20:17–38
Whipton
Evening Prayer at 6pm
29th August 1993
There are many times when the Bible gives us a special insight into the hearts and minds of some of the people whose lives are described in the Old and New Testaments.
Sometimes, these pictures can be quite discouraging and it seems that there's no way that we be anything like these men and women.
But the writers of the books of the Bible didn't want us to be put off and as we look closer, it's easy to see the human touches that the Bible includes all along the way.
We have had two readings which allow us to look at Jeremiah and Paul in particular detail.
Jeremiah was God's messenger to the people of Israel at a time of great national distress.
He was told to take God's word to people who were supposed to be following God.
But they wouldn't listen.
They spurned the message.
Jeremiah comes across as a very sensitive man, who didn't like taking a message which was being ignored.
His words condemned sin and challenged men to turn back to God.
For Jeremiah, the result of obeying God was that the prophet came into conflict with many people and our passage this evening told how he was beaten and chained overnight.
Then Jeremiah launched into a prayer of complaint about what was happening to him.
Humanly speaking, Jeremiah was feeling low.
But the passage ended with a voice of faith saying:
But you, Lord, are on my side, strong and mighty.
(Jeremiah 20:11)
And then Paul; Paul had been constantly in trouble, ever since his conversion on the Damascus road.
People had tried to kill him, to imprison him, to obstruct his preaching and teaching.
We heard his remarkable speech in the seaport of Miletus, to the church leaders of Ephesus, as he started to travel from Greece to Jerusalem.
It is a remarkable picture of a man who had experienced all sorts of difficulties and dangers…but was determined to go on.
As he spoke, he knew that the future would hold all sorts of further risks.
His sermon dealt with his past, present and future, and was an encouragement to the leaders of the church in Ephesus.
In the course of that sermon he says:
With all humility and many tears I did my work as the Lord's servant…
.(Acts 20:19)
Jeremiah would have echoed those words.
So would many of the people who we meet when we read the Bible.
And such a sentence needn't be confined to the characters of the Bible; words like those ought to be part of the way that you and I speak about our lives.
It's a challenging thought for us, but would you be prepared to say about your life that:
With all humility and many tears I did my work as the Lord's servant…
.(Acts 20:19)
There are four key ideas in that sentence, and I want to underline them for a few more minutes.
We've already looked at one of them, briefly.
Paul's experience had been ‘of many tears’.
Then he speaks of doing ‘his work’.
It's being done with ‘all humility’, and the work is the work of ‘the Lord's servant’.
God has called you and me to be members of His church.
Jesus described our life as His followers as being like a journey, and we are on the narrow path, while the rest of the world is on a broad path.
The narrow path is a hard one, and we all experience the ridicule of other people who are on the other path.
It is hard.
Sometimes we cry, either because we are physically suffering like Jeremiah and Paul, or because we are sad to see our family and friends who don't follow Jesus.
We shouldn't be surprised, and we shouldn't think that there is anything wrong with us for having tears in our lives.
Both Jeremiah and Paul had such feelings; they were sensitive men.
In the nineteen-sixties, there was a pop song ‘Big men don't cry’.
It's not true.
Big men do cry.
Jesus wept over Jerusalem; Paul cried; Jeremiah cried, he wrote,
bitterly, and my tears will flow because the Lord's people have been taken away as captives.
(Jeremiah 13:17)
So, it is ‘with tears’ that Paul has done his work.
With tears, Jeremiah had done his work.
For both of them, their work was to be a spokesman for God, taking His message to people who didn't really acknowledge Him in their lives.
Jeremiah's audience had rebelled against God and was following false gods or no gods at all.
The people that Paul spoke to in his ministry were equally misled.
They followed the pagan gods of Greece and Rome.
They enjoyed pleasure.
This Sunday, in Exeter, less than one person in ten has come to church.
The others feel that they can do without God in their lives; they feel that He is irrelevant; they want to follow false gods, like a good life, lots of material benefits, short-term happiness, and all the things which the Bible describes as being part of the ‘broad way’.
The trouble is, that however pleasant that broad way seems to be, the Bible is clear that it leads away from God.
And what's the point of a journey that seems very pleasant if it gets you to the wrong place!
You and I have got a job, as Christians, to help to point people to the right way, narrow and difficult though it may seem to be.
That's the work of every one of us here, just as it was the work of Paul and Jeremiah centuries ago.
Paul said that he did his work, with tears and with humility; Jeremiah was humble too; it's part and parcel of being a servant of the Lord.
But it doesn't mean what many people today will think of when they hear the word ‘Humble’.
Being humble doesn't mean being a wimp, being soft and out of touch, nor does it involve being a doormat that people abuse and walk over.
Humility is a strong thing.
It means that God is given the honour and glory, not us.
It means looking to Jesus, and not to anyone else for direction and support.
It means accepting that we are sons and servants of the Creator Who made the world.
It means living with the perspective that we are in touch with the Lord Whose Son died so that we might enjoy the sort of life that He planned for us at the beginning of Genesis, and living with that perspective and privilege.
Paul wrote that he was doing his work as the Lord's servant.
It's not a description that has many parallels today.
Some of you may remember households where there were servants.
I–live in a house which was planned for there to be one, and we keep a reminder of that — a bell-board in the kitchen, used to summon the maid from there to other rooms in the house.
That is a demonstration of several aspects of being a servant; your time is not your own, someone else has a call on you, you have to obey the master, you have jobs to do for him or her.
But you are under the protection of the master, who provides food and shelter, protection and care for you.
I think that these are some of the facets of servanthood that St–Paul wanted his hearers in Miletus to associate with the expression.
He wanted them to be servants as well.
Again, Jeremiah was doing the Lord's work as a servant; in the passage we heard a few moments ago, he expressed his dismay at the manner in which he was being treated by the people.
His job as a servant was to deliver an uncomfortable message.
The people didn't want to hear the message, and took out their frustration on Jeremiah.
What would you have done?
One solution would be to shut up and keep a low profile; Jeremiah tried to do that, but…discovered that he couldn't stop speaking.
The servant has to do what he's told.
And then, at the end of the passage, comes the recognition that being God's servant has untold privileges…:
‘But you, Lord are on my side, strong and mighty’
Five hundred years ago, during the Reformation, one of the leaders expressed his joy in being on God's side with the phrase:
‘One man, with God, is in the majority’
So where does that leave us?
Can Paul's words be applied to you and I?
I am sure that they can.
A Christian is someone, who in a special sense, belongs to Christ.
That describes you and I. And belonging means being both follower and servant.
So, as another week starts, we are challenged to live this week as the Lord's servants, working with humility because He deserves all the praise — not us, and not minding the tears which may come our way.
We have a resource which Jeremiah didn't have, but St–Paul did — the companionship of the Holy Spirit, to be the strength when our work leads to tears, and to be the encourager whatever we do and wherever we do it, so long as it is for Him.
So, let us pray for each other and for ourselves, that each of us may be able to say:
With all humility and many tears I did my work as the Lord's servant…
.(Acts 20:19)
Amen
JEREMIAH 2
JOHN 4 v 6–15
St Leonard's, Exeter
Communion 26/5/91
After a short break, we are returning to our studies in the Old Testament.
Three weeks ago, we looked at God's call to Jeremiah; it taught us about God, and about the prophet who had been called to be God's spokesman to His people Israel.
Tonight, we're going to look at the problems of the people.
Chapter 2 of Jeremiah starts to answer the question: why did the people of Israel need a message?
Please could you turn in your Bibles to Jeremiah chapter 2 — about page 732 in the Old Testaments.
The country was in a mess; that's a nice way of putting some really bad news.
What is really meant is that the individuals, the men, women and children, the people, they were in a mess.
And God wanted Jeremiah to tell them so.
He had promised to give His spokesman the words to speak, and the chapter in front of us is a part of God's message to Israel through Jeremiah.
Our God is a communicator; we see that in a supreme way in His gift of Jesus — but in this passage it is clear that God wanted to make sure that everyone in the land could understand the seriousness of the problem.
So he gives Jeremiah the same devastating message over and over again, with different emphases and with different targets.
But at its heart, the message is a simple one; the people of Israel have turned their backs on God; they are guilty of the sin of apostasy.
Can you imagine opening a daily newspaper, and finding that on every page, there was the same message from God; or can you imagine watching breakfast TV — or listening to the Today programme — and finding that every feature was a message from God, with different emphases, but always the same message.
That's what our chapter is all about.
First, the opening verses are concerned with the theologians — verses 1 to 3;
See how the emphasis is on a sacred possession.
The next message would spill over into the financial pages, though there is still a bit of theology — verses 4 to 8.
Here there is an emphasis on material blessings, which God had provided.
He had led the nation out of the desert, from Egypt, through the dangers of the arid regions, to a fertile country.
The people for whom the message was phrased in this way might have recognised the irony — in a fertile country, they wanted to get a little bit more, so they started worshipping a fertility god, Baal!
We'll skip over the next verses for a few moments; let's turn to another set of pages of the newspaper to see the message from the foreign correspondents about alliances — verses 14 to 19.
In their rejection of God, the people of Israel had tried to find help all over the place — in Egypt, in Assyria, by making themselves subject to foreign military strength.
It had been fruitless.
Most newspapers have a few pages of features, and that's another kind of readership.
Let's look at what Jeremiah had to say to people who were trendy thinkers, concerned about the world about them (with a little sex thrown in to make sure that the readers were suitably titillated!)
Verses 20 to 25
There's something in those verses for all sorts of people.
Those who are interested in gardening; a bit about detergent!
But the message is still the same — Israel has sinned against God, and the behaviour of the people is a scandal.
Not everyone would feel that these were messages for them; many people always turn to the cartoon page first of all, and some don't read much more than that; God gives Jeremiah several cartoons in the course of this passage; did you notice in verse 25 the dig about wearing your feet out — because the people had already worn their shoes out!
But in Jeremiah 2, there is a fantastic cartoon — verses 9 to 13.
God's people have committed a sin which He finds almost beyond belief.
They have been offered a choice.
In one hand, they have been offered fr
St Leonard's Church
29th December 1991
6.30pm (Holy Communion)
1 Cor 8: 1–6
John 1: 14–18
Two weeks ago, the rector was talking about the unity of the body of Christ in the church; as he spoke, he drew attention to a review of a new book by the Regius professor of theology at Oxford.
The review commented, with sadness, that the author had changed his view of Jesus.
Once, Professor Ward had publicly admitted that he believed in the uniqueness of Jesus.
Ten years later, his new book shows that he no longer holds such a belief.
The review ends with a note of concern, as John Richards, our archdeacon, warns that some of the theology in the book could be very damaging to God's church.
It would, as the rector's sermon reminded us, disrupt the unity of the body of Christ.
Why am I telling you this?
Because, about a week before John drew our attention to that matter of concern, I had prayerfully chosen a theme for tonight, based on the set gospel — the passage that has just been read to us from the first chapter of John.
The theme follows from a word which appears twice in it — the word ‘only’.
There's something very special about the opening chapter of John's Gospel.
John doesn't tell us any of the stories that Matthew and Luke recount about the birth of Jesus in Bethlehem.
Instead John looks back to the creation of the world…and then skips over the millenia to the ministry of John the Baptist and to Jesus, as an adult.
He doesn't get around to mentioning Jesus' name until verse 17, which was in our reading.
In it, John tells us something about Jesus that all Christians need to remember.
Twice, John says that Jesus is the only Son of God.
We saw his glory, the glory which he received as the Father's only Son.
Jn 1:14
The only Son, who is the same as God and is at the Father's side….
Jn 1:18
In other words, Jesus is unique.
There is no-one else like Him.
The baby Who was born in Bethlehem is quite unlike any other baby at any time and in any place.
The man who grew up in Nazareth, went to be baptized in the river Jordan, and brought grace and truth to the world — He is unique.
And I can hear you thinking…
‘Of course we knew that.
Of course God's only Son is unique.
Of course there is no-one to be compared to Jesus.
We wouldn't follow anyone else.’
Sadly, there are distinguished theologians who try and persuade their readers otherwise.
So this evening, as we come to the end of one year and prepare for the next, can we spend a few minutes doing a spiritual work-out and look at the consequences of what John wrote about the uniqueness of Jesus.
Can you keep one bookmark in the page for the gospel and turn to our epistle in 1 Corinthians 8.
The epistles to the church in Corinth were written to Christians in a situation rather like the one we live in.
The people around them didn't worship the one true God.
They had their pagan deities, and worshipped them in ways that could be quite riotous.
Even amongst the Greeks, Corinth was noted for its immorality — there was a significant part of the population whose god was debauchery.
It was a place where fortunes were made by traders whose god was their bank balance.
It was a place where there were huge contrasts between the ‘haves’ and the ‘have nots’— between those who worshipped at the altar of a comfortable middle-class lifestyle and those who worshipped at the altar of envy and jealousy of those around them — and I am sure that you can find echoes of those things in Exeter at this end of 1991.
The Christians in Corinth were confused; should they withdraw from such a society; one party in the church seems to have been saying that they must, to avoid being defiled by all the ‘isms’(paganism, hedonism, animism, polytheism,…) around them; the other party was saying that contact with the non-Christian society around them was all right.
What do we do?
Are we going to withdraw from the risk of being contaminated by the modern alternatives to following Jesus?
Or are we going to go along with the priorities that our non-Christian friends have?
I know that many Christians face such a choice; and different people draw the line at different points…which is a testimony to the diversity of the family of God.
Paul spends most of the rest of his letter dealing with the problem in Corinth; he doesn't come down on the side of being totally separate or of being totally indistinguishable in lifestyle — but you'll have to read that for yourself.
But the first thing that he says is really at the heart of his answer to the differing points of view about false ‘gods’.
…though there are many of these ‘gods’ and ‘lords’, yet there is for us only one God,…and there is only one Lord.
1 Cor 8:6
Paul's argument is that if you can get the word ‘only’ into your Christian thinking, then it will really help to sort out the dilemmas that were being thrown up by the different groups within the church.
We'll look at three aspects of the uniqueness of Jesus.
First, He is the only Son of God.
He is unique in His person — we cannot treat Him as if He was an ordinary human being.
So those who try to dismiss Jesus as being a good teacher, a religious leader, a prophet and no more — all of them are missing the truth.
He is unique in His deity.
Jesus has a uniquely intimate relationship with God, so that we can say Jesus is God.
St John explained it in a few words in verse 18:
The only Son, who is the same as God and is at the Father's side, he has made Him known.
If you want to know what God is like, look at Jesus.
Look at Him, being born in obscurity, in ordinary surroundings in Bethlehem; growing and working in Nazareth; look at Him, hot, thirsty and tired, travelling the dusty roads of Palestine; look at Him healing the sick, raising the dead, forgiving the sinner; and as you look, you will see God.
Look at Jesus, nailed to a cross, dying a cruel death with two criminals beside Him; look at Jesus, who was raised to life, and returned to sit beside His Father in heaven.
As you look, you will see God; and you will not find God by looking at anyone or anything else; Jesus is unique in the person that He is.
St Paul would have walked the streets of Exeter; he would have come into our schools and offices and shops; he would have visited the cinemas and sports clubs and night spots; he would have looked at the news programmes and the daily press and would have used what he saw and heard as fuel for prayer.
He would have seen, as we see, people whose ‘gods and lords’ are materialism; he would notice the efforts of men and women to solve problems in their own strength; and he would have said:
Even if there are so-called ‘gods’(like stable government, a large credit balance in the building society, a new video recorder or a newly fitted kitchen) whether in heaven or on earth, and even though there are many of these ‘gods’ and ‘lords’yet there is for us only one God 1 Cor 8:5, 6a
Second, Jesus has unique authority.
We tend to overlook the authority of Jesus at Christmas; a baby in a cradle is not normally associated with authority or responsibility.
But the Bible teaches that Jesus had unique authority.
It appears in the opening verses of John's gospel:
From the very beginning the Word was with God.
Through Him, God made all things; not one thing in all creation was made without Him.
John 1:2, 3
Everyone here tonight owes his or her existence to the power and authority of Jesus.
In Paul's words in verse 6 of 1 Corinthians 8 —
Jesus Christ, through whom all things were created,
He is active with His Father in creating and sustaining the whole of life.
You just have to look through the gospels to see many examples of the authority of Jesus.
Only He calmed a raging sea.
Only He had authority over disease and death.
Only He had the authority to forgive sins…
His teaching was so authoritative that the people followed him because they could see it was different from their normal diet of religious half-truths.
It is one of the wonders of the Christmas story that Jesus — the authoritative Word of God — stooped to be born in the humblest of settings; it is one of the wonders of the Christian faith that after His resurrection, Jesus should remind His disciples that He retained all authority in heaven and earth.
That has not changed at all in twenty centuries.
Jesus is still King of Kings, Lord of Lords, unique in the person that He is, unique in the authority that He possesses.
And He is unique in the life that he brings.
Jesus Christ, through whom we live.
1 Cor 8:6
Jesus has brought a unique new way of life into the world; St John described it in those first verses of his gospel:
Some, however, did receive Him and believed in Him; so he gave them the right to become God's children.
John 1:12
We will be thinking of that new life later in this communion service; we pray ‘that we may evermore dwell in him and he in us.’
The bread and the wine are consecrated with the reminder that ‘through Jesus, God has freed us from the slavery of sin’ and given us a life that is free of such bondage.
We will take reminders of His promise of life eternal for those who follow Him.
You can go on and on with examples from the New Testament which are reminders of the uniqueness of the life that Jesus brings to those who believe in Him.
He told His disciples that He was the vine and they were the branches, so that His life flowed in their lives, His life flows in our lives.
Tonight, tomorrow, later this week, you and I will be back in a world which tries to ignore the uniqueness of Christ; a world where men and women are serving other ‘gods’ and other ‘lords’.
Can we resolve to take the words of St Paul as both our belief and our commitment.
We believe in Jesus the only Son of God; we are committed to Him, unique in Who He is, unique in the authority that He exercises, unique in the life that He brings.
there is only one Lord, Jesus Christ, through whom all things were created and through whom we live
Amen
Galatians 3v26–29
St Leonard's
Communion (6.30pm)
Matthew 9v 9–13
25th August 1991
Matthew — the disciple
This evening, for our fourth sermon in the series on disciples, we'll be looking at Matthew.
So it will help to keep your Bible open at the passage which has just been read to us, from the ninth chapter of the gospel according to Matthew.
I was browsing in one of the bookshops recently, and discovered several books which were ‘books of lists’.
I don't know if you have seen the sort of thing; you'll find a list of all the counties of the United Kingdom, all the archbishops of Canterbury, the ten most expensive diamonds in the world, and similar trivial pieces of information.
In some cases, you might even find a list of the apostles — and there would be Matthew.
But if you made a list of the things that are known about Matthew, it would be very short: first, he was one of the twelve apostles; second, he had been a tax-collector; third, when he was converted, he gave a party for all his old friends; fourth, there is a gospel which has his name on it.
The Bible does not tell us more than that.
So we are going to have to do some detective work to find out about Matthew.
When I trained as a reader, I had to write essays on a range of Biblical subjects, and then discuss them with a tutor.
My tutor was a delightful stern lady, and I remember when I had written about John's gospel, the epistles of John, and the book of Revelation, she looked at me over the top of her spectacles and announced ‘Young man, you have assumed that because these books have all been attributed to a man named John, that they are all by the same person, who was also an apostle.
Most theologians do not think that.’
My reaction to her comment was, to some extent, ‘So what?’, though I never dared to say so to her!
Looking at Matthew is a little like that.
Many theologians find it hard to believe that the gospel which is called Matthew's gospel was written by the apostle.
So, if you are a theologian, I shall be talking about two disciples tonight, and you are getting double value in the sermon.
For everyone else, it really doesn't matter, because the detective work is going to lead to applications for us today, as disciples who follow in the footsteps of Matthew the apostle and whoever it was who put together the first gospel of the New testament.
The first essential for a disciple is that he (or she) has met with the Lord and has chosen to follow Him.
That happens in the opening verse of our lesson; we're told that Jesus was in his own city, almost certainly Capernaum, and he saw Matthew sitting in the tax office.
Jesus' fame had spread all over the region; Matthew, as a man in the centre of the financial world of that place must have heard of Jesus already.
They had probably met each other.
Matthew had probably already listened to some of Christ's teaching.
We don't know what he had thought about it before this moment when Jesus spoke directly ‘Follow me’.
The tax-collector faced a crisis in his life; what should he do?
And he decided to follow Jesus.
Have you ever noticed that when Christians speak about how they became followers of Jesus, nearly everyone will concentrate on the moment when they faced that crisis, and made their decision?
Many people look back on a moment of conversion — though it is not essential to be able to point to such a moment — with awe and wonder.
They made a commitment and accepted Jesus' love for themselves.
We don't hear about the experiences and the thoughts that preceded the step of faith.
Matthew's commitment to Jesus is like that; the days, the weeks, the months which had gone before are not relevant to the story.
So there is nothing to tell us about how and when Matthew first heard about Jesus, nor about the influence of other disciples on him.
He faced Jesus, and with joy he followed his Lord.
Disciples are  enthusi 
Deuteronomy 8v1–6
Whitestone: 26th January 1992
Philippians 4v10–20
Morning prayer at 11am
It's funny the way that some words create pictures in people's minds.
Mention the word ‘contented’ to many people, and they will think of a lazy diner, relaxing after a satisfying meal and announcing that they feel ‘contented’; others will recall the advertisements for evaporated milk, which ‘came from contented cows’.
So, when I tell you that Paul was a contented Christian, I hope that you don't think that I mean he was sitting quietly, comfortably, happy with the world and his life.
When St Paul told the Christians in Philippi that he had learnt to be content, he didn't mean that he was smug; it didn't mean that he had been well fed and could put his feet up.
The letter to the Philippians wasn't being written by a warm fireside, nor was Paul basking in the Mediterranean sunshine when he dictated it.
He was in prison.
And he was chained up — possibly to a Roman soldier.
Not the most obvious starting point for being content.
But that is what he wrote in verse 11:
for I have learned, in whatever state I am, to be content.
As we read those verses, two thousand years on, can we echo Paul's words?
Have we really learnt to be content, in any, and every situation?
Or are there times when we grit our teeth and keep an Englishman's stiff upper lip?
The words of the prisoner, deprived of freedom and many material goods, should be a challenge to all of us in the church today.
People outside the church are often not content; you just have to look at the pressures from the mass media.
‘Spend more!’
‘Buy a better one of these!’
‘Try this new product!’
‘Everyone has done this — why don't you!’
Those are the voices of people who are not content, expressed in material ways.
There are more subtle voices.
The other day, a survey showed that more than half the adults in the country felt that they wouldn't be content to live with a terminal illness which made them dependent on others.
There's a pressure to change public attitudes towards health and the care of the sick.
Then there are the political slogans that will come our way over the next few months.
They will be geared to making us express how we lack contentment with one system of government or another.
How can we learn what Paul knew,…to be content?
The answer comes in part of our reading this morning.
Paul is really grateful to the Christians in Philippi for their love which has been shown in practical ways.
The members of the church there — the first church in Europe — had followed the fundamental Christian responsibility of caring for others.
When God blessed them, then they shared their blessing with others; Paul had been a recipient of that sharing.
His circumstances had been extremely variable; nonetheless, he had received from the generosity of the Philippians.
He hadn't been ashamed about it.
It's sometimes very hard to accept what other people share with you; our human pride stands in our way; but there can be great blessing in it.
Paul goes out of his way to say a heartfelt ‘Thank you’ to the Christian church in Philippi for the way that they had continued to care for him.
The second ingredient in Paul's contentment was the greater one.
He writes in verse 19 of the assurance that he has in God's power and responsibility.
Not only was it a cornerstone of Paul's faith, he intended it to be a promise and a challenge to those who read his letter, whether in the Roman empire of his day, or Devon in 1992.
It is his statement of a reason to be content.
My God will supply every need of yours according to his riches in glory in Christ Jesus
Paul, as always, used his words with great care.
He wrote that God would supply the Christian with every need ; not with every want; not with every luxury; just every need.
In just the same way, the Lord's prayer trusts that God will provide our daily bread; He isn't asked to provide more than the basics.
The fact that He does, very often, is a bonus.
Paul knew, through the hardships of his life, and the joys, that His Lord was faithful in providing the day-to-day needs of life.
Food, clothing, shelter, fellowship; all came from a generous God.
He had learned to be content.
And Paul wrote that God would provide according to His riches.
Not ‘out of his riches’.
If your father is a millionaire and gives you a five pound note for your birthday, then you might feel a little hard done by; such a gift would be given out of his riches; it wouldn't be according to his riches.
He wouldn't notice that it had gone.
Giving according to ones riches means that the more you have, the more you give.
And Paul had found his contentment in a God — his heavenly Father — who gave according to His riches.
And I think that Paul has a smile on his face as he writes that verse.
Can't you imagine it; ‘I wonder how quickly the church at Philippi, the church at Whitestone, will realise that God's resources are limitless so that when God gives according to His riches, there are no limits to what can happen!’
Just in case the lesson doesn't hit us immediately, Paul adds the closing verse of our reading which draws our attention to the greatness of God as shown in His glory:
To our God and Father be glory for ever and ever!
We've missed out one short, but crucial, verse.
Verse 13 must be one of the best known verses in the whole letter.
Paul wrote that:
I can do all things in him who strengthens me.
In J.B. Phillips translation, the verse starts ‘I am ready for anything’ which conveys the sense a little better.
St Paul wasn't preparing to do anything when he wrote the letter; he was in prison, with limited scope for any kind of activity.
But he could be ready for anything; for the churches which had abandoned him; for the churches like the Philippian one which had continued to care; for hunger; for plenty; for the times when he had no obvious human support, and for the times when his fellow believers came and gave him encouragement.
There were no circumstances which could ever prove too much for him, not because of his strength, but because of God at work in him.
It's a vigorous faith; it's the faith that enables a Christian (and not just an apostle like Paul — any and every Christian can echo those words) to face the challenges and demands of each day, at home, at work.
But just as the strength to be content wasn't a grim determination of self-discipline in the face of varying circumstances, Paul's strength to be ready for anything came from the work of God in his life.
It all follows from that word ‘in’.
‘I can do all things in him who strengthens me.’
God hasn't given Paul an injection of energy and told him to face all kinds of circumstances.
God hasn't given Paul a bag of pills to take when things get hard.
No!
Paul's relationship with God is a close one, an intimate one.
Paul writes that he is ‘in’ God — and as we look at the way that he wrote other letters, it is clear that he made a great effort to maintain that special relationship.
He prayed, he studied God's word, he spent time with other Christians.
His vigorous faith was an active faith.
In a way, it is an echo of the closing verse of our lesson from Deuteronomy 8; God told the people of Israel:
So you shall keep the commandments of the Lord your God, by walking in His ways and by fearing Him.
Paul was a contented Christian.
Why?
Because he had learnt to face all kinds of circumstances with the strength that came from being in close fellowship with God.
And then he could be truly ready for anything.
As we prepare for a new week's challenges, may we too be contented, for the same reason as Paul, because our relationship with God is one of close fellowship ‘in’ Him.
Amen
Isaiah 61v1–11
Romans 15v14–33
pages 202–203
St Leonard's, Exeter
27th September 1992
Morning prayer at 10.30am
Over the past few months, we have been following a series of sermons on the last few chapters of Paul's letter to the church in Rome.
Today we have the last of the series, and we have come to a very sudden change in the style of Paul's writing.
You don't need a theological background to see there is a difference between the way that Paul writes in the first part of chapter 15 and in the second.
In our passage, almost every verse reads ‘I’ or ‘Me’; in the earlier chapters of the book, Paul has hardly used these words.
Looking at the sorts of things that Paul writes about as well, you'll see that there is a change in material; up to now, he has been writing about Christian doctrine.
Much of the letter has been a succession of passages of theology, rooted in the practice of Christian daily living.
Now Paul writes more personally; hence the ‘I’ and the ‘me’.
Our passage falls into two parts, one concerned with why Paul has written, and the second about his future plans.
So today's lesson is about Paul, the servant of Christ, and not about his teaching.
It's one of those lovely pieces in the letters, where we can look behind the writing to the writer.
It's like reading a biography of a favourite author to learn what makes them tick.
What makes Paul tick?
Before we answer that, we need to remember one essential fact about Paul.
He was a Christian, like you and me.
It is very easy to put the apostles on a sort of Olympic rostrum, and think that God will hang a gold medal round Paul's neck, while we get some kind of lesser award.
Maybe we think that when we get to heaven, Paul and the other pioneers of the New Testament will have positions of greater honour than the members of St Leonard's in 1992.
Such ideas are a long way from the truth; Paul was a Christian, just like us.
He was a sinner, redeemed by the grace of God, just like us.
He was a follower of Jesus Christ; just like us.
So when we look at Paul as he writes about himself, we are looking at a Christian man whose life and words have parallels for each one of us.
Glance back, if you will, to the previous chapter of Romans, and to verse 17 (chapter 14).
Paul wrote there that:
God's Kingdom is not a matter of eating and drinking, but of the righteousness, peace and joy which the Holy Spirit gives.
In the verse are three positive aspects of the Kingdom of God, and of every citizen of that Kingdom: righteousness, peace, and joy.
We looked briefly at that verse two weeks ago: righteousness, looking to God; peace, looking to one another; joy, looking to oneself.
What made Paul tick?
In the verses in front of us, there is evidence of righteousness, joy and peace.
What should make us tick?
Answer: righteousness, joy and peace.
Righteousness, first of all.
Because he is a servant of God, Paul has written his letter to the Roman Christians.
Because he is a servant of God, he has served Christ as an apostle and missionary.
So he looks to his Lord and Master first of all.
He lists things that God has done through him; none of the credit belongs to Paul at all.
He has been an instrument in God's hands.
The way that this has happened is repeated in different ways in the first few verses of our reading:
…the privilege which God has given me of being a servant of Christ Jesus…
I serve like a priest…
I can be proud of my service for God…what Christ has done through me….
Paul has been called to be a servant of Jesus Christ; so have we.
His particular work was to be a pioneer missionary — a planter of churches where ‘Christ has not been heard of’.
Your particular work is different.
You know what that work is.
I know that my work is different.
But our calling as servants is the same as Paul's.
We are called to be righteous members of His kingdom, looking to our heavenly King, and being ready to proclaim the Good News by word and deed.
Our fundamental calling is the same as Paul's.
So is the power with which we have been equipped.
Verse 19 tells us that it is the power of the Spirit of God.
And the Holy Spirit has been promised to every follower of Christ, not just to apostles.
Paul, in these verses, allows himself the chance to look back with his readers, and see the results of twenty years of Christian service.
He can honestly claim to have been a righteous servant of God; in verse 16 he writes of his service being like that of a priest, who bridges the gap between God and man, and who presents a sacrifice to God as part of the priest's duties and privileges.
For Paul, that offering is made up of the lives of the many Gentiles who have turned to faith in God.
Isaiah's vision, which we heard in the first lesson, is of future deliverance.
In the passage, he refers to the same combination of righteousness and giving the honour to God:
They will do what is right, and God will be praised for what He has done.
(Isaiah 61v3)
Those are words which could be used to describe the righteousness of Paul; and they ought to be appropriate for us too.
Maybe God can use Paul's example of righteousness to challenge us?
After righteousness, and our looking towards God, comes peace, and our response to other people.
Somehow Paul manages to look at other people in three different directions in our reading.
His over-riding concern has been for those who are lost; he has been an evangelist, a travelling missionary, taking the gospel to places where no Christian had ever gone before.
He's gone all over the eastern Mediterranean, and now has plans to go to the western end, to Spain, which was a thriving colony of the Roman empire with a lively intellectual life which hadn't been touched by the Christian faith.
Secondly he is concerned for the church in Rome, a church that he has never visited, though he obviously knew a lot of the leaders there.
And thirdly, he has dedicated some of his time and energy to raising a collection for the poor Christians in Jerusalem.
The first leg of his travel plans will take him back to the elders of the church there, with some of the converts from Asia Minor and Greece, with a love gift for the relief of the hardship amongst the Christians.
So Paul is looking to the unconverted in Spain, the church in Rome at the heart of the secular empire, and the church in Jerusalem where there were social needs of poverty to be lovingly dealt with.
Why does peace come into Paul's concern for others?
In two ways.
First, through his tactfulness.
Second through his prayer.
Paul has written some very tough things in his letter to the church in Rome.
Like every church, like every Christian organisation, there were things being said and done in the Christian family in Rome that should not be said and done in a fellowship of Christ's people.
Paul has been extremely tactful in the way that he has corrected them.
He assures his readers that he knows how righteous they are:
I myself feel sure that you are full of goodness, that you have all knowledge and that you are able to teach one another.
But in this letter I have been quite bold about certain subjects….
Some of the earlier chapters of the letter to the Romans could have sparked division in the church; but Paul has written tactfully, seeking to make peace and preserve peace.
And then he finishes the chapter with a prayer:
May God, our source of peace, be with all of you.
It's telling, the way that God is described as our source of peace.
We very often describe Him as ‘God of peace’.
In this passage, Paul reminds his readers not only that that they should be at peace, but also where that peace will have its origin.
Peace should be ours too, within the church family, and the origin can only be God.
As Paul wrote to the church in Philippi, ‘God's peace passes all human understanding.’
We need such a reminder, just as the Roman believers did.
And it finds an echo in the chapter of Isaiah that formed our first lesson; the word ‘peace’ isn't actually used, but the picture of deliverance has a thread of divine peace running all the way through it.
Paul showed a sense peace in his outlined plans for the future.
He wanted to see the believers in Rome, but that was only a part.
As a pioneer, he wanted to go where there was no church.
In the last century, someone asked the missionary David Livingstone where he wanted to go.
The answer was ‘Anywhere, so long as it is forward!’
Paul knew that his plans were in God's hands, and that certainty comes across very clearly in the way that he sets out his desire to go forward for Jesus.
Some of you may continue the longstanding habit of Christians, of adding ‘D.V.’ to the ends of letters describing what you plan to do.
In verse 32, Paul slips in a sort of ‘D.V.’ expression, ‘if it is the Lord's will’.
He knew that it wasn't going to be easy.
He asked for prayer about the journey to Jerusalem, knowing the tensions that existed between the Christians who had been of the Jewish faith, and those who were converted Gentiles.
In Acts 21, we are told about the strong feelings of the rank-and-file members of the church in Jerusalem.
With hindsight, we know that the visit to Jerusalem ended with Paul in chains, going to Rome with a military escort, not as a free man.
The challenge for us is not so stark; I don't suppose that anyone here faces the risk of being falsely arrested and given an unjust trial.
But the future is never clear, and there are often things that we are afraid might happen to us.
Paul's words and Paul's example present us with a picture of a God who is the source of peace, and of a man who had learnt that God's peace was on tap at all times.
Righteousness, peace, and finally joy.
Joy seems to fill every part of Paul's life.
He faced danger; Paul was absolutely fearless.
He was always in trouble.
He was joyful, absurdly joyful.
And it wasn't a sort of ‘grin and bear it’ kind of happiness.
Paul didn't keep a stiff upper lip because that was the way that he thought that Christians should behave.
He was joyful, because that is the way God wanted him to be, and because that is the way that God wants us to be.
If you look back to verse 13 of chapter 15, you'll see Paul's prayer:
May God, the source of hope, fill you with all joy and peace by means of your faith in him.
Joy works inwardly, towards ourselves first, and then overflows in outwardly.
Paul's mood as he writes to the Romans is a very excited one.
He obviously wants to see the Christians in the capital city of the empire.
He wasn't writing ‘It will be nice to see you’ out of a sense of duty.
He genuinely wanted to be with them.
The prospect of seeing them made him full of joy.
He wasn't going to Jerusalem simply because the collection was burning a hole in his pocket.
He really wanted to take that visible demonstration of Christian unity from one group of believers to another.
He enjoyed being with his old friends in Jerusalem.
And he enjoyed the challenge that would follow from a pioneering church-planting trip to Spain.
Some people believe that when you are a Christian, then you have no more joy in your life.
They think that following Jesus is the end of anything which makes your heart bubble over with joyfulness.
There are those whose impression of our faith is of a series of rules which all begin ‘You must not…‘, and who think of a Christian with something to celebrate as a contradiction.
For us, Paul's example of joy is an effective counter to that sort of view.
But the sceptic can't see the way that Paul's example is an answer, because the things which made Paul joyful are alien to the non-Christian way of life.
Christian joy is different from that of the outsider; it starts from different standards.
It is summed up in the words of Paul about his planned arrival in Rome:
I know that I shall come with a full measure of the blessing of Christ.
(verse 29) and I will come to you full of joy,…, and enjoy a refreshing visit to you.
Isaiah's vision of the deliverance of oppressed people included two references to God's gift of joy.
The prophet saw that one day God would:
give to those who mourn in Zion, Joy and gladness instead of grief.
and the promise came that:
Your joy will last for ever.
So righteousness, peace and joy are the characteristics of Paul, a follower of Jesus.
Paul is a demonstration of these examples of Christian living.
But I know that there are some people here who find such an example hard.
The family of Jesus is not made up of people who are righteous in everything, peaceful whatever happens, joyful at every moment.
It would be absurd to think so.
And if you are conscious of how your life doesn't match the ideals in each of these areas, just as I am aware that mine falls short, then there is a message here for us as well.
Paul presents a practical demonstration along with his prayers.
We saw that he prayed in the verse at the end of last Sunday's passage; he prays in verse 33 as well.
Paul knew that the family of God will be strengthened and changed by prayer, and the letter to the Romans is filled with short, single-verse prayers, for such strength and changes.
Christians who are perfect in righteousness, in peace and in joy are in very short supply this side of eternity.
But our God wants His church to be a place where the Holy Spirit is able to increase those three, steadily and thoroughly, and so we can pray with Paul:
May God, the source of hope, fill us with all joy and peace (and we add righteousness) by means of our faith in him, so that our hope will continue to grow by the power of the Holy Spirit.
Amen
Ephesians 3v14–21
John 14v12–17
page 242
St Leonard's, Exeter
21st February 1993
Holy Communion at 10.30am
Please will you turn back to our epistle, from chapter 3 of Ephesians.
Over the past few months, our morning series of sermons has been concerned with different aspects of prayer.
Today, we reach the end of the series; I hope that you have found that the series has improved your prayer life, as we have looked at the whole subject from several different angles.
This morning, the end of the series is marked with the doxology from Ephesians 3, verses 20 and 21, which follows on from the prayer of Paul that we have just heard.
Ephesians is a book about the church.
When Paul writes ‘You’ he means ‘All of you’.
He is writing to a group of people, and the ‘You’ includes everyone in that group.
All the teaching in this letter is concerned about the Christian community, not about Christian individuals.
It's not like the prayers that we heard about a few weeks ago, from Paul's letters to Timothy and Philemon, where he was addressing an individual.
Now, Paul is addressing a group — and that group is the colony of heaven that was to be found in Ephesus.
Right in the middle of the letter, we find today's lesson, and Paul manages to slip in two verses which are — to use a twentieth century expression — mind-blowing.
It is easy, in 1993, to lose the impact of them both.
None of the translations really does full justice to verse 20, and we'll do a little detective work when we look at that verse in a few minutes.
And the word ‘Glory’ in verse 21 is so much a part of the language of our worship that it easy to overlook the significance of the phrase that Paul uses there.
We read ‘Glory in the church’; it's a phrase that can't be found elsewhere in the New Testament; when the Ephesian Christians heard that phrase when the letter was read out, it probably came as a great surprise.
Let me explain.
It is no secret that preachers refer to theological books when they prepare sermons.
I went to the University Library, and found a book called ‘Christian Words’.
It's a sort of dictionary of many of the words that we use as part of our worship and teaching.
The entry on ‘Glory’ runs to two pages, and is almost entirely about the Glory of God.
Three words help to summarise what the Bible says about God's Glory — brightness, splendour and beauty.
You can trace those through the Bible; Moses saw the Glory of God — His brightness; Psalms refers to the Temple, where the splendour of God is to be found; the shepherds were surrounded by the brightness of God's Glory, and so was Paul on the road to Damascus.
The brightness of heaven burst into our world and showed God's glory when Christ was transfigured.
The beauty of God was revealed in Jesus, and you will find many references to that in the Gospels and epistles.
All of that would have been well known to the Ephesians, who had been converted from false gods who had no glory, to be followers of the one true God whose glory had been demonstrated in the splendour, the brightness and the beauty of the Saviour.
Paul has already written about the glory of God in his letter to the Ephesian church.
It would have been part of their worship and prayers to say with confidence, ‘Glory belongs to God’.
In the same way, we have the message on the beam behind me, ‘Glory to God’; and there are several places in the service today that use those words.
And then comes the bombshell; ‘To God be the glory in the church, and in Christ Jesus’.
With those few words, Paul revolutionized the idea of the church.
He is saying that the church shows part of God's glory.
God's glory is not confined to heaven and the future life with Christ which Christians look forward to with confidence.
He's saying that the existence of the church is essential to God's glorious gospel.
And so that means that the church is something to live for, an
God raised us up with him to rule with him in the heavenly world.
He did this to demonstrate for all time to come the extraordinary greatness of his grace in the love he showed us in Christ Jesus.
In other words, all of us all have one foot in heaven right now.
The church is already a part of heaven.
And the same idea pops up at the end of chapter 2, where Paul describes God's building project, His church.
Verse 22:
In union with him, all of you are being built together into a place where God lives through his Spirit.
The church is on earth, and so it will have imperfections.
It will only be at the end of time that God's glory will be fully visible in the church.
Now let us look back to verse 20 of the lesson, to see how God can work to make His glory fill the church.
We'll have to do a little detective work on it.
The Good News Bible says:
To him who by means of his power working in us is able to do so much more than we can ever ask for, or even think of.
A more accurate rendering reads:
To him who is able to do infinitely more abundantly above all that we ask or think in accordance with the power which is at work within us.
Have you come to every sermon in the series on prayer?
Or is this the first one?
Whichever it is, do you believe that God answers your prayers?
If you have any doubts, I pray that this verse, the last that we will look at in the series of sermons, will clear them completely away.
Verse 20 says that God can do what believers ask in prayer.
But Paul knows that sometimes it is hard to put our prayers into words, so the verse includes that; God is able to do what believers think of.
In fact, the verse says in the Greek that God is able to do all that believers can ask for or think of asking.
But that wasn't enough for Paul; he knew that God wasn't limited to human speech and a human mind.
He wrote that God is able to do above all that believers can ask for or think of asking.
Even that piece of teaching wasn't enough; Paul had to use a very rare word, to make it clear that God's power to answer prayer wasn't limited in any way.
The word is made up of three parts, stuck together like building blocks.
God is able to do abundantly above all that we can ask for or think of asking; add a building block.
God is able to do more abundantly above all that we can ask for or think of asking; add another building block.
God is able to do infinitely more abundantly above all that we can ask for or think of asking.
And, by the way, that amazing, inexpressible power is at work in God's church!
And, fellow-Christians, that should be the lesson from our series of sermons on prayer.
We have a God who longs to answer prayer; a God who listens to our words and answers them; a God who knows our thoughts and answers the prayers that we cannot express in words; a God whose ability to answer prayer is not limited by the finite, but who can do infinitely more abundantly above all that we can ask for or think of asking.
The Ephesians had been converted from service of false gods, who had no power except the power of fear and the demon-world.
Now the letter presents them with a view of God at work in their church which was mind-stretching.
My friends, we follow that same God.
He has not changed one bit.
Something similar came from our gospel reading; when Jesus promised the gift of the Holy Spirit, before he returned to His Father, He told His disciples:
whoever believes in me will do what I do — yes he will do even greater things, because I am going to the Father.
And I will do whatever you ask for in my name so that the Father's glory will be shown through the son.
Let us pray that God's church, the bride of Christ, the colony of heaven, all of us, may truly show His glory in the world, demonstrating the power of God, His beauty and purity, His brightness and splendour.
Amen
Noah — a man of faith
Exminster
7th March 1993
Morning Prayer at 10.00am
The story of Noah's ark is one of the best known stories from the first chapters of Genesis.
It has all the ingredients for an appealing story, and an appealing picture.
It's so successful that many people seem to miss the point.
Cartoonists draw pictures and make jokes about who had to clean up the mess below decks, or how many rabbits there were on board when the flood went down.
Comedians have their gags, wondering why Noah didn't swat the mosquitoes while he had the chance.
And models of Noah's ark must be among the most enduring of children's toys, whether the animals are made of wood or plastic.
But the story is not about the animals.
They are part of it.
It's a story about God, and about one man who followed Him.
Noah was a man of faith.
In the series of sermons for Lent, you will be thinking about a variety of people, who are described in Hebrews chapter 11 as heroes of faith, and are presented there as examples for Christians to follow.
What can we learn about faith from Noah?
And what has his experience of God to say to us in 1993?
We haven't had time to read the whole story today; can I encourage you to look at it for yourself sometime this week?
The account in Genesis starts with God.
God looked at the earth, and the words are the same as were used when God looked at the earth on the days of creation.
Then he saw that everything was good.
Now he sees that
the wickedness of man was great in the earth
and things are no longer good.
The world which He had made was no longer going in the way that He wanted.
It was evil.
What happens next is a reminder that God is the Ruler.
He chooses to remove the disorder and chaos from His creation.
I am sorry that I have made them
God was sovereign; He had the authority to destroy the whole world because of the sinfulness and violence of men.
But there is another side to His authority, and it is a mysterious one.
Instead of destruction, God planned to start again, and make things new.
The story of the ark is the story of God re-creating the world that He had made.
And it all happens through one man and his family of seven.
So we see another aspect of God; He is full of grace.
He cared for Noah, freely and very, very closely.
Genesis presents a picture of an extremely intimate relationship, where God spoke to Noah clearly, lovingly and directly.
What kind of man was Noah?
He was a man of faith; that's what it says in the sermon title, and that's what the Bible repeatedly tells us.
But what was that faith really like?
I think that there are three sides to Noah's faith that we can learn from.
It was obedient faith.
It was persistent faith.
And it was rewarded faith.
Noah obeyed God.
He heard the word of God, and did what he was told.
It's obvious that what God said to Noah would have seemed extremely odd; build a huge boat in a country far away from any substantial water.
Build a boat, and go on building it in spite of the cost to your reputation.
I'm sure that there were scores of people who told Noah that he was a fool to construct an ark.
But the story in Genesis doesn't tell us about them.
Their views don't matter, because they had turned their backs on God.
And we don't hear about Noah questioning what God said.
He just got on and obeyed.
Twice the Bible says that:
Noah did all that God commanded him
Obedience remains central to our faith.
We can say with confidence that God won't ask us to build an ark — because the story of the flood ends with a promise that there will never be such a deluge again.
But God still wants us to obey Him.
Noah lived before Moses and so didn't have the Ten commandments as a basis for living righteously; but he listened to God, and obeyed Him.
Jesus summed up our responsibility of obedience in His teaching of the two great commandments, to love the Lord our God with all our heart, soul and mind.
His teaching is full of an emphasis on obedience, not because we are forced to, but because we are free to do what is right, what God wants.
We have the advantage of living after the incarnation, and the coming of the Holy Spirit to teach us about God.
And that puts a great responsibility on us to be obedient to what Jesus taught us.
Noah's faith was obedient faith.
Noah's faith was persistent faith.
It went on and on and on.
Building the ark wasn't a matter of nipping to the DIY shop and coming home with a few boxes labelled ‘Flatpack ark’.
It was more a matter of putting together a substantial structure, a large building, using the crude tools of the day.
It must have taken a long time.
Noah persisted at it.
He knew that sooner or later, the flood would come, even if the sinful people around him didn't believe in that, or in anything else which God had said.
And then he was persistent throughout the flood itself.
Forty days of rain, as God had told him in advance.
Then five months of sailing on the flood.
Then nearly five more, waiting for the right time — God's time to come out.
We live in an age when people want things to happen in an instant.
Everything must happen — just like that!
You only have to look at the press and television to see how impatient many in our society are.
The faster something is, then the better it is!
In the kitchen, there are microwave ovens to save time; there are packet mixes to save time; electric kettles are advertised on the basis of the speed with which they boil water.
In the office, more and more is being sent by fax, because it is quicker than postage.
More and more plants are sold in pots, because growing them from seed takes too long.
Sometimes we seem to be losing touch with the fact that some activities cannot be rushed.
And it is easy to bring that sort of attitude to our faith.
We want answers — and we want them now!
We pray — and expect God to respond within seconds.
We read the Bible, and we expect to understand it immediately.
We come to church, and we think that the Christian body should be instantly perfect.
And time after time, with such an attitude, people are disappointed.
Following Christ is not a way for instant satisfaction.
It may be slow progress; it will make demands on our energy and our lives.
Faith has to be persistent.
Each of us has sadnesses which cannot be dealt with in a flash; the strain of long-term illness in a loved one; the frustration of unemployment; the unhappiness of rebellious children; friction between family members.
God doesn't offer us instant solutions.
He offers us His Holy Spirit to sustain our faith, to be our companion on the dark nights and lonely days.
Noah's faith was persistent; through the taunts of unbelievers as he worked; through the rainstorm; through the tragedy of knowing that men and women were dying in the flood; through the long days and nights waiting for the next stage, as the waters went down.
Noah waited patiently, and persistently, for God.
And then, Noah's faith was rewarded.
The end of the flood is a time of new beginnings.
God's promises to Noah and his descendants — including you and me — tumble over each other.
I will never again destroy every living creature as I have done.
While the earth remains, seedtime and harvest, cold and heat, summer and winter, day and night, shall not cease.
I establish my covenant with you…
I set my bow in the cloud.
And this all brings us back to God, with Whom we began the sermon.
Noah's faith was in a God Who makes promises and keeps them.
It was faith in a God Who is watching over the world, and is active in it.
It was faith in a God Who cared for an individual, and spoke to him, lovingly and regularly.
It was faith in a God Who is unchanging.
So Noah's faith, in its obedience, its persistency, its rewardedness, is an example for us, and a pointer to the unchanging God Who Noah followed centuries ago, and Who we follow today.
May He help us to have such faith, and be such faithful followers.
Amen
Elisha (when the oil stops flowing)
2 Kings 4:1–7 (page 366)
John 20:19–23
St Leonard's
16th May 1993
Communion at 10.30am
Please turn to page 366 of the Old Testament section of the Bibles; today we have the second of a series of sermons about the life of Elisha.
The distinguished physicist, Sir Hermann Bondi, once described the sort of people who become scientists.
He said ‘Little children are always asking questions that begin ‘Why?’
At school, they learn the answers to some of their questions and one of the results of education is that they stop asking questions like that.
Education has its failures; some people never stop asking questions that begin ‘Why?’
We call them scientists!’
My training has been as a scientist, and I still ask questions which begin ‘Why?’(as well as others beginning ‘How?’ and ‘What if?’.
And the passage we are to look at today made me ask several ‘Why?’ questions, and in the next few minutes, I want to try and share the questions…and some answers…with you.
The story we heard a few moments ago concerns one of the miracles that God performed as a part of Elisha's ministry in Israel.
It's one of a succession of stories of the way that God clearly showed His power through His prophet.
So what are my ‘Why?’ questions?
The first is this: ‘Why is this story in the Bible?’
And then we can go on and look at the passage, which brings together the words of the widow and Elisha and the actions of God.
‘Why had the widow got into the situation she was in?’;
‘Why did she turn to Elisha for help?’;
‘Why did Elisha answer in the way that he did?’; and ‘Why did God perform a miracle for the widow?’.
There's a final question, which is not connected to the passage: ‘Why did the preacher select the gospel reading that we heard a moment ago to accompany this story of Elisha?’
So first of all, ‘Why is this story in the Bible?’
Can you keep your place in 2 Kings and turn to two verses from 2 Timothy, chapter 3 verses 16 and 17.
It's a well known passage, about why we should use the Bible.
Paul writes:
All scripture is inspired by God and is useful for teaching the truth, rebuking error, correcting faults, and giving instruction for right living, so that the person who serves God may be fully qualified and equipped to do every kind of good deed.
In many translations, the words at the start of verse 17 appear as ‘the man of God’, and those are words which echo many passages about the prophets in the Old Testament.
We can say that God's word is inspired by God for our benefit.
So the simple answer to our question is that God wants us to find something useful in this passage from His word so that we — people who serve God — or, in the other translations, men and women of God — may be fully qualified and equipped to do every kind of good deed.
The second question that I asked was: ‘Why had the widow got into the situation she was in?’
If you were here for last Sunday morning's sermon, John answered that question when he started the series on Elisha.
Quite simply, the country was corrupt.
It's easy to find examples of similar wickedness and sin in the twentieth century.
Here was a widow, with debts.
The man who was owed the money planned to take her two sons as slaves.
But that was not the way debts were to be settled.
If God's law had been obeyed, then the children could not have been sold into slavery.
The book of Leviticus expressly forbids it.
And if God's law had been obeyed, special care would have been shown to a widow by her family and friends.
It wasn't happening.
Money took priority over compassion; a family's rights were irrelevant alongside getting the money back.
So this widow turned to Elisha.
And I asked the question ‘Why?’;
‘Why turn to him?’
On a human level, she came to him because nobody else was helping.
But on a much more significant level, she turned to the man who is repeatedly described as ‘The man of God’.
Elisha was the man that God had equipped for that time in history, in that land, and for the specific needs of individual people around him.
Paul described the members of the church as the men of God, when he told Timothy about the value of God's word.
So, in our generation, you and I are similar.
We are the people that God has equipped, for this time in history, in our city and  neighbourhood , for the specific needs of the people around us.
God has called us to be the Elishas — the people of God — in twentieth century Exeter.
There was a purity and a peace in the life of Elisha which made people around him see God, and call him ‘the man of God’.
My next question was ‘Why did Elisha answer in the way that he did?’
His response is interesting because it was immediate and for what was left out.
He didn't condemn the money-lenders; he didn't condemn the family and friends who weren't doing anything to help; he didn't even ask her how much she needed.
There is a lovely sense of the purity of Elisha in the way he didn't condemn or judge.
He simply asked the woman one question — and told her what to do in faith.
She had some olive oil; it was in a small jar, possibly a tiny jar no larger than a perfume bottle.
And the man of God told her to go out and talk to her neighbours and come back with as many empty jars as she could borrow.
It doesn't make sense!
She had perhaps a few spoonfuls of oil; she was told to pour those minute contents of her jar into jars that might have held a hundred times as much as she had.
But then God's commands don't make sense if we try and look at them with twentieth-century attitudes.
She obeyed, and her faith was rewarded.
The debt was cleared, and she was given the opportunity to live without fear.
There is something significant in the way that Elisha answered immediately.
Here was a man who was in touch with the living God of Israel.
What he said was God's word to the widow.
He didn't hesitate and say ‘I'll have to ask God about that’; in the few seconds that it took her to express her need, Elisha knew what to say to her.
How did he know?
Can you turn to the second chapter of Nehemiah for a glimpse of the answer.
Nehemiah was another man who kept in touch with God.
He too was in a position where he had to reply at
As the Father sent me, so I send you.
…He goes on: Receive the Holy Spirit.
And what does the Holy Spirit do?
He keeps us in touch with God.
Just as Elisha could answer the widow's need because he had been in touch with his Lord, so the Holy Spirit is God's agent to keep us in touch with Him, and to make us pure.
And the Holy Spirit is the channel for God's power in the world today.
God has given us the Holy Spirit so that He can work in His world.
Maybe we won't see miracles like the one described in our reading.
But God is still in the business of performing miracles through human agents, like you and me.
He is transforming lives that are suffering from the corruption of the world, just like that widow and her sons.
He is still giving new life to those who believe and trust Him.
All the questions I asked at the beginning were concerned with the Old testament passage and started ‘Why?’.
The last one is different: it's about us.
‘Why not let God take us and use us to be like Elisha in the world today?’
May God make us like Elisha — men and women of God, filled with His peace and purity, in touch with Him in prayer, and allowing His power to work in His world.
Amen