

New health and science joint venture for AEA
Customers are users of radioactivity in medicine, industry and research
AEA HAS joined forces with the health science group, Amersham International plc in a venture to serve the users of radioactivity in medicine, industry and research.
The new company, Safeguard International, is a 50/50 enterprise that responds to the needs of customers who use radioactivity in healthcare, life science research and industrial quality and safety assurance applications.
It is envisaged that the new company will be staffed by existing staff from both AEA and Amersham.
‘Initial requirements will probably be for ten staff,’ explained Dr Philip Tasker, Safeguard chief executive.
‘This may rise to about 20 in three  years' time if we do well.
‘Most of these will be engaged on commercial and business development activities,’ he added.
‘The new company will be based at Culham in Oxfordshire.’
In Philip's view, Safeguard International will be a truly international venture.
‘We expect the majority of our turnover to be from overseas markets,’ he said.
‘We are targeting mainly Europe, North America and the Far East.’
The new company combines our own substantial technical and engineering skills with the expertise of Amersham International in the safe handling and distribution of radioactive products.
‘Throughout the world customers in medicine, industry and research are facing increasing environmental and regulatory pressure,’ added Philip.
‘The venture is the first international organisation with the appropriate range of skills to offer a comprehensive environmental management service to these users of radioactivity.’
There will be opportunities for both AEA and Amersham to expand into new areas of activity by working with Safeguard and there is also the possibility of a great deal of subcontracting work.
New magazine launched for industrial customers
A NEW technology magazine,Competitive Edge , was launched early this month at a reception for our customers, potential clients and the press.
Produced by the Corporate Communication Service, the quarterly publication focuses on key technical issues of significance to industry.
Competitive Edge , sponsored by AEA's industrial businesses, will be sent free of charge to 14,000 people within large and small industrial companies, government and to academia.
‘Technology transfer, which amounts to some £120 million of our turnover, can be achieved through a range of mechanisms — one of course is through publications such as Competitive Edge ,’ explained Dr Stuart Nelson, management director of our Industrial Business Group.
‘We work for some 2000 customers and a magazine such as this will contribute to the awareness of technical issues in industry.’
Fun in the House
Who's a pretty girl then?— a young guest befriends an even younger and louder visitor.
Staff and their families really had a fund day at the recent opening of Consultancy Services' refurbished Thomson House at Risley.
Visitors young and old let their hair down and enjoyed the entertainment, which ranged from clowns and bouncy castles to computer games and a disco.
The official opening ceremony was attended by our customers and potential clients, as well as other guests, including John Rimmington, director general of the Health and Safety Executive.
For full details, turn to centre pages.
Annual Review overview
In 1992/93 AEA made an operating profit of £23 million on a slightly reduced turnover of £415 million.
There was an 17 per cent increase in our business in the UK private sector and an 8 per cent growth in overseas sales.
Full details of our performance figures and highlights of the past year are contained in a special four-page supplement inside.
NEWS AND COMMENT
EDITORIAL
Reading brochures and newspapers these days, you can't help but notice the amount of ‘buzzwords’ that are commonly used.
I am sure you will have come across synergy, pushing the frontiers or rationalisation, and although most of you will know what they mean, can you give a simple explanation?
Well, the other day someone who was explaining how AEA gives its customers a ‘competitive edge’ came up with a simple, yet brilliant clarification of the phrase using a tale about two friends.
Apparently, they were on safari and one afternoon came across a very hungry-looking lion.
After staring at the two chaps with ‘you'll do for a light snack’ eyes, the lion started to wander towards them.
Fearing the worst, one of the chaps coolly reached into his bag for a pair of training shoes and put them on.
His friend looked at him quizzically and said, ‘They'll be no good against that man-eating lion’, to which came the reply, ‘No, but I'll be able to run faster than you!’
Thanks also to the 400 of you who entered last month's word search.
It was a brilliant response — the best we've ever had for a competition.
This month, just to show we're brolly nice people, we've added a second prize of a new-loom AEA umbrella!
New electronic mail system moves nearer to fruition
MOVES TO implement the new Lotus cc:Mail electronic mail system are moving rapidly as the team responsible have been discussing requirements with Businesses and Services and planning its design.
Over 3.5 million users worldwide
Reputed to be the most popular electronic mail service in the world, with over 3.5 million users, cc:Mail is simple to use.
Furthermore, its integration with other desktop applications allows it to be used as a powerful document transmission system.
Initially, some 3000 staff will be connected to cc ;Mail.
The product will support personal computers (DOS and Windows access), Apple Macintoshes and Sun workstations.
It will also provide gateways with other services such as fax and Internet mail.
All-in-1 will gradually be withdrawn as it is replaced by cc:Mail.
The Quality and Information Systems team is currently running a pilot cc:Mail system with around 250 users AEA-wide.
A series of presentations are due to take place during this month and August to enable staff to have the chance to see and ask questions about the product.
Roll out in September
The main roll out of cc:Mail is expected in September and to run through to the end of the year.
LOOK HERE — Derek, right, looks at the Society's strategic analysis results with consultant, Judith Shawcross and Bernard Kelly of British Nuclear Fuels.
Society in gear for recruitment drive
THE BRITISH Nuclear Energy Society (BNES) is embarking on a major recruitment drive.
Following a recent strategic analysis, it found its members valued the Society, but not enough potential members had even heard of BNES.
The 1,000-strong learned Society, formed in 1961, is actively seeking those with an interest in nuclear power to become new members.
‘No one needs academic qualifications to join, just an interest in nuclear energy,’ explained Derek Pooley, Society president and managing director of our Nuclear Business Group.
‘We are especially keen to attract young people and women as they are not adequately represented within the Society, although we have members from 19 to 92’.
The Society provides members with information about the UK and international nuclear industry, as well as providing opportunities for members to meet, attend lectures and to present and publish technical papers.
‘The best ambassadors for promoting nuclear power are the industry's staff,’ added Derek.
‘The Society can help keep them abreast of the latest news and put them in touch with others who have similar interests.’
Joining the Society costs £25 per year, but for new members who sign direct debits the rest of 1993 is free.
Members receive a bi-monthly magazine,Nuclear Energy , as well as Nuclear Europe Worldscan from the European Nuclear Society and Atom from AEA Technology.
‘Membership offers real value for money,’ said Jean White, Society membership secretary.
‘You have access to a whole wealth of information on nuclear topics and can, if you require, meet regularly with other members.’
If you are interested in attending a local meeting or want to join, speak to Jean White on Harwell extension 6132, or see the membership form included within this issue of AEA Times .
Still in with a shout
A ‘MAGNIFICENT’ equal third out of a filed of 374, is how our entry fared in the worldwide competition to come up with a solution to re-seal the ruined Chernobyl reactor.
Our idea — which would involve wheeling a building large enough to cover London's Tower Bridge over the damaged reactor — gained us a $ prize and, more importantly, an automatic place on the short list for bidding for the 3 million ECU feasibility contract.
‘First prize was not awarded as no idea offered a ‘complete solution’, but I and many others are convinced that ours is the only design that can be built to price,’ said Gerry Bauer, project manager.
‘We  learnt a lot during this first phase, which involved giving detailed presentations to technical experts — and our competitors’, he added.
‘Bidding for the feasibility study starts later this year and I am confident that we have a great chance.’
GREAT CHANCE —‘Ours is the only design that can be built to price,’ said Gerry Bauer.
Identify gift shop
If you want to show off our new identity to the outside world — be it your family, friends or business colleagues — then here's your chance with the new collection of promotional gifts.
From 19 July you will be able to purchase from your local stores a large range of gifts — carrying our new logo — at competitive prices.
These include Schaeffer pens, keyfobs and baseball caps, as well as sports umbrellas, holdalls and leather filofaxes.
A detailed list will appear in the next issue.
So watch this space.
Merger will create world class environmental service
WARREN SPRING Laboratory is to merge with AEA in a move that will result in the establishment of a National Environmental Technology Centre.
This will provide a world class source of environmental consultancy and technical services.
It is anticipated that most of the scientific and technical staff from the Laboratory one of the Government's five research agencies, will move to either our Culham or Harwell sites.
Numbers not known
‘The precise numbers of those involved are not yet known,’ explained chief executive Dr Brian Eyre.
‘The details of how the teams from both organisations will integrate will be decided over the next few months by a project team made up of staff from AEA and Warren Spring.’
Relocation is expected to be complete by March 1995 when the existing Warren Spring site in Stevenage will be taken over by Glaxo.
‘Plans are moving well,’ said Dr Stuart Nelson, managing director of our Industrial Business Group.
‘A steering group and a project team have been formed and we will have a clearer indication of how to best integrate our teams by the end of this month.’
‘Their excellent research and technical services in environmental science and technology are fully complementary to our own,’ added Brian.
‘The merger provides the potential for developing more business than we would have achieved separately and I am confident that we have the basis for a successful future.
The Government is currently reviewing the future of all five of its research laboratories.
Management consultants, P A, were commissioned to review the options for Warren Spring's future and it was evident from the technical synergies and the fact that we had appropriate accommodation at Culham/Harwell — coupled with our ‘enthusiastic response’— that the merger with AEA was the best way forward for all concerned.
New chairman takes up the reins
NEW CHAIRMAN Sir Anthony Cleaver has taken up his position…but there will be no leisurely ‘settling in’ period.
Commenting on his first impressions to AEA Times , Sir Anthony said, ‘Obviously my top priority must be the current strategic options exercise in AEA, in which the DTI's consultants and AEA's own consultants are examining the feasibility of privatisation.’
At the time of going to press, Sir Anthony had already had a series of strategy discussions with chief executive Dr Brian Eyre, as well as meetings with the DTI's privatisation advisers, investment bankers Barclays De Zoete Wedd, and our own advisers, management consultants McKinseys and merchant bankers Lazard Brothers.
‘At the same time,’ he said, ‘I must also get to know my colleagues on the Board as fast as possible.
All of this is giving me a good opportunity to get up to speed quickly on AEA and the various issues we face.
‘I am also anxious to learn as much as I can about AEA, and we are planning a series of visits to the different sites over coming months.
I'm greatly looking forward to meeting people in the organisation.’
Sir Anthony, who remains chairman of IBM UK, will be dividing his time equally between IBM and AEA.
‘I have taken up office in Rex House in London, but will be a frequent visitor to the sites,’ he pledged.
Sir Anthony paid tribute to the progress John Maltby had made in steering AEA to a much more commercial approach to business.
‘Under John's leadership, the last three years have seen significant progress and given us a good start in tackling the challenges that lie ahead.’
Highest ever bungee jump by member of British public
Nigel bounces back after amazing 300 foot fall
IT TAKES a confident — and brave — man who claims that freefalling without a parachute is safe.
And just to prove it, he went out and did it!
Nigel Holloway, chief technical consultant with Consultancy Services at Culham, carried out a safety assessment of the growing craze of bungee jumping and proved it was safe by doing the highest ever jump by a member of the public in this country.
Jumping at the same event was the famous ski jumper Eddie ‘The Eagle’ Edwards.
Launching himself form the top of a massive 300 foot crane, Nigel plunged towards the ground at high speed with only a bungee (a strong rope made of rubber encased by a purpose-designed braiding) stopping him from eating his words.
‘It was only slightly traumatic, but I knew from my safety audit of the operators that it was virtually impossible for things to go wrong,’ explained Nigel.
‘It was over too quickly.
There was a big whoosh of air, a bit of G-force, a few gentle bounces (150 feet high!) and that was it.’
Nigel first started looking at bungee jumps in 1990 when he was asked to be an expert witness in an industrial tribunal concerning a bungee jump at a fairground.
‘I think that certainly helped in preparing me for the jump — after all I had three years to think about it,’ said Nigel.
The risk of death in a bungee jump in Nigel's opinion lies between one in one million and one in ten million.
‘That is still greater than riding on the Black Hole at Alton Towers,’ he said.
‘It is about the same risk as my drive from Oxford to London to take part in the jump.’
Juan's 24 hour Japan marathon
SLEEP is becoming a thing of the past for Juan Matthews, our new business development executive for Japan.
In his new role, he is responsible for building on the already large success of AEA involvement in this vitally important country.
Just to show how busy things get, Juan and his colleagues recently took part in a 24-hour intensive workshop on looking at a strategy to increase business in Japan.
Unlike the classic 24-hour race, however, the group did snatch a few hours sleep.
‘Our business in this market has grown impressively over the last five years, thanks largely to the efforts of Tony Hardacre and our agents, the Sumitomo Corporation,’ said Juan.
‘We are highly regarded in Japan for our technical quality and scientific approach, but we still have some way to go.’
The results of the latest 24-hour workshop are now beginning to bear fruit in Juan's view, as plans are now in place to strengthen relationships with customers such as Kansai, Tokyo Electric Power and Japan Nuclear Fuels Limited, which is building the large nuclear fuel cycle complex at Rokkashomura.
Staff pull out the stops to win first export order
STAFF WITHIN the newly-opened Advanced Engineering Materials Centre at Harwell pulled out all the stops recently to dispatch its first export order.
The order, worth some £11,000, for 100 precision-machined depleted uranium components went to the German company Amersham-Buchler.
‘The job required us to cast the parts to near finished size, precision-machine them and then clear up the waste,’ said section manager Dr Brian Hudson.
‘The multi-disciplinary team of craftsmen, furnace operators and health physics personnel — led by production manager Tracey Inwood — worked with so much enthusiasm and dedication.’
Tracey added, ‘The order was a good test for our facility as it employed several items of our equipment.
I am delighted that they all passed with flying colours.’
‘Helpful’ MMC report behind changes in AEA
THE MONOPOLIES and Mergers report on the service we provide, published in May 1992, was a good outcome for AEA.
In fact it is understood that another public sector organisation about to come under MMC scrutiny is modelling its approach on ours.
But, what has happened in AEA in response to the MMC's 58 recommendations?
On July 2 July DTI published our ‘Second Response’ to the MMC study.
This showed that we have now implemented the majority of the recommendations while the remainder are either well in hand or about to be tackled.
The recommendations covered a broad spectrum of activities.
In many cases they focused on areas which AEA had already identified as essential to our future success and where we had already initiated action.
AEA's Commercial and Planning Director, James Bretherton, commented that the ‘MMC Report has been useful external validation of what we are trying to achieve.
The comments and recommendations are an important endorsement of our drive towards commercial viability.
Their views on such issues as our management and financial information systems, our approach to planning, the revaluation of our land and buildings and our marketing strategy were particularly helpful.’
Here are some of MMC's recommendations and what we, in AEA, have been doing about them:
Management and financial systems
MMC said that we should bring our locally-based IT units at all sites with a corporate IT service to which business-based IT units should be accountable.
This integration took place in April 1992 and IT strategy and standards are now developed by the corporate IT service in conjunction with the business-based units.
Civil Service Link
MMC endorsed AEA's objective of breaking the Civil Service link and introducing a unified structure.
The link was severed on 1 July and the aim is to move to being a single status organisation by 1 August 1994.
Physical Assets
MMC recommended that we should revalue our land and buildings at least once every five years.
We have carried out a revaluation of our assets as at 1.4.92 to time and cost.
Also, an annual revaluation of our investment properties required for accounts purposes as well as for good practice has been undertaken with an effective date of 31 March 1993.
Marketing and sales
MMC recommended that we improve our market intelligence particularly on market share analysis by product and service.
They also said that we should ‘benchmark’ ourselves more against our main competitors.
We are implementing these ideas progressively and our latest business plans incorporate much enhanced knowledge of market share and of how our competitors are performing.
MMC also said that we should review the sales growth targets of our businesses to ensure that they are both sufficiently ambitious and sustainable to meet the objectives of our corporate plan.
We have done this and are now putting more emphasis on expanded sales to the private sector home market and specific overseas markets, as our recently published results show.
We have also made organisational changes to refocus business development efforts to meet new targets including the setting up of the Business Strategy Unit and the appointment of business development executives.
Project management
MMC endorsed our plans for Corporate Requirements and Guidelines for Project Management.
These were launched a year ago and implemented for all new capital expenditure projects from September 1992.
The benefits have already been seen and the guidelines are being updated and expanded to place further emphasis on how we deal with the risk points in any projects.
Planning
MMC recommended that our corporate plan include some specific quantified medium term goals to measure our efficiency and quality of service.
We are discussing a number of corporate-level performance indicators with DTI covering efficiency, quality and some basic financial parameters.
These could form a top tier of targets which could be developed for application to individual businesses.
MMC also said that in preparing its business plan each of our businesses should carry out a strategic review of its options in conjunction with a product/market sector analysis.
As reported in the recently published Corporate Plan (see the supplement in the June issue of AEA Times )— we have done this.
AEA will make its third and final response to the MMC Report in May 1995 but, as James Bretherton comments, ‘Responding to the Report is a progressive process.
We will be making regular reports to the AEA Audit Committee in the interim and vigorously pursuing the remaining actions as an integral part of our strategy for commercial success.’
GOOD GUIDE — the MMC report has been a ‘useful external foundation of what we are trying to achieve,’ says James Bretherton.
News in Brief 
Exploiting new business
A small team of business experts have been gathered together to look at the ways new markets and business prospects can be fully exploited.
The Business Strategy Unit, headed by Ken Currie, will provide a wide range of support to the business managing directors and the chief executive and will be working closely with business and international staff, as well as with Strategic Planning, Corporate Communication, Finance, QIS and our chief scientist.
‘We will be using AEA's knowledge of markets and products to develop a strategy for business development,’ explained Ken.
Silver success
Twenty five years and still going strong, that's the Heat Transfer and Fluid Flow Service — known as HTFS — which is celebrating its silver anniversary this year.
Since it was formed in 1968 as a joint venture between AEA, NEL and the Atomic Energy of Canada Limited, the Service has grown and now boasts over 200 members worldwide.
The Service recently won contracts totalling £640,000 from the Department of Trade and Industry.
‘We have been pioneers in many areas over the years,’ said Dave Butterworth, managing director.
Top Doctor
Dr Keith Pilling has been appointed head of Occupational Health Division following the recent retirement of Dr Graham Green.
In his dealings with the outside world, Keith will be known as AEA chief medical officer.
He will remain at Winfrith where he will continue to be responsible for the site's Occupational Health Department.
A bit of a laugh!
Outgoing chairman John Maltby speaks about his term of office
‘A great deal has been achieved’
IN HIS final interview with AEA Times as chairman of AEA Technology, John Maltby praised the enormous efforts of staff in effecting the changes within the organisation over the past three years.
But, he added, it was his view that while a great deal had been achieved more work needs to be done to complete the necessary cultural changes within AEA.
He began by explaining his mission for AEA and whether he saw that it had been accomplished.
‘In my time at Burmah Oil I had led a complete reconstruction of the Group.
When I was asked by John Wakeham to join AEA as a part-time member in 1988, it was clear that it would to help lead a similar re-orientation and I felt I could make a useful contribution.
‘I joined because I wanted to help the chief executive and other senior managers in AEA effect the transition to a highly commercial organisation.
Sound business
‘You can never say that you have finished the job but I do feel that there is now wide acceptance that we've got a sound business.
There is much to be said for moving away from total government ownership.
The concept that AEA is now able to stand on its own feet as a business is a huge achievement, based on where we were in 1988.
John saw the milestones of his tenure as firstly the financial results of 1990/91 and 1991/92 in which AEA recorded increasing profits.
‘We certainly surprised a lot of people and I think we may even have surprised ourselves by the progress we had made in a relatively short time.’
He puts the success down to people in AEA winning new business and the great deal of work done in reducing the cost base.
Another important milestone was the report on AEA by the Monopolies and Mergers Commission.
‘We achieved about as satisfactory a report as we could have hoped for and that has helped us enormously in developing the future of the organisation.
The result was due to a dedicated management who devoted quality time to ensuring the best outcome.
Many valuable lessons were learned in the process.’
People of great ability and dedication
He added, ‘We have a large number of people of great ability and dedication.
With this resource behind us there must be scope for creating a successful enterprise.
But the most difficult part is the culture change that people must accept during the transition to a fully commercial structure.
Much has already been achieved but more work needs to be done, particularly in attitudes to reducing costs.’
Looking to the prospects for privatisation, John is optimistic.
‘However, it will not be an easy task.
There are a lot of issues still to be resolved and government faces some difficult decisions in coming to a conclusion.’
He looks back on a stimulating and happy relationship with his fellow Board members.
‘Certainly I've had terrific support from the part-time members and recognise the important contribution made by the full-time members.
‘In part, I think it was that Brian Eyre and I managed to establish a way of working together so that the potential for internal conflict was minimised.
I have tremendous regard for the efforts that senior management have put into the transformation of AEA.’
Anyone thinking that at 65 John Maltby will now accept graceful retirement is much mistaken.
‘I remain Chairman of a large company, Harrison and Crosfield, Chairman of the Dover Harbour Board, which is also looking towards privatisation, and I've got a number of charities I'm involved in.
I think that's enough, for somebody of my age, to keep me reasonably quiet.’
Optimistic note
And his final message to AEA is as usual optimistic.
‘I believe that AEA can become a very important scientific and engineering services organisation.
It has the capacity to make a major contribution to the stimulation of scientific achievement for the good of wealth creation in this country.
My very best wishes to with you all.’
VIEWPOINT —‘We certainly surprised a lot of people and may even have surprised ourselves,’ said John Maltby.
Pooling resources in the water sector
Making the most of potential market sectors is crucial in today's tough commercial world.
To do this, many companies have turned to ‘networking’— a way of making contacts and pooling resources, knowledge and expertise — to help achieve success.
Staff from our businesses and Estates met recently to see how networking works and how it could increase our share of business in the water industry.
Sponsored by Tony Taig, the business development executive for the water industry, the event included a presentation about issues facing the sector by Mike Hoffmann, chief executive of Thames Water.
AEA's business in the water sector was just short of £1 million last year.
‘We clearly have the capability to increase this, but it will be a hard slog,’ said Tony.
‘We must not underestimate the challenge and the costs involved of winning new business in this field.’
‘The event proved useful in providing some positive plans for further exploiting the water sector,’ said David Simmers, corporate training manager and even organiser.
‘The workshop certainly made people feel more part of a team and demonstrated the power of the networking approach.’
UP TO THE MINUTE— you won't have to leave your desk to gain access to latest reports.
Wealth of information at your fingertips
IF YOU want to know what books are in the library or find out about the latest reports on new topics, you can now do this without leaving the comfort of your office.
Provided you can access the Harwell Vax computer — called HARAN — it is possible to delve into five bibliographic databases covering information on journal articles and patents to details on books and magazines held in the library.
‘Many people AEA-wide are able to access these databases,’ explained Tim Dixon of Harwell's Library and Information Service.
‘The beauty of this system is that you don't have to leave your desk to find out about the whole wealth of information we have at hand.’
According to Marshall Stoneham, the newly-appointed AEA chief scientist, these databases will be invaluable.
‘Our business and research strength depends crucially on rapid and efficient access to information.
This development will be of real value.’
This type of information used to be held on an IBM mainframe computer, but this closed down for financial reasons.
‘There is a definite need for such a system.
Use of the system is free provided a special identifier is used,’ added Tim, who is contactable on Harwell extension 5566 for queries.
FRIENDLY FACES — our police officers were seen as polite, helpful and smart.
You agree that our police fit the bill
A resounding thumbs up has been given to our police officers by staff at AEA and British Nuclear Fuels following a detailed customer opinion survey.
More than 2100 people — some 53 per cent of the 4000 samples — returned their questionnaires and the widespread view of the AEA Constabulary was a positive one of smartly turned out, helpful and honest officers.
‘The results are extremely encouraging,’ said chief constable Hugh McMorris.
‘I was delighted that so many people responded, which shows their high level of interest in the Force.’
Hen went on, ‘We were seen as polite, helpful, smart, neither rude nor aggressive, honest and readily available when needed.
Most respondents said they felt secure and expressed a good deal of confidence that we would act calmly in an incident.
Also 83 per cent believed that we made a positive contribution to good customer relations.’
The survey did point to some areas where improvements could be made.
Chief inspector Walter Walker, who helped organise the survey, explained, ‘Many said that they wanted us to be more friendly and caring, and give more information to visitors.
‘Some also commented that they thought we were not fit enough,’ added Walter.
‘However, we are taking on board all these comments.
We are introducing a fitness programme and more emphasis will be placed on reception arrangements for visitors calling at sites.’
Each year there are close to 600 incidents of crime reported to our police, around two thirds of whom are based on BNFL sites.
‘We are currently clearing close to 32 per cent of these cases and over half of the property stolen is recovered,’ said Hugh.
‘Theft of property is one big area of concern, although there are a large number of thefts of and from motor vehicles — especially at an open site like Risley — and a number of road accidents,’ he added.
‘However, crime is not our biggest task, as we are here to provide a secure work place.
‘Last year there were 316,000 visitors to the sites that we police — and what is heartening is that there was not one single complaint against us,’ emphasised Hugh.
‘This survey also highlights that we are certainly going in the right direction.’
Consultancy Services opens its new offices to staff and the outside world
OPEN ALL HOURS
Consultancy Services' refurbished Thomson House opened its doors to staff and the outside world last month with two special open days.
The official opening ceremony was attended by our customers — and potential clients — and by the Bishop of Warrington and local MPs, whilst the building was opened the following day for staff and their families.
The opening marked the culmination of a major exercise of moving around 450 staff and all their equipment from nearby Culcheth after the site was sold for residential development.
‘It was a major feat and staff reacted with great enthusiasm and cooperation,’ said Dr Terry Butland, business director of Consultancy Services.
‘A major plus is that it is a much better working environment for us all.’
Unveiling a commemorative plaque at the opening, John Rimmington, director general of the Health and Safety Executive, said, ‘Utilising your resources effectively is the key to success and AEA have done just that with this building.
I wish you all the luck in the world — although I suspect that you may not need it.’
In Terry's view, most of the staff are beginning to enjoy working in Thomson House.
‘There seems to be much more interaction at all levels,’ he said.
This feeling was reinforced by Dr Don MacInnes, manager of the Structural Integrity Department, who explained that feelings were largely positive.
‘There was some concern  before we moved — particularly about the open plan layout — but by and large people's fears have not been realised.
CLOWNING ABOUT — there was plenty of fun during the staff open day.
‘The move was incredibly smooth,’ he added.
‘We went home on the Friday evening of the move and turned up a few days later and just started work — it was great!’
Get together
During the afternoon of the staff open day, which attracted over 400 people, there was family entertainment galore.
The children in particular had a great time with computer games, entertainers and bouncy castles to keep them occupied.
For those with slightly less energy, the evening consisted of a barn dance and disco, and every one had the opportunity to listen to Consultancy Services' David Webber and his string quartet.
‘It was a great day and everybody had a good time,’ said publicity manager Poul Gosney.
We expected people to just come and go, but most didn't — they had a great get together.’
With hungry mouths to feed, the Conference Centre laid on cream teas during the afternoon — which visitors enjoyed as they reputedly got through ‘an amazing 600 scones and cream’— and an evening barbecue.
‘We thoroughly enjoyed the day,’ added Don.
‘We were dancing until midnight.
We should have them a bit more often — it was good to have some fun with our friends and colleagues.’
Breaking the link is essential for success
ON 25 JUNE AEA announced a decision to break the Civil Service link from 1 July.
This followed extensive discussions with the unions over the last three months but was without their agreement.
Commenting on the decision chief executive Dr Brian Eyre said, ‘We have always regarded breaking the link as essential to our commercial success whether or not we are privatised.
So after very careful consideration and discussion, I and my Board colleagues decided that it was in the best interests of AEA and its employees to go ahead now.
I have written to those employees previously covered by the link explaining the reasons, and expressing my regret that we were unable to take this important step with union support,’ he added.
‘However, as I said in my letter, I look forward to constructive negotiations with employee representatives about the introduction of a new and single status structure and about pay settlements for the remainder of the year.’
Management will be negotiating a 1 August pay settlement for those grades that normally have a pay review in August.
An assurance has been given to the unions that non-industrial pay settlements for this financial year from 1 July will be no worse than equivalent settlements in the Civil Service, subject to the public sector pay restraint policy.
Staff Side chairman Paul Forster has expressed union concern at the decision ‘to break the agreements with staff on pay and conditions in the face of strong opposition by employees.’
Some two-thirds of AEA's non-industrial workforce are union members.
Ballots conducted by the IPMS and CPSA have shown strong opposition to AEA management's decision.
Workshop looks at teamwork
A SERIES of team-building initiatives have been taking place across AEA to give staff at all levels the opportunity to work together to formulate team action plans which can be applied in the workplace.
They aim to provide participants with a greater awareness of effective teamworking and its benefits and enable them to contribute their thoughts and ideas to their managers on current key business issues.
Sue Almond of Corporate Training at Risley commented, ‘These three-day workshops are highly participative.
They include non-work-related tasks to enable groups to focus on the process skills rather than the task skills.
‘In other words we look at how we should work together to get things done rather than the technical details of the task,’ she added.
‘The real key to the success of the workshops is the commitment from the team and their managers to maintain the momentum from the workshop into the work environment!’
Good practice saves estimated £10 million
HIRE PURCHASE — Purchasing and Supply were last year responsible for hiring the massive Penrod drilling rig at Dounreay.
LAST YEAR AEA spent about £140M on external purchasing.
‘Even if we only manage to save 1% of that then £1.4 will have fed straight into our bottom-line profit,’ says Robert Nicol, recently appointed corporate manager, Purchasing and Supply.
In fact Robert estimates that  in 1992/1993 some £10M was saved through good purchasing practice.
At the moment businesses and services handle about 30% of our external spend themselves.
They have been helped to do this by the introduction of so-called ‘call-off’ contracts set up by Purchasing — which is part of AEA Estates — to enable them to place orders.
This saves time and money and Robert and his team will be looking for further ways of working with them to streamline the process.
‘Our plan is that our IT systems will enable users to order direct from the supplier by electronic means from their terminals.
This is the way many other forward-thinking organisations are going.’
As Robert points out this is the first time that this function has been run as a single corporate entity.
‘Our new structure is already paying dividends.
We still have location-based teams but these work in partnership to make the best use of specific expertise at particular sites.
We also have a small team responsible for driving corporate initiatives.
For example they are looking at how the best of what other people do can be applied in the AEA.’
One major project for the corporate purchasing team is a tender exercise for the aggregated electricity supply to all AEA sites in England.
They plan to do the same for other utility supplies later in the year.
Director of Estates Mike Pilbeam comments ‘I am very keen that Purchasing and Supply plays a full role in the development and implementation of the commercial strategy that we are pursuing generally in Estates where a key to success will be our relationship with our suppliers and our customers.’
This means that an even more professional service must be the goal.
Robert Nicol emphasises the need to train and equip his team to deliver this.
It is also a priority to achieve full QA accreditation.
‘Things are a far cry from the old days when purchasing was perceived as a routine activity governed by rules and procedures.
Today there is scope for flair and creativity and for making a major contribution to AEA's profitability.’
‘It's crucial at the forefront of science, to spend a fair slice on research and development’
Investing in our future
Even in the thick of recession, companies in the UK have spent six per cent more on research and development in 1992 than in the previous year.
It shows how seriously companies take research and development and for AET this represents ‘our biggest single area of investment.’
‘IT IS crucial that a company such as ours — at the forefront of science and engineering — spends a fair slice on research and development,’ said Dr Stuart Nelson, managing director of our Industrial Business Group.
‘What's more, this investment is needed if we are to stay ahead of the game.’
AEA investment in its Corporate Investment in Research and Exploitation — CIRE — programme currently equates to around five to six per cent of business turnover.
‘This equates to some £18 million this year,’ he said.
‘This compares favourably with companies in our business sector.
‘Four per cent is the average figure for companies in the electrical and electronics field, whilst three and a half per cent is common in the aerospace and chemical fields,’ added Stuart.
‘So with the exception of the pharmaceutical industry, which traditionally spends a high proportion of turnover on research, we fare very well.’
Streamlined
Administration of the CIRE programme, with the retirement of Dr Ron Bullough as chief scientist and director of research, has now been updated and streamlined.
These moves will ensure that the programme better supports the longer term strategies of our business, as well as maintaining AEA's recognised technical excellence in the scientific community and giving more value for money.
‘It is or intention to ensure that the money is well spent,’ Stuart explained.
‘It is an investment in our future and it is crucial that we get good returns.’
The programme, which presently consists of some 350 projects, now moves further away from the old underlying research approach — concerned primarily with excellence — towards that of a purposefully managed portfolio of quality technical investment projects supporting AEA's business aims.
Management of the programme is now overseen by Stuart and Dr Derek Pooley, managing director of our Nuclear Business Group, and detailed assistance is provided by Ken Currie's Business Strategy Unit.
‘Money will only be invested in ideas where we can see a gain,’ said Ken.
‘We will look at projects which can offer a pay back in up to five years, except in the case of new business investment projects — NBIPs — which require a shorter return on investment.
These NBIPs are fairly large, potentially risky projects which can yield significant returns in the short term.
‘Around a third of CIRE investment is spent in this area,’ said Ken.
‘The Computational Fluid Dynamics Service is a good focused example of how this money can be used to open up potentially lucrative markets and innovative technology.’
Research managers within our business will be responsible for the supervision of individual projects — and ensuring their value for money — except in the case of NBIPs which will be monitored corporately.
Our new chief scientist, Dr Marshall Stoneham has responsibility for monitoring the technical quality of the work and advising on ways of achieving greater research effectiveness through inter-business cooperation.
In Stuart's view, one way of perhaps increasing value for money is encouraging our customers to pay for certain areas of research.
‘Supplementing our own investment with money from customers is certainly more cost effective.’
he said.
‘We get a large proportion of our funding from the CEC  and we obtain money from the Department of Trade and Industry's LINK programme for collaborative research ventures.’
He went on, ‘Under the new CIRE  arrangements we will be refocusing on product areas.
We will also ensure that we maintain our skills base.’
The business development executives will have significant input into the programme.
‘With the detailed market knowledge that they are now building up, the business development executives will prove crucial in highlighting new markets and products that we could effectively exploit.’
To date, there have been many projects and ideas that have benefited from CIRE funding.
According to CIRE programme secretary, Dr Roger Thetford, the projects cover an enormous range.
‘In some cases, investment is geared by participation in a CEC programme,’ he said.
‘For example, a neural networks project grew out of a Harwell-led European initiative, ANNIE.
We are now collaborating with Perkin-Elmer in marketing MatchFinder, a neural network that recognises patterns produced by spectrometers.’
He added, ‘CIRE money has also been used to develop other neural network products such as the dynamic signature-recognition system that can detect forged signatures on cheques and credit cards.’
Another successful project investigated the production of improved phosphor coatings — for display tubes and the like — by a sol-gel process.
‘This technology has led to a better-quality product which can be used in high-definition displays,’ said Roger.
Nuclear projects also receive a significant slice of CIRE investment.
‘We are currently spending money on finding the basic properties of advanced mixed oxide nuclear fuels and how the fuel oxidises during the manufacturing process.
This joint venture with British Nuclear Fuels is already receiving orders for the fuel to be used in thermal reactors.’
Biggest area of investment
‘The £18 million we currently spend on research and development shows how serious we are at strengthening our science and engineering skills base,’ emphasised Stuart.
‘This represents our single biggest area of investment.
‘As William Waldegrave's recent White Paper highlighted, the country's future depends on the effective exploitation of science and technology.
Not only that, our own future as a leading science and technology business demands that we keep ahead of our competition by securing the maximum possible benefit from our research.’
STAYING AHEAD — research and development represents AEA's biggest single area of investment.
Apple a day
Don't be under pressure to become under weight
ANOREXIA NERVOSA is an eating disorder which has become an increasing problem over recent years especially as there is so much pressure these days to be ‘thin’.
It usually affects young women from all backgrounds, but tends to be more common in those engaged in employment or activities that emphasise leanness or fitness to improve performance or appearance.
What are its features I hear you ask?
Well, it is abnormally low body weight for age and height, an intense fear of gaining weight despite being underweight and a misperception of body size and denial of the problem.
Its other features are loss of periods, anxious or obsessive behaviour especially related to appearance or food, low self esteem, moodiness and depression.
Various behaviours are used to induce a loss in weight and in addition to the obvious ones of the avoidance of foot and undereating, including binge eating, self-induced vomiting, laxative use and the use of other drugs (appetite suppressants and diuretics).
Medical complications are common and are caused by starvation or weight reduction habits.
They include:
heart failure
kidney failure
bowel disorders
muscle/nervous disorders
fractures
blood disorders
dental problems
The treatment for most people who are moderately or seriously ill is usually undertaken at a specialist unit.
Nowadays techniques such as counselling, psychotherapy, goals planning and rewards-based therapies are used.
Because of the severity of the undernutrition most patients require ten to twelve weeks of in-patient treatment during which time they begin to eat normal meals.
They are discharged when they reach their target weight.
Anorexia Nervosa is a long term illness and regular follow-up appointments are necessary.
Care and support falls on medical staff, workmates, family and friends.
Relapses are common and helpers should have realistic expectations.
The seriousness of the disorder should not be underestimated, as between four and eighteen per cent of those becoming ill develop long-term ill-health or die.
Those requiring further information or help should contact the Eating Disorders Association at:
They operate a telephone counselling service, as well as running self-care groups and producing an informative newsletter.
If you have further queries on this or any other topic, please give me — or one of my colleagues — a call.
I am on Winfrith extension 3460.
Facing up to safety
Nearly 700 local children took the initiative on safety last month and earned a certificate from Harwell to prove it!
For the second year running Ridgeway House played host to the ‘Junior Citizen Project’ run by Thames Valley Police.
The 10-year-olds followed an adventure route of ‘real life’ scenarios challenging them to think of how to deal with emergency situations that they might have to face in daily life.
‘Never thought it would happen to me’
Dounreay's Myrtle is ‘thrilled’ with MBE news
GAELIC GIRL — Myrtle conducts the Melvich Gaelic choir, a job she has undertaken since 1981.
‘A BOLT from the blue’ is how Dounreay's Myrtle Gillies described hearing of her ‘thrilling’news that she had been awarded the MBE in The Queen's birthday honours.
‘I was absolutely amazed as it was so unexpected,’ explained Myrtle.
‘You always read about others getting these awards, but I never thought it would happen to me.’
Living in such a rural community ensured that no one escaped the news.
‘It's been great because every one has shared in the pleasure of it’, she added, ‘All my friends and colleagues have been so enthusiastic and my family are over the moon.’
Wonderful times
Myrtle joined AEA in 1961 as an assistant scientific officer and stayed with the Metallurgy Division until March this year.
She presently works with the Corporate Safety Directorate dealing site emergency planning.
‘The past 32 years at Dounreay have been wonderful.
Anything I have accomplished in that time ranks as only a minor contribution compared with the achievements of the Fast Reactor research and development team,’ she said.
‘I feel all these people rightfully share in this award.’
She is perhaps better known to the local community for her involvement with two Gaelic choirs.
Myrtle is a founder member of the Melvich Gaelic Choir — and has served as its conductor since 1981 — and conducts the Coisir Chataibh Choir.
She is also an elder of the Strathy and Halladale church and captain of the local Girls Brigade.
Would the honour change her?
‘No way.
Well, I hope not,’ she added.
‘However, it does give you a huge personal lift and it is great recognition for the work you do.’
DEATHS
Outside Lane
What drives women in 1993?
AS DEALERS prepare for an ‘L’ of a rush as August fast approaches, they can expect that far more of their customers than ever before are going to be women.
In fact the numbers of female motorists has risen sharply over the past few years and since 1987 the number has almost doubled.
There are currently more than 12 million female motorists — almost half of this country's 25 million drivers — and each day women are passing their tests in greater numbers than men.
It is estimated that this August, a third of all new L registration cars will be bought by women.
What's more, a large number of husbands and boyfriends will be heavily influenced in the car they choose by the woman in their life.
According to a report by the Automobile Association — Women and Cars — the typical British woman motorist enjoys driving, is confident behind the wheel and sees her car as a necessary tool for work and a social life.
The report claims, however, that she dislikes using public transport, multi-storey car parks and driving on motorways.
In fact, almost 20 per cent have never driven on their own on a motorway and many fear breaking down and being attacked whilst using them.
‘Many women do not feel comfortable on motorways,’ said the report's author, Sue Cassell.
‘Yet they are Britain's safest roads in terms of accidents and access to emergency services, and women should be encouraged to use those roads.’
Despite this, the car — in times of increasing violent crime and reduced public transport — is seen as crucial to women's freedom.
The report reveals that 88 per cent of women, if travelling alone, would not use the train at night, 83 per cent would not use the bus and an amazing 46 per cent would rather not use a taxi.
No fault, no pay
THE COST of comprehensive insurance premiums should drop now that one of the major insurance companies has followed General Accident and withdrawn from the ‘knock-for-knock’ agreement.
Norwich Union says that drivers of cars that can be costly to repair and low-risk policy holders could save up to 15 per cent.
‘Knock-for-knock’, where an insurer pays for damage to the car covered under its policy — regardless of blame, has become unpopular as it passes on the costs of settling claims to comprehensive policy holders.
Under the new proposals, simple formulae will be used to apportion blame and work out the ratio of costs to be paid by each insurance company.
PRIZE WORD SEARCH
RETIREMENTS
Oatcakes, cow dung and swamps — but Power Challenge '93 was fun!
Power and the glory
WADING THROUGH mud or swimming through a cold ravine with just a few oatcakes and nuts to keep you going is not very one's cup of tea, but for six Risley lads it was fun.
‘Fun, in a perverse sort of way,’ said Chris Kingscott of Reactor Services, describing their involvement in Power Challenge '93, claimed to be the largest corporate event ever to be held in this country.
Representing AEA, the six — Kevin Shannon, Mark Davies, Keith Jones, Richard Judge, Chris Wheatley and, of course, Chris — finished joint ninth out of a field of 63 team from all sectors of the electricity generating industry.
‘We surprised ourselves.
It was not bad for a first try from a scratch team,’ added Chris.
‘We all enjoyed ourselves and, more importantly, we hope to raise about £900.’
The event — which last year raised over £68000 for the benefit of young people who are disabled, unemployed on probation or from ethnic minorities — consisted of numerous tests, designed to challenge the lads' teamwork, communication, leadership and ingenuity.
New identities
The theme for the weekend of gruelling tests was espionage and all the participants had to tackle such missions as forging passports and assuming new identities, navigating through woods, building a reactor and a boat, as well as finding the spy, code breaking and building a rocket nose cone to confuse the enemy.
‘With James Bond theme tunes ringing the air, we soon learnt our new motto —‘shimply shplendid’(apologies to Sean Connery),’ said Chris Wheatley.
‘The event started with a gentle warm-up session — aerobics in a wet field recently sprayed with cow dung!
We should have realised that this was a sign of things to come.’
The hardest task for the lads was swamp skiing, a severe test of cooperative behaviour where they had to navigate a 50 metre course barred by three electrified barriers on two 10 foot planks of wood.
‘Team spirit reached an all time low on this one, but at least we didn't come to blows,’ added Chris.
Teamwork and communication
According to Tony Taig, business development executive for utilities and the team's sponsor, the lads did really well.
‘It was a damn good weekend,’ he said.
‘These events are great at encouraging teamwork and communication and I would be keen to support others in this type of activity.’
Reflecting, Chris thought that they had learnt a lot about working as a team.
‘Each person had a huge role to play,’ he said.
‘Our final position showed that we had quite a bit of initiative and stamina.
In fact, we were shimply shplendid!’
LIKELY — Chris Wheatley, Mark, Kevin, Chris, Richard and Keith wonder what they have let themselves in for and, below, they get to grips with crossing a very cold lake.
LOOK OUT — Mark Davies finds time to study a model reactor which the team had to reconstruct.
Annual Review 1992/93
An AEA Times Supplement
A springboard for growth
£23 million operating profit is a sure base
AEA is poised to capitalise on the hard work of the last three years and realise its carefully-laid plans for the future, according to John Maltby.
Writing in the Annual Review for 1992-93, AEA's former chairman, says: ‘Results for the year were satisfactory and, although turnover was marginally lower, operating profits of some £23 million demonstrate the quality of the underlying business and confirm that we have a sure base on which to build.
The efforts made to focus on new opportunities are now paying off.’
At £415 million, turnover is £10 million lower than 1991–92 and reflects the currently difficult economic climate and a deterioration in trading conditions for a substantial component of our UK government business.
Within this year's operational costs, some £62 million was set aside to reshape and restructure AEA to enable us to develop as a successful commercial business.
This covered costs associated with reducing the workforce and with making essential improvements to the utilities infrastructure.
New business won in both nuclear and industrial sectors
On a positive note, in this last year there have been many achievements of major contracts completed and new business won in both nuclear and industrial sectors.
There was significant growth in UK private sector industry from £40 million in 1991-92 to £47 million (17 per cent) and overseas sales increased from £43.7 million to £47.4 million (eight per cent ).
World class teams drawing on quality support
The industrial businesses also increased their turnover by 15 per cent from £105 million in 1991-92 to £121 million this year, reinforcing one of AEA's aims of diversifying its customer base and opportunities have been created both in the UK and overseas as a result of acquisitions and joint ventures.
‘We enjoy a powerful and broad skill base’ writes John Maltby, ‘with world class teams drawing on high quality support.
All have risen to the challenges of the year in many different ways and have helped ensure our future progress.
I would like to express my appreciation to all who have worked so hard.
‘For all the vicissitudes of the past, AEA remains a remarkably coherent enterprise, base don advanced scientific and engineering expertise.
It has a wealth of products and skills to sell and ready markets to serve.
It is constantly adapting to meet the requirements of its customers.’
The Fiscal Year at a glance
We work in partnership with customers to help them exploit innovative technology.
Towards a robust and profitable business
We have continued to make progress towards our objective of establishing AEA as a commercially robust and profitable international business, writes chief executive Dr Brian Eyre.
The operating profit of £23 million reflects the underlying trend of a sound business and provides a good base on which to build, he says.
Inevitably the recession and particularly the continuing decrease in the Government's role as a customer for nuclear technology has continued to exert pressures on our turnover with the associated need to adjust our cost base and structure.
We have therefore provided for further restructuring in response to these pressures and to ensure that AEA is fully prepared to win new business in a highly competitive marketplace.
Those of use who have worked so hard to ensure that the UK retained its position as one of the world's leaders in fast reactor technology must register disappointment following the Government's decision to cease funding our participation in the European Fast Reactor R&D programme.
But we accept that there is not a customer for this work and we are getting on with the job of ensuring that the business as a whole continues to develop positively.
Strong portfolio
Our future lies in building a broadly-based business serving not only our Government and nuclear industry customers but many others including those in aerospace, oil and gas, process and manufacturing industries.
I am pleased that we have made good progress in this strategy by gaining a strong portfolio of business in the UK private sector and overseas.
However, it is vital that AEA continues to develop.
That is why we have made some changes to the business structure and appointed business development executives to lead a new thrust in business development.
The focus of this will be the expansion of sales to the private sector and to selected overseas markets.
That too is why we welcome the appointment by the Government of consultants to examine the feasibility of privatisation as an important step along the path of establishing ourselves as an independent business.
We and our advisors are now working with the Department of Trade and Industry and its advisors to determine the optimum way forward.
The broadening horizon of AEA
A year of continuing diversification
The task ahead has been clearly recognised and 1992–93 has been a year in which we have continued to apply our skills and core technologies across the wider spectrum of human endeavour from healthcare to the care of the environment in which we live.
Very significantly, many of the examples of our recent work on these pages have involved joint ventures with other organisations both in the UK and overseas.
In his introduction to the Annual Review, Dr Eyre stressed the importance of strengthening our opportunities for new business by forming commercial partnerships by acquisition and joint ventures.
These form the major planks in our future strategy.
There are 20 instances currently of our involvement in external business ventures with many others under review.
These include:
the recent purchase of Sonomatics Ltd to broaden our non-destructive testing capability;
the joint venture with BNFL to exploit the potential of mixed oxide nuclear fuel;
the joint venture with Hunting Engineering and Brown & Root to form the Hunting-BRAE consortium to manage AWE;
the AEA O'Donnell joint venture providing reactor services in the USA;
the setting up of CFDS Inc. in the USA to exploit the rapidly developing market for computational fluid dynamics;
the merger with Warren Spring laboratory to create a major centre for environmental research.
On these pages we review some of the recent commercial successes which combine to form the foundation of our new business.
Consultancy
Many companies and organisations throughout the world turned to AEA for consultancy and help during the past year.
We were able to offer solutions to a wide variety of problems from decontaminating nuclear facilities to assessing the safety of new rail links.
Cleaning up in Eastern Europe
Our experience and wide range of multi-disciplinary skills enable us to tackle complex and difficult tasks.
Among these, AEA is actively helping the countries of Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union clean up various types of contamination resulting from Chernobyl and a variety of other nuclear and non-nuclear activities.
Following extensive international concern over the levels of safety of the older power reactors in the former USSR, AEA has been appointed to manage an international programme of safety evaluation for RBMK-type reactors in Russia, Lithuania and Ukraine.
We are also a member of another European Commission-funded international consortium which is evaluating the safety of VVER reactors in Ukraine and Bulgaria.
Our staff are also active in Slovakia and Hungary.
Environmental safety worldwide
The protection of our environment world-wide is also a major focus for our expertise, and waste management consultancy is just one of the services for which our customers turn to our Environmental Safety Centre.
This year we have been involved in projects in both Hong Kong and Mauritius, while our Waste Management Information Bureau, which draws on the resources of the whole of AEA, has responded to a record number of enquiries during the year.
Our international standing as managing agents and consultants in energy efficiency and renewable energy was highlighted this year when the International Energy Agency appointed ETSU as its overall manager for the analysis and dissemination of renewable energy technologies.
ETSU will be responsible for gathering and analysing data on international projects and devising worldwide distribution of the results to governments, utilities and industry.
First in safety
A number of major programmes for the European Commission keep us closely tuned to the increasingly important European standards and directives in safety and reliability.
Our EGRESS computer model, which has received widespread media attention, is a world leader in assessing the safety of people in complex structures.
In the Netherlands, industry has already benefited from the presence of AEA Technology (Netherlands) BV, launched in November 1992; safety and reliability is the main focus of the new subsidiary.
In Hungary, the process industry looked to us for safety advice and provided our first contract in Eastern Europe.
The oil and gas industry has benefited from our expertise in flow measurement to develop a unique failure modes effect analysis of offshore fire protection systems.
Other industries, such as transport and water, also turn to us increasingly in matters of safety and reliability.
We have been appointed to handle all safety management aspects of Crossrail, the high profile cross-London rail link planned by British Rail and London Underground.
International partnerships
Technology transfer in the UK and overseas is one of AEA's prime activities.
In the Far East, the Indonesian government awarded us a major contract for the design of a fuel transfer and storage system for their research centre near Jakata.
A number of our staff have been seconded to reactor centres around the world to assist in the transfer of a variety of technologies, including silicon neutron doping, high pressure water loop procurement, installation, commissioning and operation, reactor safety assessment and decommissioning studies.
In France, we have collaborated with Technicatome and Siemens of Germany to undertake repairs to the Institut Laue Langevin's high flux reactor at Grenoble.
Oil and gas production
In the North Sea, our skills in multiphase flow, heat transfer, separator design and vibration analysis have combined to help UK and Norwegian operators increase production throughput.
Our transient pipeline analysis code has been further developed into a saleable workstation or PC-based product which was released in February 1993.
An increasing number of customers have turned to our Petroleum Engineering laboratories for scale prevention and optimisation services.
The DTI continues to receive the support of a dedicated team providing oil reservoir services and has recently agreed that we can offer these skills to the oil industry; expansion of our home market is now a key target.
Technical services
AEA offers a wide range of highly-competitive technical services.
In all cases, clients can benefit from our ability to bring all our multidisciplinary skills and resources to bear on their problems.
High-tech healthcare
Over a number of years AEA has been actively transferring technology developed in other sectors into the area of healthcare, where we are involved in a wide range of activities which include the development and full-scale clinical trials of new medical products.
One highly visible example of this work is ‘AEA in Orthopaedics’, the point of contact for clients to gain easy access to our comprehensive range of services relating to the design, testing and manufacture of orthopaedic implants, which already has contracts with the Department of Health and all major orthopaedic implant manufacturers.
We have also joined with Bio Flo, a major healthcare industry supplier, to develop an artificial liver for Corin Medical we have used X-ray absorptiometry to measure the bone changes around new artificial hips in arthritic patients.
In a very human example of technology transfer, children at several hospitals in the UK and abroad have had unsightly birthmarks (sometimes called ‘port-wine stains’) treated by a new laser system developed by AEA and licensed to SLS Ltd.
At one hospital alone almost 300 children were treated in a single marathon session entitled ‘Light Relief’.
AEA has also developed a novel system for sterilising medical equipment and this is undergoing trials at a major UK teaching hospital.
New materials test facility
The new Advanced Engineering Materials Facility, opened by the Minister for Trade and Technology in March this year, will undertake process development services, prototype design and manufacture, and short-run production enabling customers to evaluate new processes.
It will also provide a focus for our growing business in uranium metal processing.
Our core expertise
AEA's ability to tackle unique nuclear recovery tasks was highlighted this year when we designed, built and operated a special plant to recover the nuclear material from unused fuel made for the German THTR reactor.
Our diverse expertise has been called upon during the past year for the retrieval of radioactive isotopes from redundant industrial fire detection systems, telephone dials and medical sources; the development of techniques for treating heavy metal discharges from industrial smelters; the provision of packages for radioactive  sources used by hospitals and health authorities.
Ron Parish of AEA and Peter Elliot, right of Thwaits and Reed, clockmakers, examine one of the faces of Big Ben prior to inspection and refurbishment of its hands and associated mechanism.
Last year we broke all records for reprocessing Materials Test Reactor fuel, handling 700 fuel elements and 2225kg of metal.
Contracts included the reprocessing of fuel from the University Research Reactor near Manchester and the last elements from the DIDO and PLUTO reactors at Harwell.
Combustion project extended
The European Commission has invited our Combustion Centre to extend its successful MID-COM project (Multi-dimensional Imaging Diagnostics for Combustion).
The technical programme will be co-ordinated by AEA, with support and input from the DTI and British Gas, Exxon, Perkins Technology, Rolls Royce and Shell among others.
Big savings from pump partnership
British Steel, National Power and North West Water are among participants in The Pump Centre, a major new co-operative initiative run by AEA which could save clients millions of pounds by improving awareness of the latest pumping technology among component suppliers, manufacturers and users.
Controlling airborne pollution
The Department of the Environment has appointed our Modelling and Assessments Department to run a major programme to study pollution in UK cities.
To help meet the growing need of many industries for complex measurement of the make-up of their materials, products, by-products and wastes, AEA last year launched the Aerosol Sciences Centre.
The Centre has been contracted by the European Community Bureau of Reference and the DTI's Valid Analytical Measurements Programme to collaborate with other organisations in the development of calibration standards for aerosol measurement equipment.
Nondestructive testing
A wide variety of industrial customers seek the help of our National Nondestructive Testing Centre.
With a number of major international partners, including Airbus Industrie and Lufthansa, we have set up a programme to assess safety factors on ageing aircraft; Pirelli commissioned us to conduct field inspections of joints in high voltage power distribution cables to meet quality assurance requirements.
Developing new markets
With an eye to new markets for our technical services, we are developing closer relationships with partners in Western Europe.
Technologies such as‘Silver II’, for the destruction of organic wastes, are also attracting international interest as an alternative to incineration, and we are making good progress with contracts for aspects of waste management in Japan.
In the field of process engineering the Heat Transfer and Fluid Flow Service has signed up a new customer, SNERDI, from the People's Republic of China.
Special products
AEA develops and supplies specialised products which can not only help to improve operations but also directly boost profitability.
A solution to a worldwide problem
The growing stockpile of used tyres is a worldwide problem addressed by AEA.
Our joint venture, AEA-Beven, has developed a batch pyrolysis unit to break down tyres to recyclable materials without producing damaging emissions.
The residue, a carbon-based char, can be used instead of activated carbon in, for instance, sewage works.
The first unit is now operating in Virginia, USA.
Utilising plutonium stocks
International interest in the sue of the plutonium from irradiated nuclear fuel has led to a joint venture with BNFL.
This material can be used in reactors by converting it into mixed (MOX) fuel.
At Windscale, a MOX Demonstration Facility for manufacturing thermal MOX fuel for pressurised water reactors was completed in January and the first contract has been secured from the Swiss utility NOK.
Fuel elements go overseas
The Netherlands, Germany and Australia are among our many overseas customers for nuclear products.
Last year, we produced 100 fuel elements for the German FRJ-2 reactor and 150 for the reactor operated in Australia by ANSTO.
The Petten reactor in the Netherlands now uses Mo99 generated from fuel elements manufactured in our newly-commissioned enriched uranium dispersed-fuel production line.
Another satisfied customer
Last year for the first time, Nuclear Electric was able to operate the Dungeness B nuclear power station at over 1200MWe, largely thanks to an AEA computer-based reactor protection system.
The level of safety provided by the system is of such a high standard that operational restrictions have been lifted on the station's two AGRs.
Nuclear Electric can now generate extra electricity worth up to £200,000 a day at almost no extra cost.
An outstanding year
1992–93 was an outstanding year for AEA in developing products for the oil and gas sector.
A prime example was the ultrasonic inspection vehicle for the Snorre Field Tension Leg Platform tethers which was delivered during the year to Saga Petroleum of Norway.
The vehicle was developed in a joint venture with Veritec of Norway and Tecnomare of Italy.
AEA's contribution included the ultrasonic systems, data transmission and associated software.
Another ultrasonic downhole inspection tool developed by AEA for the oil industry has undergone trials and is expected to make a major impact on traditional mechanical inspection techniques.
Alan Foster and Nick Graves carry out underwater examinations of irradiated fuel at  Scottish Nuclear's Hunterston B station.
Contract research and development
As a research-based organisation, AEA's future is dependent on the work done in its laboratories to provide a constant flow of products for the marketplace; in 1992–93, we invested £21 million on in-house R&D.
But our scientists and their research and development tools are themselves our most valuable resource, which can be employed to conduct experimental work for governments, other institutions and companies throughout the world.
At the frontiers of technology — Mike Vine assembles a solar drive for INMARSAT under ultra-clean conditions.
Customer service
Our research and development also provides continuing support to Nuclear Electric.
Last year, our experience in two important areas of nuclear power — fission product release and transport processes — has proved valuable in helping Nuclear Electric develop safety cases for power reactors.
AEA also contributes to the PWR safety programme; last year we further developed the INSPECT code, which is used to help predict the behaviour of iodine in a PWR loss of coolant accident.
In a programme which offers large potential cost savings to Nuclear Electric, we performed a series of tests aimed at strengthening the existing safety case for AGR fuel routes.
These tests determine the release of ruthenium and other fission products during oxidation of irradiated AGR fuel in the event of a refuelling incident.
Sunrise industries
Over the last two years, an increasing number of Japanese customers have shown an interest in the radiochemical facilities at Harwell, particularly in the modular shielded cell facility, and also in our computational expertise.
Our clients have included Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, Japan Atomic Energy Research Institute and Japan Nuclear Fuels Ltd.
Playing our part
During the past year we have continued to play a full part for the UK government in the international research effort which pursues nuclear fusion as a long term energy option.
Our accomplishments in 1992 included a significant contribution to the Joint European Torus (JET) project, excellent results from the Small Tight Aspect Ratio Tokamak (START) fusion device conceived by AEA, and successful modification of our COMPASS tokamak.
Our in-house experimental programme centres on these last two tokamaks.
COMPASS now operates with a vacuum vessel shaped to allow experiments which will focus on impurity control.
START has had outstanding experimental success this year, recording electron temperatures up to 5 million degrees C with excellent energy containment; it is important for the future development of fusion power that, after 13,000 discharges, no major instabilities have been observed for this low aspect ratio tokamak.
Who's who on the AEA Board
What the papers said about our results
THE QUESTION and answer session at our annual review press conference was comprehensive and detailed.
Journalists focused on a wide range of issues from specific aspects of our accounts for 1992/93 to the forms which privatisation may take and associated timing, to our projected future staffing levels.
Subsequent articles in the press tended to concentrate on:
The £62 million set aside to cover exceptional costs — as explained at the conference this was necessary to make us more competitive in the marketplace and included costs associated with restructuring our workforce and renewing our infrastructure.
The projected further reductions in staff numbers of some 1000 by March 1997.
One paper, the Warrington Guardian, misrepresented the situation by suggesting that these reductions would fall exclusively on Risley.
A bulletin was issued to all Risley employees pointing out that these projected losses would, in fact, be across AEA.
How our various nuclear liabilities would be handled under privatisation.
At the conference, we said that we recognise that government could not include the nuclear liabilities in any privatisation and that a solution would have to be found to retain these in the public sector.
The press also reported the fact that we had achieved operating profits of £23.4 million — no mean achievement in the current economic climate — increased turnover by our industrial businesses and significant growth in our UK private sector business and in overseas sales.
The press also showed an encouraging understanding of our mission to establish ourselves as a world-class scientific and engineering services business.
London's Evening Standard referred to ‘AEA Technology — the reshaped Atomic Energy Authority’ and the Daily Telegraph described us as the ‘re-styled AEA Technology.’
AEA's new chairman
Our new chairman is Sir Anthony Cleaver who assumed his responsibilities on 1 July.
Sir Anthony is also currently chairman of IBM UK Holdings Limited and hold non-executive directorships of General Accident and Smith and Nephew.