

LASMO
Darby takes challenge of LASMO leadership
Meeting of minds…
Joe Darby (right) and John Hogan map out their strategy to bring LASMO continued success
NEW management changes at the top of LASMO have seen Joe Darby appointed chief executive and John Hogan chief operating officer.
Joe replaces Chris Greentree, who leaves to pursue other interests after a 20-year career with the company.
Joe officially took the helm on 28 January.
He has been with LASMO since 1989, first as executive chairman of LASMO North Sea, then joining the board of directors and, more recently in June 1992, being appointed chief operating officer responsible for the day-to-day running of the group's worldwide operations.
At the same time John Hogan, managing director of LASMO North Sea for the past four years, steps up to become chief operating officer.
John is succeeded as managing director of LNS by Russell Harvey, previously the production and operations director.
‘I look forward to the challenge ahead with great enthusiasm,’ said Joe Darby.
‘LASMO is a remarkable success story.
Having started with nothing other than very modest share capital more than 20 years ago, it is now a major player on the UK and international scene.
Our assets are of high quality, our people are dedicated professionals and I believe, working as a team, we can take LASMO to new heights in the future.
‘Ordinarily I would have commented in some detail about our business, but cannot do so at this time as we are in a closed period prior to the announcement of our 1992 results on 24 March’.
However, Joe underlined that LASMO has embarked upon a strategy aimed at strengthening the group's financial position to create capacity for future investment in exploration and development opportunities worldwide.
Initially this will involve the disposal of certain peripheral and non-core assets to help drive down group debt and gearing.
‘At the same time we are addressing the fundamentals of our business; how to find oil and gas reserves at lower cost and how to develop them more profitably’.
‘Our overall objective, of course, is to generate profits and value for our shareholders and maintain a thriving business which will continue to offer challenging and satisfying employment prospects for all our staff.’
‘In the prevailing economic climate, dominated by low dollar oil prices, the task is not easy and demands a high level of cost consciousness which I shall be promoting throughout the group.’
Joe has nearly 25 years' experience in the oil industry.
He graduated with first class honours in oil technology from Imperial College London and his early career was spent with Amoco and Shell working in the UK, Netherlands, Guyana and Australia.
He joined Thompson North Sea in 1977 and rose to become chairman and chief executive, a position he held when LASMO acquired Thompson in 1989.
Joe warmly applauded his predecessor's achievements.
‘Chris was the architect of LASMO's tremendous expansion over the last decade, playing a particularly prominent role in our overseas development.
LASMO is now a billion barrel oil company involved in exploration and production in 12 countries, with production equivalent to 180,000 barrels of oil per day.
‘All of us pay tribute to Chris's achievements and wish him, and his wife Hilary, every success and happiness in the future’.
Chairman Lord Rees paid tribute to the 20-year contribution Chris had made to the company.
‘Since 1973 he has been associated with the development of LASMO from a small UK independent to its position today as a substantial international oil and gas exploration and production company’.
‘Chris has been in the international oil industry for 36 years.
His experience and knowledge will be missed.’
He added: ‘We believe Joe Darby is now the right man to take LASMO forward and to develop the company's full potential’.
As chief operating officer John Hogan will take overall responsibility for the management of LASMO's worldwide operations.
He has been managing director of LASMO North Sea for the last four years and has been responsible for the group's activities in the UK and Netherlands.
A geology graduate of Kings College, University of London, John has worked with Shell, Britoil and Elf in the UK and Europe.
He joined LASMO in 1981 and later transferred to the company's US subsidiary as exploration vice president, returning to the UK in 1989.
Russell Harvey, who succeeds John, is a mechanical engineering graduate of Imperial College, London.
He worked with Phillips Petroleum and Kerr McGee and gained production, field development and drilling experience in Norway and the US.
He joined LASMO in August 1991 and was subsequently appointed production and operations director in February 1992.
In this role he has been responsible for LASMO'S operated and non-operated North Sea projects.
The next issue of Pipeline will feature an interview with Joe Darby.
Priority call for ‘sour gas’ power stations boosts hopes for Liverpool Bay project
LASMO has welcomed the UK Trade and Industry Select Committee's recognition of the value of sour gas projects for electricity power generation.
‘British Energy Policy and the Market for Coal’, drawn up by an all-party House of Commons select committee on trade and industry, includes a recommendation to the House of Commons that in determining a licensing policy for gas-fired generating capacity, priority should be given to the construction of power stations which use sour gas as the main fuel.
Gas from the Liverpool Bay fields, in which LASMO has a 30 per cent interest, is described as ‘sour’ and contains a mixture of hydrogen sulphide and nitrogen.
It is not suitable for domestic purposes and can only be used for power generation.
In fact the select committee report identified Liverpool Bay as a prime example of a sour gas project, and therefore LASMO is encouraged that approval will be granted to allow this development to proceed.
Partners
Liverpool Bay partners LASMO, Hamilton and Monument have already spent more than £O million on the project and gas has been sold to Powergen, one of the UK's major power generators.
It is the generator's task to construct a new power station to accept the gas and turn it into electricity.
The UK energy review, of which the select committee's report is a part, began in October 1992.
It was prompted by nationwide dismay at an announcement that 31 out of 50 pits still operating in the UK were to close and up to 30,000 miners' jobs would be lost.
The select committee's remit was to ‘consider the consequences of British Coal's pit closure programme for the electricity consumer, the exchequer and the economy, and to examine alternative forms of energy in terms of prices.’
In doing so, the committee had to look not only at the use of coal in power stations but also the increasing use of gas.
Benefits
To ensure both sides of the issue were fully understood, UKOOA, acting on behalf of all UK operators, is urging the Government not to forget the benefits the offshore industry has brought to the UK economy — typical annual investment of over £9 billion — and huge contributions in royalties and taxes.
It says that up to 50,000 jobs in the oil and gas industry onshore, and 5,000 offshore jobs could be at risk if the government decides to impose constraints upon the industry's access to a free market.
UKOOA argues that this would discourage exploration and production around the UK and have a severe knock-on effect on the country's economy.
It fears that if there are no outlets for UK gas because gas-fired power stations are not being built, exploration and production companies will move their interests elsewhere.
The committee's report will be taken into consideration in the preparation of a White Paper, dealing with the pit closures and any other changes that might affect the energy market.
In mid-February, the Point of Ayr gas terminal in North Wales, which will process gas from Liverpool Bay, received planning permission from the Welsh Office.
The construction of this terminal and construction of the Connah's Quay power station will provide a major impetus for the local economy.
Hamilton has estimated that these two projects and the offshore development will create some 3,000 construction jobs and over 200 permanent jobs.
With a combined capital expenditure of £1.4 billion, it would also represent the largest single investment ever made in Wales.
Further news on the White Paper will be carried in the next issue of Pipeline .
Top team gets all the facts it needs
LASMO's ‘top team’ will get more of the facts and figures it needs before taking key decisions in future.
A major exercise now under way aims to upgrade the quality of information reaching chief executive Joe Darby and his follow board members.
This will help them to make better informed decisions on behalf of the company, its shareholders and employees worldwide.
The target is to establish a computer-based executive information system [EIS]within LASMO.
This will be along the lines of those pioneered with considerable success by other leading organisations, such as Phillips Petroleum and Amerada Hess.
Potential benefits for the company include cost savings, more effective reporting procedures, and a better understanding of the business in general.
Senior executives themselves, meanwhile, can anticipate time saving, less paper to wade through, improved communication and more effective meetings.
A steering committee headed by project manager Keith Ebbels, with exploration and production director Tom King as executive sponsor and IT input from Richard Smith and Hans Kammer, is driving the initiative in LASMO.
Phase 1 puts exploration and production in the spotlight.
Completion of this first phase is anticipated by Q3 1993, to be followed in turn by other areas of the business — accounting, treasury, personnel, and so on— until ultimately the whole company is covered.
Keith said: ‘The less time company chiefs spend waiting for information, interpreting it and then debating whether it's right or not, the more they can devote to deciding what action needs to be taken.
Once everything is in place with our EIS, LASMO's directors will be far better equipped — as we say — to run the business by the bow wave rather than through the rear view mirror’.
Even in 1993, Keith points out, management information reaching the boardroom in a great many companies is often of poor quality, not timely, not relevant or unintelligible.
A BP survey, for example, revealed that barely 30 per cent of internal reports in that organisation came up to the mark.
Now LASMO aims to keep its own directors and managers up to speed with high-calibre intelligence from all quarters.
But, according to Keith, this will take more than simply organising hardware and writing the appropriate software.
He said: ‘In a company such as ours there is a huge reservoir of potentially valuable information simply lying around untapped, maybe in someone's head or gathering dust in a file somewhere.
We need to get it onto management information databases [MIS], where it can be accessed and used by the EIS system when required.
This is something which, historically, we have not paid enough attention to, however implementing an EIS will force this very worthwhile discipline on the whole company.
‘As we progress, these databases will be adapted and improved to see if they exactly meet users’ needs.
But there is another side to this exercise.
We must get the human issues right.
This means changing people's way of thinking and working, maybe breaking down fences and getting them to share information they might for some reason be reluctant to divulge.
‘We accept, for example, that the chief executive could always ring someone up.
But he might get the wrong person for his needs, possibly due to vacation, sickness, or the respondent may misunderstand the question, indeed, may well be unaware that certain information actually exists.
‘Our EIS software will extract validated data and convert it into a more user-friendly form — charts, graphs and tables — allowing ‘drill down’ to greater levels of detail within a subject.
‘It is important that we break the system into manageable tasks and tackle them each in turn, in order of priority.
So in future we hope that, if anyone needs to have an up-to-date picture of the reserves in, say, Nova Scotia, they could just click it up on screen rather than have to wade through some hefty document or wait for someone to get back to them.’
Richard Smith commented: ‘This is a very challenging and wide-ranging project.
We understand why people don't care for reporting, and it's often because they'd rather get on and drill or explore or sort out problems.
‘But, apart from any other considerations, it is very often a statutory obligation, and we must get our reporting organised and controlled.
‘Initially, this will put pressure on certain people.
But each of us must keep our information up-to-date so the company as a whole can be up-to-date, too.’
Keith added: ‘Within LASMO we have already detected a healthy scepticism in what we are trying to do.
Some people believe we are going to be spending large sums of money on this project, while others remain to be convinced of its worth.
‘However, the fact is that most of the work is being done in-house using existing resources.
We shall not be throwing everything into the air and rewriting systems that already work satisfactorily.
Our approach is to be one of evolution rather than revolution.
‘We are simply doing what we have to do.
Companies who do not adopt this EIS culture into the ‘90s will certainly go the way of the dinosaur.
Those who do will have the competitive edge that ensures future business success.’
Oil discovery in Algeria
LASMO and its co-venturers, has announced news of an oil discovery in Algeria.
Exploration well EMK 1, drilled to a target depth of 3,750 metres, revealed the presence of hydrocarbons in two Triassic zones.
In the first test zone, the well produced oil at a rate of 1,972 barrels of oil per day and 3.7 million cubic feet of gas.
In the second test zone, oil and gas flowed at daily rates of 1,750 barrels and 13.6 million cubic feet respectively.
Working interests in the block are Anadarko Algeria Corporation [operator], 50 per cent; LASMO Oil Algeria and Maersk Oile Algeriet A/S, 25 per cent each.
N Sea sales realise £210m
Major deals concluded at ‘favourable’ prices as rationalisation moves ahead.
A SERIES of major asset disposals in the North Sea has raised more than £210 million for the LASMO group.
The disposals are part of LASMO's continuing asset rationalisation programme and include interests in producing fields and exploration acreage.
Companies involved in the key transactions were Deminex UK, Murphy Oil Corporation, Pentex Oil and Enterprise Oil.
Despite a very depressed North Sea market the disposals have been made at prices which compare favourably with those achieved for recent industry sales.
John Hogan, chief operating officer, said: ‘We have realised full value for the assets and the successful completion of the transactions reflects admirably on the skills of our staff in all departments.
‘We concluded the two most significant North Sea deals of 1992 and the total value of our disposals accounted for nearly half of all North Sea transactions in the last year.’
Largest
In the largest transaction, interests in 17 blocks were sold to Deminex for £105.8 million.
These include LASMO's entire holdings in the Bruce and Keith fields [blocks 9/8a and 9/9b], the M fields [blocks 22/20 and 23/16a]and a 25 per cent interest in block 16/12a — containing the ‘Tree’ fields — Pine, North and South Birch and Elm.
LASMO remains as operator of this block with a 33.85 per cent interest.
John said: ‘By reducing our holding in this block we are spreading our risk and freeing up funds for development elsewhere.
Pre-development studies are under way on South Birch and a final development decision is due to be taken later this year.’
None of the Deminex assets are currently producing but, in total, the package contains some 36 million barrels of oil equivalent which were booked by LASMO as commercial reserves.
LASMO's second largest sale was to Murphy Oil Corporation of the US which acquired an 8.52 per cent interest in the T-block development for US$100 million [£62 million].
The Agip-operated T-block contains the Tiffany, Toni and Thelma fields and first oil is expected in mid 1993.
Interests
Other transactions included the sale of working interests in the producing Balmoral and Maureen fields to Pentex Oil for US$30 million [last summer, Pentex bought the onshore interests of LASMO including the oil producing Stockbridge field in southern England]; the sale of interests in blocks 22/27a and 29/2a both containing gas discoveries, to Enterprise Oil for £15.2 million; and the sale of a minor interest in Netherlands block K9 to a subsidiary of Goal Petroleum for £2.2 million.
The disposals have changed the shape of LASMO's North Sea portfolio.
The number of blocks has been reduced by 25 per cent to 125 and the number of blocks with working interests of 10 per cent or less has been reduced by 42 per cent.
John said: ‘The bulk of our North Sea business is now concentrated in three sub-basins — the Central North Sea around Piper and Saltire; the Southern Gas Basin, including Markham and Caister; and the Liverpool Bay complex with the Hamilton, Hamilton North, Douglas and Lennox developments.’
Programme
Outside the UK, the disposal of peripheral assets has continued.
At the end of December LASMO announced the sale of its 3.75 per cent interest in the South East Sumatra Production Sharing Contract to Itochu [formerly C.Itoh]of Japan.
This transaction has raised approximately US$19.5 million.
Earlier 1992 sales of peripheral assets included Ultramar Oil and Gas — completing LASMO's withdrawal from the US, the Australian interests of Ultramar and half of LASMO's 55 per cent share holding in LASMO Canada Inc [now renamed Elan energy].
Chief executive Joe Darby said: ‘These sales form a key part of the group's continuing programme to focus the business and reduce debt and gearing.
‘The latest announcements bring the amount raised from the 1992/93 disposal programme to over £1 billion, of which £363 million represents proceeds from peripheral upstream assets.
The balance relates to Ultramar's downstream business.’
Satisfactory
Joe is keen to emphasise that the upstream sales would not have been concluded for less than full value.
He said: ‘We have achieved very satisfactory prices under difficult market conditions.
‘We have a clear groupwide strategy to establish a sound financial business with the capacity for future investment in the many exploration and development opportunities we have around the world.
‘Our objective is to generate profit and value for our shareholders, and create a thriving business with challenges and satisfying employment prospects for our staff.’
As Pipelline went to press LASMO announced it had signed an agreement for the sale of its remaining Australian interests to SAGASCO Resources Ltd for Aus$10 million [£4.8 million].
The interests comprise exploration permits in the Carnarvon and Bonaparte Basin in Western Australia, and their sale marks the end of the company's exploration and production activities in Australia.
Kadanwari gets the go-ahead for 1995
LASMO has signed contracts for the sale of gas from the Kadanwari field with the Pakistan government and the Sui Southern Gas Company.
The field, operated by LASMO Oil Pakistan, has estimated reserves of more than 700 billion cu ft.
It is due on stream in 1995 and is expected to meet about 10 per cent of Pakistan's total current gas consumption.
The field lies in the Sindh province in southern Pakistan within the Tajjal concession area.
It was discovered by LASMO in 1989 and has been successfully appraised by three wells, all of which flowed gas on test rates in the range 29–38 million cu ft per day from a depth of 3,300m.
Gas will be processed on site and sold under a 15-year contract to the SSGC, which is constructing a 408 km pipeline from Kadanwari to Karachi.
Initial plateau production is planned at 152 million cu ft a day from six wells.
Working interests in the Kadanwari field are LASMO Oil Pakistan [operator], 18.42 per cent; Kufpec [Pakistan]and Idemitsu Pakistan Oil Exploration, both 15.79 per cent ; and the Oil and Gas Development Corporation, 50 per cent .
Festival strikes a chord with young musicians
MUSIC students in Scotland and London are tuning up for the first annual LASMO Music Festival to be held in the theatre at Haddo House, Aberdeen, on 22 June.
The festival is the main activity associated with the LASMO arts Trust which was launched at the inauguration of the Staffa oil field last year.
It is LASMO's first venture into the field of arts sponsorship.
The trust, which runs for five years, is chaired by the Marchioness of Aberdeen and Temair and administered by the National Youth Orchestra of Scotland.
It is designed to provide encouragement and financial support to five outstanding young students considering a professional career in music.
Five music schools will be contacted and asked to nominate one candidate each who will then be asked to play a short piece to be judged at the festival.
Cash prizes will be offered to the winners.
This year LASMO is delighted to have Lady Barbirolli, widow of the great conductor and a famous oboist herself, as chair of the judging panel for the first competition evening.
Haddo House and its 180 acres of gardens lies about 20 miles north of Aberdeen.
It was designed in 1731 by William Adam, and much of the beautiful interior is ‘Adam Revival’ carried out about 1880.
Just the ticket for lucky Anne
Haddo House, venue for the LASMO Music Festival
Long Service awards.
Long Service Awards.
Long Service Awards
Write on!
Eddie has golden touch
LASMO's second longest-serving employee celebrated 15 years with the company at an awards lunch just before Christmas.
Eddie Titcomb, manager of Pensions and Equity Participation, joined in September 1976 as the company accountant and assistant secretary and has been a LASMO man ever since.
Only Sue Lewis, secretary to Lord Rees, can better that record.
‘When I joined the company there were only six LASMO employees in total,’ he says.
‘But the increase in staff numbers is only one of the dramatic changes I have seen within the company.
On another level, for example, the size of office premises has grown tremendously over the years.’
Back in 1976, Eddie was responsible for the group's published accounts and three years later became company secretary, assuming responsibility for office administration and personnel during his time in that post.
He stayed there until February last year when he took up his current position heading a three person unit within the Personnel department.
Away from the office, Eddie is very much a family man.
He lives with his wife and two children in Amersham and is currently taking golf lessons with one of his sons at a local club.
He is also a keen tennis player, running the men's winter league at his club and even makes time to teach cycling awareness to youngsters at nearby Holmer Green.
Two into one goes nicely in Rome!
LASMO's Rome office combined two celebrations into one, presenting its long service awards at December's Christmas dinner.
Martin Scott, managing director Central Region, presented Brian Hodgson with a 10-year award and Naya Youssoufian with one for five years.
The festivities began with cocktails in the candlelit general manager's room where Prosecco and Martini flowed freely.
All staff were accompanied by their partners, the room was covered with festive decorations, Christmas songs were played, and even Santa Claus put in an appearance.
Santa — Enrico Pozza, LASMO Rome computer officer — called each person in turn onto his knee.
He followed this up by giving everyone a present.
The party then moved off down the Spanish Steps to the Hotel della Villa where the main dinner and presentations took place.
An all together great occasion
FIVE years ago LASMO Pakistan was formed, so with great pride the office has now celebrated its first long service awards.
The only 10 year awards were for those who had worked for LASMO elsewhere — Rupert Kidd, LASMO Pakistan's general manager, and Chris Riley, finance and administration manager.
Pakistan is Chris's first overseas post but Rupert has also been with LASMO Columbia.
Five-year awards went to Mohammad Anwaruddin, personnel and administration manager, Mohammad Zafar, field logistic supervisor, Bruce Dingwall, chief explorationist and Mohammad Siddiqui, the office assistant.
This was the first time that employees and their partners, including those in the field, had got together socially.
In all about 90 people attended.
Martin Scott, managing director Central Region, presented the awards.
He praised LASMO Pakistan for its achievements in the last year, especially the successful gas negotiations on the Kadanwari field [see page 2]and the partnership with Shell in Block 36, Northern Pakistan.
The evening was organised by Maria Isabel assisted by Veronica Rodrigues, Rupert Kidd's secretary.
Food was prepared by Alfred, aided by Noor and Michael, cooks for the Dingwall and Beck households.
Prior to the awards dinner, the British contingent from LASMO Pakistan held their annual casino night.
It raised just over £2,000 for flood relief.
Anne and Ray Morrison, Steve Robertson, Byron Beck and Sara Riley acted as croupiers.
KT Robertson sold chips and Faye Ashton worked on the door.
Receptionist Naveen Naqvi won a round trip to the UK, courtesy of  Philippines Airlines and Sara Riley won a return ticket to Bangkok, courtesy of Thai Air.
Champs' plans go back in the melting pot
In case anyone is wondering why there hasn't been any coverage of LASMO's tournament-winning broomball team recently, it's because there is no ice on the Broadgate rink.
LASMO Oilers' captain, Peter Coote from graphics, explained: ‘The problem was that bubbles began to appear in the ice — one of the refrigerant pipes had leaked or burst.
‘Unfortunately, these pipes had been built into the concrete beneath the ice.
‘This may have seemed like a good idea when the rink was being built because it should give long term durability, but when a problem like this arises then the whole rink has to be closed and dug up.
The cost of such work is enormous.’
Sadly no alternative venue is available.
Nearly all users are from the City of London and they wouldn't be able to travel further out.
Also, the neighbouring wine bar sponsors activities on the rink and it's in their interest to hold the tournament there since it provides entertainment for their customers.
Peter added: ‘It's a shame because we had four teams ready to play this year — more than in any previous year.
And it isn't as if it's one of those sports where regular training is an option either.’
Prospective players needn't rush out to the gym though.
‘If you're reasonably fit you'll be all right— and it's even better if you play hockey in one of its forms,’ he stressed.
The team may have resigned itself to a fixtureless season but there is some small consolation.
As Peter says: ‘At least we remain champions for another year.’
Pride of Pakistan
E-Mail proves first-class!
Telex and facsimile could make way for latest high-tech global communications network.
LASMO employees around the world could be linked up by the latest in high-tech communications as early as next year.
Trials with electronic mail are already proving a big success in the UK.
And, according to Richard Smith, computer services manager, a larger international network that enabled colleagues to flash messages — even long and complex documents — across the globe in seconds would boost efficiency and generate substantial savings.
He said ‘I'm very pleased at the way everyone is coming to terms with the idea and benefits of electronic mail.
And while in the short term it won't replace other forms of communication such as fax or telex, in time these will become as relevant to our business as semaphore or the carrier pigeon were hundreds of years ago.
Groundwork
‘Indeed, we shall progress from, what could be termed, straightforward communications into the much wider and valuable area of information exchange.
In the 1990s this is the way a modern multinational company such as ours must operate’.
Much of the groundwork to date on E-mail and Broadcast — a handy message service — has been carried out at little cost.
Both operate through the existing PC and file server network established following the company's move into Broadgate in London three years ago, and were supplied as part of the installation.
The LASMO PC network was extended at first to Broadwalk House and the Aberdeen office, then, in the wake of the Ultramar deal, to Moorgate and Chiswick.
Now it also extends to the Netherlands and the Markham platform.
Richard explained that everyone on the E-mail network has an electronic mailbox to which letters can be ‘posted’.
Files stored on the system, from spreadsheets to a lengthy legal document, can also be attached at the push of a button.
Such letters are available immediately the recipient opens up his PC.
Hard copies are easily obtained via the local printer.
‘Facsimile transmissions are not acceptable for legal purposes’, said Richard.
‘So while getting a document or computer disk from, say, London to Indonesia can take up to three days by post or courier, with electronic mail a valid print-out will be to hand in next to no time.
This is just one important advantage of E-mail.
‘Another is cost.
Faxing or telexing a 60–70 page document is a time-consuming and therefore expensive process, and always with that nagging uncertainty that one or two pages might not have transmitted properly.
‘With E-mail it zips through at a fraction of the cost, and such a system also eliminates many of the difficulties associated with operating in different time zones.’
Users of Broadcast can easily transmit a brief one-line message to others on the net-work.
This works even when recipients are away from their desks providing their PC is left on —‘far more efficient than sticking a Post-It note on their screen,’ Richard smiled.
And thanks to a smart directory — a custom-designed programme by Richard himself — senders can track down the person they want even if they have only the recipient's first name, or just the vaguest idea of their title or where they work.
A decision will be taken shortly on whether to invest in a more advanced E-mail package and, if so, which one.
For, as Richard said the wrong choice could prove an expensive mistake.
Differently-priced packages offer different features, for example, the ability to copy in a number of other people on the same transmission.
In the meantime the whole of the UK was due on the existing E-mail and Broadcast network by the end of February, and it is planned to extend these benefits to Jakarta via a special link.
Richard added: ‘The communications boys are doing their sums and I am confident we shall be able to upgrade our E-mail system.
Whichever one we go for, I'm certain LASMO will enjoy many advantages and a rapid payback.’
Clothing and cash sent in to aid quake victims
LASMO employees in the Far east responded with typical generosity when an earthquake devastated the East Nusa Tenggara island of Flores.
Thousands of inhabitants reeled from a double disaster as tremors from the quake also created a Tsunami tidal wave that destroyed whole areas of land and villages.
LASMO's office in Jakarta, Indonesia, together with employees, spontaneously donated to an appeal for disaster relief.
In next to no time they had collected nearly three million rupees [just over £1,000].
Most of the cash went on new clothes for both adults and children.
Some of the LASMO workforce also donated used clothing.
In addition to individual employee contributions, the company also donated seven million rupiahs making the total LASMO donated about Rp.10 million [about £3,500].
The clothes that were collected were handed over to Pertamina, the Indonesian state oil company.
Pertamina head office was especially active during the Flores emergency, acting mainly as central co-ordinator for gifts of money and clothing, and passing everything on to the disaster relief co-ordinators.
Assistance came from all Pertamina affiliates and subsidiaries throughout the country as well as the production sharing contractors, of which LASMO is one.
LASMO social co-ordinator Hetty Rasjid expressed her thanks to all those who helped organise the donation, collection and forwarding to the victims of the Flores disaster.
Trio celebrate coastal strike
LASMO is one of the three companies which has made a gas discovery about six miles east of Scarborough off the Yorkshire coast.
Exploration well 41/24–3 was drilled to a total depth of 4,834 feet by the Penrod 92 jack-up rig.
It tested 34.3 million cubic feet of gas per day.
As the block lies close to the coast the partners have been particularly aware of local environmental sensitivities.
Prior to drilling, the operator consulted local bodies such as the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds and the fishing industry.
In addition, non-toxic water-based drilling fluid was used in the well.
Block 41/24 was awarded during the 12th round of offshore licensing in May 1991, Licence interests are held by Conoco [operator], LASMO and Aran Energy.
Party enjoys taste of the high life
Members of the LASMO exploration department in Yemen made tracks for the highest spot for miles around in order to celebrate a highspot in the local social calendar.
They trekked into the mountainous countryside in Southern Arabia for what turned out to be a memorable day.
This year's event was organised by Australian operations geophysicist Brett Kelsall and his wife, Di.
Employees and their families were among the 100 or so people who joined a convoy of 25 four-wheel drive vehicles in order to hit the heights.
The British Ambassador was also in the party.
The intrepid band braved a precipitous mountain track snaking its way up to the highest peak on the Arabian Peninsula [Jeebl Nabi el Shwayb — 3,666 metres, or about 12,000 feet).
It was a lovely clear day as the LASMO group got out to stretch their legs.
They walked the tough, circuitous route to the top, leaving the serious altitude running to a group of local Ethiopian exiles!
Everyone who made it to the summit was rewarded with a magnificent panoramic view.
And, being true explorationists, they managed to find small patches of snow, ideal for snowballs, on the north facing crevices of the mountain top — even in Arabia.
The day was rounded off with a picnic and the purchase of commemorative T-shirts.
A great time, it was agreed, was had by all.
Aker called in at South Birth
LASMO has awarded a conceptual engineering contract to Aker Engineering plc for pre-project studies covering the potential development of the South Birch field.
Block 16/12a, which contains South Birth and other ‘Trees’ fields — Pine, Elm and North Birch, lies in the central North Sea.
The engineering work will consider a number of production and transportation options including tie-back to Marathon's South Brae facility and tie-back to a floating production unit.
The scope of work includes the design of pipelines and manifolds, subsea equipment selection and design of the subsea well control system and umbilicals.
The contract is scheduled to be completed by early summer.
Other participants in block 16/12a are Sun Oil, Hardy and British Gas.
Hopes high as Whitehall ponders new N Sea bids
Minister decides in May as LASMO seeks up to eight offshore licences
LASMO North Sea will discover in May if its latest bid to secure further exploration rights in UK waters has been successful.
The company has applied for licences in a total of eight blocks in the latest round of offshore licensing organised by the Government.
In some cases the LASMO bid covers a whole block, in others only part of a block.
Putting the bid together in time for the mid-December deadline has meant a £2 million outlay on LASMO's part.
But, as exploration manager Colin Gray told Pipeline , even this considerable sum could prove a drop in the ocean if the company gets all, or a fair proportion at least, of what it wants.
In total more than 60 companies have applied for 122 out of the 435 blocks in the first two stages of the 14th offshore licensing round — the biggest response for 20 years, according to energy minister Tim Eggar.
Although the LASMO bid covers eight blocks the reality is that the company — in the face of rival applications — hopes to secure maybe two or three of them.
Any fewer would be ‘disappointing’, said Colin, while four or more would be a bonus.
‘This bid is a clear indication of our confidence in the potential still offered by the UK Continental Shelf and our continuing commitment to exploring it,’ he said.
‘There are still some excellent blocks to be had, though it is getting harder.
Despite certain options in regard to UKCS, we still believe there's plenty of life in the old dog yet!’
At the end of January, Colin, together with team leaders Roger Tucker and Steve Corbin, made a three-hour technical presentation to the Department of Trade and Industry [DTI]in London in support of the LASMO bid.
‘We all felt it was very well received,’ said Colin.
‘Of course there is always the risk that other bidders will decide to go along to the DTI and offer to drill more wells than us, or deeper ones, perhaps in the manner of a loss-leader.
‘But, given a level playing field, we believe that the work commitments we are agreeing to are as great as can be justified in commercial terms, and hope that this is recognised by Whitehall.’
The announcement of which bidders are successful will most likely come by way of a ‘planted’ question in Parliament.
According to Colin, all those in LASMO North Sea will be on tender-hooks as news of the decision draws near.
‘We hope it will be the highlight of 1993 — a favourable outcome would set the seal on a tremendous amount of very hard work by the technical groups and the rest of the LNS team.’
Colin pointed out: ‘Some of the blocks on offer pose particular environmental problems.
Much of the acreage in this round is closer to the coastline, and as such has many implications in terms of how it could impact upon fish spawning, local bird life, and even the Ministry of Defence in some cases.
‘The DTI does not under-estimate the problems likely to be encountered in respect of some of these blocks and so it has not offered any acreage which it believes would be impossible or completely impractical to explore.
For commercial reasons the exact location of the areas targeted by the company must remain confidential for the time being.
However, as Colin Gray indicated, they are either within striking distance of current LASMO operations — where it would be relatively straightforward and economical to tie in a smaller discovery to an existing field — or otherwise they offer such exciting prospects as possibly to warrant major investment.
In the first example, production could begin as early as 1998.
However, in the case of a more substantial discovery requiring greater appraisal and investment in development, no output could be anticipated before the 21st century.
Either way, said Colin, the areas that LASMO has its eye on all have the potential to bring further success and prosperity to the company.
Team pits its wits against rival firms
LASMO has agreed to sponsor a team of ten players to take part in the third annual Brain Game.
Martyn Lewis of BBC News is this year's Question Master and he'll be pitching the posers — somewhere between Trivial Pursuit and Mastermind standard — to teams of ten from some of the country's largest companies.
The questions cover a wide range of subjects so all participants can contribute.
This is a great opportunity for LASMO's team to pit its wits against the best in Britain, have a really enjoyable evening and help a most worthy cause.
All proceeds to to the Marie Curie Cancer Care charity.
In last year's Brain Game, 36 teams competed and raised £70,000 which paid for a team of six nurses at one of the Marie Curie Cancer Cure centres for 12 months.
The aim this year is to raise £75,000 to pay for over 10,000 hours of Marie Curie Nursing in patients’ own homes.
Brain Game 1993 takes place at The Brewery, Chiswell Street, EC1.
They can't wait to mix it with the opposition!
Fancy teaming up to shoot a few goals in a dynamic, fast growing team sport?
The company has formed a new netball team by combining players from LASMO North Sea and LASMO plc and it's looking for new recruits to boost its current 15-strong membership.
‘At the moment the team is coached by Andrew Soper from the computer department, although he won't thank me for telling everyone,’ said Suzanne Isaacs of the Personnel Department at Broadgate.
‘He plays for a mixed side in his spare time and is well up with the rules which is pretty useful because they seem to change every couple of months.’
Suzanne added: ‘We train on Wednesday evenings after work at a school near the Minories, EC2 and hope to start playing matches against other oil companies in the near future.
After that we intend to either join an existing league or to establish a new one.
Most such leagues play at lunchtimes, on varying days, so a large, reliable squad would be a distinct advantage.’
LASMO is sponsoring the team by paying part of the cost of court fees, referees [for league matches]and kit.
Existing members have already started a ‘kit kitty’ to pay for the remaining amount.
Their first match is against a men's team from Accounts.
For further details contact .
Mapping out the future of LASMO North Sea
Shooting for glory