

RBS leads move to fill Taurus gap Page 5
Dealing room best outside London Page 7
TV campaign a great success Page 3
Cashline cash for Sainsbury shoppers
CASHLINE machines are to be installed at several Sainsbury supermarkets as part of a Royal Bank plan to increase the number of ATMs at what are known as third party or remote locations.
Machines are also to be opened at Edinburgh and Manchester Airports, two Scottish hospitals and Ibrox Park, home of Glasgow Rangers Football Club.
The deal with Sainsbury will result in Cashline terminals being installed at the company's supermarkets in Bridgend (Mid Glamorgan) and Totton (Hampshire).
Provisional agreement has also been reached to open terminals at a further six Sainsbury sites and future negotiations could lead to the service becoming available at several other stores.
The Royal Bank has 753 ATMs throughout Britain.
Of these, 429 are in Scotland and 324 are in England and Wales.
All are the responsibility of Branch Banking's 12-strong Network Development team, based at 31 St Andrew Square, Edinburgh, and headed by Nigel Spencer.
More than 60 ATMs are at third party locations and Nigel's aim is to substantially increase this number by the end of the year.
‘Market research has revealed that customers prefer ATMs to be located at supermarkets, shopping malls, airports, railway stations and self service petrol stations,’ he said, ‘so the main thrust of our expansion programme is towards remote sites.
These are also potentially very profitable.
Most Royal Bank third party ATMs are located at ASDA, Safeway, Co-op and William Low supermarkets although terminals have recently been installed at two Gulf Oil petrol stations in Edinburgh.
Cashline machines will also be installed at some JET service stations if talks with another oil company — Conoco — are successful.
Already agreement has been reached to open one terminal at a JET station in Edinburgh.
ASDA's superstore in Rawtenstall, Lancashire is to become the first of the supermarket chain's English stores to get Cashline, and, following lengthy negotiations, a terminal is to be installed in the Royal Victoria Shopping Centre in Tunbridge Wells.
Talks are also being held with British Rail to explore the possibility of installing Cashline terminals at selected main line stations.
During the next few months, Network Development will be stepping up its search for possible locations, and branches will often be requested to supply local knowledge when new sites are identified.
In addition the team will continue to foster its existing relationships.
‘As for the long-term future, we will ensure the Cashline network grows and meets the demand of our customers whilst operating profitability,’ said Nigel.
‘As technology continues to evolve, the self service environment will be an important component in the Bank's strategy.
Deposit Taking, statement printing and bill paying may be added to the functions Cashline or other similar self service devices deliver.’
Nigel Spencer, Manager, Network Development (standing right) with (from left) Brian Turner (Senior Assistant Manager), Graeme Robertson,(Senior Assistant Manager), Harry Hay (Manager, Network Services Development) and Sally Gibson (Senior Assistant Manager).
Ian Liddell (Manager, Network Operations) discusses a point with (from left) Donald Hardie (Senior Assistant Manager), Donna Thomson (Administration) and Ronnie Aitken (Assistant Manager).
Hazel Syme (Assistant Manager, Network Operations) using the Cashline Machine at a Safeways store in Edinburgh.
Queen to unveil sculpture
THE Royal Bank has commissioned a major work of art for Drummond House.
A sculpture by the distinguished artist Sir Eduardo Paolozzi will be erected outside the main door and the Queen will unveil the work at the official opening on 2 July.
The sculpture honours the promise made by the Royal Bank when it announced the South Gyle project in 1989.
‘We committed ourselves to the City of Edinburgh initiative asking companies to set aside a suitable proportion of the cost of any development to commission new works of art.
The Paolozzi sculpture will handsomely fulfil that promise,’ said Lord Younger.
Sir Eduardo was born in Leith and studied at Edinburgh School of Art and the Slade.
He is one of Britain's leading post-war artists with an enviable international reputation.
A committee has been set up by Norman McLuskie, MD of Operations Division, to develop arrangements for the Royal visit.
Its central brief has been to involve staff as closely possible in the event.
The building is too large for the Queen to see all of it.
The committee is preparing a special itinerary which will take in the most interesting corners of the building — the note-chewing machine, the Treasury dealing room, the videoconferencing facility — as well as the aerobics area and gymnasium.
Staff at Drummond House with young children or grandchildren are being invited to enter a Royal Family quiz, with the winner providing the young child to present the Queen with a welcoming posy.
Flower arrangers can test their skills by submitting designs for that posy, and colleagues will choose the winning entry to be made up for 2 July.
The committee is looking at ideas for mementoes of the Royal occasion not just for Her Majesty but also for the staff of Drummond House.
Straight talking by the Chief Executive — page 3
Top branches quick to hit Royline target
Royline Consultant Tina West presents the North of England Sales Award to Blackpool South Shore Manager, Tony Hoskins.
THREE branches have been presented with Royline sales awards following the regionalisation of the competition.
Glasgow St Enoch Square picked up the Scottish award, Blackpool South Shore were tops in the North of England, and Maidenhead were champions in the South of England.
Anne Dickie, Manager Royline Sales, said regional awards had been introduced so that the efforts and results of branches could be better highlighted and rewarded — and she praised the first three winners.
Glasgow St Enoch Square found themselves among the prizewinners for consistently coming up with good, well qualified leads.
‘Their target for 1992–93 is six sales but they have proved that to be an underestimate of their potential, having achieved five sales so far,’ said Anne.
Blackpool South Shore were rewarded after quickly achieving their target of two.
‘They are a relatively small branch with only six staff but Manager Tony Hoskins and his team are constantly on the lookout for potential Royline users,’ said Anne.
Maidenhead were given an award for providing a constant stream of contacts which are very well qualified.
‘They have the belief that every business customer is a Royline user until proved otherwise,’ said Anne.
‘Their target for the year is two but they have achieved four sales so far with more in the pipeline.’
For the second successive quarter.
the team award went to Manchester.
They have the power to improve service
A NEW mainframe computer has been installed in the Fettes Row data centre to support the Branch Banking System throughout the UK.
As a result of a Request For Proposal process, IBM was asked to provide a more powerful and more up to date processor to replace one of the two existing IBM 3090–600J machines.
The new system is an IBM ES/9000–820 which gives a boost of over 40 per cent in processing capacity over the previous machine.
This increase is expected to last about 18 months at which point a further upgrade will be required.
The new computer also provides an excellent platform on which to base new Columbus applications.
The increased processing capacity is required to support the underlying growth trend of 17 per cent per annum in computer usage and to cater for the introduction of new applications.
Some of the major reasons for the increase in resource consumption include a 23 per cent increase in Royline customers over the past year, a 60 per cent increase in the number and complexity of Back Office account enquiries and a 40 per cent increase in authorisation processing associated with online systems such as SWITCH, EDI and Cashline Reciprocity.
The actual implementation process which enabled the Bank to successfully cut over from the Old IBM 3090–600J to the new machine was recalled by Alan Knight, Manager, Capacity and Performance, Services Delivery, Technology.
‘There is far more to introducing a new machine of this size and complexity than simply installing the hardware,’ he said.
‘Site preparation, hardware and software testing have to be carried out by the relevant specialists and plans have to be made to ensure that the upgrade will cause no interruption to the service provided to our customers.’
The implementation plan, drawn up jointly by IBM and Bank staff, had the following objectives:
The new configuration must be fully operational by Sunday 14 March 1993
There must be no loss of production service within prime shift
There must be adequate provision for complete system and application testing
There must be due regard for contingency
The new equipment was delivered to Fettes Row during the first week in February and located in the East machine room.
The processor is very complex and needed to be assembled and connected to the power supply and chilled water cooling system.
Following successful completion of this initial installation, new channel cables were laid to all the peripherals (disks, tapes, printers etc) which need to be connected to the system but existing connections to the two 600Js remained in place.
At this stage the channel cables were not actually connected to the peripherals so that testing of the processor and channels could be carried out without affecting the existing systems.
‘During the week beginning 22 February, those peripherals necessary for us to test the new system were connected up using the new channel cables and spare channel adaptors on some device control units.’
said Alan.
‘Testing continued until we were satisfied that the new processor was functioning correctly and all devices could be connected to the system ready for complete cut over.’
The weekend of 13/14 March was used to do the cut over and to ensure that everything was in full working order.
Had problems occurred, the peripheral configuration could have been reconnected to the 600J so that service could continue to be provided until the problems were resolved and the cut over completed on the next weekend.
When the 820 was finally accepted, the old channel cables and 600J were removed — this had to be completed 31 March as this was the date when the lease on the old machine expired.
The ES/9000–820 is a new generation of technology compared to the 600J and is colloquially known as a ‘Summit’ class machine.
‘Because of this we have had to contact all our hardware and software suppliers to check if any changes needed to be made to any of their products which we have installed,’ said Alan.
‘In addition to being based on new technology and being over 40 per cent more powerful than its predecessor, the 820 has twice as much memory and this will provide us with the potential to exploit new, more efficient techniques for online applications and batch processing.’
The new computer has some state of the art fibre optic channels as well as the conventional copper ones but these will not initially be used and will come into play as new device types are acquired in the future.
The new 820 has four ‘engines’ and is at the top end of the IBM mainframe family but is not actually the most powerful.
Not only can up to four more engines be added to the complex but also the engines themselves can be replaced by more powerful versions.
The full potential of the range is such that the new machine could be upgraded to up to 250 per cent of its initial capacity.
These more powerful models can be created from the 820 by relatively simple field upgrades and this potential, combined with the fibre optic channels, clearly provides plenty of scope for further expansion, an important factor considering the likely impact of Project Columbus.
Successful completion of a complex exercise such as this upgrade requires team work and a project team consisting of people from Services Delivery, Technical Services Systems Development and IBM have spent a considerable amount of time over the last few weeks to ensure that the upgrade when ahead without impact on Technology's customers.
‘It is customary to wish good luck to new enterprises but, in this case, I am sure that the team worked very hard to make sure that luck had no part to play in the implementation and so the good wishes would have been redundant,’ said Alan.
Fulham saved!
THE uncertainty surrounding the future of Fulham Football Club has been lifted following an agreement with the Royal Bank, owners of their Craven Cottage ground.
Fulham can now continue to lease the ground for the next decade and have the option to purchase it outright at a price of just under £8 million at any time during the 10 years.
The deal is comparable with that struck between Chelsea Football Club and the Royal Bank for the lease of Stamford Bridge.
Fulham will pay a low introductory rent for three years while they seek a partial redevelopment of the stadium.
This will enable them to cover the rental on the ground and to fund eventual purchase.
Fulham Chairman Jimmy Hall said, ‘It's not VE Day — but it's like EL Alamein.’
Museum opens
CUSTOMERS at Child & Co have given an enthusiastic welcome to a newly opened museum room at the branch.
Hundreds have so far viewed the display of books, papers and office equipment used by Child & Co since the formation of the bank in the 16th century.
The museum room was designed and created by Corporate Communications ‘Archives Section.
At the same time the Section published a new illustrated history of Child's, copies of which can be obtained free from the branch.
Survey reveals TV ads were ‘very successful’ The Bank's Scottish TV campaign was a great success.
It dramatically increased awareness of the Bank in the marketplace and helped bring about a significant increase in sales — particularly Gold 90 Accounts.
Errol Dow, Market Research Manager, Personal Banking Services, looks at the campaign and its results.
LAST autumn, the Bank was back on television in most of Scotland for the first time in more than two years with a campaign of three commercials.
But what exactly were we trying to achieve with the TV campaign?
There was a need to raise the profile of the Bank within Scotland.
We had not actually been ‘on air’ in Scotland for two years, such publicity as we had received had been more critical than favourable and our image in the marketplace had slipped.
We felt that a positive message delivered through TV advertising could help us regain the position of being seen as a market leader, a quality provider and a major innovator in financial services.
That is what we wanted to achieve but how were we going to do it?
Our marketing agency, Faulds, were asked to take three very powerful messages from our existing messages from our existing product range and develop advertising that was easy to understand and humorous — an approach which building societies have successfully adopted in the last few years.
Most Bank advertising in contrast has been much less effective, with obscure messages and vague image statements that were at odds with public perception.
The end result was three 40-second TV commercials.
The first commercial (nicknamed ‘Office’) made the key point that our Gold 90 interest rates were better than the three biggest building societies ‘accounts.
The second ad was set in a courtroom and described our new product ‘Balanced Banking’ and had the message that, with our automatic transfer, customers ‘money was always in the right place to earn more interest.
The third in the series feature a footballer and talked about a mortgage offering a 2 per cent discount in the first year.
All of these benefits, whilst clear within the Bank, were not widely known by our customers.
In fact, our research showed they would be quite surprising to customers and non-customers alike.
From the basic idea that we had some very surprising product benefits grew the comic device used in the commercials of people being so surprised they fall of their seats.
This was an idea that could easily have got out of hand and extensive research was conducted before and after the ads were produced to make sure the communication was exactly as intended.
The results from this were extremely positive and predicted better results than any ads we had produced before.
Before the campaign went on the air, the Bank put in place a research programme to establish just how effective it would be.
The research consisted of four stages — the first to show us where we were before the campaign went on air, the second (half way through the 8-week TV campaign) and the third (immediately after the campaign had finished) to show what impact the advertising had.
The fourth stage was planned to take place in late March and will show what our position is after we have been off the air for some time.
At each stage of the research we interviewed people all over Scotland asking them to tell us three things:
had they seen the Royal Bank ads?
had they understood them?
had the ads changed their opinion of the Bank in any way?
We obviously also monitored the sales of our savings, mortgages and Balanced Banking arrangements over the same periods.
The research asked people what they understood from the advertising.
Through analysis of those results it is clearly understood.
People also need to like advertising if it is to be successful and, again, the results show that people did find the ads funny and enjoyed watching them.
Charts 1 and 2 illustrate the effect the campaign had on customer and non-customer perceptions of the Bank in the two key areas of mortgages and savings.
Chart 1 shows the proportion of people agreeing or disagreeing that ‘RBS is a good place for a mortgage’.
The effect of the campaign has been quite dramatic.
In October, 36 per cent of respondents disagreed that RBS was a good place for a mortgage and only 24 per cent agreed.
By mid-way through the campaign this had narrowed to a level where nearly as many people agreed as disagreed and by the end of the campaign we had totally swapped over people's opinions.
In December, 31 per cent of respondents agreed that RBS was a good place for a mortgage and only 19 per cent.
A similar picture can be seen from Chart 2 which shows how we are perceived in terms of providing ‘high rates of interest for savings’.
Again, we have achieved a cross over effect.
Before we went on air, the number of people disagreeing that RBS had high rates of interest for savings was higher than the number agreeing.
By December when the campaign was finished, the reverse was true.
The results for many other image statements also showed similar increases.
For example, we are now much more likely to be seen as a bank that is widening its range, attracting new customers and eager to help people.
In short, people now have a much better opinion of the services offered by the Bank, and we have made significant inroads in the task of persuading customers that building societies are not necessarily the best place to go for savings and mortgages.
There was an immediate and rapid increase in the growth of the Bank's Gold 90 Account balances from the time the commercials went on air.
Chart 3 indicates that, as a result of the advertising, growth in Gold 90 balances in Scottish branches initially grew much faster, although, subsequent to the advertising campaign, growth in English and Welsh branches has caught up with the help of other communications, including the Personal Customer Newsletter and posters in branches supporting some magnificent local sales efforts.
Many branches have reported large sums being transferred by individual customers from building societies as a result of our advertising and its high interest claim.
Balanced Banking is also proving popular with around 50 per cent of the customers joining Balanced opening a new high interest savings accounts, and these accounts show higher average balances than for savings accounts not linked to Balanced Banking.
The total growth in our Gold 90 balances is well in excess of the goal we set ourselves and across the whole of the UK we achieved almost 50 per cent of our 1992/3 target by the middle of February.
In the very depressed mortgage market, the commercials have clearly also been successful in terms of raising public awareness of the Royal Bank as a provider for their next mortgage.
Sales results, however, take longer to come through than for Savings.
We can conclude that the advertising campaign has been very successful:
the campaign has dramatically increased the awareness of the Bank in the marketplace.
people have generally liked the campaign and have taken out the desired messages.
the Bank is now seen very much more as a bank to save with and a good place to go for a mortgage.
the campaign has significantly helped to increase sales, particularly Gold 90 Accounts.
Further advertising is planned for the coming months to build on the success achieved to date.
For the time being the TV advertising will be confined to Scotland as the density of the branch network there makes it much more cost effective than in England and Wales.
1 IMAGE RATING: GOOD PLACE FOR A MORTGAGE 
2 IMAGE RATING: HIGH RATES ON INTEREST FOR SAVINGS 
3 G90 Monthly Growth
Straight Talking…=
EVEN the ‘Best Bank’ will have some dissatisfied customers.
I want to encourage such customers to complain and I want us to resolve those complaints quickly.
courteously and efficiently.
I say encourage because three out of four dissatisfied customers simply go away disgruntled — having concluded that it is not worth complaining.
When a customer does complain, we have the opportunity to:
Make amends.
Keep their business.
Ensure they speak well of us rather than denigrate us to their friends.
Sell them more of our products.
Learn from our mistakes and make sure they don ‘t happen again.
That's the theory.
Unfortunately, it's quite clear from the letters which hit my desk that we are throwing away many of these opportunities —
Too many customers walk away unhappy with the ‘solution’ to their problem or, worse, without any real attempt on our part to resolve it.
Too many customers wait too long for replies to their complaint — replies which in too many cases are badly written and do not deal with all aspects of the complaint.
Too many customers do not get an open admission from us that we made a mistake — nor do they get the full apology that is their right.
Too many customers are alienated by our miserly attitude to compensation for mistakes that we made.
And it's happening too often!
I have asked Service Quality Development for some simple ‘do's and dont's’ in handling complaints and these are listed on a ‘flyer’in this issue.
I want to encourage complaints, welcome complaints and make it easy for customers to complain.
Right now written complaints outnumber compliments ten-to-one.
Let's turn it round the other way
It can be done.
In anticipation of Her Majesty's opening of Drummond House in July, Chief Press Officer Alwyn James looks at some of the Royal Bank's earlier Royal connections.
Just how Royal are we?
WHEN the Royal Bank of Scotland was set up by Royal Charter in 1727 there was a very good reason for building the word ‘Royal’ into its name.
The new dynasty, the German and Protestant House of Hanover, had a few scares from the Scottish end of the realm, notably the 1715 Rebellion in favour of the Catholic Stuart exile, James.
Although the Bank of Scotland has been established by no less a Protestant champion than William of Orange, this nervousness led George I, or rather his advisers, to doubt that bank's allegiance.
The King took the opportunity by the need to renew Bank of Scotland's monopoly north of the Border and said in essence (and in German)‘No, we shall set up a new large bank, which will be on our side and which we shall call ‘Royal.’
He even had a ready made foundation for the new bank — the Equivalent Company set up to administer the money and debentures paid to Scotland as a compensation for some pre-Union perfidy on the part on the English.
(It is worth pointing out that, no matter how important and stimulating the move was for Scottish business, there was no need to have doubted the Bank of Scotland.
As soon as it loyalty was tested, with Bonnie Prince Charlie and his fierce Highlanders sighted on the horizon, Bank of Scotland was even faster than the Royal at dashing up the road to the safety of the Castle.
Bankers do not support rebellions until they are successful.)
But back to the Royal.
George I set in motion the preparation of the Royal Charter for his new bank.
He was however never able to sign it.
There was something of a delay in Chancery and the Charter, dated 31 May 1727, got stuck in the queue, with unusual results.
By the time the Charter issued by George I came to be processed, he was dead and his son, George II, was on the throne.
Not too much Tippex was needed to amend the Charter to one of the new King.
The Royal Bank was doubly Royal.
The birth of the Royal Bank had wider repercussions.
The pattern of a single central bank was broken and the creation of the Royal Bank led directly to the establishment of such competitors as the British Linen Bank (1746), the Commercial Bank (1810) and the National Bank (1825).
Together, the Big Five laid the foundations of the distinctive Scottish systems of a small number of large banks with extensive networks, as opposed to say the English pattern of thousands of small banks with nothing more than a local presence.
The Scottish system offered an unequalled banking stability and was to be followed eventually by most industrialised nations.
One aspect of the Scottish success — the total confidence of the Scots in the paper money issued by its banks — led to today's unusual situation where commercial banks continue to issue their own notes.
When George III dropped by to see the estate
Drummonds Bank was set up by a Scot in the Scottish end of London (the name Scotland Yard dates from mediaeval times when the kings of Scotland and their ambassadors would lodge there.
The Jacobite sympathies of the family might well have prejudiced them in the eyes of the early Georges, but George III, especially after falling out with Coutts, had an affectionate and very special relationship with Drummonds.
He and many of his family banked with the Charing Cross ‘shop’ and even, with due notice, dropped into to admire the Drummond estate in Hampshire.
The family recorded an anxious moment during the visit when the King lifted five-year-old Catherine Drummond in his arms and put her ‘upon the Table which so much alarmed her that she burst out a crying.’
Many a parent will recognise that little incident!
The King ‘was very good-natured about it and set her down immediately.’
Loyalty to the old King did nothing to establish Drummonds with his heir — and indeed the story has it that curbing the Prince's spending on the orders of the King led to Drummonds being abandoned by the new monarch in favour of Coutts.
In February 1812, Andrew Berkeley Drummond, newly appointed Keeper of the Privy Purse by the ailing George III, wrote to a cousin joining the bank of a long letter of banking advice.
One paragraph reflects the relationship with the King.
‘What is deposited with you is not Yours — No, it is the property of the confiding Friend who places his reliance on you.
It is the property of the Widow and the Orphan who regard it as safe in your Hands, & in our case moreover it is the property of the Sovereign of the country who selects us for the deposit because he expects (& expressly has declared that to be his motive) to find in us, the nice Honour of Gentleman added to the common honesty & Integrity of Men of Business.’
Our coat-of-arms
ALL Royal Bank banknotes carried the arms (and head) of George II up until as recently as the early 1960s when there was a general clampdown on indiscriminate use of the Royal Arms and we were told to go and get our own.
Which we did.
The Royal Bank's own coat-of-arms, granted in 1960, is not often seen in the Age of the Logo, but does appear on our banknotes and, more recently, made a welcome appearance on the Highline card.
It carries a number of reminders of our Royal roots.
The upper half of the shield shows kingly lions in the Royal colours gold and red, holding the old crown of Scotland.
The dexter (more important) supporter of the shield is the white horse of Hanover, decorated with Royal oak leaves, a reminder of Charles II.
Who's got the 1727 Charter?
The arrival of professional archivist Vicki Wilkinson among the documents held at the Edinburgh end of RBS was followed by a surprise discovery.
The impressive Charter which we had for long presented as our original 1727 ‘birth certificate’ is not.
The first reaction of the Royal Bank's Board on receiving the document was to have it translated into Latin!
It is this that we have been displaying and using in publications.
We may never know why the Board felt the original English version needed to be translated, but the much more important question remains.
Where is the original Charter?
Answers on a postcard, please, to Newsline .
It would be nice to find it before 2 July.
Glittering Coronation
CHILD & Co can boost an even longer Royal connection than the Scottish side of the clan.
Sir Francis Child was the banker to William and Mary and even had to arrange to provide jewellery, some of it his own and his wife's, for the great double Coronation.
The new sovereigns were not really wealthy enough at that stage to do full justice to the grandeur required for such a majestic British event.
Sir Francis records his pique that, having made these efforts, he was not even given a free ticket for the Coronation and had to buy his own.
A special topping for Number 36
THE lovely Georgian facade of 36 St Andrew Square — home of RBS since 1828 — is crowned by a Royal court-of-arms.
And not just the ordinary version you see today, but the rarely encountered Hanoverian version.
Up until the early years of the nineteenth century, the British monarch still laid claim to France and to represent this claim heraldically the Royal arms included fleurs-de-lis in the second quarter.
At the Treaty of Amiens, designed to provide a half-time interval in the Napoleonic War, Britain gave up this rather theoretical claim (but incidentally got Ceylon, Trinidad and a few other colonial gems) and dropped the fleur-de-lis.
That led to the Royal arms we know today — England or Scotland in the first and fourth quarters, Ireland in the third quarter and Scotland or England in the second.
When the Royal Bank bought the building in 1825 it had been the Government Office of Excise and quite correctly bore the Royal arms, although no-one had got around to updating them.
Things were tight after all that round-the-world fighting which ended in 1815.
The Royal Bank saw no need (indeed had no right) to alter them and so they remain until today.
There was a slight hiccup in the 1950s when a good citizen of Edinburgh objected to our bearing the arms.
Lord Lyon King of Arms, ultimate authority in these matters, declared that the arms were part of the fabric of the building and not relating to the occupants.
They should therefore remain.
Whether he would have come to that conclusion if the building was betting-shop is an interesting thought, but we ‘ve been delighted to go along with his judgement.
Taurus: Bank leads move to fill gap
WHEN Taurus, the paperless share settlement, was surprisingly cancelled, the Royal Bank took speedy and positive steps to fill the gap.
John Barclay, Deputy Group Chief Executive and Terry Pearson, Senior Securities Adviser, hosted an industry-wide initiative at the Bank's Lombard Street office when 60 securities specialists met to consider and promote practical ideas to develop a rapid and cost-effective replacement.
Terry said, ‘I believe the meeting was extremely constructive.
A range of key issues critical to the functioning of the UK market were considered.
A Statement of Joint Proposals was submitted to the Bank of England Task Force on Securities Settlement, which has been given the remit to put together an alternative.
‘We hope our ideas will be a useful starting point for determining the future direction,’ said Terry.
One recommendation suggests that the Bank of England pushes ahead with developing an automated settlement system for large institutional investors.
Another calls the setting up of a clearing house to take over the running of the settlement from the Stock Exchange and a third for a quick move to rolling settlement, under which all share bargains are settle after a set number of days.
As the Royal Bank is firmly established as a leading provider of services to the securities industry it was natural for it to assume responsibility.
As Global Custodian it has over £100 billion of assets under custody and provides custody and investment administration services to many leading UK institutional investors, pension funds, insurance companies and fund managers.
As Registrar it provides shareholders registration services to over 200 companies.
This initiative has presented the bank in a very positive way and has generated a great deal of media coverage.
The Bank of England Task Force for Securities Settlement is due to announce its proposals for the replacement system by the end of June.
The Royal Bank has offered to work closely with Task Force to ensure that a more realistic and achievable system is implemented and this offer is likely to be accepted.
Consultants bring in £13 million
ROYAL Scottish Consultants attracted more than £13 million to the Royal Bank in the first three months of the current financial year.
Through a competition called ‘Come Together’, the Consultants are being encouraged to bring ‘new’ monies to the Bank and at the end of January this totalled £13,681,818.
Those who achieve the best results in each Royal Scottish Region can win £50 — but it's not easy.
‘In addition, they must achieve at least 85 per cent of their own target,’ explained Sales Development Manager Nick Finlay.
The competition wasn ‘t up and running in October but November's winners were Paul Adams (Wigan), Chris Burgess (Manchester St Ann Street), Joe Murphy (London Nottinghill Gate), Ian Williams (Sutton), Jim Russell (Kirkcaldy), Jane Davies (Stranraer) and Louise Bye (Dronfield).
Jim Russell was also a winner in December along with Peter Daly (Brighton and Hove) and Robert Green (Leigh).
Chris Burgess (second right) receiving his cheque from Royal Bank Local Director, Manchester Ian Maddocks.
Looking on are Rob Brown (left), Manchester Regional Sales Manager, Royal Scottish and John Fryer, Chief Manager, the Royal Bank's Manchester St Ann Street Office.
Prompt action prevents card fraud
Two quick-thinking staff at Higher Broughton Branch have been rewarded for helping foil a possible £25,000 card swindle.
Mike Shaw and his Supervisor Barbara Finnan were each presented with a £50 cheque by Brian Roberts, Regional Manager, Retailer Services North, Payment Services/Card Services.
The two staff turned detective after a retailer, unknown at Higher Broughton but a customer with Manchester Rusholme Branch, paid in two vouchers for amounts in excess of £13,000.
Because of the amount involved, Mike alerted Barbara who called for the cards to be queried.
Said Brian, ‘We were then able to ascertain that the cards were counterfeit.
We also established that a similar sum had been paid in through our Strangeways Branch although this had not caused any alarm.
However, thanks to the action taken at Higher Broughton we were able to prevent the funds being withdrawn.’
Mike Shaw (left) and Barbara Finnan after they had been presented with their cheques by Brian Roberts (centre).
Most readers find Newsline ‘interesting’
THE majority of staff find Newsline informative, interesting and useful according to a survey by the Bank's Market Research Section.
Just a small minority think the newspaper is lightweight and trivial, and most staff would like to see more business news and more social news.
The survey was designed to gain staff opinion on the design and content of the publication — which is sent to every member of staff — and to assess interest in proposed news features.
The results revealed that 12 per cent of staff think Newsline content is very interesting and 71 per cent fairly interesting.
Just one per cent find it very uninteresting with the remainder finding it fairly uninteresting or neither interesting nor uninteresting.
Results were similar when staff were asked how informative and how useful is the content of the publication.
The majority — 73 per cent— think Newsline is of equal relevance to junior and senior staff.
Critical comment of the content — expressed by, at most, one per cent of respondents — includes ‘Only has good news, ignores the harsh realities’ and ‘too much about people I ‘d never heard of’.
The most popular proposals for future features are profiles of branches and departments, business news, social news and staff club announcements.
Less popular are competitions and advertisements.
Most staff like the design and appearance of Newsline with 83 per cent saying the length of stories is just right, 88 per cent that the design is about right and 89 per cent that Newsline is easy to understand.
Almost two-thirds of respondents receive their own copy of Newsline without fail, and two per cent say that they have never received it.
A significant minority — 21 per cent— think it is not very important for staff to receive their own personal copy.
The remainder — 79 per cent— think it is very, or fairly, important that Newsline is sent to every member of staff.
The majority of staff — 62 per cent— read all or most of Newsline while 38 per cent read some or just a little of the publication.
The survey was based on a postal questionnaire sent to a representative sample of 2,000 members of staff and 200 retired staff.
A total of 1260 questionnaires were returned — response rate of 57 per cent.
Hospital choses Telford Branch
‘ABSOLUTELY delighted’ is how David Taylor, Manager of Telford Branch described his reaction on hearing that his Branch had been appointed bankers to the Princess Royal Hospital, due to become a NHS Trust on 1 April.
David and his team had worked hard to win the appointment in the face of tough competition from other financial institutions.
‘They liked our location, they liked our Royline, they liked our price and we got on well together,’ said David.
The Princess Royal Hospital, with a staff of 1,100 is one of the largest employers in Telford.
The Royal Bank branch opened in the town just two and a half years ago.
‘In that relatively short space of time we have established ourselves as a vital source of providing banking services to local people.
The Bank's new relationship with the Princess Royal NHS Trust reflects how the Bank is an integral part of the community.
Cash backing for education plan
The Bank's Community Fund is helping people in remote rural areas learn new skills through the Open University's community education programme.
The Bank donated £45,000 to back the three-year programme, which delivers a range of community education packages in the Highland and Islands.
The money will help fund a resources library and make learning units available to small, remote groups either on loan or as permanent gifts.
It will also enable tutors to visit community groups and to train tutors in areas where they are not presently available.
Gordon Fenton, the Bank's Community Affairs Manager said, ‘Our Community Fund was set up specifically to help skilled and committed bodies, both professional and voluntary, to make even more of their skills and enthusiasm.
This co-operation is an ideal example of that.
Open Line THE Editor welcomes contributions for publication in OPEN LINE but reserves the right to shorten or amend them.
Letters should include the writer's name and address but on request these will not be published or disclosed.
It was all part of the service!
Dear Editor
SINCE the late Sixties, I had enjoyed an annual fishing holiday in August on the River Avon on the Ballindalloch estate in Banffshire.
Over the years, many friendships were made with anglers who stayed and fished from the Delnashaugh Hotel.
However, the August fishing became so appalling that my companion and I decided to try a week in May.
This, of course, meant a new set of companions.
To our surprise, the other guests were Jim Bruce and his party.
To the non-angler this may seem of little importance but to the lesser informed JB is 50 per cent of the firm of Bruce and Walker, rod manufacturers, and as far as we were concerned walked on water!
On about the third day there was a bit of excited chatter between himself and Jim Thom (the manager) on the subject of obtaining a £100 Scottish banknote.
Failure abounded so I waded in —‘Leave it to me, Sir!’
On the phone to Richard Bellamy: ‘The big man wants a £100 note.’
Bellamy: ‘Leave it to me’.
Twenty-four hours later………
Bellamy: ‘The note will be with Grantown on Spey Branch on Thursday morning.’
With pride I announced to himself that The Royal Bank of Scotland had triumphed.
Thursday morning: himself, myself and large black labrador sally forth to G-o-S.
Arrive at the branch; no note, come back in an hour.
This is spent in the most splendid hotel in G-o-S where I am regaled with the angling orgies and subsequent champagne parties of earlier years.
Back to the Branch.
Thank Goodness the note had arrived.
Chest out, glowing with pride we return to base with labrador on lap and conversation stilted.
I ventured: ‘Excuse me Sir, why do you want this note?’
‘Well’, he said, ‘there are two pubs in my village, one of which I patronise.
The landlord of the other pub comes in occasionally, orders and ½pint and give him this note.’
Give those shares to charity
Dear Editor
IT is apparent from Newsline that staff of the Royal Bank are always quick to support a good cause.
I should like to suggest a way in which it is possible to give something for nothing.
Recently I sold a number of ‘profit share’ shares and found myself left with six shares which I had received as a dividend.
The question was — what to do with them?
The dealing costs for selling a small number of shares outweigh any benefit.
At this stage, a penny dropped.
What about giving them to charity?
I have a personal contact with Children's Aid, a registered charity who concentrate their efforts in placing orphans from the streets of Brazil with loving families in Portugal.
As the two countries have close links with regard to language and culture, the children quickly thrive and are rescued from a life of prostitution and drug dealing and a life expectancy of 18.
It has occurred to me that other staff within the Royal Bank may be in a similar position to myself, holding a small number of shares which would cost more than their worth to sell.
If you feel that you would like to give something for nothing, please send your name and address to The Finance Director, Children's Aid,.
The relevant paperwork will then be forwarded to you.
Have you a funny story to tell?
Dear Editor
I PLAN to compile a book of anecdotes, stories and jokes relating to banking and related activities and would be interested in receiving such from both existing and retired bank staff.
If there are sufficient good stories, I would hope to have the book published with part of the proceeds being donated to the RNLI and/or other charities.
The stories should relate to actual events involving bank staff or customers and apply to any part of the Royal Bank of Scotland whether it be within the UK or within European or Worldwide operations/divisions.
I already have five extremely amusing stories and I know these would make very interesting reading.
Obviously, there is no intent to embarrass any person and real names will not be used.
The jokes/anecdotes/stories can be short or long and, as an example, I will tell the tale of a branch who loaned a customer a sum of money so he could undergo plastic surgery.
Unfortunately, they were unable to recover the loan because the customer had changed his looks completely and they were unable to identify him.
Marathon bike ride
Dear Editor
During the weekend of 15/16 May I plan to cycle the Northern Lancashire Cycleway, a 130 mile route which takes in some of the most beautiful and hilliest areas of Lancashire and South Cumbria.
The aim of the ride is to raise money for the Royal National Lifeboat Institution and I hope to raise £1,000.
I would obviously be very grateful for any sponsorship which my colleagues in the bank can offer.
They can contact me at the address below..
Help us if you can says loyal soccer fan
WAITING for the fate of Fulham's football ground to be determined proved too much for one fan so he wrote a poem to Chairman George Younger.
By return of post, he ‘d had a reply — also in verse — from Donald MacDonald, Head of the Chairman's Office.
Here are the two poems.
To: Lord Younger
Please hear my plead From a fellow human being with just one need; After working all week on little pay I look forward to Saturdays so can watch my team play.
What makes it more enjoyable Like my father years ago, Is to stand by the river where Oxford and Cambridge yearly row.
Like the Thames through London It will always flow.
I would like to think on Saturdays To Craven Cottage I will always go.
All the pain of Fulham leaving Only you can heal, If you can sit down with our Chairman And work out a deal; Surely leasing or selling to Fulham would be very sound, Instead of being owners of a derelict ground.
Thank you for reading this one supporter's plea And here's to an outcome which suits both you and me.
Dear Mr Reid
Thank you for your clever verse About your favourite side; It's written well — I ‘ve read much worse, Your cause, besides; But now you ‘ll know that Craven Cot Will still be there for you; We ‘ve tried out best, we ‘ve done a lot To make your dreams come true.
The Bank along with Jimmy Hill Have shaken on a deal, With common aims and much good will It's virtually sealed.
You see, in spite of all you read About the nasty banks, We ‘re mostly very nice indeed But seldom get the thanks.
So now you club whose Fulham name Of legend, myth and fable, Should show it merits all its fame By shooting up the table.
Its home's assured, so let us see Just how the team can play; Bradford nothing, Fulham three Will do this Saturday!
Now, Barry, I shall end my spiel And put this to dictation, You know we poets only feel Short bursts of inspiration.
So thank you for approaching us, I wish you all the best, I ‘ll hop off soon and catch my bus And give my brain a rest!
BARLEY CORN 2
By any standards, Wednesday, 3 February, was a day of confused messages.
At 4pm, the RBS Chairman and Director of Personnel were grilled by a Parliamentary committee on the job cuts and the responsibility of training staff for the new demands.
But at 11am, the Secretary of State for Scotland had congratulated RBS on the hundreds of Direct Line jobs being created in Glasgow.
And at 12 noon, the Secretary of State for Employment had announced that RBS had won a coveted training award for the quality of its training programmes.
A day is a long time in politics.
Just one little month later, BBD's Deputy MD Bob McInnes was fielding some heavy (and live on air) criticism from BBC Radio.
To the accusation that Performance Plus was encouraging staff to chase customers for payment, Bob observed that he thought that was what the BBC was doing with people who hadn ‘t bought a TV licence.
Cue for change of subject.
Forget the Loch Ness Monster and Lord Lucan, the Yeti and the Holy Grail.
Where are the 365 collecting boxes for last year's Ian Botham Walk for Leukaemia that never made it back to Corporate Communications?
Four months and three circulars later they are still lost.
If you have a red cylindrical plastic container looking like a miniature pillar box with the slot in the wrong place, send it back to Corporate Communications, now.
All of us will shudder with our colleagues on the receiving end of a nasty robbery attempt.
Even when the attempt fails there is little immediate comfort for those involved.
The fact for example that the bandit screens withstood the swinging sledge-hammer and the discharged shotgun at Heaton Chapel Branch last month did not make the experience any more palatable for anyone involved.
But the fact that the would-be robbers left empty-handed is a powerful deterrent to any future attempts.
The initiatives which we are introducing — upgraded screens, time-lock tills and smoke/dye devices — are beginning to prove their worth, with five out of this year's 11 raids thwarted.
Improving still further on this start is the best way of sending this message to the villains: ‘There are no easy pickings at the Royal’.
In the long run, that is the best way of protecting staff and customers alike.
The letter to the Registrars, from a rather remote region somewhat nearer to the Equator than to Cancer, began reasonably enough.
But after a few compliments lobbed in the direction of the Bank came the sting.
Could we produce to our normal high standards as many copies as possible of the enclosed 5 Naira banknote?
Could we then put these into an empty TV or radio set and return them to the writer?
Although an official response has already been sent off,Newsline readers may wish to pen their own reply and let us see if they can be as imaginative as the original writer.
Goodwill generated from the Bank ‘many and varied sponsorships has not often been converted directly into banking business.
But now, building on the long-running links with the English and Scottish Volleyball Associations, the Badminton Association of England and the Hockey Association, BBD's Centralised Banking Services is to offer special loan schemes to some 145,000 members of those associations.
Let's hope we see more of this type of cross-fertilisation.
Barleycorn can reveal the details of the new Managers Car Scheme.
All cars will be standard Ladas in corporate dark blue.
Up to five pale blue RBS logos will be mounted on the side to designate the grading of the driver.
(Just think of the whispers sweeping around the office when Jeremy or Karen are seen in the car-park adding — or better still subtracting — a logo or two.)
Colleagues who rank as director or above will have no logos but will have the RBS coat-of-arms emblazoned on the front doors, while main board directors will in addition fly corporate flags from the front grill.
The savings are astronomical, they tell me.
Results reviewed at Corporate Banking conference
CIBD's team of Relationship Managers had a chance to hear for themselves how their role fits in with the future for the Royal Bank when they were addressed by Chief Executive George Mathewson in February.
Dr Mathewson, speaking at the team's second Corporate Banking conference, also provided an overview of the general policies of the Bank, a subject which was then given a Divisional slant by Managing Director Ian Robertson.
After a welcome from Malcolm Atkinson, Corporate Director, Corporate Banking, Birmingham, the Conference began with a review of the Division's results from Ken Duncombe, Director, Corporate Banking, who later also spoke on career structures.
Among other speakers were three guests from other Divisions.
Project Director Cameron McPhail gave a talk on the current position and future targets of Columbus, while a presentation from Jim Rafferty and Tom Turner of Payments Services led to a lively debate in the afternoon question and answer session chaired by John McGuire.
Dealing room will be best outside London
WORK has started on the construction of a fully integrated dealing room at Drummond House for Treasury and Capital Markets, Scotland (TCMS).
With 36 dealing stations, it will be the largest and most sophisticated north of the border.
Completion is expected in early June.
At present TCMS have a foreign exchange dealing room in Moncrieff House, Glasgow and a Sterling Money Market Office at 31 St Andrew Square, Edinburgh.
But this has meant cross-selling capabilities have been fragmented, and some overhead costs have been duplicated.
‘Our new integrated room will maximise our sales efforts and enable us to offer one stop shopping to our customers,’ said Bill McKay, Head of TCMS.
‘Having Corporate Banking, Securities Services and other departments in Drummond House will also help us give a much more effective service, and enable special deals to be put together much more quickly,’ he added.
Bill described the business potential in Scotland as ‘huge — a recent survey having showed £103bn managed by Scottish life assurance companies and independent  managers .
‘Edinburgh is Europe's second largest centre for funds under management, but no bank has made any serious commitment to tapping this source from here,’ he said.
‘In the past this has mainly been done from London with nothing more than token force based either in Edinburgh or Glasgow.
Scotland is our own backyard and we don ‘t intend to allow any other bank, regardless of nationality, to be top dog.’
To enable TCMS achieve clear leadership in both the corporate and inter-bank sectors, the department has undergone several changes during the past 12 months.
These have included upgrading and adding new credit and dealing systems, putting direct lines into all the main London and two New York foreign exchange brokers and focusing more clearly on Branch Banking Division and Corporate Banking relationships.
Senior Trading Manager Jim Kerr has taken over the inter-bank team while David Peebles, Senior Corporate Manager, has been recruited to head the corporate dealing and business development team.
Jim Kerr, formerly Chief Dealer at Bank of Scotland, Glasgow spent a number of years dealing in London during which time he built many inter-bank relationships in the UK, continental Europe and North America.
He has Dennis Barron, ex Banco Exterior and Bank of New York, London as his Trading Manager while David Lamb, fresh from a two year spell on the spot desk in London, joined the team in January.
David Peebles joined TCMS from Midland-Montagu, Edinburgh but earlier in his career he worked in Edinburgh for the Hongkong and Shanghai Bank and in South Africa with Nedbank.
David's Number 2, Corporate Manager John Hemingway is responsible for advising branches and small to medium corporates on currency and interest rate risk management.
He used to be with Midland Bank, Edinburgh.
The corporate dealing team will be completed when David recruits a Senior Corporate Dealer.
This position was advertised in the financial press and attracted nearly 50 replies from five countries!
‘Add to this John Imrie's knowledge of domestic money markets, 12 other foreign exchange, sterling and currency money market dealers plus support staff and you already have a Treasury and Capital Markets team that is the most experienced in Scotland,’ said Bill.
‘Results so far have been impressive — just wait until they get into their new dealing room!’
Bill McKay
Greig finishes top in exams
BRITAIN ‘S top Chartered Institute of Marketing student is a Royal Banker — 28-year-old Greig McCallum.
Greig, a Business Initiative Manager with Project Columbus, learned of his success following publication of the Institute's 1992 examination results.
His reward — a £200 cheque, an engraved paperweight and a certificate — was presented to him by Colonel Douglas Spratt, President of the Edinburgh branch of the Chartered Institute of Marketing at a special students ‘evening.
Colonel Spratt highlighted the importance of the qualification for people planning a career in marketing.
Just the tonic!
BLOOD pressures shot up among the staff at Scunthorpe Branch — because of a Royal Scottish Assurance promotion.
But their offer of free financial health checks proved just the tonic and generated a lot of new business.
Direct Banking is TSU's first choice
THE Royal Bank's newly-formed Telephone Service Unit is to be known as Direct Banking.
The title was suggested by two Newsline readers — Chris Law of Internal Audit, Regent's House, London and Susan Grieve of Coventry Branch — in our ‘Name the unit’ competition.
They will share the first prize of £500, receive a framed copy of the Direct Banking logo and be invited to spend the day with the unit.
The senders of five other names chosen for research among customers will each receive £50 and a design of their logo.
They and their suggestions are Alistair McConnachie, Manager, Lerwick Branch (Dial Direct and Call Direct), Hugh Parker, Personnel Training Support Unit, Esdaile, Edinburgh (Solutions), the staff at Sanquahar Branch, Dumfriesshire (Extension One), Deborah.
c/o Charles Allan, Operations Support (Banking Direct), and John Needham, Corporate Manager, Glasgow City Centre Group of Branches (Call Direct).
Chichester go to number one
CHICHESTER Branch achieved the prestige of being the Number 1 Royal Scottish commission earning branch in the UK for the month of January, earning new commission of £7833 plus renewals, making a grand total of £8084.
Said Andy Reeves, Customer Services Manager, ‘Our success has resulted from a very basic principle — staff awareness.
Mike Spencer-Phillips, Royal Scottish Consultant, organised a staff seminar to give a broad outline of Royal Scottish products following which the lead referrals have been flooding in.
There have been no fancy gimmicks in producing referrals, and the staff are to be commended for their considerable efforts.’
Our picture shows Andy (right) receiving the commission cheque from Mike Spencer-Phillips watched by (back row, from left) Chris Bailey, Peter Anderson, Jenny Langdon and Fiona Hawthorne;(front row), Emma Francois, Jenny Benham, Tracey Pyett, Tracey Redding and Dawn Thackray.
Warrington first past the post
TOP selling Warrington Group are the first winners of Liverpool Region's Royal Scottish Quarterly Award.
And Group Manager David Catterall is over the moon!
‘Everyone on the staff has worked really hard,’ he said, ‘and it's great that their efforts have been rewarded.’
The Group, which is made up of Warrington and Runcorn Branches, pulled off victory by finishing top of Liverpool Region's Royal Scottish sales chart in the first three months of the financial year.
They achieved 173 per cent of target.
Certificates were presented to each member of staff and a crate of wine was cracked open so they could celebrate.
David's reward was a shield presented by Steve Burrows, Local Director, Liverpool.
and John Paterson, Royal Scottish Regional Sales Manager, North West England and Liverpool.
Holt's sew up South of England
HOLT ‘S Farnborough staff brushed aside all opposition in a Royal Scottish Assurance leaders referral competition — and ended up £500 the richer!
They then celebrated by putting the money towards a dinner-dance.
The competition was open to all branches in South of England Region.
Each was set a target which had to be achieved to earn a place in a ‘super league’.
Our picture shows Royal Scottish National Sales Manager Brian Reilly (fourth from left) presenting the £500 cheque to Holt's Farnborough Manager Stephen Godby.
Looking on are (from left) Stephen Morris, Suzanne Pope, Robert Hillary, Martin Waghorn (Chief Manager), Neil Hepburn (Regional Manager, Southern), Phil Adams (RSA Consultant).
Andrew Jones, Tom Jones and Tracey Baker.
Video View with Iain Harrison
DISTRIBUTION of the Columbus Video —Changing the Shape of BBD — has been completed.
Initial feedback from staff has been encouraging and I hope that this will be reflected in the questionnaires which all staff in BBD have been asked to complete.
The video, whilst aimed at staff in BBD, was also sent to all other Divisions.
It is fair to say that a considerable amount of effort was put into the Columbus Video with staff from within Columbus and from out with the project being involved.
Care was also taken to ensure that the video is as up to date as possible, keeping staff fully informed of the Bank of the future.
With regard to Branch Security, there are a couple of videos due to be released soon.
The first,Don ‘t be a soft target , relates to security procedures at branches and the need to ensure that these procedures are always adhered to.
It was made for Barclays Bank and we are grateful to them for allowing us to adapt it for our own use.
Don ‘t be a soft target will complement the Pushover video which was distributed to branches in November 1988.
The second video —What Happens Now?— gives an explanation of post-crime proceedings following a raid at a branch.
It was produced for the Bank of Scotland, Clydesdale Bank as well as ourselves and will be released to branches in Scotland in the near future.
Also in the pipeline are a couple of Service Quality Development videos on counter courtesy and telephone techniques.
These follow on from Service Quality's successful Try my Bank problem solving video which featured Richard Wilson from One Foot in the Grave .
Other possible future projects include a video on credit, a video on the half-yearly results 1993 and the possibility of a further video on the subject of staff security.
More on all these projects later.
RoyScot Trust land Classic FM deal
James Cross in one of Classic FM's studios with equipment financed by RoyScot Trust.
CLASSIC FM's 3 million listeners need no introduction to the works of Beethoven, Wagner and Tchaikovsky.
But James Cross is a different matter.
Few know anything about him!
Yet it's James they have to thank every time they sink into their armchairs to listen to their favourite classics.
For it was he who arranged the finance which went a long way towards putting the station on the air.
James works for RoyScot Trust in Theale, Berkshire and it's his job to seek out new customers.
So, nine months ago, when he heard that a consortium was planning to launch Classic FM — Britain's first radio station — he lost no time in trying to do business with him.
Steve Horner, the station's Financial Director, appeared interested.
Money was needed to purchase vital studio equipment and other machinery.
Negotiations opened but it was several months before the two men reached an agreement for ‘substantial borrowings’.
Soon afterwards Classic FM's studio in the heart of London began to take shape and at the beginning of September 1992 the station started broadcasting.
It was an immediate success and already rivals, BBC Radio 3 are being given a run for their money.
Meanwhile, James continues to tune in to Radio 1.
‘I ‘m no great lover of classical music,’ he said.
‘But I do listen to it when I ‘m in the mood, or when I want to wind down.’
The new station's shareholders include GWR Radio of Swindon, the American media giant Time Warner, Home Counties Newspapers and Sir Peter Michael, one of Britain's richest businessmen.
Among the station staff are Henry Kelly of Game for a Laugh fame and Michael Barry, the food and drink connoisseur.
New company celebrates
LEADING Isle of Man businessmen, as well as several Max politicians and government officials were among 150 guests at a reception to celebrate the launching of Capital House Investment Management (IOM) Limited.
The new company — a subsidiary of Capital House — offers a wide range of investment services for the corporate, institutional and private investor.
and expansion plans will result in its staff working closely with The Royal Bank of Scotland (IOM) Ltd.
In a press statement, visiting Capital House Chief Executive Norman Riddell — who has since left to join Invesco Europe as Chief Executive — and the Manx subsidiary's Managing Director Bob Straskiewicz said that Capital House was a truly world-wide operation.
Through its offices in Jersey, Hong Kong, Singapore, Boston, Edinburgh, London and Manchester as well as the Isle of Man, it managed funds valued in excess of £4bn.
Other Capital House representatives from the UK and Jersey flew to the Isle of Man for the reception and afterwards attended a staff dinner.
The Isle of Man operation was acquired from Standard Chartered Equitor towards the end of last year.
Norman Riddell with (from left) The Rt Hon Miles Walker (Isle of Man Chief Minister), Hugh Ward (Managing Director, Capital House International Investment Management Ltd) and Patricia O ‘Loughlin (Director, Bonds and Currencies).
Bob Staszkiewicz,(second left) with some of his staff.
From left are Karen Dutton, Jackie Fargher, Phil Cowley and Julie Mann.
WINNING IDEAS
Simply silver
A simple but effective idea from two Coatbridge staff has resulted in them sharing a £500 silver award.
June Peat and John Carlin (above suggested that repair kits be made available for counter pen sets.
Stolen pens and chains could be replaced thus ending the practice of throwing away the holder.
The idea is expected to save about £5,000 a year.
Repair kits will shortly be available from Stationery Department.
Between 1 January — 28 February, bronze awards were made to T Walker, Liverpool, Dale Street (introduction of new interest adjustment advice form), Valerie Taylor, Leith (crossing stamps now to include address and postcode), Rosemary Scott, Lockerbie (clarify between Gold Highline Mastercard on the Gold rates leaflet), Kevin McConnell, Croydon Branch (advise staff of bank houses available from homesale), Janice Lees, Galashiels (word processing author's form to be printed on both sides), Steven Lawlor, Anstruther Branch (converting Poll Tax to Royal Scottish payments — letter), Caroline Cash, Bradford (introducing external funds transfer form), Peter Barr, Branch Services (provide details of share prices via Inside Track ).
Encouragement awards over the same period were made to 
In January, 25  suggestors received a Commemorative note in our first bi-monthly prize draw.
Our next prize draw will take place on 31 May — remember each entry is eligible.
Ideas continue to pour in — to date we have received more than 2,000.
Top participating region is the North of England and Midlands, 19 per cent of whose staff have contributed ideas.
The South of England are in second place with 14 per cent, while Scotland lags well behind with only 9 per cent .
Stop press
WINNER of our San Marino competition is David Smith of Dundee Reform Street.
He has won our launch prize of a fabulous three day trip to the San Marino Grand Prix in addition to a £1,000 Gold Award.
More details in the next edition of Newsline .
Waste paper idea brings cash bonus
THREE or four times a month a Royal Bank lorry laden with 4 tonnes of waste paper pulls out of Drummond House and sets off for a paper mill in Fife.
The trip is the final link in a recycling programme which in about 18 months ‘time is expected to earn the Bank £54,000 a year.
That's in addition to a saving of more than £40,000 in a full year.
The man who suggested turning the Drummond House waste paper into hard cash is Edinburgh Facilities Transport Manager, Hugh Sinclair.
‘The idea came to me during September 1991 when I saw a pile of waste paper being loaded into a contractor's vehicle at the back of 36 St Andrew Square.
I thought there was no reason why the Bank shouldn ‘t be doing than itself,’ he said.
His next move was to ask several Scottish paper mills if they were able to take the waste paper, de-ink it, then produce a finished product for re-use.
Four mills hadn ‘t the necessary equipment but a fifth, Smith Anderson & Company, said they could carry out the process.
Hugh went to their mill in the small town of Leslie to discuss the matter further with Smith Anderson's Purchasing Manager, Gavin Anderson.
Then armed with an array of facts and figures he bounced his idea off managerial colleagues Roddy Greig and Ron Erskine.
‘I suggested the Bank collect the paper, shred it, bale it and deliver it to the mill,’ said Hugh.
‘That way, we would save the contractor's connection charges of over £40,000 — and get paid for each load.’
Hugh's plan involved purchasing a heavy duty shredder, a baling press, a fork lift truck and a purpose built Ford lorry — total outlay £61,500.
But, he argued, the Bank would be on to a winner once it started collecting, and selling, 12 tonnes of paper per week.
The scheme would also benefit the environment.
Executive approval was given — and just before Christmas, Operations Division's Waste Recycling lorry made its maiden trip to Leslie.
Productivity, currently running at 4 tonnes every seven working days, is expected to double by September with the target of 12 tonnes every week being achieved by the middle of next year.
This will include 5 tonnes of computer paper, 4 tonnes of mixed colour letter paper and 3 tonnes of white letter paper.
Plans to extend the scheme to other Bank premises in Edinburgh are already in hand and waste paper from Registrars and Stationery Departments will soon end up being recycled.
‘Eventually the scheme could cover much of Scotland and then spread to England,’ said Hugh.
In the meantime, drivers Frank Galashan and Danny Hopkins are keeping the Waste Recycling lorry moving by taking it in turns to drive the vehicle to Leslie.
Hugh Sinclair (centre) hands the keys of the Waste Recycling lorry to Danny Hopkins.
Looking on is Frank Galashan.
Plastic cups sent for recycling
Property Department's Shona Jennings eyes up some of the plastic cups collected at Drummond House.
Shona is Assistant Buildings Administration Officer.
TEA time is now green time at Drummond House.
For gone are the days when the used plastic cups ended up in the dustbin.
Instead, staff are putting them into special collecting bins so that they can be taken away for recycling.
Altogether, the Drummond House workforce sip their way 22,000 cuppas each week which means there are so many empties they have to be carted off by lorry at regular intervals.
Eventually they end up at a reprocessing plant where they are ground into tiny flakes, washed and dried.
Some flakes are then sold for use in various applications while the remainder are used to make coat hangers, video cassettes and a host of other items.
The recycling scheme is run by the non-profit making Save-a-Cup Recycling Company which was set up  by a group of plastic cup manufacturers and a number of companies in the UK vending and foodservice industries just over a year ago.
The Royal Bank is one of the first organisations in Scotland to join the scheme.
Save-a-Cup's aim to ensure that the millions of cups used in offices throughout Britain do not harm the environment by being burned or dumped on landfill sites.
It expects to be recycling around 400 million cups a year by 1994.
Roddy Greig, Manager, Transport and Messenger Services, said, ‘It takes only seven plastic cups to produce enough material to manufacture a 12-inch ruler.
The Bank's waste cups will go to produce a wide variety of goods and may even be used to make the trays for collecting the Bank's waste paper.’
Young environmentalists have a day out in Edinburgh…=
Charles Winter (centre) shares a joke with Cyril Littlewood while entertainer Gary Wilmot calls forward the prizewinners.
THERE were smiles all round when entertainer Gary Wilmot appeared as the star guest at a luncheon at Edinburgh Zoo for the Royal Bank's top young environmentalists.
And in next to no time he was a hit with the prizewinning youngsters.
Gary had taken time off from Edinburgh Playhouse where he was starring in the musical, Me and My Girl.
He congratulated the youngsters, all of whom had won prizes in the 1992 Young Environmentalist of the Year Competition.
Senior prizewinner was 13-year-old Donald Campbell whose mother Lydia works at Kirkwall Branch.
Junior champion was 10-year-old David Dathan whose link with the Bank is through his grandfather, pensioner Arthur Hoult.
David lives in Sutton Coldfield, West Midlands.
Both boys won a week's discovery holiday for two in Dorset, and, like the 17 runners-up, were also given a year's subscription to the BBC Wildlife Magazine and the choice of a camera, pair of binoculars, telescope or microscope.
Amy Roberts, a winner in 1991, was given a special prize of two tickets for Me and My Girl, and later went to Edinburgh Playhouse with her mother, Ruth.
Prizes were presented by the Bank's Vice Chairman, Charles Winter, and at the gathering was Cyril Littlewood, Chairman and Director of the Young Peoples Trust for the Environment, and organiser of the Young Environmentalist competition.
This year the competition is being extended to customers ‘children and young relatives.
Gary Wilmot, Cyril Littlewood and Charles Winter join the prizewinners.
They are (standing, from left), Lesley Mitchell, Pippa Bell, Donald Campbell, Andrew Plenderleigh, Vicky Quinn, Paul Brierley, Gillian Relf, Amy Roberts, Suzanne Milton, Jennifer Inwood, Danielle Forder, Linda McIrdy, David Dathan, Louise McGregor, Sarah Orth and Nicholas Maitland;(kneeling), Neil Henderson, Mary Richie, Jamie Maitland and Steven Chapman.
Loughborough best in East Midlands…=
LOUGHBOROUGH have become the first holders of the East Midlands Region Branch of the Year trophy.
They took the title following an all-round improvement in performance for growth and profitability.
Regional Manager Malcolm McDowell presented the award to Loughborough Manager Paul Whittaker who thanked his 13 staff for their support.
‘It's down to your hard work and a team effort that we have won this trophy,’ he said ‘Let's make sure we retain the award in the current year.
Malcolm said Loughborough had been innovative and show modern thinking in its approach to selling and business development.
The branch also had an excellent approach to producing RSA leads and  enjoyed good branch inspection, particularly in advances control and advances records.
Our picture shows Malcolm (right) presenting the trophy to Paul.
…= thanks partly to Julian!
LOUGHBOROUGH Manager Paul Whittaker used a secret weapon as he masterminded his branch's success.
He called in Julian — a six-inch-tall red, white and blue garden gnome!
Julian, together with a £10 gift voucher, is presented to the month's most successful business developer.
At the prizegiving, the winner is expected to pass on any tips to other members of staff.
Competition to win the gnome is intense.
‘Occasionally espionage, even sabotage, is suspected,’ said Paul.
‘But it's always in good humour and fun.’
Julian was named after first winner Julian Lawrence who is seen here with two other winners, Heather Valente (left) and Liz Marshall.
More jobs for Glasgow as Direct Line expands
AT least 200 new jobs are to be created in Glasgow as part of a major expansion plan by Direct Line.
This will take the company's total workforce in the city to over 400 — and even more jobs could follow if Direct Line's rate of growth continues at its present level.
The insurance giant has had an office in Glasgow's West Regent Street since 1988 but it now plans to purchase the four times bigger and brighter Fitzpatrick House in the heart of the city.
The new building, which is at the junction of Cadogan Street and West Campbell Street, is light, airy and open plan, making it ideal for Direct Line's telesales and teleclaims operations.
About £2 million will be spent on equipping the premises before staff move in during May.
Direct Line's Chief Executive Peter Wood said Glasgow was a key location for the company.
‘We have found the quality of staff, the communications and facilities offered by the city to be excellent which is why we have selected Glasgow for further growth of our core business and the centralisation of some functions.’
Retirements
Alex Reid cheques out
ALLOA and Alva Grouping staff presented a cheque to Senior Manager Alex Reid when he retired after 43 years ‘service.
He said he would use the money to purchase an oil painting.
Alex worked at branches in Annan, Kelso, Penicuik, Granton-on-Spey, Airdrie and Glasgow before moving to Alloa in 1986.
He is pictured with Grouping staff at his farewell party at Alloa's Gean House Hotel.
Luncheons arranged
THE annual reunion luncheon for Glyn's pensioners will be held at Regent's House on 19 May.
Three other 1993 reunions have also been arranged.
Manchester pensions will meet and the Portland Thistle Hotel on 7 October; National Bank pensioners will lunch at  on 29 October; and Threadneedle Street pensions will meet on 3 December, also at .
Invitations will be sent out in good time but pensioners with any queries should contact Charles Muir at Regent's House ().
DONALD Smith, Regional Manager, South of Scotland was presented with a farewell cheque to mark his retirement from the Royal Bank.
The presentation was made by Branch Banking Division's Deputy Managing Director, Bob McInnes, and at the same informal ceremony Donald's wife, Ada, was given a bouquet.
Donald joined the Bank in Carnoustie and served in a number of branches in Dundee and Perth before moving to Head Office in 1965.
Later he held managerial posts in Alloa, Edinburgh Davidson's Mains, Kilmarnock and Edinburgh West End Office before being appointed Area Manager for Edinburgh Branches in 1985.
He then spent five years as Assistant General Manager, UK Banking.
Our photograph shows Donald and his wife (centre) with Bob McInnes and Isobel Dalgetty, his former secretary.
Bradford reunion
NINE former staff at the old Williams & Glyn's Bradford Branch were soon talking about ‘the good old days’ when they met for a reunion in one of the city's wine bars.
Julia Newton, Kath Metcalfe, Helen Rhodes, Sue Thirkill, Andy Stuart, Simon Cash, Yvonne Johnson, Nicola McGrath and Mike Smethurst had such a good time they are already planning another get-together in the not too distant future.
Colourful farewell for Esther
ILL-HEALTH has forced Esther McNally, Group Leader, Company Registration, Registration Department to take early retirement.
She left with the best wishes of all her colleagues — plus a colour TV which was presented to her by Tom Gorrie, Manager, Taurus.
Esther's banking career began in 1977 when she joined Davidson's Mains Branch, Edinburgh as a 17-year-old junior.
In 1982 she transferred to Company Registration, Registrars Department where she was one of the founder members of the Savers Section.
Over the years she saw the section expand from handling only one company to its present total of 29, involving 50 members of staff.
Copy for the next issue must be submitted by 7 May
Another Crufts win for Carole
DOG-lover Carole Birdsall wasn ‘t barking up the wrong tree when she acquired her four Old English Sheepdogs.
All have won prizes at Crufts.
Sara (Brinkley Dream Come True to Palamine) was the first to win at the world famous show when, in the 1986, she was judged best the in the Post Graduate class.
Two years later, Katie (Beauvallon Bo-Peep at Palamine) won two classes — the Special Junior and Undergraduate — and in 1991, Sara's daughter Blossom (Palamine Cherry Blossom) was voted best of 24 in the Special Junior class.
In 1992, Sara's son, Sonnie (Palamine Cherish the Dream) was judged top Special Puppy at only 10 months, and this year he was again among the award winners, being voted best Special Yearling.
Said Carole, ‘From a household of four Old English Sheepdogs all four have won first prizes at Crufts and the only male has done it twice.
Not bad considering he was the only puppy in the litter — and I wanted a bitch!’
Comic Day collection
BANK Officer Noel Crossley of Chapel-en-le-Frith Branch dressed up as a tomato on Comic Relief Day and went on a tour of the town with a collection bucket.
Back at the Branch, customers were greeted by cashiers clad in red noses, and at the end of an enjoyable day, more than £40 was in the kitty.
Meanwhile, staff at the Credit Card Centre paid £2 each to wear casual clothing for work.
Altogether, they collected £425.
Cash Flo promotion
FORTY teachers from schools in South Humberside found a Royal Banker in charge of the class when they went to Grimsby Branch to learn about the Bank's Cash Flo initiative.
Nick Spencer and some of his colleagues organised the evening class which aimed to help teachers help pupils learn the value and management of money.
‘There are 47 schools in the area taking part in the project, and we ‘re hoping to reach children in the nine, ten and eleven years ‘age brackets,’ said Nick.
Following a successful pilot in Hull Branch, Cash Flo is being promoted throughout the north east of England and could eventually go nationwide.
It won a School Curriculum and Industry Partnership last year and Industry Partnership last year and is part of the National Curriculum economic and industrial understanding subject.
More members wanted south of the border
THE Royal Bank of Scotland Assistant Managers ‘Association operates through local areas based on geographical boundaries.
Unfortunately, the coverage in England is not as widespread as we would like, leaving many areas without the benefit of a formally functioning Association.
The reason for this situation is largely historical, due to the Assistant Managers ‘and the corresponding Managers ‘Associations being well established in Scotland in the Royal Bank pre merger.
Since 1985, the Association has promoted itself in the South but has encountered difficulty in establishing a countrywide structure due in even part to branches being thin on the ground in some areas and the difficulty in telling all assistant managers of the benefits and purpose of the Association.
The Association exists purely for the benefit of assistant managers.
Members of local branches meet in the evenings to discuss social and business matters.
Their views are then taken forward to the Central Association which passes them on to the Bank through forums such as the Joint Consultative Committee.
Recently these have covered branch staffing, assistant managers ‘overtime, internal advising of job vacancies, Project Columbus, performance related pay, Bank communication and assistant managers ‘career expectations.
At present the Central Association is chaired by me.
I can be contacted at the Giffnock Group, Glasgow,.
Vice-Chair is Helen Souter, Edinburgh Cashiers, and Secretary is Evelyn Dick, Credit Control Department, South of England,.
We would be only too pleased to provide information on the Association.
The Central Association can also assist staff who wish to become more actively involved but do not have a formal branch of the Association.
We would stress that the Association exists for staff in Grades 7–10, and has retained the title, Assistant Managers ‘Association to differentiate from the similarly named Managers ‘Association which covers staff in Grades 11 and above.
If you are in a Grade between 7–10 but are not participating in the Association, ask yourself why?
Unless you have no opinion on any aspect of the Bank affecting us today, then the Assistant Managers ‘Association is the place for you and your views.
Pool tales
POOLE Branch will be 25 years old later this year.
Diane Maidment would be pleased to hear from any former staff members with an amusing, unusual or interesting tale to tell about their stay at the Branch.
She would also appreciate any photographs of the branch and/or staff.
Diane can be contacted at the Branch at  .
Charity raffle
A FOOTBALL autographed by Coventry City players was the star prize in a charity raffle organised by staff at the Royal Bank's Coventry Branch.
Winner Melvyn Walsh collected the ball from Cashiers Janet Robinson and Julie Symons.
The raffle raised £115 for Children in Cities 1992.
Quizzed
GRAHAM Ramsay, Dave Mulholland, Barbara Collier and Mike Banks were presented with a shield after winning Operations Support's first annual quiz night.
The event, organised by Angela Ainslie and Phyllis Bell, attracted seven teams who were asked questions on a wide range of topics.
Questionmasters were Jackie Taylor and Kathryn Harper.
Peeps into the past
THIS photograph shows the staff at the Royal Bank's Edinburgh West End Office in 1922 shortly after they had moved from  to temporary premises at .
Why they moved and for how long they stayed in Charlotte Square, however, is a mystery.
Vicki Wilkinson, Assistant Manager, Archives () would like to hear from anyone who knows the reason.
The branch is opened at  in March 1870, the premises having been bought from Messrs John Watherston & Son for £3,500.
The accommodation included a dining room drawing room and flats and the first agent or manager was George Andrew.
The tellers have been identified (from left) as Mr Scolley, Mr Miller, Mr Abernethy and Mr Simpson and the agent in the doorway as James Harper.
However, the gentleman at the back of the picture are as yet unnamed.
In 1976, a new branch was developed at  which, when it opened in 1980, housed the business of the West End Office, Shandwick Place Branch, Princes Street West and Ladies Branch.
The development is now known as the West End Office.
Archives, London are in the final stages of research a short history of Drummonds Bank.
Philip Winterbottom, Assistant Manager, Archives would like to hear from anyone who worked at Drummonds prior to 1960 and who could tell him about the branch as it was and of any changes or innovations which occurred.
If you have any information or any photographs of the branch, particularly staff, please give Philip a ring on , or write to him at .
Sarah wins award
ONLY four years after becoming a venture scout, Sarah Smith has qualified for the movement's top training honour — The Queen's Scout Award.
She was presented with the award by Yorkshire's Deputy County Commissioner for Venture Scouts, Roger Williams, during a ceremony at Huddersfield Town Hall.
County Commissioner John Emmott was also present.
Sarah, a 19-year-old Clerk at the Royal Bank's Huddersfield Branch, is a member of the town's Coritani Venture Scout Unit.
She gained her Queen's Award after spending two years working on several community projects including talking to young people about drug abuse and helping with conservation.
Scouting takes up much of Sarah's spare time but she still squeezes in regular visits to Huddersfield Technical College where she is studying for two ‘A’ levels — geography and business studies.
Gold for Christine
CHRISTINE Elliott enjoyed every minute working for her Duke of Edinburgh Gold Award — and when she met the Duke at the presentation ceremony she told him so.
‘Prince Philip was interested to her that I already held the bronze and silver awards and asked me whether I had enjoyed myself going for gold,’ said Christine.
‘I told him that it had been great.’
Christine, a graduate trainee with London Belgravia Group, collected her award at St James's Palace — seven years after setting out to gain her bronze.
To get her gold she took up bell ringing, did a lot of swimming, helped the National Trust clear up after the 1988 hurricane, and completed a 50 mile long trek in Glencoe in four days.
She also helped at a Brownie Pack and was a volunteer mini-bus driver for children with special needs.
Hazel prepares for trip to the States
TWENTY-ONE-YEAR OLD Hazel Rodgers is preparing for three months ‘voluntary work in America after being chosen to represent the Royal Bank in this year's Winant and Clayton Volunteer Scheme.
Hazel, a Clerk in Private Trust and Taxation, Edinburgh, will fly to the USA in June — but she won ‘t know her final destination or what type of work she will be doing until much nearer the time.
‘It could be New York, Connecticut, Washington or Manhattan,’ she said, and I could end up working with the elderly, mentally handicapped, children or Aids victims.’
Hazel heard she ‘d been chosen for the Scheme in early March — several months after she had submitted her application.
‘They phoned me at home on a Friday evening and that night I went out to celebrate,’ she said.
The Winant and Clayton scheme dates back to 1948 when a group of young Americans came to Britain to work in youth clubs and parishes.
They were known as the Winant Volunteers, after John Winant, the US Ambassador to Britain during the Second World War.
In 1959, five British students piloted a similar British scheme when they went to work in New York.
The next year they were followed by the first Clayton Volunteers (named after the Reverend (Tubby Clayton, founder of TocH).
Hazel Rodgers
My three months as a volunteer
Diane Wrens in Hoolywood
ON Friday 26 June 1992 — nine months after I had applied to be a Winant and Clayton Volunteer — I flew from Heathrow to New York.
My final destination was Fountain House in Manhattan.
This is a psychiatric rehabilitation centre for people unable to cope with daily problems.
Even getting up in the morning is difficult for some.
The work was totally different to the volunteer work I had done at home and was quite a challenge.
I spent my mornings in the Education Department teaching basic subjects such as reading and English.
I had never taught in a classroom before but, although daunting at first, it turned out to be education for me as well as the students.
For people with mental health problems, a sympathetic ear and understanding is an essential part of their rehabilitation.
The realisation that this illness could apply to anyone broke down the illusion that it only affects those who have dropped out of society.
Whilst working, I stayed in an apartment only 20 minutes ‘walk from Times Square.
Every evening and weekend I set out to discover  ‘The Big Apple’.
There was never a dull moment and among the places I visited were the Statue of Liberty, Central Park, the World Trade Centre, the Empire State Building, Wall Street and Chinatown.
In the words of Frank Sinatra, New York is the city that never sleeps — and I can certainly vouch for that.
At the end of my work placement, I teamed up with two other volunteers for a three week holiday.
We flew to San Diego on the West Coast where we hired a car and headed for the bright lights of Las Vegas.
We stayed there for five days — hoping to strike it rich, but had to be content with a car full of cuddly toys!
From Las Vegas we travelled through the desert and Indian Territory to Yosemite National Park.
The scenery was the most beautiful I ‘d ever seen.
Next stop was San Francisco — hidden by smog — and I never did find the Golden Gate Bridge!
As time was flying by, we headed down the coast, stopping at numerous beaches, finally reaching Disneyland and Universal Studios.
I think the day we spent at Disneyland was my favourite.
To finish in style, we spent a luxurious four days in Palm Springs — lying by the pool — in temperatures of 120C, just enough to finish off the tan.
Stornoway staff help hospice
‘IN-HOUSE’ lunches were dished up by staff at Stornoway Branch to raise money for the Bethesda Nursing Home and Hospice on the Isle of Lewis.
Then to bring in even more cash, they organised a quiz night.
£ 
At the final count, there was £600 in the kitty, and a cheque for this amount was presented to Nursing Officer Christine Maclean (left) by Manager Ewen Munro (second left).
Helping hold the cheque is Resource Manager Norma Macsween and others in the picture are (from left) John Macdonald, Ellen Macdonald, Alan Sillars, Margaret Morrison, Anne Henderson, Donald Macdonald, Anne Macleod, Christina Bain and Mairi Macleod.
On the road to Bosnia with a lorry load of aid
At the end of last year, Ian Fulton of Technical Services and his friend Sean Elvin took a lorry containing 14 tons of aid to Croatia.
Their destination was the small town of Krk where they handed the aid to representatives of Feed the Children and the Croatian Red Cross.
This is Ian's story.
THERE are many people to thank for their help — those who contributed goods or money towards the trip; those who assisted us during our journey (there are a lot of good people out there!);
Premier Brands of Liverpool for the cash to hire the cab; Frank Brown and the pupils of Musselburgh Grammar School for their hard work and donations; staff and pupils at Prenton High School, Moreton near Liverpool for their donations; Sean's wife Angie for not producing their second child until Sean arrived home; Susan, my long suffering wife, who never batted an eyelid as this project unfolded and gave me lots of encouragement.
Sunday 29 November
We left Musselburgh at 14:00, drove to the Premier Brands complex in Moreton and spent a pleasant evening in their social club before retiring to our hotel.
Monday 30 November
I damaged my back while helping to load the trailer.
We drove to Ramsgate, arriving at 22:30.
Because of my injury, I got the bed in the cab whilst Sean slept in the passenger seat.
Tuesday 1 December
We took the 09:30 ferry to Dunkirk and met a driver from Perth.
A Dunkirk he waited for us so we could tail him through Lille and Mons into Belgium.
He left us after we had reached Luxembourg as this was as far as he went.
We crossed into Germany and stopped for the night at a service station between Speyer and Karlsruhe.
We again slept in the cab, Sean taking the bed and me improvising with an inflatable mattress across the driver and passenger seats.
Wednesday 2 December
We went through Stuttgart and Munich on our way to the Riechenhall border crossing.
This was where I began to wonder if we would succeed with our mission.
We were required to get four stamps on a form, German customs and passport control plus Austrian customs and passport control.
We showed the Germans our passports and Feed the Children/Red Cross documentation and were through in ten minutes.
The Austrians, however, were a different kettle of fish.
As our papers were in English and not German, we spent the next hour or so being rejected, first at Gate One and then at Gate Six.
We eventually went to the Austrian Police in an effort to get some assistance and, as good fortune would have it, we met it young Austrian called Thomas who worked at one of the Shipping Offices on the border.
He translated for us and it was only after he had argued our case with the Head of Austrian Customs that we started to get somewhere.
Eventually the Head of Customs authorised our documents so it was back to Gate One for the two remaining stamps to allow us into Austria.
What a transformation, suddenly the guard spoke English, we received the required stamps and were sent on our way after three hours of total frustration.
As a way of thanks, we handed Thomas a wee bit of Scotland that had been given to us by Frank Brown, a teacher at Musselburgh Grammar School.
Exit one highly delighted young Austrian and two very relieved Scotsmen.
Thursday 3 December
Sean gave me a birthday card from my wife Susan and I had my photograph taken to prove that I did wear my ‘Now you're 40’ badges and socks!
We drove until we reached St Michael where we paid a hefty toll of £30 to use the next stretch of road.
As we pulled through the barrier we noticed that a British truck had stopped just in front of us.
We pulled over and met the two drivers.
They were from Bolton and were delivering a prefabricated office to the UN in Split.
They had refused to pay the toll as they were delivering humanitarian aid.
I returned to the toll office, got our money refunded plus a signed waiver that allowed us seven days to return to St Michael without having to pay on the Austrian roads.
Another piece of good fortune!
At the Austrian/Slovenian border, 100 cigarettes got us out of Austria a sight quicker than we got in!
The weather took a turn for the worse and we found ourselves driving a very grey, bleak day.
Beyond Postojna the roads became increasingly worse, twisting and turning as we went through at Janene on the Croatian border where it was explained that we would have to pay a reduced fee (as we were carrying humanitarian goods) of 13DM in order to acquire the appropriate papers to allow us to enter Croatia.
There appeared to be some problem with our papers regarding the tonnage we were hauling until a 20DM note was produced and we insisted that we did not require a receipt.
So the appropriate documents we went to the Croatian Customs who stamped our papers and insisted on giving us each a bottle of orange juice.
We left them some cigarettes and they sent us on our way.
As we approached Rijeka the weather, like the roads, took a real downward turn.
The road was overhung with rocks and the view from the driver's window was a sheer drop.
What with the fog, the rain and the dark it was frightening to say the least!
We crossed to the island of Krk at 16:30 and found ourselves on what was virtually a single track ‘road’ heading for the town of Krk.
At the Red Cross warehouse, we were met by Stoyaeka who drove us to her house where she gave us a meal of soup, bread, stew and dumplings, all washed down with a very palatable local red wine.
Stoyaeka explained that she was born in Bosnia and had lost ten of her close family (brothers, sisters, nephews and nieces) in the fighting.
She had only three members of her immediate family left in Bosnia but did not hold out much hope of getting them out.
She had lived in Slovenia between 1970 and 1983 when she moved to Krk to get married.
We were only an hour's drive from the front and it was quite frightening to watch the TV and see the Croatian coverage of the troubles, considerably more horrific than what we had seen on the BBC.
That night we stayed at Stoyaeka's house.
Friday 4 December
We were treated to a marvellous breakfast of bread, cheese and salami followed by ham and eggs and lashings of coffee………luxury!
We said good-bye to Stoyaeka and were at the warehouse at 07:30 where we were introduced to Josef who would co-ordinate the unloading of the trailer.
I wasn ‘t much use as my back was still sore, but Sean, Josef and 15 or so pupils from the local school — all of them refugees — emptied the lorry by 09:00.
Josef gave us a thank you letter from the Red Cross, and a teacher told us that Britain supplies more aid to Croatia than any other country.
That made us feel very proud.
Our mission complete, we started the long journey home.
We were allowed out of Croatia without any trouble but the Slovenians searched the lorry from top to bottom for weapons before allowing us through.
At the Austrian border a Dutch lorry driver took us under his wing, translated to the Austrian guards for us and we were on our way soon afterwards.
At the German border we were helped by a German trucker who got us the required stamps.
A German Customs officer asked us about our trip and where we came from.
When we said Edinburgh, his fellow officer began to regale the merits of Heart of Midlothian Football Club!
However, another officer was not so polite about Scotland, particularly its whisky.
They were very friendly, however, and we were soon on our way.
Saturday 5 December
The weather was getting colder.
We drove across the Belgium border at Aachen, stopped at a service station about 30 miles from Brussels, and slept in the cab.
Sunday 6 December
We crossed into France and caught the 12:15 ferry from Dunkirk to Ramsgate.
Sean had a free ticket to the Smorgasbord as he was the driver but the waiter charged me only half price after hearing where we had been.
We spent the night at a service station just north of Wolverhampton.
Monday 7 December
We arrived back in Musselburgh at 15:05.
After dropping off my bags, all we had to do was to return the cab.
Sean set off with me following in his car but two miles down the road, the car's clutch gave in.
Sean had no idea and carried on.
I contacted Sean's sister who came to the rescue — but as soon as she arrived her car broke down!
An hour later, Sean tracked us down, started his sister's car and towed his own back home.
Was this where Jesus fed the 5000?
WITH over 100 others from various parts of Britain, I planned to visit many sites of historical interest and biblical fame.
Politically it was perhaps not the best time to visit Israel with the deportees refuelling the Intifada unrest in the lands of the West Bank.
We were based in an Arab owned hotel in Bethlehem which, although only five miles from Jerusalem, is part of the West Bank and, unlike the Christmas card image, is a very run-down town.
Opposite the hotel was a refugee camp with children who were constantly trying to part unwary tourists from their money.
Yet it was perhaps fitting that Jesus was born in this squalid town.
The first two days were spent in and around Jerusalem with the first poignant moment being the walk down the Mount of Olives with its magnificent views over the old city.
This was where Jesus wept over Jerusalem.
In the Kindron Valley part of the Garden of Gethsemane has been preserved with a number of very old olive trees which may even date back to the time of Jesus.
Since the six-day war in 1967, the Jews have had access to the old city and many excavations have revealed its past history.
Over the past six months, the tomb of Caiaphas, the high priest, has been found and also the tomb of Manaen, an early disciple (Acts 13 v 1), complete with Christian symbol.
In 1883, General Gordon was impressed by a rock face to the North of Jerusalem which resembled a human skill — Golgotha — Calvary.
Around the same time an ancient tomb was discovered in a garden only 250 yards from the skull rock which fitted exactly the biblical description.
These sites were special and, despite the noise of an adjacent bus station and wailing loudspeaker from a nearby Moslem minaret, it was easy to be whisked back in time and imagine the scene many years ago.
Day three was spent at the lowest place on earth — 1400 ft below sea level — the Dead Sea and, after visiting the ancient palace of Herod the Great at Masada, it was time for the obligatory float in the Dead Sea.
It was very cold!
We also had time to take in the caves of Qumran where the Dead Sea scrolls were discovered.
Ray Beattie, Manager, Nantwich Branch fulfilled a life long ambition to visit Israel when he went on an eight-day tour of the country.
Day four started early — 5am — as we were heading for Galilee.
The route was via the Jerusalem to Jericho road, of Good Samaritan fame.
At 8am we were passing through Jericho as the local children were heading for school and we came under attack from youths throwing large stones.
One scored a direct hit but, despite being showered with glass, there were no serious injuries.
Our coach was carrying yellow number plates (Israeli) whereas Arab vehicles carry blue number plates, making us an obvious target.
Because of the delay and police inquiries, we were unable t o walk round the ancient ruins of Jericho, said to be the world's oldest city and I am pleased to confirm the walls are not standing!
The river Jordan marks the boundary between Israel and Jordan and is patrolled.
The valley, itself, is very fertile with fruit growing areas — Israel is self sufficient in fruit and vegetables.
Galilee was blue and calm — many of Jesus's miracles were performed in this region.
In the hills above the ruins of Capernaum near the Mount of Beatitudes we stopped at a natural grassy amphitheatre which could easily seat 10,000.
These people could have been addressed by one man who would have been heard comfortably.
Was this the site of the sermon on the mount or the feeding of the 5000?
We ‘ll never know but it could have been.
We returned via Nazareth and the Valley of Jexreel and Megiddo.
Is t his where it will all end — Armageddon?
The last two days were spent near Jerusalem visiting Emmaus, and the Valley of Elah where David slew Goliath.
Back in Jerusalem, excavations have proved the exact location of the temple, and treasures are being remade to biblical design in preparation for the restoration of the next temple.
Two pages of sport start here
Volleyball trio taste life at the top…=
MORE than 12 years after teaming up in Heriot-Watt University's volleyball team, two Royal Bank staff are once again in the thick of the action.
Lorraine Syme-Smith (centre) and Margaret Holligan (right) turn out regularly for Balerno NUVOC in the Ladies Third Division of the Scottish National League.
A third Royal Banker, Gil Cattanach (left), is also a regular player in the team.
During their student days both Lorraine and Margaret were awarded Heriot-Watt Blues and selected for the Scottish Universities side.
Later, Margaret stopped playing for a few years so she could concentrate on squash but three years ago she returned to the sport and now plays outside hitter for the Balerno team.
Lorraine left it until the start of the season before deciding to hang up her knee pads but her retirement didn ‘t last long.
‘Because we had just switched from the Lothian District League to the National League I thought it was a good time to concentrate on coaching,’ she said.
‘But then the team suffered a run of injuries and after only a handful of matches I was back on the field.’
Gill took up volleyball at school and returned to the sport three years ago.
She plays as a middle hitter.
Although new to the National League, Balerno are holding their own.
‘We ‘re in the upper half of the table,’ said Lorraine, ‘having won nine of our 14 matches.’
Back at the Bank, Lorraine works as a Senior Systems Programmer in Technology, Margaret is in the Economics Department, and Gill is in Personal Banking Services.
Ten-pin bowlers have great time
AIRDRIE Branch staff ended a night out at a local bowling alley with a delicious buffet.
In between mouthfuls, the winning team (above) showed off their well-deserved medals.
From left are, Fraser Mackenzie, Paul Mullen, Ann Walter, John Docherty (Royal Scottish), Lesley Hunter, Lorraine McLeod and Steven Graham.
The staff voted the evening a great success and are already thinking of ‘going down the alley’ again.
Girls exercise for charity
LORRAINE Hughes and Tina Smith touched their toes, stretched, danced and did other aerobic exercise in a three-hour sponsored Aerobathon for the Royal Marsden Cancer Appeal.
The energetic duo, who work in the Accounts Department at Credit Card Centre, raised £196.50.
Television presenter Alastair Duval congratulated Tina (left) and Lorraine on their achievement.
Roy Castle was also one of several celebrities to support the event.
Wanted: rugby players
CALLING all rugby enthusiasts!
The Royal Bank's Glasgow Club is on the look-out for new players.
Anyone interested should contact Match Secretary Gary Torbett at Greenock West Blackhall Street or Graham Rintoul at Glasgow Govan.
The club has so far played two games and is undefeated.
Bank curlers help Scots to a famous victory!
TWO Royal Bankers were among 56 Scottish curlers who in January regained the Strathcona Cup from the Canadians.
Roger Scott, Manager, Peebles Branch and Ronnie Dunachie, retired Manager of Helensburgh Branch, spent four weeks in Canada as members of the Royal Caledonian Curling Club's touring party.
Roger played in the East team while Ronnie joined the West team.
The Strathcona competition, first staged in 1909. is held every five years, alternatively in Canada or Scotland.
Great start for East players
THE East Team played 18 games during our ten day stay in Nova Scotia and New Brunswick and when we left St John for Quebec City we had established a lead of over 100 shots.
This was an excellent beginning, particularly as we had learned that the West Tour were also comfortably ahead.
Our stay in Quebec city — a beautiful city — was, regrettably, only for one day and the next day we moved to Montreal.
There we were, hosts of Royal Montreal Club — the oldest sporting club in Canada.
We achieved good wins in and around Montreal and when we moved to Ottawa our lead had increased to 150 shots.
Games became more difficult in Ottawa, generally the ice became much quicker — at one Club members were having difficulty with the speed of the ice.
However, play was kept tight and we slowly increased our lead.
From Ottawa we spent a memorable day in Prescott where the club was celebrating its centenary.
The day started with our bus being stopped by the police, and the RCCC Chaplain, Reverend Bill Holland and Tour Captain, Roy Sinclair were ‘arrested’ for having ‘deep pockets and short arms’.
The two were handcuffed together, taken off the bus and put in the back of the police car which then escorted us into town with lights flashing and siren blaring.
We played two games that day at Prescott Club and we were entertained after dinner by a Fiddlers Rally — a superb day.
West improve as thaw sets in
THE Western Tour commenced at Winnipeg, where we experienced four days of temperature ranging from -28C to -35C.
And although the hospitality was superb, we were relieved to move to the warmer climate of Vancouver and Vancouver Island.
As we thawed out so our curling improved, which stood us in good stead when the tour progressed into the curling hotbed regions of Edmonton, Weyburn, Saskatoon and Calgary.
Nevertheless, playing against Canadian Province champions and, on one occasion against former world champion Ed Northcott, resulted in severe erosion of the lead we had built up earlier.
Also, the curling schedule of close on two matches per day, coupled with extensive travelling, proved exhausting, and in Calgary we welcomed the pleasant break of a day visit into the Rockies to Lake Louise and Banff — winter wonderlands of snow and ice.
And so to Regina, where we had a conducted tour of the main training school of The Royal Canadian Mounted Police.
This was most enjoyable and, rejuvenated by the visit, we emerged comfortable winners in Regina and confidently flew out to Thunder Bay on Lake Superior — a fascinating flight over vast stretches of snow bound forests, frozen lakes and rivers.
At Thunder Bay we played our one and only outside match on the solidly frozen River Macintyre, but this had to be severely curtailed due to the intense cold.
The overall results at Thunder Bay again favoured Scotland and so it was with a comfortable lead that we left for our final destination.
Toronto.
Here we met up with the East Team.
With the adrenalin in full flow, both East and West concentrated on four further days ‘curling at various venues in Toronto, at the end of which we were thrilled to emerge as the first Scottish team to win in Canada since 1949.
And there's also success for Christine and Peter
CHRISTINE Cannon (right) skipped her Stranraer Rink to victory in the Royal Bank's Scottish Ladies Championships at Kirkcaldy.
The rink will now represent Scotland at the World Championships in Geneva.
Although Stranraer were in command from the start of the final, they were in danger of losing four shots and the match at the last end but a missed stone from the opposing skip handed them victory.
Wendy Bell (Private & Offshore Banking, Edinburgh) and Judith Stobbie (Branch Services, Edinburgh) who were in last year's winning team failed to make it to this year's final.
Their rink was knocked out in the semi-final.
Christine is picture with the other members of her rink (from left) Margaret Richardson, Mairi Herd and Claire Milne.
A YEAR after coaching the Scottish Junior Ladies rink to victory in the World Championships in Germany, Peter Louden (left) has struck gold again.
Helped by his sisters Katie and Edith as well as Alex Torrance Jnr, he skipped Perth to a dramatic last shot victory in the Scottish Mixed Championships at Kilmarnock.
A week later he came close to winning another gold in the Scottish Men's Championships but his Perth Rink was pipped in the finals.
Peter, who works in the Royal Bank's Personal Loans New Business Section at Head Office, was Scottish Junior Champion in 1988.
Last year he also coached the Scottish Ladies champions at senior level.
He is pictured with (from left) Katie, Edith and Alex.
Staff Club members dine in
THE unfamiliar sound of a Scottish Dance Band was heard echoing throughout Drummond House, Edinburgh but not even the security guards looked surprised.
The occasion was the first dinner dance at the building to be organised by Staff Club Scotland.
Over 130 sat down to a five course meal and afterwards danced to the music of Scarhill Sound under leader Jim Drysdale of RoyScot Factors.
‘It was a great evening,’ said Margaret Thorburn, Assistant Secretary, Staff Club, ‘and the meal was excellent’.
Pictured enjoying a drink are (from left) Jim Stott, Bob Gunning, Dick Jones, Linda Gunning, Margaret Jones, Maree Bell, Lindsey Morrison, Ian Bell and Tom Morrison.
At the table are (from left) Jim Brydie, Lorraine Brydie, David Croal, Alison Croal, Jim Leonard, Christine Dickson, John Dickson, Carolyn Leonard, David Heddle, Heather Heddle and Margaret Thorburn.
Audit trio pave the way
THREE members of Group Internal Audit Department are pioneering a Royal Bank scheme to create its own banker-accountants.
David Gorman, Grant Lyall and Stuart McIntyre, who are all in their mid-twenties, began studying for Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland (ICAS) qualifications last September.
They already hold qualifications from the Institute of Chartered Bankers of Scotland.
As part of an agreement with ICAS, the three will be allowed to gain practical experience in specialist departments of the Royal Bank instead of in professional practice.
‘In that way, we will be able to groom our own accountants, combining banking skills with accounting professionalism, and a thorough knowledge of the Bank,’ said Julian Leiper, Head of Group Internal Audit.
David, Grant and Stuart are due to complete their studies towards the end of 1995 but have already cleared the first hurdle.
All three passed their first accounting examinations.
Aberdeen managers get some healthy advice
MEMBERS of the management team at Aberdeen Central Branch have been told to eat less and exercise more if they want to live to a ripe old age!
They were given the advice by experts from Grampian Health Authority's Health Promotion Department after undergoing private and confidential fitness tests.
The managers had their height, weight, blood pressure, flexibility, stamina and lung capacity measured and were asked for details of their lifestyle.
The information was then fed into a computer which produced individual body reports together with advice on how to become more fit and healthy.
Aberdeen and Scotland soccer star Alex McLeish was on had to give moral support.
‘I was a bit nervous beforehand but it turned out to be very easy,’ said Personal Account Manager Anita Cooper.
‘It confirmed that I don ‘t exercise enough and suggested a programme of swimming and walking.
I was very impressed.’
Corporate Manager Ian Redpath also praised the test but admitted he, too, was told to take more exercise.
Sixteen companies in the Grampian Region were visited by the fitness analysts as part of a programme to promote better health in the workplace.
‘The idea hasn ‘t needed any hard selling,’ said Senior Health Promotion Executive Fiona O ‘Brien.
‘An increasing number of employers are realising that a healthy staff brings long-term benefits.’
Central Branch Chief Manager David Hamilton is a member of the Business Advisory Committee of Grampian Heart Campaign.
Central also have a close involvement with Aberdeen Royal Hospitals — NHS Trust who have maintained their accounts at the Branch since April 1992.
Ruth sprints back
AFTER a year long lay-off because of injury, sprinter Ruth Girvin is back in action — and back among the medals.
First, she recorded a personal time of 7.80 seconds when finishing second in the 60 metres at the Scottish National Championships.
Then, in a match against Wales, she finished third — also in the 60 metres.
Ruth works at Dumfries Whitesands Branch.