

PERSONAL CUSTOMER SERVICES
UNDERSTANDING ALL YOUR FINANCIAL NEEDS AND MEETING THEM
The Royal Bank Of Scotland AT YOUR SERVICE
The Royal Bank of Scotland is one of the oldest and best respected financial institutions in Britain, with its ancestry dating back to 1727.
We now look after the needs — financial, certainly, but much more besides — of private and business customers throughout the UK and abroad.
We have over 850 branches, 650 of which offer a 24 hour service through our Cashline facility, while reciprocal arrangements with Bank of Scotland, Barclay Bank and Lloyds Bank allow our customers to use over 5,500 cash dispensing machines throughout Great Britain.
You can also use your Highline or Cashline Card to withdraw cash in some European Countries.
We provide a complete range of domestic and international banking services.
Motor and home insurance is provided through Direct Line Insurance plc and our new Life Assurance Company, Royal Scottish Assurance plc, has recently launched a full range of life assurance products.
This brochure can do more than introduce you to a few of the services that our personal customers find most useful.
Our staff in any branch will be more than happy to advise you about other ways in which we can help — you, your family, your business.
Welcome to The Royal Bank of Scotland…
CURRENT ACCOUNT SERVICES
INTEREST PAYING CURRENT ACCOUNTS
An Interest Paying Current Account provides a range of benefits which bridge the traditional gap between a Personal Current Account and a Savings Account, including interest on credit balances and free banking as long as the account is no more than £100 overdrawn.
A Highline card issued on an Interest Paying Current Account incorporates a cheque guarantee limit of £100.
PERSONAL CURRENT ACCOUNTS
A Personal Current Account is the simplest, safest and most convenient way of handling your money, providing you with a cheque book, Highline or Cashline card, standing order and direct debit facilities, as well as expert financial advice from our staff.
PREMIUM ACCOUNTS
The high interest on a Money Market Account combined with the convenience and ease of a Current Account.
GOLD CHEQUE ACCOUNT
A Current Account for individuals who have high incomes or substantial assets and who require an account with greater flexibility.
The Gold Cheque Account provides preferential interest rates on both credit and overdrawn balances.
Free banking is available as long as the account does not become overdrawn by more than £100.
Surplus credit funds can be transferred automatically to a savings account.
A high limit Gold Highline card is available and application can be made for a Gold Mastercard.
REVOLVING BUDGET ACCOUNTS
Combining the benefits of a budget account with a borrowing facility, the Revolving Budget Account helps to tackle unexpected bills and allows you to buy what you want when you want it without having to set up further loan arrangements.
STUDENT ACCOUNTS
As well as providing the benefits of a Current Account, we offer students tiered interest on credit balances, no account charges on accounts that remain in credit or within the limit of a pre-arranged overdraft and commission free travel services until the end of February after graduation.
We also provide interest free overdraft facilities in the first year of study.
STARTING WORK ACCOUNTS
We make the transition from school to full-time employment that much smoother by offering a Current Account with a Cashline card giving easy access to your money.
SAVINGS ACCOUNTS
GOLD DEPOSIT ACCOUNTS
The Gold Deposit Account gives you high rates of interest and immediate access to your money.
Only £1 is needed to open an account.
GOLD NINETY ACCOUNTS
The Gold Ninety Account is a very high interest ninety day notice account for the longer term investor.
Interest can be applied either annually or monthly.
TAX EXEMPT SPECIAL SAVINGS ACCOUNTS
The TESSA is a five year savings plan, which pays interest gross at the end of a five year period.
In addition a bonus, which is guaranteed at the time the account is opened, will be paid on maturity.
BID DEPOSIT ACCOUNTS
An easy way to invest larger sums of money on the Money Market for fixed terms, or at specified terms of notice or indeed at call.
Interest rates can now be fixed for the duration of Fixed Term Accounts.
ROUTE SEVENTEEN ACCOUNTS
An account for 14 to 17 year olds which gives freedom and independence with a cash card, high rate of interest, regular communication and a free account opening pack.
CASH CLUB ACCOUNTS
We make banking fun for 9 to 13 year olds when they join Cash Club.
Each member receives a Cash Club card, an account opening pack including a Cash Club sport wallet, regular competitions and information as well as a high rate of interest.
RAINBOW SAVING ACCOUNTS
The Royal Bank of Scotland has designed a special account that allows you to provide for your children's future and enable these savings to grow steadily over the years.
CASHLINE DEPOSIT ACCOUNTS
Our Cashline Deposit Account pays interest on the money you have in your account while providing you with access to over 5,500 cash dispensing machines throughout Great Britain, along with standing order and direct debit facilities.
NOTE: INTEREST PAYMENTS
Interest is payable net of the basic rate Income Tax (this may be reclaimed by non-taxpayers) or payable gross subject to the required self certification.
In the case of joint accounts, where one party to a two party account is a non-taxpayer, half the interest can be paid gross where the non-taxpayer provides the required self-certification.
Interest can also be paid gross to overseas residents provided a declaration is signed stating that they are not ordinarily resident in the UK.
LOANS
PERSONAL LOANS
Anyone aged 18 or over may apply to borrow amounts from £500 to £15,000 for practically any purpose, for example, a new car, electrical goods, furnishing or home improvements.
We are happy to consider proving loans up to 100% of the cost of the item.
What's more, the interest is fixed at the outset, so the repayments stay constant throughout the term of the loan, which makes budgeting easier.
GRADUATE SERVICES
For graduates we have a special loan scheme to help with the transition to full-time employment.
MORTGAGES
Whether you're looking for your first flat or have finally found the castle of your dreams, The Royal Bank of Scotland has a range of mortgage schemes specially designed to meet your particular needs.
You can also apply for financing for your first home, a mortgage for a holiday home and re-mortgaging facilities.
EQUITY RELEASE
Our Equity Release service allows you to borrow up to 80% of the value of your home, less any outstanding mortgage or other loan secured on it, either as a lump sum or simply as a credit facility to be used as and when you like.
Your home is at risk if you do not keep up repayments on a mortgage or other loan secured on it.
CREDIT/CHARGE CARDS
ACCESS AND VISA
A Royal Bank of Scotland Access or Visa credit card is convenient, flexible and safer than carrying cash.
They are welcomed in over 300,000 retail outlets in the UK and 8,000,000 in over 170 countries.
You can also use your card to obtain cash at any one of 10,000 Bank branches throughout Great Britain displaying the Access or Visa symbol and from any Royal Bank of Scotland Cashline machine.
AMERICAN EXPRESS GOLD CARDS
An exclusive charge card for those with an annual income of over £25,000, which combines the comprehensive banking facilities of The Royal Bank Of Scotland with the financial flexibility of American Express.
CASHLINE
With a Cashline card you can have cash at your fingertips from our network of Cashline machines nationwide.
In addition you can withdraw cash from the Bank of Scotland and Lloyds Bank cash dispensing machines — a total of over 5,500 throughout Great Britain.
You can also obtain instant details of the balance in your account or request a new cheque book at any Royal Bank of Scotland Cashline machine.
You can also use your Cashline card to withdraw cash from cash dispensers in some European countries.
HIGHLINE
This versatile multi-function card not only combines all the benefits of a cheque guarantee card and Cashline card but also allows you to pay for goods and services quickly and easily without writing a cheque at retailers displaying the Switch sign.
Highline is the modern and efficient way of running your Current Account.
A Gold Highline Card is provided with a Gold Cheque Account only.
ASSURANCE/INSURANCE
ROYAL SCOTTISH ASSURANCE plc
The new life assurance company of The Royal Bank of Scotland, which is jointly owned with Scottish Equitable Life Assurance Society, provides an attractive range of life assurance, pensions and investment products.
Advice is available through trained representatives in branches.
DIRECT LINE INSURANCE plc
Direct Line Insurance is a subsidiary of the Royal Bank of Scotland plc and has already saved money for hundreds of thousands of policy holders who buy direct.
MOTOR INSURANCE
Direct Line is the UK's leading direct motor insurer.
There are no tedious proposal forms to complete and cover is available instantly over the 'phone if required.
Simply call  for a free quotation.
HOME INSURANCE
A Direct Line home insurance policy is approved by all the leading Building Societies and standard rates are up to 20% lower than those of other leading insurers.
Call  for first class cover at a really competitive price.
TRAVEL
TRAVEL SERVICES
Whether you are going abroad on holiday or business, The Royal Bank of Scotland allows you to relax in the knowledge that everything has been taken care of; travellers cheques and eurocheques, foreign currency, Access, Visa and travel insurance.
EUROCHEQUE
Royal Bank of Scotland eurocheques and a eurocheque card are widely recognised, simple and most convenient payment method for personal customers in Europe and the Mediterranean whether you want to obtain cash, pay hotel bills or purchase goods over the counter.
TRAVEL INSURANCE
The Bank has arranged for a special travel insurance policy to insure those travelling against a range of mishaps such as personal accident, delayed departure and many other occurrences.
TRAVELLERS CHEQUES
A convenient, flexible and safe way of taking funds abroad — either in sterling or other currencies — is to buy travellers cheques.
They are widely  accepted easy to use and, if lost or stolen, you are promptly refunded by the Bank.
HIGHLINE AND CASHLINE CARDS
Remember you can use your card to obtain currency at around 6,000 cash dispensers in some European countries — take your card with you, in addition to your usual currency, travellers cheques, eurocheques, Access or Visa card.
TRUSTEE SERVICES
TAXATION SERVICES
If you have little time to deal with personal tax matters or have tax worries, the Bank's tax expert can deal with any aspect of personal taxation and will look after your interest no matter how simple or complicated your tax affairs may be.
EXECUTOR AND TRUSTEE SERVICES
The Bank has a division which specialises in the administration of family trusts.
As well as advising on death duties and acting as executor of wills, this division will provide for those who need help in managing their own affairs, arrange retirement benefits and advise on tax reduction.
Travel Insurance
Take the worry out of travelling
The Royal Bank of Scotland has arranged a special Travel Insurance policy with General Accident Fire and Life Assurance Corporation plc.
To arrange your Travel Insurance simply complete the Proposal Form and hand it in or send it with your payment to any Royal Bank of Scotland branch.
Who can apply
1
Anyone taking a conventional holiday or a business trip of a commercial nature (excluding manual work)
2
United Kingdom residents living in the UK at the date of issue of the policy
as long as it is a round trip commencing in and returning to the United Kingdom.
Reference in this proposal to the United Kingdom includes the Isle of Man and the Channel Islands.
Europe Assistance emergency service
You are automatically entitled to use the Worldwide services of Europe Assistance.
In the event of injury or serious illness abroad a 24 hour service is available for immediate help.
Summary of cover
Applicable to each person insured.
Please note this is a summary cover only.
The policy itself being a legal document will define the precise terms of the cover.
A specimen may be examined at any Bank branch.
Baggage and personal money £1,500
Loss of or damage to personal belongings and/or Money.
Limit any one article £250, limit for valuables £500.
Maximum money £500.
Limit for cash or bank notes £250.
If your baggage is temporarily lost for longer than 12 hours on the outward journey we will compensate you for the emergency purchase of essential items up to a total of £100.
Loss of a passport up to £150
Reasonable additional travel and accommodation expenses necessary to obtain a replacement passport.
Losses should be reported to the Police within 24 hours.
Personal accident £15,000
Benefit is paid in respect of death, loss of limbs or sight or permanent total disablement.
Death benefit for children is limited to £1,000.
Cancellation and curtailment £3,000
Covers non-recoverable travel and accommodation charges in the event of unavoidable cancellations or curtailment of the holiday due to your injury or illness, or that of your travelling companion, relative or close business associate; or due to unemployment, all occurring after the date of issue of the policy.
Medical and emergency expenses
Area 1 £1,000.
Areas 2 and 3 £2,000,000.
Covers costs incurred for medical treatment plus any additional hotel, travel and repatriation costs.
Hospital benefits £300
Inpatient hospital benefit payable at a rate of £20 for each day.
Personal liability £1,000,000
Your legal liability for accidental injury to third parties or damage to their property.
Delayed departure
Delay in departure of the ship or aircraft in which you are booked to travel.
We will pay:
First full 12 hours of delay £20, each subsequent full 12 hours delay £20, up to £100 in all OR
Cancellation of the holiday after 24 hours delayed departure up to £3,000.
Legal expenses and advice £25,000
Legal costs and expenses incurred by you in pursuit of compensation arising from your death or personal injury during the period of insurance.
Advice on any legal problem which arises in connection with the journey or holiday or with damage to your home.
Missed departure £300
Additional accommodation and travel expenses incurred as a consequence of accident or mechanical failure involving the motor vehicle in which you are travelling or failure of public transport services resulting in failure to deliver you to the International departure/return port or airport in time.
Main exclusions
Baggage and money
1
Losses not reported to the Police within 24 hours.
2
Pedal cycles and contact lenses.
3
Loss of money and jewellery in a suitcase while in transit by air and outside your control.
4
Loss of valuables and money from an unattended vehicle.
5
Breakage of sports equipment while in use.
Personal accident, cancellation and curtailment, medical expenses and hospital benefit
1
A medical condition of any insured for which (at the time of purchasing insurance) the insured:
(a) is receiving inpatient treatment or is on a waiting list for inpatient treatment 
(b) has received a terminal prognosis
(c) is travelling against the advice of a qualified medical practitioner or for the purpose of obtaining medical treatment.
2
Pregnancy or childbirth where the expected date of birth is before, or within 8 weeks of, the expiry of the period of insurance.
3
Any anxiety state and/or depression suffered by the insured and diagnosed at the time of purchasing this insurance.
4
Aerial activities except as an aircraft passenger.
5
Racing, motor cycling (over 125cc), mountaineering or rock climbing, subaqua diving, pot holing or football.
6
Manual work
7
Winter sports and the use of dry ski slopes (unless the appropriate premium has been paid).
8
Expeditions or crewing a vessel from one country to another.
Personal liability
Liability arising out of:
1
your trade, business or profession
2
occupation of land or buildings
3
use of animals, vehicles, firearms, vessels or aircraft of any description.
Delayed departure
Strike or industrial action existing or notified by declaration of intent at or prior to the date of purchasing insurance.
Legal expenses
1
Claims against an operator, agent or carrier.
2
Legal expenses incurred prior to authorization and approval of claim.
Missed departure
Strike, riot or civil commotion in respect of which a warning has been given prior to the date this insurance is purchased.
Excesses
You will probably be responsible for the first £35 of each claim in respect of baggage, money, medical expenses and cancellation and curtailment (except when a claim is made for the initial holiday deposit).
The policy excludes claims resulting from suicide, drugs/intoxicating liquor or HIV (Human Immunodeficiency Virus) and/or AIDS.
The policy is subject to the war exclusion clause.
The Insurance Ombudsman Bureau
General Accident are founder members of this bureau, an independent body whose services are available to Royal Bank of Scotland travel insurers policyholders.
Insurance Companies Act 1982
The Royal Bank of Scotland plc is connected with the Insurers of the Travel Insurance Scheme as defined in the Insurance Companies Regulations 1981.
European Community reciprocal health agreement
If you are travelling to an EC country we recommend that you obtain E111 from your local Post Office.
This will entitle you to benefit from the Reciprocal Health Agreements which exist between Common Market countries.
Holiday checklist — helpful hints
Things to remember:
Order Travellers Cheques from The Royal Bank of Scotland.
Order foreign currency from The Royal Bank of Scotland.
Check passport and visa.
Cancel papers and milk.
Advise local police of dates house unoccupied.
Take Travel Insurance policy with me on holiday.
Let's be frank!
If we've got it wrong……help us put it right!
At The Royal Bank of Scotland we believe that the most important people in our business are our customers.
You should receive a fast, accurate and trouble-free service and our staff should be courteous and ready to solve problems or complaints.
We are constantly striving to improve and to do this, we need to know what you think.
This leaflet is intended to make it easy for you to comment on our service and it outlines the procedures which are available to you.
Should you wish to complain, please use this leaflet and we'll do our best to put the smile back on your face.
Our Complaints Procedure
1
Our staff are there to help you.
Please first refer your complaint to the original point of contact.
2
If the matter cannot be resolved to your satisfaction by the branch staff, please contact the Manager.
Managers are responsible for all aspects of their branch and should be able to investigate and resolve your complaint.
3
If you are not happy with the response you receive you should use this leaflet, or write a letter to the Head of Service Quality Development at the Freepost address shown on the leaflet.
Please include an outline of the circumstances and what action you wish to take.
We will sand an acknowledgement within two working days of receipt and we will respond fully within ten working days.
The Banking Ombudsman
In the unlikely event that the matter remains unresolved after taking these steps, you can apply to the Banking Ombudsman for arbitration.
The Royal Bank of Scotland is a member of the Banking Ombudsman Scheme and any correspondence should be addressed to:
The Banking Ombudsman provides a free service, acting independently of banks as an impartial adjudicator.
The Ombudsman operates under Terms of Reference which permit him to deal with:
complaints about most types of banking business
But not some categories of complaint including those:
about general Bank policies
about commercial decisions in lending
which relate to Stock Exchange or Life Assurance business (see below)
which have still to reach deadlock within the Bank's complaints procedure.
Investment Related Complaints
If your complaint relates to Stock Exchange or Life Assurance business and we are unable to resolve matters between us, you may refer directly to:
Give an Encore!
If we've got it right……tell us!
Dear Customer
Your Opinions Are Important
At The Royal Bank of Scotland, we constantly seek to improve the quality of service we give to our customers.
With your help we can get better and better.
Encore, Encore!
Encore is your opportunity to recognise Bank staff for a positive act of customer service.
We wish to reward staff who you think deliver an excellent service.
We believe this will encourage them to excel time and time again.
All you have to do is complete the attached freepost card, outlining the particular act of service you have received and the member of staff you wish to nominate.
Reasons to Award your Encore
You may wish to nominate a member of staff at your own branch, or another branch you have visited.
Here are some examples of the service we value in our staff.
A friendly, efficient service aimed at getting it right first time.
A responsive, helpful approach to a problem you may have had.
a courteous response to your day-to-day banking needs.
If you think you have received an exceptional level of service, why not tell us about it?
With your help we can go on improving and offer you even better service.
THE ROYAL BANK OF SCOTLAND AND SPORT
SPONSORSHIPS
SPORT CONTRIBUTING TO ENJOYMENT, PARTICIPATION, AND A HIGH STANDARD OF ENDEAVOUR
Organisations of all kinds look to our sponsorship as a means of associating their name with enjoyment and a high standard of endeavour and of establishing their commitment to the activities of the broader community.
Sport provides ideal opportunities to achieve these aims, and The Royal Bank of Scotland is a well-established supporter of a wide range of sporting activities at both senior and youth level.
Our flagship events are Scotland's home Rugby Internationals at Murrayfield which we have sponsored since 1982.
The Bank has been fortunate in that during this time we have been associated with a Grand Slam in 1984 and a share of the Five Nations Championship in 1986.
We were also closely involved with Scottish Rugby at another level.
For some time, it had been recognised that significant numbers of promising young players were being lost to the game by a lack of a smooth transition from school to senior club.
The formation of the Royal Bank Youth Leagues in the early 1980s gave players and clubs alike the platform to correct this outflow from the game.
At the same time as our launching of Youth Leagues, we identified volleyball as a growth sport which was not only visually exciting but also had a good, clean image.
As a consequence, we have sponsored both the Scottish National League and Cup competitions since that time and witnessed the sport gaining greater exposure both in newspapers and now on television.
At youth level we have also for a number of years sponsored the Scottish Schools National Swimming Championships and the Scottish Schools Badminton Union Competitions.
When, towards the end of 1985, we merged with our sister bank to form Britain's first nationwide 850-strong branch network, we realised that it would be important to develop name awareness throughout England and Wales.
Sport sponsorship was an excellent means of contributing to this end.
Our experience of sponsorship in Scotland was invaluable and, because of the success we enjoyed there with volleyball, we chose to support the National Leagues and Cup competitions in England and we recently sponsored a four-nations international event which provided some of the finest volleyball ever seen in Britain; thanks to television coverage, nationwide audiences were able to share in the excitement.
Our programme in England and Wales also includes the Inter-County Badminton Association Championship and the Indoor Hockey Club Championship, which also receives annual national television coverage.
We were also the first sponsor of televised croquet in association with Granada TV and we have since launched a competition to stimulate schools involvement in this fascinating sport.
The Bank is recognised as a major contributor to sport by both governing bodies of sport and the media.
Whichever Royal Bank of Scotland sponsored event you are attending or indeed participating in, we hope, above all, that you enjoy it.
EDUARDO PAOLOZZI
The Wealth of Nations
In the summer of 1992 The Royal Bank of Scotland commissioned a sculpture from Sir Eduardo Paolozzi, the Queen's Sculptor-in-Ordinary for Scotland, to go outside the main entrance to their large new office building Drummond House, at South Gyle on the outskirts of Edinburgh.
The work, called The Wealth of Nations , was unveiled by Her Majesty The Queen on 2 July 1993.
Made of bronze, brass and stainless steel, it is the artist's largest, most monumental sculpture to date.
As Paolozzi explains in this leaflet, ‘The whole represents a strong belief in optimism and progress ’.
It unites fragments of a classical past with the geometry of modern life, the latter co-existing and drawing strength from the humane vision of the former.
The massive hands grip truncated shafts of what could either be weapons of destruction or tools with which to build and construct.
This metaphor of destruction and construction runs throughout the whole sculpture.
It refers not only to a present which is constantly breaking down to form reveal the fragments of the past, but a view of our surroundings which may seem whole and contiguous, but which in fact is forever splintering and reshaping itself as our minds piece together the fragments that our eyes actually perceive.
This is also the way Paolozzi works, continually reordering and reformulating a whole battery of shapes [in wood, plaster and on paper]that he has himself created, altered or found.
As he works on a new piece he is able to make a series of models, maquettes and drawings with this repertoire of effects to try out different emphases and viewpoints.
New sculptures suggest themselves, such as The Road to the Isles, where, instead of us, the viewer, moving round the sculpture, the sculpture itself moves  past us on a railway wagon on its way to other surroundings.
The theme of movement is again explored in the twisting pieces of aluminium, that have been translated into bronze in the final sculpture.
These act as formal devices linking together the separate elements of the work, forming organic curves against the geometrical masses, but they also refer back to the serpent in one of the most famous classical sculpture groups,The Laocoon.
This, in turn, was the subject of a celebrated book by the German writer, Gotthold Ephraim Lessing, who argued that sculpture was not a fit medium for representing time and movement.
Paolozzi takes up the challenge with relish, as he deliberately creates hiatuses and breaks in The Wealth of Nations .
We think that we can see a reclining figure, but in reality there are only parts.
Paolozzi anticipates not only the rapid movements of our eyes, but also our travelling along in a car, as we take in only those parts that are most significant — head, hands and feet.
In a nice ironical touch, Paolozzi does not aim to represent the movement of the figure [as the Futurists might have done]but our own movement in seeing it.
The title The Wealth of Nations comes from Adam Smith's classic about the search for noble endeavours.
Incorporated into the sculpture is a quote from Albert Einstein, ‘Knowledge is great but imagination is even greater’.
Together these two concepts give the key to both the sculpture and the inspiration for its bold commission by The Royal Bank of Scotland through the good offices of a non-executive director, Angus Grossart.
From the beginning, the sculpture was envisioned as a landmark positioned to enhance and counterpoint the administrative offices of The Royal Bank of Scotland and the surrounding landscape.
Human elements balance geometry in an attempt to reconcile ancient human values with present day notions of modernity.
The dynamism of bronze bulk is placed in perspective with man's sense of dignity.
Many Scottish artists have gone to Paris or Rome to polish their vision before returning to Scotland.
The Wealth of Nations is an amalgam of the three great themes which run through the history of art — still life, the portrait and the landscape.
Driving or walking around the sculpture will be like turning a model in space — the apparent contradictions transforming themselves into new realities.
The surrounding hills are reflected in the position of the figurative elements; the geometric parts mirror the life of the building.
The whole represents a strong belief in optimism and progress.
The forms of the sculpture overlap in rotation.
The spectator in movement will see one mass protrude over another with the changes of image accelerated for people passing in cars — a kind of reality fixed in a rapidly changing life.
In evolving the final arrangement of elements for The Wealth of Nations the artist began with a series of drawings and models set in relations to the building.
This enabled the foundry and The Royal Bank of Scotland to anticipate the final result.
To attach past experiences to the discoveries of the present; to combine sense of place with new technologies and yet leave abundant room for the individual's imagination, these are part of the aim of this work.
The variety of views offered to those approaching from different angles give a wealth of sensations and references — each one sparking a new idea.
Imagination was crucial in the concept of the work and imagination in the material which binds the work together.
Eduardo Paolozzi
1924 Born in Leith, Edinburgh of Italian parents
1943 Attended evening classes at Edinburgh College of Art.
1944 Attended St. Martin's School of Art, London.
1945–7 Attended Slade School of Art, London where he became friends with Nigel Henderson, Raymond Mason & William Turnbull.
1947 First exhibition at Major Gallery, London.
1947–9 Lived in Paris, where he got to know, among others, Giacometti and the work of Dubuffet.
1949 Returned to London where he shared a studio with Turnbull.
1949–55 Taught textile design at the Central School of Art, London.
1951 Commission for fountain for Festival of Britain on South Bank, London.
1952 Gave a lecture, ‘Bunk ‘, on popular culture to the Independent Group at the Institute of Contemporary Arts, London [ICA], of which he was a member.
1953 Co-organiser of exhibition ‘Parallel of Life and Art ‘at the ICA.
1953 Commission for fountains for International Horticultural Exhibition, Hamburg.
1955–58 Taught sculpture at St. Martin's School of Art.
1956 Took part in exhibition ‘This is Tomorrow’ at the Whitechapel Art Gallery, London.
1960–2 Visiting Professor at Staatliche Hochschule für Bildende Künste, Hamburg.
Visiting Professor at University of California, Berkeley.
Began teaching in Ceramics Department, Royal College of Art, London, to which he is still attached.
1971 Retrospective exhibition at Tate Gallery.
1974–5 Spent a year in Berlin.
1975 Retrospective exhibition at the Nationalgalerie, West Berlin.
1976 Commission for wall painting, West Berlin.
1976 Commission for doors for Hunterian Art Gallery, Glasgow.
1977–81 Professor of Ceramics at Fachhochschule, Cologne.
1978 Commission for European Patent Office, Munich Camera .
1979 Commission for wall relief, Mönchengladbach.
1980 Commission by British Rail for Euston Square, London [Piscator].
Commission by London Transport for mosaics at Tottenham Court Road tube station.
1980–6 Commission for large sculpture for Rhine Garden, Cologne.
1981 Commission by Reddich Development Corporation for twelve glass mosaic panels for Kingfisher Shopping Centre.
Appointed Professor of Sculpture at Akademie der Bildenden Künste, Munich.
1982 Commission for playground sculpture in Pesch, Cologne.
Commission for fountain for Garden Festival, Berlin.
1986 Appointment Her Majesty's Sculptor-in-ordinary for Scotland.
1987 Commission for Alte Pinakothek, Munich [For Leonardo].
1988 Knighted.
1991 Commission for reliefs for new Munich Airport.
Commission for sculpture for Picardy Place, Edinburgh [Manuscript of Monte Cassino.
Eduardo Paolozzi: The Wealth of Nations
Paolozzi's new sculpture can be seen at the main entrance to The royal Bank of Scotland's new administrative building, Drummond House, South Gyle, Edinburgh.
Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art
Belford Road, Edinburgh .
The Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art has a large collection of works by Eduardo Paolozzi, many of which are on show in the Sculpture Garden beyond the Café Terrace to the rear of the building.
Paolozzi's monumental bronze Master of the Universe 1988–9 is in the grounds in front of the gallery.
ROYAL SCOTTISH assurance
Are your investments performing as well as they could be?
Royal Scottish has a range of savings and investments products to meet all your needs.
Are your investments performing as well as they could be?
Like many people, you may be putting money aside in one of the variety of deposit based savings accounts now available.
They're ideal for saving in the short term and of course your money is accessible.
But how well do these savings accounts perform in the longer term?
Is your money actually growing or merely marking time?
The plain fact is that even in a deposit based account, unless you're a non-tax payer, any interest you make will already have had tax deducted and you may find your money is probably doing no more than keeping pace with inflation.
So when it comes to making provision for the future, you should be looking at ways of making your money work harder.
that's where Royal Scottish comes in
Royal Scottish offers a range of investment plans linked directly to the stock market.
In the short term, such equity based investments can of course be volatile, however, over the medium to long term they have consistently provided excellent returns compared with deposit-based savings.
deciding your objectives
Perhaps you're thinking about a new car or a holiday; a house deposit or a home improvement scheme; a wedding or family  celebration; perhaps you are preparing for your retirement.
Whatever your aims, building up a cash reserve for the future always makes sense.
However, different people have different long term objectives, and different ways of saving for them.
Do you want to make regular contributions to an investment plan, or to invest a lump sum?
Are you looking for short, medium or long term investment?
Is capital growth your priority, or are you interested in generating income?
Do you require immediate access to your money?
We'll look at questions like these with you.
Then show your tax-efficient ways of meeting your investment objectives.
a comprehensive portfolio of products
Royal Scottish offers a full range of high performance investment products, administered and managed on your behalf by our specialist investment managers.
Capital Investment Bond
The Capital Investment Bond is a unit-linked life assurance policy designed for lump sum investments of £2,500, or more.
The return on your investment can provide regular income in combination with a lump sum when the bond is encashed.
Up to certain limits, this income is free of personal taxation.
While the Bond is intended as a medium to long term investment, it may be encashed at any time.
Endowment Savings Plan
Here's a simple solution for the regular monthly saver looking for an excellent level of return for quite a modest investment.
The Plan has a fixed term of 10 years, with built-in life assurance cover over the entire period.
When the plan matures, all proceeds are entirely free of tax.
Personal Equity Plan [PEP]
A PEP is a uniquely tax-efficient way to invest via a lump sum or a regular monthly investment.
Unlike most other forms of investment, the profits made are totally exempt from taxation.
In fact PEP investments are so attractive, they are restricted to a limit of £6,000, per person in any one tax year, PEPs are flexible too, allowing you to cash in all or part of your investment at any time.
Unit Trusts
Like PEPs, unit trusts are a convenient means of investing.
Your regular monthly contribution or lump sum payment purchases units in a large pooled fund from which equities [stocks and shares]are bought and sold on your behalf.
Each unit represents a wide range of investments, spreading the risk to an extent that's normally not possible for an individual investor.
Unit Trusts can be aimed at generating income or capital growth.
While they are best regarded as a medium to long term investment, you can always sell your units at any time you wish.
PEPs and Unit Trusts available from Royal Scottish are managed by Capital House, a Royal Bank of Scotland Company.
Royal Scottish can help you
Royal Scottish Assurance is a progressive, dynamic company founded on a base of over two centuries financial experience.
In a constantly changing economic environment we are able to draw on the strengths of our parent companies — The Royal Bank of Scotland and Scottish Equitable — and create effective and flexible ways to meet the needs of people like you.
our consultant, your adviser
An expert Royal Scottish Consultant will work with you as your personal financial adviser, helping you with financial planning so that you and your family benefit now and in the future.
In partnership with you, our Consultant will help you determine your particular needs, aspirations and priorities.
We'll help you organise your finances, highlighting the ideal products tailored to meet your needs and satisfy your financial ambitions.
Please note that benefits cannot be guaranteed and that the value of investments can go down as well as up.
PERSONAL EQUITY PLAN
Tax Free income + Growth
The LOGICAL choice for your savings
83% Growth over the past 5 years
In the last year interest rates have fallen steadily so that they are now at their lowest level for nearly 25 years.
While this is good news for millions of borrowers and mortgage holders, it is not such a rosy picture for those people who have come to expect a healthy return from their savings accounts.
At The Royal Bank of Scotland we are always looking for ways to ensure that our customers achieve a good return from their savings, particularly now that interest rates are much lower.
Therefore, in the current climate, the Income & Growth Personal Equity Plan [PEP]+ offers an attractive investment option as it provides returns based upon stock market performance and you are able to take your proceeds completely free of UK personal income and capital gains tax.
The Income & Growth PEP allows you to invest in the Capital House Income & Growth Unit Trust which, despite one of the most difficult periods for stock market investment, has seen an investment of £100 grow to £183 over the last five years — had you been able to invest in the Income & Growth PEP over this period you would have received this return free of all personal taxes.
PEPs, which were introduced in 1987 as a means of encouraging more people to invest in stocks and shares, are now considered to represent an important part of a  balanced savings portfolio, with over 2 million people having now bought one.
This leaflet details the main features of the Income & Growth PEP and highlights how it could benefit you.
It also answers many of the questions most commonly asked by those people who are considering investing in a PEP..
+ The Income & Growth PEP is an option within the Capital House Capitaliser Plus PEP which is managed by Capital House Investment Management Limited [Member of IMRO], the specialist investment arm of The royal Bank of Scotland.
The PEP invests exclusively in the Capital House Income & Growth Trust, an authorised unit trust managed by Capital House Unit Trust Managers Limited [Member of IMRO, Lautro and AUTIF], which is a wholly owned subsidiary of Capital House Investment Management Limited]
HOW MUCH CAN I INVEST?
As you might expect from an investment plan that offers tax-free returns, there is a limit to the amount you are allowed to invest each year.
Under current legislation you may invest up to £6,000 in a general PEP in any single tax year.
[The minimum amount you can invest is £500].
Although it is not possible to apply for a PEP in joint names, a husband and wife can each invest up to £6,000 in separate plans.
HOW DOES THE INCOME & GROWTH PEP WORK?
The Income & Growth PEP invests exclusively in the Capital House Income & growth Unit Trust which invests in UK companies with good growth prospects and above average yields.
When you invest in a unit trust PEP such as the Income & Growth PEP, your investment will be pooled with money from other investors thereby creating a large fund.
Your investment will buy units in that fund and you will therefore have access to a far wider-ranging portfolio of investments than most individuals could realistically set up and manage on their own.
WHY SHOULD I INVEST IN A PEP NOW?
History has shown that investing in the stock market during times of economic recovery has proved rewarding for investors who are looking for a good return over the longer term.
Most commentators agree that, with interest rates and inflation at a low level, the UK economy is now well placed to emerge out of recession.
Because your money will be in a unit trust fund that specifically invests in UK companies, by opening a PEP now, you have the opportunity to take particular advantage of the potential growth in the economy.
And, as the fund buys shares in a wide range of different companies, the overall risk is reduced.
Of course, as with any investment in stocks and shares, the value of units and the income from them can go down as well as up, and an investor may not get back the amount originally invested.
Also, levels and bases of, and reliefs from, taxation are those currently applicable and may be subject to change, and their value depends on the individual  circumstances of the investor.
Please remember that past performance is not necessarily a guide to the future.
AM I ELIGIBLE TO APPLY FOR A PEP?
Anyone who is 18 years or older, and who is classified by the Inland Revenue as a UK resident, can open a PEP.
But please remember that you can only contribute to one general PEP in any one tax year.
CAN I RECEIVE AN INCOME FROM MY PEP?
Most people who invest in PEPs prefer to have their income reinvested to boost the value of their investment.
However, you can opt to have the income paid out to you every six months, currently in May and November [subject to the Terms and Conditions].
If you wish to take advantage of this option, simply tick the appropriate box on the application form.
If you do decide to opt for the income to be paid out to you, this can be arranged by payment directly into your bank account.
WHAT IF I NEED ACCESS TO MY MONEY?
There is no fixed investment period for a PEP although, to get the full benefit, it should be viewed as a longer term investment, ideally for a minimum period of between 5 and 10 years.
However, you can take out all or part of your money quickly and easily at any time without affecting the tax-free status of your investment.
If you want to take out part of your investment, you can withdraw a minimum of £500, provided you keep at least £500 in the PEP if you want the Plan to remain in force.
[If the balance in your PEP falls below £500 you will be given the option to withdraw the full balance or add to it so that it rises above the minimum level].
HOW WILL I KNOW HOW MY PEP IS PERFORMING?
On receipt of your application you will be sent an acknowledgement and full details of the Plan.
From then on you will receive a statement twice a year — in May and November — detailing how your investment has performed.
Each statement will show:
the number and value of units held for you
the tax that has been reclaimed on your behalf
how much of your income has been reinvested
the subscriptions and withdrawals that you have made over the period
WHO IS RESPONSIBLE FOR INVESTING MY MONEY?
Capital House Investment Management Limited [a member of IMRO], which is the investment management company of The Royal Bank of Scotland, manages the Income & Growth PEP.
The Capital House subsidiary, Capital House Unit Trust Managers Limited [a Member of IMRO, Lautro and AUTIF]manages the Income & Growth Trust in which your money will be invested.
Capital House was launched in 1987 and is now one of the largest fund managers in the UK.
It currently has £4 billion under management for a wide range of private and corporate investors.
WHAT ARE THE CHARGES?
As is normal with unit trust plans, there are two types of charges made by Capital House Unit Trust Managers Limited to cover the cost of managing your investment:
The initial charge is currently set at 6% of your investment.
The annual charge is currently 1.25% of the value of your investment and is charged each year that the plan is in force.
HOW DO I PROCEED FROM HERE?
We've made applying for the Income & Growth PEP as easy as possible, because the sooner you invest the sooner you will start to benefit from a professionally managed investment portfolio and your tax-free returns.
ROUTE 1
Simply complete the application form and return it — with your cheque — in an envelope to:
Cheques should be made payable to Capital House Investment Management Limited.
If you have any queries regarding this PEP offer simply call the PEP Helpline free of charge on  during office hours.
ROUTE 2
Contact your local branch to arrange an appointment with a Consultant from Royal Scottish Assurance [RSA], the Bank's life assurance, pensions and investment company, who will be delighted to answer any further questions that you may have.
FREE FINANCIAL HEALTH CHECK
The Royal Scottish Consultant can also arrange to conduct a financial health check for you — completely free of charge or any obligation.
Of course, if you apply for a PEP by sending your application direct to the PEP Department at Capital House, you can still benefit from the free financial health check — simply contact your local branch.
Cancellation
Under the Financial Services [Cancellation]Rules 1989, an investor is entitled under certain circumstances to cancel a Plan he has opened and have returned to him the sum invested.
These circumstances are set out at the top of the Application Form.
Where the value of the investment falls below the completed cancellation notice is received, an amount equal to such fall in the purchase price will be deducted from the refund he would otherwise have received; therefore he will not get a full refund of the money paid by him.
The Royal Bank of Scotland plc [a Member of IMRO and of SFA]represents only The royal Bank of Scotland Marketing Group for life assurance, pensions and unit trust business.
This Group includes Royal Scottish Assurance plc and Capital House Unit Trust Managers Limited [Members of Lautro].
RSA [Services]Limited is an appointed representative of Capital House Investment Management Limited for Personal Equity Plan business.
FIRST TIME BUYERS
2% off our Mortgage Rate for mortgages over £40,000 for the first year.
It's true!
If you're buying your first home and your mortgage is £40,000* or above you could qualify for the following benefit:—.
2 A 2% discount for the first year that's 5.99%, typical APR 8.2%
When you're looking for your first home, there are so many things to consider.
It's a hectic time and you'll need help and advice along the way.
At The Royal Bank of Scotland, we emphasise the quality of our mortgage service which means you will have a clear understanding of the home buying process.
Depending on your requirements we'll be able to suggest a package that's tailor-made to suit you — and what's more, this mortgage advice is completely FREE and without obligation.
The Royal Bank also offers a range of special offers from loyalty bonuses for existing mortgage customers to discounts for those borrowing larger sums.
So, if you're looking for a mortgage now or in the future, go ahead and make your move — speak to any of our staff today.
They'll be delighted to help you.
Alternatively you can complete the coupon opposite to make an appointment at your convenience — we'll contact you as soon as possible.
However, if you would prefer, call us FREE on  quoting ref.
RB 477E for an appointment or simply to request further information..
The New Account ROUTE SEVENTEEN for young people
Introducing route seventeen
a new bank account for young people aged between 14 and 17
independence and freedom to choose
A new bank account that give you independence and freedom to choose how to organise your money the way you want, when you want.
Route Seventeen Account holders do not require an adult to countersign when opening an account or on any of their transactions.
Special high interest rate
A new bank account that pays regular interest on your savings at a special high rate.
[The current interest rate slip is included with this leaflet].
Interest is calculated on the daily cleared balance and paid direct to your account.
So your savings grow with you.
Route seventeen card
A new bank account with the Route Seventeen card which provides instant access for cash withdrawals and account balance enquiries from Cashline machines at branches of The Royal Bank of Scotland, virtually 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
You can also get cash from Bank of Scotland, Barclays and Lloyds Bank machines and even from bank  machines in Spain and Portugal.
Ask your branch for further details.
You can withdraw up to £50 a day from any of these machines with Route Seventeen card.
It is possible to withdraw more than the £50 daily limit, as long as you have sufficient funds, by going into any branch of The Royal Bank of Scotland.
It is not possible to withdraw more than the amount in the account so you avoid any risk of running up an overdraft.
Free account opening pack
A new bank account that provides everything you need to organise your money, with the help of the free account opening pack containing a specially designed statement holder, pay-in book holder and Route Seventeen card holder.
info, competitions, big prizes
A new bank account that keeps you in touch and in the know.
account holders will receive statements of their accounts every three months, so they know exactly how fast their savings are growing.
They will also be receiving regular info three times a year on the world of music, sport, TV and films, plus special discounts, free offers and great competitions with chances to win big prizes.
help and advice
A new bank account that recognises that, being able to make your own decisions can bring its own problems.
Route Seventeen Account holders not only get easy access to their savings but also easy access to the experience and expertise of The Royal Bank of Scotland staff who will provide all the help and advice you need in the way you need it.
your new bank account
A new bank account that can be opened by completing the attached application form and depositing a minimum of £1 at any branch of The Royal Bank of Scotland.
New account holders will receive their opening pack immediately, to be followed a few days later by their Route Seventeen Card.
The Personal Number to be used with the Route Seventeen card will be posted when the card receipt is returned.
A personalised pay-in book will also be posted within a few days of opening the account.
Conditions of use
If your card is lost, stolen or for any reason liable to misuse, telephone immediately, and then write confirming your telephone call to:— The Royal Bank of Scotland plc Card Services Centre 42 St. Andrew Square, Edinburgh EH2 2YE Telephone  [24 hour numbers]
1
‘your card’ means your Route Seventeen card.
‘your account’ means your Route Seventeen Account.
‘the Bank’ means The Royal Bank of Scotland plc.
‘Personal Number’ means your Personal Identification Number which will be sent to you by the Bank.
2
Your card is the Bank's property and you must return it to the Bank if you are asked to do so.
3
Your card does not give you the right to overdraw your account.
Your Route Seventeen Account may not be overdrawn.
4
Your card cannot be used to withdraw more than your daily limit from Cashline machines.
5
You must memorise your Personal Number and destroy the slip of paper notifying you of the number.
6
You must not tell anyone your Personal Number, not even the Police or the Bank's staff.
If you tell anyone your Personal Number and that person withdraws money from your account, then the Bank will consider that you have given permission to take money from your account and the Bank will not take any responsibility for the loss.
7
You must keep your card safe.
Don't give it to any other person.
8
If your card is lost, stolen or liable to misuse, you must immediately telephone and write to the Bank either at your branch or at the address at the beginning of these conditions.
Written confirmation of your telephone call must be received by your branch or the above address within 7 days.
After the Bank receives your telephone call, you will not be liable for any withdrawals from your account by any other person using your card.
9
If you don't want to have a card anymore then you can end this agreement by writing to the Bank and returning your card.
[If posting the card, it must be cut in two].
The Bank will not be able to take any action until they receive your letter.
10
The card may be sent to you by the Bank.
11
The Bank is entitled to debit your account with all the amounts you withdraw using your card.
You will be liable subject to Condition 8 above.
12
If your card is lost, stolen or your Personal Number is disclosed to another person, the Bank have the right to inform the Police and give them any information they require.
13
The Bank may end this agreement by cancelling your card.
14
Ending the agreement, whether by you or the Bank [see Conditions 9 and 13]will not affect your responsibility for withdrawals made before the agreement is ended.
15
The Bank has the right to change these conditions at any time.
changes will come into effect as soon as the Bank informs you of them.
16
If you withdraw money using your card in a currency other than sterling, your account, will be debited in sterling and the conversion into sterling will be at a rate of exchange decided or authorised by the Bank.
17
If you wish to deposit money using the Cashline machine, then you must use an envelope provided by the Bank in the machine.
Place your cheque or cash [no coins]in the envelope with a pay-in slip [from your book]stating the amount and your account number: The Bank will credit your account with the money as soon as possible.
18
Money you deposit in your account may not show up in your balance immediately.
This might affect the amount of money you have available to withdraw.
Your responsibilities
the Bank's Rights
General
Interest rate
Interest on your money is calculated daily and is added to your account at the end of March, June, September and December.
The interest rate is subject to change and is correct at time of printing.
Interest can be paid without deduction of tax to non-taxpayers.
If you qualify, a simple certificate, available at any Royal Bank of Scotland branch, will need to be completed and returned to your branch.
If we do not receive a certificate by the time interest is payable, or you do not qualify, your interest will be paid after deduction of basic rate tax [at current rates this would be 6.75%].
Depending on your personal tax position you may still be able to claim the tax back.
THE ROYAL BANK OF SCOTLAND AND THE ARTS
SPONSORSHIPS
THE ARTS
Organisations of all kinds look to sponsorship as a means of associating their name with enjoyment and excellence and of establishing their commitment to the activities of the broader community.
The Arts provide ideal opportunities for achieving these aims, and The royal Bank of Scotland is a well established supporter of a wide range of artistic and creative events.
Orchestral concerts feature prominently in the Bank's sponsorship programme and the unique nationwide branch network of the Bank is reflected in the geographical spread of the orchestras which it supports.
These include the City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra, Bournemouth Symphony Orchestra, the Halle Orchestra, The Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra and the Scottish Chamber Orchestra.
North of the Border a long and fruitful association has existed between the Bank and the Scottish chamber Orchestra, the latest joint venture being a series of School Workshops followed up by Family concerts within the relative areas.
Concerts by the CBSO have been sponsored at the Town Hall, Birmingham, at Nottingham, Warwick Arts Centre, Coventry, the Barbican Centre and Derby, The Royal Bank of Scotland Concerts with the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra have visited Liverpool, Preston and Blackburn and with the Halle Orchestra to Manchester and Sheffield.
Operatic Ballet events included Leeds evenings of Opera North's productions of Macbeth, Lucia di Lammermoor, Tosca and La Traviata and Northern Ballet performances in Manchester and Norwich.
A striking feature of the Bank's recent sponsorship programme has been the inclusion of major exhibitions alongside the more traditional concerts.
The exhibition Impressionist Drawings touring Manchester, Oxford and Glasgow drew enthusiastic crowds including the largest attendance at any event ever held at Manchester Art Gallery.
A number of other exhibitions were sponsored including those dealing with LS Lowry Centenary.
Alfred Munnings, Mr. Wood's Fossils.
The Jewellery of René Lalique, Lord Provost George Drummond, the Crofting Act Centenary.
A Hot Bed of Genius, Patrons and Painters 165O–1760 and Wealth of a Nation.
In 1990 Glasgow was selected to be the European City of Culture and in this connection a sponsorship programme was devised including a performance by the world renowned Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra, an exhibition of a selection of the  of Camille Pissarro at The Burrell and a number of other events.
The Bank has its headquarters in Edinburgh, and in recognition of this, there has always been a significant sponsorship related to the Edinburgh International Festival, invariably intended to maintain the quality of international contribution.
In recent years the sponsorship has supported Paris Opera Ballet with Rudolf Nureyev.
The Lyon Opera, Finnish National Ballet and Opera, Japanese Matsuyama Ballet Company, National Opera of Spain and the Slovak National Opera and Ballet.
1988 proved to be a very special year for recognition of the Bank's support of the Arts.
In the early part of the  year the Bank was honoured as the winner of the category for Outstanding support of the Arts in the Scottish Awards for Business Sponsorship of the Arts.
At the end of the year the Bank received the prime accolade as having the Best Corporate Arts Programme in Great Britain.
The Award was presented by the Duchess of York at the 11th ABSA Awards ceremony in London.
Our support for the arts continues to be recognised, our latest award being the 1990 Scottish Award for Business Sponsorship of the Arts in the Best Single Event Category.
The award was in respect of an exhibition entitled ‘Wealth of a Nation’ mounted by the royal Scottish Museum, the award being presented by His Royal Highness The Prince of Wales at a special ceremony in Edinburgh.
Whichever Royal Bank of Scotland — sponsored event you are attending, we hope, above all, that you enjoy it.