

OPEN ACCESS
THE NLS STAFF NEWSLETTER ISSUE No 6 October 1992
FOR SHE'S A JOLLY GOOD FELLOW
Colleagues were delighted to learn that one of the Library's senior staff, Miss Margaret Wilkes, Head of the Map Library, had received the Fellowship of the Royal Scottish Geographical Society at an award ceremony on 5 October.
Honoured with Miss Wilkes were Tom Weir, the well-known writer, and Sir Donald MacCallum, a Trustee of the Library.
Previous recipients of the award include Magnus Magnusson, Sir David Attenborough and The Princess Royal.
Her Royal Highness attended the award ceremony in the Signet Library and congratulated Miss Wilkes on this recognition of her services to historical cartography in Scotland.
Miss Wilkes, a geography graduate with a postgraduate qualification in historical geography, joined the Library in 1973 from the Department of Geography in the University of Sheffield.
She lectures extensively on maps and the collections of NLS in particular as well as promoting a very active outreach programme designed to make the Map Library and its contents better known throughout Scotland.
She has published articles on the collections in all the major map journals and last year published, with the Scottish Library Association,The Scot and his Maps a concise, authoritative and readable history of her subject.
CYCLE RIDE
Sally Harrower, Issue Hall, has for some years entered the Edinburgh to St Andrews cycle ride in aid of Lepra.
This year Sally raised a total of £384.65 and was delighted to receive a plaque for the highest amount raised by an individual.
Sally has asked that her thanks be passed on to all of the staff in the Library who supported her so generously.
She also says that she is doing the ride again next year…
STAFFING CHANGES
Elizabeth Burchell, Curator G in the Music Room, retired in August after 23 years with NLS, almost all of which was spent in Music.
Elizabeth retired a little earlier than she had planned for domestic reasons but says that she intends to keep in touch with colleagues.
Her experience and her deep knowledge of Music Room procedures will be missed.
Her replacement in the Music Room is Tim Lawrence, who has been transferred from the Map Library.
July saw the early retirement on health grounds of Hugh Durham, formerly Senior Messenger.
Hugh had been with NLS for some nine years but unfortunately developed a heart condition which left him unable to drive at work.
We all wish him well for the future.
New staff include Stuart Arnot and Duncan Purdie, both Porter/Messengers, and Janet Wilkie, Reprographics Operator 11.
There have in addition been a number of casual appointments.
Congratulations are extended to Janet Higinbotham, Lynne Tobin, Ian Inglis, John Peacock, Malcolm Fraser, Bob Venters and Kenny Cameron who were all successful in gaining promotion.
Congratulations also to Alison Cutt, Lending Services, on the birth of her daughter, Christina, in September.
Both are well.
THIS SPORTING LIFE
On 9 August the Library's team of anglers (Bill Harkin, Jim Mason, Rab Neil, Willie Ogilvie, Walter Porteous, Colin Scott and Bob Venters) played host to the 1992 Civil Service Scottish Sea-Angling Championship, held this year at Dunbar.
Hopes were high for a pleasant summer's day fishing, but unfortunately this was not to be: heavy wind and rain — and a stomach-churning eight foot swell — resulted in a lot of green faces and a fewer that expected number of fish being caught.
The Library's teams — winners of last year's competition — did not fare so well this time, coming in 9th and 10th out of 14 teams, but the fishermen are hopeful of winning back the trophy for the Library next year.
Also in August, Bill Jackson was crew member on a winning yacht in the Clyde Cruising Club's Tarbert weekend.
Bill races regularly on a 35 foot yacht called Gemini, and on this occasion the boat scored a double victory — winning the Class 4 25-mile race from Port Bannatyne, by Rothesay, around Garroch Head to Tarbert, then the 12-mile return race to Kames in the Kyles of Bute.
Congratulations to all concerned.
CHRISTMAS IS COMING…
…and the good news is that Library staff can once again benefit from a special discount on all goods for sale in the Library Shop.
After the success of last year's scheme, staff will, from 2 November, be able to claim 15% discount on all books, cards and gifts from the shop.
The offer runs right up until Christmas Eve — perfect for last-minute Christmas shopping!
Books make the ideal Christmas present, and among those currently in stock are Muriel Spark's autobiography Curriculum Vitae , in which she writes of her childhood in Edinburgh and the people and places which have influenced her work — including the original Miss Brodie; and Alisdair Gray's new novel Poor Things , a Frankenstein-inspired tale which has been described as his best work yet.
The shop carries a wide range of Scottish fiction and poetry, including the first complete collection of the poetry of Mary Queen of Scots,Bittersweet Within My Heart , compiled and edited by regular Library reader Robin Bell, and the first collection of poems by Angus Peter Campbell, the man hailed as the greatest Scottish poet to emerge in 20 years.
Books of old photographs are always fascinating, and there are several examples to be found in the shop, including Thomas Begbie's Edinburgh , a photographic portrait of the city in mid-Victorian times, and To see Oursels , a striking portrayal of a rural Scotland which has now all but disappeared, and which draws on the unrivalled collections of the National Museum of Scotland's Ethnological Archive.
Last but by no means least, everyone should buy at least one copy of Olive Geddes' fascinating Swing Through Time — the perfect Christmas present for golfers everywhere!
EUROPEAN TREASURES
The Library is marking the holding of December's European Summit in Edinburgh with a display of some of its treasures — the books, maps and manuscripts which tell the story of Scotland's long involvement in Europe and our shared inheritance.
The exhibition opens on 2 November in the Exhibition Hall.
Associated with the exhibition, a number of senior staff are giving a series of lectures as part of the University of Edinburgh's programme of continuing education.
These take place in the Board Room and include:
‘Medieval manuscripts from Monastery to workshop ’ by Elspeth Yeo;
‘The Borghese Collection ’ by Alison Harvey Wood;
‘Europe: the mapmakers’ view ’by Margaret Wilkes;
‘Manuscript collections and collectors ’ by Ian Cunningham;
‘Form, function and formula ’ by Alan Marchbank;
‘Scots in Sicily ’ by Ann Matheson;
‘The Libraries of Scots Colleges and monasteries in Europe ’ by Alastair Cherry;
and ‘European Bookbindings in the National Library ’ by John Morris.
Details on how to join the classes are available from Kenny Gibson or Jackie Cromarty, or from the Centre for Continuing Education, Edinburgh University (Tel.031–650 4400)
STRESS AWARENESS
Several staff have expressed concern about the high level of workplace stress they feel exists in some sections of the Library.
In an attempt both to gauge the extent of the problem and to help managers identify and cope with stress in themselves and others, Douglas Donnelly, Safety Officer, organised a stress awareness seminar which was presented by the Occupational Health Service.
12 staff attended and most found the day of benefit.
It has now been agreed that another two such seminars will be held and Douglas will shortly be asking for nominations to attend.
VDU QUESTIONNAIRE
Replies are coming in to the questionnaire on VDU use which was recently issued to all staff.
Douglas Donnelly will be analysing the results in an attempt to identify problem areas so that appropriate action can be taken and staff will be kept informed.
The VDU Users' Group is grateful to all who have co-operated in this survey.
A questionnaire on smoking in the Library is under preparation by a working group of the Health and Safety Committee — and they will shortly be seeking the views of staff on what could turn out to be a contentious issue.
BRITISH ANTIQUARIAN DIVISION
Within the Department of Printed Books, the British Antiquarian Division has a special responsibility for the Library's collection of older books.
Staff duties in this division include the acquisition of non-current printed material, mainly of Scottish relevance; the cataloguing of British books printed before 1801; dealing with bibliographical enquiries; providing advice to institutional and private libraries; and various other duties involving close co-operation with many of the Library's other departments.
Staff are also required to invigilate in the South Reading Room, and occasionally to assist with the preparation of the Library's exhibitions.
At present the department consists of seven members, each with their own particular areas of specialization; these areas include modern literature, Gaelic, Scottish history, bindings, photography, children's books and sport.
This broad spectrum of interests is reflected in the material acquired for the Library by the department.
Recent accessions have included the first American edition of Joseph Black's Lectures on the elements of Chemistry ,(Philadelphia: 1807); a Paris edition of John Barclay's Argenis printed in 1621, and an item believed to have been printed in Edinburgh about 1800 entitled ‘A Pleasant Humourous and satyrical poem ’, part one of which calls on young women to ‘embrace the pure and holy state of matrimony’: part two ‘contains excellent directions in the choice of a husband…’
The department also deals directly with the Library's many and varied special collections.
Among the more notable of these are the Hugh Sharp collection containing many English and American first editions in unusually fine condition; the Bute collection of English Plays, and the Rosebery collection donated in 1927 by Archibald Philip, 5th Earl of Rosebery (1847–1929).
There are of course other collections too numerous to mention, covering topics as diverse as witchcraft and mountaineering, baking and Ossianic literature.
So if you want to cast a spell, climb a Ben, bake a cake or find out about Fingal, this is the place to be.
SUCCESSFUL STUDIES
Congratulations to Sharon Doolan, Reprographics Unit, who learned recently that she had been successful in gaining two further Scotvec modules in photography.
Sharon has been taking evening classes at college for the past two years.
LECTURE
Alison Harvey Wood gave a paper on ‘Italian immigration to Scotland’ at the 4th Annual Conference of the Scottish Association of Family History Societies in the Mitchell Library Theatre in Glasgow on 12 September 1992.
The theme of the conference was ‘European immigration into Scotland’.
Open Access is produced by the National Library of Scotland as a medium for the exchange of information among employees.
Contributions or suggestions for articles will be welcomed and should be sent to Jackie Cromarty or Pauline Scott or to one of the section representatives listed below.
Willie Alexander (Building and Services);
Moira Allen (SSL);
Fred Guy (Computer Services);
Sally Harrower (Reference Services);
Alison Harvey Wood (Foreign Books);
Mark Henderson (Publications);
Rab Jackson (Preservation);
Jennifer Laurie (Accessions);
Jim Mason (British Antiquarian);
Sheila Mackenzie (Manuscripts);
Diana Webster (Map Library).
The next issue will be published in December — the copy deadline is 20 November 1992.
OPEN ACCESS THE NLS STAFF NEWSLETTER ISSUE No 7 DECEMBER 1992
MISSION VOLGA
Staff will recall that Penny Carter, a casual part-time member of staff in Foreign Books, appealed for money some time ago to support an evangelising trip to Russia.
She has given us an account of her experiences .
Mission Volga's main purpose was to bring hope to people in the midst of hopelessness in a country of continued political unrest and financial chaos.
A cruise ship was hired to sail from St Petersburg to Rostov-on-Don, holding some 30 evangelistic meetings en route and distributing new testaments, medical supplies and food aid in 12 cities.
500 foreigners from 17 countries and 12 branches of the church took part, the first time since 1054 that western and Russian Orthodox churches have worked together.
It was the biggest mission in Russian history.
I was based in Rostov-on-Don, part of the British team preparing for the ship's arrival.
That was an unforgettable night: we watched the ship arrive in the company of local Christians and shared their joy and their fear.
They were afraid because elsewhere a group of armed cossacks had besieged the ship, threatening to kill anyone who disembarked.
Thankfully no-one was hurt.
Our team visited schools, colleges, libraries, hospitals and even backstage at the local theatre.
A highlight was a party in the children's hospital where we gave presents to all of the children, mums and staff as well as handing over medical supplies and a lap-top computer.
We could not have survived without the 13 local interpreters who became our guides, chaperons and friends.
Life in Russia is hard (and since we deliberately chose to stay in a cheap non-western hotel we experienced some of the hardships first hand) but I shall never forget the generosity and overwhelming hospitality shown to us by the people of Bastaisk church.
They are poor and often hungry but they shared what they had with us.
I am very grateful to everyone in the Library who contributed to the costs of this trip.
Mission Volga formed part of a more ambitious project to take the gospel message to distant parts of the former Soviet Union.
Next project Mission Transsiberia!
ENTERTAINMENTS COMMITTEE
The committee is planning a number of events for early in the new year, including a Skittles Night on Saturday 20 February in the Corstorphine Inn.
They will also be organising one or more Open Evenings so that family and friends of staff can be shown round George 1V Bridge and Causewayside.
The new NLS video will be shown and wine will be served courtesy of the Library.
Dates will be announced later.
Other events are at the planning stage but the committee always welcomes any suggestions from staff or offers of help.
THE NATIONAL LIBRARY OF SCOTLAND CHRISTMAS LITERARY QUIZ
People always seem to assume that if you work in a library, you should know all there is to know about books.
Now is the time to prove them right by entering our Christmas literary quiz — and as an added incentive we are offering a bottle of Glenmorangie for the first correct entry drawn out of the hat.
Send your answers to Pauline Scott by January 1993.
1.
Fill in the blanks in these book titles, and give the name of the author.
a
One Hundred Years of 
b
Eyeless in 
c
A Pocketful of 
d
Le Meaulnes 
e
for Breakfast 
2.
Name the novel (with author) from which these FIRST LINES come —
a
Mother died today.
Or maybe yesterday, I don't know
b
Wars came early to Shanghai, overtaking each other like the tides that raced up the Yangtze and returned to the gaudy city all the coffins cast adrift from the funeral piers of the Chinese Bond.
c
It was the best of times, it was the worst of times…
d
Miss Brooke had that kind of beauty which seems to be thrown into relief by poor dress.
e
On a very hot evening at the beginning of July a young man left his little room at the top of a house in Carpenter Lane, went out into the street, and, as though unable to make up his mind, walked slowly in the direction of Kokushkin Bridge.
3 —and these LAST LINES .
a
It would be like taking ‘a room with a view’.
For James Bond, the same view would always pall.
b
He picked up the novel which Miss Poski had left on the desk and settled down to await his loved one's final combustion.
c
As soon as they had strength they arose, joined hands again, and went on.
d
‘Anything to eat?’ cried Charlie, laughing.
‘Oh, you just wait and see!’
e
‘Honey.’
Schaffer took her hands and spoke severely and earnestly, ‘Honey, don't ever again mention that word to me, I'm allergic to horses.’
‘You eat them?’
Heidi gazed at him in astonishment.
‘In Montana?’
‘I fall off them,’ Schaffer said moodily.
‘Everywhere’.
From which novel (by which author) do these characters come?
a
Fuchsia, Steerpike, and Mrs Slagg
b
Jenny, Miss Lockhart, and Mr. Lloyd
c
Ford Prefect, Prostetnic Vogon Jeltz, and Vroomfondel
d
Catherine Morland, Henry Tilney, and Isabella Thorpe
e
Alison, Lily, and Conchis
Name the novel in which this festive illustration can be found.
BUILDINGS UPDATE
The programme for Causewayside Phase 2 has been revised because of delays due to weather and ground conditions and completion is now expected in June 1994.
Staff in Phase 1 will shortly see the installation of new lighting and a revised furniture layout on Level 3, necessary to comply with the new EC regulations on VDU use.
Level 7 should be ready for occupation by Cataloguing in February 1993.
Three new rooms have been constructed within the attic of the Lawnmarket Building for use by Computer Services.
Fred Guy moved into the penthouse suite in November and now has one of the best views in Edinburgh.
Work to the external elevations of GB is still largely ongoing although the front elevation is now complete.
The remaining work has been delayed because of problems encountered with the render and the removal of the existing paint.
All work should be completed by February 1993.
STAFF CHANGES
New permanent recruits to the Library include Iain Hoffman, a Museum Warder, and Colin Hairs, a Reprographics Operator 11, both of whom joined in November.
We have also welcomed the first of the ‘new blood’ recruits, Dr Louise Yeoman, Curator F/E in Manuscripts.
Dr Yeoman, who specialises in 16th and 17th century Scottish history, came from the Scottish Records Office.
Also new is Eric Dickson, Curator E and Head of Official Publications.
Mr. Dickson, a graduate of the University of Edinburgh and Robert Gordon's, was previously with the Scottish Office Library.
New casual staff include Andrea Christie in the Map Library and Catriona McCartney in Lending Services.
Congratulations are extended to staff who have been successful in gaining promotion; they include Kenny Cameron, now in SSL, Tam Burke in the Map Library, Adrienne Muir in British Antiquarian, Lynne Tobin in Cataloguing, Bob Venters in the Security Unit and David McClure in the Porter/Messenger unit.
Tim Lawrence has been transferred from Maps to Music.
We are about to lose four staff on maternity leave: Jackie Cromarty, Exhibitions, Sharon Doolan, Reprographics, Moira Allan, SSL and Linda Jansen, also SSL, although we hope to see them all back in due course.
Belated congratulations to Frank Russell, Sighthill Bindery, on his election success in May.
Frank represents the Sighthill ward on Edinburgh District Council and currently chairs the Council's Personnel Committee.
THE GHOSTS OF CHRISTMAS PAST
Two fine, upstanding members of staff attend a Christmas party in the staff canteen, c.1971 — which just goes to show that Christmas in the National Library is not what it used to be!
UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH STAFF CLUB
The University of Edinburgh Staff Club has recently changed its rules to open membership to the graduates of universities other than Edinburgh.
As an extra incentive, the Club is currently offering free membership for the year 1992–3 to all such graduates, ie, alumni of other universities who are not (a) alumni of Edinburgh University or (b) members of staff of Edinburgh University or (c) existing members of the club during 1991–2.
The free membership offer ends in September 1993, but all members of staff of the National Library of Scotland should be aware that they are also eligible to join the Club as associate members at any time; the yearly subscription is currently £68.50.
The Club is based in Chambers Street and offers an extensive range of facilities including restaurants, bars, squash and snooker; membership also entitles you to take advantage of the very competitive rates for both accommodation and private functions.
Further details are available from the Staff Club, tel 031–650 2395.
UNIVERSITY SPORTS CENTRE
Library staff are entitled to join the University of Edinburgh Sports Centre in the Pleasance.
Membership costs £50.00 for the academic year and gives access to a wide range of sports facilities including squash, tennis, badminton, netball, basketball and volleyball courts, indoor football and hockey pitches and several fitness training centre and gymnasia.
Judo, karate, dance, fencing, table tennis, carpet bowls and aerobics are all available.
Application forms are available from Pauline Scott.
PRESERVATION DIVISION
Led by the Head of Preservation the Preservation Division is primarily responsible for protecting and prolonging the life of the collections.
To achieve this the Division must work closely with most of the Library's departments, and must also be in touch with developments in preservation.
The Preservation Division advises on the formation of library preservation policy and strategy and provides services connected with the conservation of antiquarian volumes, manuscripts and maps, the binding of periodicals, protective boxes, microfilming, photography, exhibitions, etc.
At present there are 37 people at various locations in three separate buildings.
These include the Binding Preparation Unit, the Conservation Workshop, the Perspex Workshop, the Reprographic Unit, the Print Room, Photography and Sighthill Bindery.
Most conservation and binding work passes through the Binding Preparation Unit (BPU) for documentation.
BPU is split into two locations, one on G floor and the other at level 7 Causewayside.
The office on G floor prepares work for the Conservation Workshop, and the level 7 office processes work for Sighthill Bindery.
The Conservation Workshop housing eight conservators applies remedial treatment to collections.
Types of material treated include books, manuscripts, maps, globes, photographs and ephemera material.
There is an impressive range of equipment including a leafcaster, ultrasonic encapsulation, low and high power magnification, suction table/humidification chamber and vacuum press.
A second smaller Perspex Workshop located in the old building on Y floor produces perspex cradles and stands for material being placed on exhibition to ensure the items are safely supported.
Wrap-around enclosures made from conservation boxboard to give protection to items awaiting treatment are also made in the Perspex Workshop.
This effort supplements an existing boxing programme which aims to give items entering storage the protection of a binding or box.
Sighthill Bindery deals with the Library's journal and monograph binding requirements.
Including a Manager, a total of 14 staff is employed in the Bindery.
In addition to binding journals and monographs, Sighthill bindery also deals with some manuscript items and maps.
Protective enclosures in the form of boxes and portfolios are also made at the Bindery.
Equipment here includes a computerised lettering system for book cases.
The Reprographic Unit, located mainly on J floor, consists of 9 staff and is responsible for photography, microfilming and electrostatic copying from the Library's collections.
Equipment in the Reprographic Unit includes four microfilm cameras, a digitised reader printer, an ultrasonic splicing machine, a colour enlarger, a photographic colour processor and a 35mm microfilm processor.
Recently three further microfilming cameras specially built to accommodate filming from bound newspapers have been installed with darkroom facilities at Sighthill Bindery.
This is intended to serve as a dedicated newspaper microfilming project to deal with newspaper preservation problems across Scotland and not just those within the NLS collections.
A camera operator funded by the Andrew Mellon Foundation is presently microfilming from selected material.
All filming is produced to high archival standards producing three generations of film of which the archival negative is stored in suitable conditions and in a different building as part of the disaster control measures.
The Reprographic Unit also delivers the ever increasing photocopying needs of other departments in the Library.
The Print Room in the old building on X floor deals with photocopying, standard and colour, up to A3 size.
Another print room located on level 3 at Causewayside Building deals with photocopying from maps up to AO size.
To meet office copying needs alone over 500,000 photocopies were produced last year with this year on target for 500,000 copies.
NEWS No 13 Summer 1992
AN EXCITING PURCHASE FROM THE ROYAL SCOTTISH GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY
Successful negotiations with the Royal Scottish Geographical Society have allowed the Library to acquire a number of unique cartographic treasures to add to its map collection.
Of particular national significance is the attractive Italian-printed representation of Scotland alone, and not attached geographically to the rest of Great Britain, as in earlier maps by George Lily, an Englishman resident in Rome.
Acquired in 1919 by the Royal Scottish Geographical Society as a gift, it is thought to have originated in a 16th-century collection of maps bound into atlas form.
Another, and different, outline of Scotland appears on a vellum portolan, or sea-chart, which also depicts the fjorded coastline of Norway, including the famous whirlpool, Maelstrom, together with the south-east coast of Spitsbergen.
Its place-names betray a French origin to the chart; Jan Mayen island today, is named Ile de Richelieu, a reminder of Cardinal Richelieu's eminent position.
The portolan dates from around 1635 when European whaling interests in Arctic waters were at a peak.
The third component in this outstanding purchase is a set of 19 manuscript maps and plans known as the ‘Wade Collection’, through its association with Field-Marshall George Wade.
Comprising plans of the military roads, forts and barracks in the Highlands during the period 1724–40, it includes an exquisitely drafted map of the Moray and Cromarty Firths and their settlement pattern, and a detailed map of the country between the upper Dee valley by Braemar, through Glen Feshie to the military barracks at Ruthven.
The plan was for another military road over the watershed between Dee and Spey.
The final item is a delicately coloured manuscript draft on squared paper in the hand of David Livingstone.
Made during the period 1859–1863, it covers an area round Lake Nyasa (Lake Malawi), and represented the explorer's latest findings.
Seldom do so many and varied examples of the mapmaker's skills appear on the market at the same time.
By this judicious purchase, the National Library has ensured the preservation of a significant cartographic collection for posterity.
NLS News aims to keep readers and friends of the Library in touch with the range of activities and developments in services.
More information about any aspect of the Library can be obtained from Dr Alan Marchbank, Director of Public Services.
Comments on NLS News , suggestions for future articles, or requests to be added to the distribution list can also be sent to Dr Marchbank.
RETROSPECTIVE CONVERSION
On 1 April a further step in the Library's plans to automate aspects of its printed collections was achieved with the implementation of the VTLS Serials control module.
On that date work began on the conversion of the existing manual Kardex file, containing the records of the Library's periodicals holdings, into machine-readable format.
The project, which is expected to take some 18 months to complete, will enable all library staff to have access through the online catalogue to up-to-date information on all periodicals and newspaper titles currently received, including the date of the last issue received, and, in most cases, the expected date of the next issue.
As records are created online for both existing holdings and new titles received in the Library Periodicals Unit staff will make use of the VTLS Serials control module for recording issues, on receipt, in the online system.
In addition to predicting the expected date of receipt of the next issue the system will give staff greater control over claims for missing issues and pressmark changes.
Further sub-systems of the module will enable automatic circulation of new issues to members of staff, recording of binding information, and subscription accounting to be undertaken.
The new system will also be of direct benefit to the Library's users.
When complete, readers will have access, via the online catalogue terminals, to detailed holdings of all current periodicals held by NLS.
In addition, the automated check-in facility will alert readers to current issues of periodicals as soon as they are processed.
Remote users will also have access through the JANET networks.
The project is being supervised by Peter Wellburn, Head of Periodicals, and John Nicklen, Head of Serials Cataloguing, to whom queries may be directed.
HUGH MACDIARMID CENTENARY
On 28 April 1992 a whisky reception was held to launch on its way the Library's travelling exhibition on the poet Hugh MacDiarmid, whose centenary is celebrated this year.
The reception, supported by the Glenmorangie Distillery Co., was attended by several of MacDiarmid's friends and contemporaries, who heard a lively and enlightening talk given by the writer Owen Dudley Edwards.
The display is now set to tour Scotland for the remainder of the centenary year, taking in several locations which have strong MacDiarmid associations — Langholm, where he was born; Montrose where his masterpiece A Drunk Man Looks at the Thistle was composed; and Lanark, close to Brownsbank where he spent the later years of his life.
The display will also be seen in Shetland, where MacDiarmid lived during the thirties.
MacDiarmid Touring Schedule Dumfries Museum 27 May–27 June 1992 
Lesser Buccleuch Hall, Langholm 1–15 July 1992 
Lanark Library 17–29 July 1992 
Mitchell Library, Glasgow 3 August–12 September 1992 
MacRobert Centre, Stirling 16 September–9 October 1992 
Inverness Museum & Art Gallery 22 October–28 November 
Montrose Library 3 December 1992–9 January 1993 
Arbroath, Brechin and Carnoustie Libraries January–February 1993 
Glasgow Polytechnic March 1993 
JILL MCBRIDE
The Library has created a new post of Customer Services Officer to develop its links with the library community in Scotland and throughout the United Kingdom.
The post, in the Lending Services Division, has been filled by Mrs Jill McBride, BA, ALA, who comes to NLS from East Lothian District Council's library service where she was Bibliographic Services Librarian.
Mrs McBride will be developing information and support services to promote inter-library co-operation and will represent the Library on inter-library loans bodies.
GOLF IN SCOTLAND
A new book (to be published in July by HMSO) written by Mrs Olive M Geddes of the Library's Manuscripts Division will fascinate anyone who is curious about the early history of golf.
Called A Swing Through Time: Golf in Scotland, 1457–1743 , the heavily-illustrated book takes a look at the little-known dark ages of golf — the 400 years which preceded the appearance in 1744 of the earliest surviving Rules of Golf.
Using early documentary evidence, Olive Geddes guides the reader expertly through the first four centuries of the sport, shedding light on its birth, the techniques and equipment used, and above all, its social standing as it began to develop from an outlawed activity to the world's most internationally popular game.
Olive Geddes has a particular interest in sporting archives, of which the National Library has a fine collection, including the papers of the Scottish Football Association, the Royal Highland Yacht Club and the Edinburgh Skating Club.
A Swing Through Time: Golf in Scotland, 1457–1743 by Olive Geddes will be on sale in the Library shop from July 1992.
NEW BOOKS ON ROBERT ADAM
As part of its contribution to the Robert Adam bicentenary celebrations in 1992, the National Library is publishing two books on the architect.
Monumental Reputation :Robert Adam and the Emperor's Palace is the illustrated companion to the Library's major summer exhibition on Adam.
It has been written by Dr Iain G. Brown, as Assistant Keeper in the Library's Manuscripts Division, who also researched the exhibition.
Published in association with English Heritage,Robert Adam :Architect of Genius by Julius Bryant offers an introduction to Adam's architecture by exploring the thoughts and personal ambitions behind his designs, and looking at some of the sources of his inspiration.
Both books are available by post from the Library Shop:Monumental Reputation costs £3.50 plus 50p p&p, and Robert Adam :Architect of Genius costs £2.95 plus 50p p&p.
In addition,Robert Adam :Architect of Genius is offered at a special discount price to all visitors to the exhibition.
Monumental Reputation :Robert Adam and the Emperor's Palace is on at the National Library of Scotland from 1 June to 30 September 1992, and at Kenwood, London, from 4 November 1992 to 28 February 1993.
NEWS No. 15 Winter 1992/93
EUROPE: THE ENVIRONMENT DIMENSION 1992 IBM/SSL LECTURE
This year's IBM/Scottish Science Library Lecture, the third in a series sponsored by IBM (UK) Ltd, proved to be as highly successful as its predecessors.
A packed lecture theatre in the Royal Museum of Scotland, on Tuesday 8 December, greeted the guest speaker, Sir Crispin Tickell, whose lecture was entitled ‘Europe: the environmental dimension’.
The lecturer was introduced by Lord Crawford, who outlined Sir Crispin's long and distinguished first career as a diplomat and his departure into the field of climatology.
Sir Crispin began with a brief overview of the world's climate and environment before and after the rise of man.
He spoke of the impermanence of the European environment and the influence on it of man's activities.
Our generation is seeing the global drawbacks of industrialisation, the responses to which to which are fourfold: local, national, regional and global.
Local responses tend to come first and popular pressure is very important, especially since more people belong to environmental pressure groups than to political parties.
Sir Crispin advocated the need to change the method of measuring the wealth of nations.
Natural resources should be included as well as the factors which constitute the Gross National Product.
European policy makers need to consider the environmental issues before policies are implemented.
Sir Crispin felt that the European Community was the natural unit for dealing with environmental problems but not enough has yet been done in this area, since, for example, there is still no European environmental agency.
Throwing money at the problem, however, is not the answer; this may only create more difficulties for the environment.
The European Community must be careful not just to lecture, particularly to Eastern Europe, but to demonstrate the way forward.
Sir Crispin's lecture was followed by a lively questions session which clearly demonstrated the interest and concern of the audience.
NLS News aims to keep readers and friends of the Library in touch with the range of activities and developments in services.
More information about any aspect of the Library can be obtained from Dr Alan Marchbank, Director of Public Services.
Comments on NLS News , suggestions for future articles, or requests to be added to the distribution list can also be sent to Dr Marchbank.
NLS TRUSTEES ARE HONOURED
Judge David Edward, a Trustee of the Library since 1966 and an Honorary Professor of the University of Edinburgh, received the University's Alumnus of the Year award at a ceremony in the McEwan Hall on 28 November 1992.
Judge Edward has had a distinguished career in the law culminating with his appointment in 1992 as a Judge of the Court of Justice of the European Communities.
He now travels frequently between Luxembourg and Edinburgh but maintains a keen interest in the affairs of the National Library as well as those of the many other Scottish institutions with which he is involved.
Ruari McLean, another of the Library's Trustees, recently received an individual award from the American Printing History Association.
Mr McLean has a vast knowledge of typography and book design, knowledge which he is happy to share with the Library.
It is encouraging to see his experience recognised internationally.
CITY OF ABERDEEN LIBRARY SERVICES JOINS VISCOUNT
The first Scottish subscriber to the VISCOUNT system is the City of Aberdeen Library Services.
Staff from Aberdeen were among 63 representatives of 35 libraries who attended a series of VISCOUNT demonstrations organised by the Library's Lending Services during November and December, and were so impressed by what they saw that they decided to join the system, which they have been using successfully since January.
VISCOUNT (originally an acronym for Viewdata Interlibrary System Communications Network) is a computer network of libraries organised by LASER (London and South East Region).
It brings together data from 7 of the 10 UK Library Regions.
Lending Services, as the headquarters of the regional library system in Scotland, has been as active participant in VISCOUNT since its inception in 1985.
One of the principal tasks of Lending Services is to maintain the Scottish Union Catalogue.
This began life in the early 1930s, and now is invaluable for locating volumes held by over 100 Scottish libraries, in order to satisfy inter-library loan requests.
Many of the records in the Scottish Union Catalogue have been entered in the VISCOUNT database, making the information instantly available to all subscribers.
VISCOUNT has revolutionised the work of Lending Services, because it provides a greatly improved means of access to both bibliographical and library location information: the system currently details over 30 million library locations for more than 3 million titles!
Subscribing libraries have access to this enormous pool of bibliographical information and can then send loan requests to each other electronically.
Gains in accuracy are thus matched by a reduction in time delays in obtaining material on behalf of readers.
Pat McKenzie, Lending Services VISCOUNT Officer, said: ‘Most people who attended the demonstrations were impressed by the potential benefits for their libraries and for their users, and felt that the system would be easy to operate’.
Several other libraries have expressed strong interest, and she confidently expects that other subscribers will shortly follow Aberdeen's innovative lead.
BOOK DELIVERY SURVEY
A survey of the operation of delivering books, and some other materials, from the Library's bookstacks to readers in the George IV Bridge Building and in the Scottish Science Library was undertaken in February and March 1992.
The aim of the Book Delivery Survey was to assess the quality of the current service, and, as an aid to planning the distribution of the collections in preparation for the completion of the Causewayside Building in 1994, to provide information about the use of closed-access material by the Library's readers.
The survey was carried out in two parts:(a) by timing all stages in the delivery of a book, from the initial completion of a call-slip by a reader to the issue of the requested item to the reader; and (b) by questionnaire, seeking the views of readers on the book delivery service.
An interim report, presenting the broad findings of the questionnaire, was completed in November 1992.
The Library was pleased to note the high level of reader satisfaction with the delivery service and with the standard of help offered by NLS staff.
The main source of frustration for readers, both at George IV Bridge and at SSL, was the longer time necessary to deliver material from another building.
A full report on the survey, incorporating the results of the timing exercise and additional data from the questionnaire, will be prepared during the first half of 1993.
The Library is grateful to readers who helped by filling in a questionnaire.
TELEWORKING
The Library recently acquired its first teleworker in Mrs Louise Graham, of Gairloch, Wester Ross.
Teleworkers — people who never actually go to work, but work from home using computers linked to their employer's headquarters — are a comparatively new phenomenon but the idea has great potential for the scattered rural population of Scotland.
Working from a computer terminal in her home, some 200 miles to the north of the Library's Edinburgh headquarters, Mrs Graham.
a former member of staff, carried out quality control work on the computerised catalogue.
The trial period was organised and funded by the Association of Community Enterprise in the Highlands and Islands with Ross and Cromarty Enterprise but the Library is now investigating whether the arrangement can be made permanent.
DOORS OPEN DAY
On the afternoon of Saturday 12 September 1992 as part of a city-wide event organised by the Cockburn Association and sponsored by PSA Projects, the Causewayside Building was open to visits by the general public.
‘Doors Open Day’ is part of the Council of Europe's European Heritage Day which involved 48 properties in Edinburgh.
It was designed to invite visitors to step inside and explore buildings whose distinguished, colourful or unusual interior are rarely open to the public.
Tours were organised by Dr Marchbank and conducted by the Librarian, Miss Wright and Ms McGrath, with the help of Miss Cowan and Mrs Booth to round up stragglers and ensure no-one got lost.
An estimated 250 people were shown round in 11 tours, leaving the guides footsore and hoarse!
One couple had visited 13 sites in one day and many had the Library on a list of 7 or 8 visits.
ASSOCIATION OF SCOTTISH VISITOR ATTRACTIONS
Following an inspection of facilities for visitors, the Association of Scottish Visitor Attractions has ratified the Library's application for membership.
ASVA was set up to give tourist attractions the opportunity to share common experiences and problems and is committed to improving standards for visitors throughout Scotland.
The Library sees ASVA membership as part of its drive to improve services for all its users.
ADAM EXHIBITION MOVES TO LONDON
Following its success in Edinburgh, the Library's Robert Adam exhibition, ‘Monumental Reputation’ has transferred to London, where it is on show until the end of February.
The picture shows the exhibition being unloaded at its highly appropriate London venue: Kenwood, an Adam house set in its own parkland at Hampstead, and currently in the care of English Heritage.
CIRCLS No. 1 June 1992
SCOTTISH LIBRARY AUTOMATION SURVEY
THE SURVEY
In recent years Lending Services has been increasingly concerned about the impact of automation on inter-library lending activity and in particular on the Scottish Union Catalogue — concerns which are shared by colleagues in ILL work throughout the UK.
Accordingly, 108 questionnaires were issued to libraries throughout Scotland earlier this year.
An excellent return of 95% was achieved.
THE MAIN RESULTS
Of the 103 libraries that replied, 67 have already automate or are in the process of automating, and 26 have plans to automate.
Only 3 libraries felt that automation of their libraries service was unlikely.
University libraries are the only group in which all are automated, including systems for circulation, cataloguing and ILL.
Of the 41 Local Authority libraries that replied, 24 had automated or were considering automation; the majority had implemented automation of accessions, cataloguing and circulation, but only 2 had introduced automated systems for ILL.
Of the 25 college and 20 special libraries that replied, the majority were already automated, and many others were planning conversion to automation in the near future.
Only 1 library service out of the 9 school services that replied had been automated.
THE IMPLICATIONS FOR THE SUC
Only half of the libraries that returned questionnaires could say that they had considered how automation would affect the way they could continue to contribute information about holdings to the SUC.
However, the questionnaire results did reveal a renewal of interest amongst automated libraries in finding a way to notify accessions and withdrawals in the future.
It is obvious how important this is, because the relevance of the very substantial database of information represented by the SUC (records of well over 2 million works are currently held) could be seriously eroded if automation leads to a progressive decline in notifications.
Ultimately, it will be the traditional strengths of co-operation and ILL which will be damaged.
At present 5 library systems successfully notify accessions and withdrawals by tape; it is hoped that this number will increase in the future.
In the interest of library co-operation the SUC needs notification of additions and withdrawals.
If your library does not participate in the work of the SUC, or if you are currently considering automation and would like advice on automated input, tape compatibility, etc., please contact Eileen Watson, the Editor of the SUC at Lending Services, from whom copies of the full results of the questionnaire survey can also be obtained.
Co-operation and interlending Report for Collaborating Libraries in Scotland
CIRCLS is an occasional bulletin issued by the National Library of Scotland Lending Services, acting in its role of regional bureau for Scotland.
CIRCLS communicates NLSLS activities, describes changes in inter-library loan procedures, requests information from NLSLS users, and records new developments in inter-library co-operation.
Each issue of CIRCLS usually concentrates on one main topic, with items of news included as relevant, and is sent out with regular NLSLS mailings to libraries throughout Scotland.
Additional copies can be obtained on request from NLSLS.
THE SCOTTISH PANEL ON INTERLIBRARY LENDING
SPILL was formed in 1990 to provide a forum for the staff of Lending Services to discuss procedures and co-operative issues with staff in Scottish libraries who are actively engaged on loans work.
The membership is drawn from the various sectors of librarianship — public libraries, academic libraries, school library services and special libraries — and members are invited to serve on SPILL for a term of 2 to 3 years.
There are currently 18 members, who are joined by the four senior staff of Lending Services.
The meetings, which are chaired by Dr Alan Marchbank,(the Library's Director of Public Services who has overall responsibility for Lending Services), are held three times each year, in February, June and October.
New members joining SPILL this year were H. Good (Strathclyde University),J. Gail (Dundee District Libraries),M. S. Calderwood (West Lothian District Libraries),V. Corrie (Association of Scottish Health Sciences Libraries) and M. C. T. Buchan ,(Robert Gordon's Institute of Technology ).
Examples of the subjects being discussed by SPILL at the moment are:
Revised inter-Library Loans Procedures
SUC Automation
UK Fiction Reserves
Children's fiction and ILL
Training for ILL staff
Lending of playsets
BLDSC services and customer panels in Scotland
CUSTOMER SERVICES OFFICER
The new post of Customer Services Officer in Lending Services has been filled by Mrs Jill McBride.
Born and educated in the West of Scotland, Jill did her professional training at RGIT in Aberdeen.
She has worked with both Midlothian and East Lothian District Libraries, her last post being Bibliographic Services Librarian in Haddington.
Her new job is to ‘sell’ the services offered by Lending Services to libraries throughout the country and to develop information and support services to promote interlibrary co-operation.
SCOTTISH FICTION RESERVE
Moira Burgess, the compiler of the 1986 edition of the Directory of Authors in the Scottish Fiction Reserve , has been asked to begin work on the revisions needed for the next edition, projected for publication in the course of 1993–4.
In the near future, therefore, we will be writing to libraries for help in providing information about their current holdings and collecting policy as well as new authors in their areas.
It is also intended to carry out a number of modifications to the current listings, and to introduce new features which will broaden the usefulness of the Directory .
LAW LIBRARIANS VISIT LS
The Scottish Law Librarians Group held their AGM this year in the Seminar Room at the NLS Causewayside Building, and afterwards heard from Christian Wright about the work of Lending Services.
This was followed by a tour of Lending Services, the Scottish Science Library, and the Map Library.
SCOTTISH POETRY LIBRARY ADDS HOLDINGS TO SUC
In order to promote the use of the stock of the SPL, details of the Library's holdings are currently being added to the SUC.
Penny Duce of the Poetry Library, who recently visited Lending Services said that the Library would be pleased to accept requests for books on BL forms, but that she did not expect to be borrowing material for SPL itself.
LINC
As the Regional Library Bureau for Scotland, Lending Services, in common with the other Regional Library Services in the UK, has been a Founder Member of the Library and Information Co-operation Council since its inception in 1988.
Copies of, and information about, the various publications of LINC (Linclines, Issues in Focus etc ) have been circulated to colleagues in Scotland by Lending Services.
Further information about the work of LINC can be obtained from Miss Christian Wright, Superintendent of Lending Services.
S S L NEWS ISSUE NO 3 SPRING 1993 THE NEWSLETTER OF THE SCOTTISH SCIENCE LIBRARY
Continuing our policy of letting you know what services you will find in the Scottish Science Library (SSL) this issue highlights our collection of company annual reports, our CD-ROM collection and the foreign periodicals collection, which formerly belonged to the Royal Society of Edinburgh.
THE ROYAL SOCIETY OF EDINBURGH'S PERIODICALS COLLECTION IN THE SCOTTISH SCIENCE LIBRARY
In 1982, the Royal Society of Edinburgh (RSE), one of the most important learned societies in the country, transferred its extensive foreign periodicals collection to the National Library of Scotland (NLS) and it is now available in the SSL.
This collection is listed in The World list of scientific periodicals .
A large proportion of the collection has been acquired by the exchange of the Society's publications with those of learned institutions throughout the world.
Some of these titles are unique within Scotland.
TITLES FROM ALL CORNERS OF THE WORLD
This exchange policy continues today, and currently well over 800 periodical titles are received from all continents.
At present the collection consists of nearly 5000 periodical runs and covers subjects such as geology, botany, biology, and palaeontology.
QUESTIONNAIRE
In March 1992, a questionnaire was sent out to all of the Society's exchange partners in the hope that records could be updated and entered on to a database.
This work is now in progress and so far two thirds of the questionnaires have been returned.
CATALOGUING THE COLLECTION
Work started on integrating the collection into the NLS catalogue in 1987 and approximately 950 titles from the collection have been catalogued to date.
As a rough estimate, the average number of records required per title is 5.
On this basis the cataloguing of this periodical collection could need as many as 25 000 records before it is completed!
Readers wishing to consult periodicals from the Royal Society of Edinburgh Collection are advised to ask SSL staff for assistance.
IBM/SSL LECTURE 1992
This year's IBM/SSL Lecture proved to be as highly successful as its predecessors.
A packed lecture theatre in the Royal Museum of Scotland on Tuesday 8 December 1992, greeted the guest speaker, Sir Crispin Tickell, whose lecture was entitled ‘Europe: the environmental dimension’.
A longer article on the lecture was published in issue number 15 of NLS news .
There are also plans to publish the text of the lecture.
Copies of NLS news are available free of charge from the Library.
Please call the Science Library if you want to obtain further details, or if you would like a copy of NLS news .
COMPANY ANNUAL REPORTS
The Scottish Business Information Service (SCOTBIS) holds a large number of company annual reports, probably the most comprehensive collection publicly available in Scotland.
The reports are, with a few exceptions, from every fully quoted or USM (Unlisted Securities Market) company listed on the International Stock Exchange in London.
500 major international company reports are also held.
‘most comprehensive collection…in Scotland’
The collection was started in 1989 when SCOTBIS opened, and the Library intends to keep a maximum of 5 years of reports from each company on the open shelves.
The companies were contacted directly and were asked to send their annual and interim reports.
The collection is kept up-to-date by staff regularly checking to see which companies have been added to, or removed from, the Stock Exchange.
If a company has been removed from the Stock Exchange list then their reports are disposed of after a year.
A list giving the holdings of the Library's collection of annual reports has been produced and costs £10.00.
If you would like to purchase a copy, or would like any more information, please contact Liz MacDonald on extension 3514.
DATABASES ON CD-ROM
References at your fingertips
SSL is building up a collection of databases on CD-ROM (compact disc read-only memory) in business, scientific and technical subjects.
CD-ROM, based on audio compact disc technology, permits large quantities of information to be stored on standard size compact discs (550 MB per disc).
Combined with microcomputer retrieval software, this allows powerful search features to be incorporated.
Why use CD-ROM?
CD-ROM includes most of the features of conventional online searching of remote databases, such as Boolean searching.
However, unlike online searching, there is no charge for computer connect time.
Although the Library has to pay for the discs, no further costs are involved in searching.
In this respect, CD-ROMS have more in common with printed abstracts and indexes, so Library users can search them directly at no cost to themselves.
Searching is easy and quick
The search software is user-friendly, with menu-driven commands, colour screens and help facilities, and users are able to carry out searches themselves with little or no instruction from library staff.
The results of a search can be stored on a floppy disc or printed out.
Details of the costs of these additional services are available on request in the Library.
When can I use the CD-ROMS?
There is a booking system for the use of the CD-ROMs and readers can book one hour sessions in advance, either in person or by telephone.
The CD-ROMs currently available in SSL include Science Citation Index, Compendex, FAME, Predicasts F&S and PolTox.
For a full list of the CD-ROMS, either ask at the Enquiry desk in the Library, or call us on one of the telephone extensions given in the information panel.