

CHIEF EXECUTIVE'S COLUMN
Pulling together
Some years ago a presenter at a seminar on project management referred to the Taylor Woodrow logo and said he had often wondered who was on the other end of the rope.
His suggestion, ‘the professional team’, brought peals of laughter.
This thought occurred to me as I was reflecting on an article which suggested that the industry's problems of yesterday were very much the same as those of today and that no real progress was possible because of the vested interest of the institutions of the industry.
This may be partly true but I believe that since the 1970s profound changes have taken place within the industry due to external pressures.
The dissatisfaction of the industry's clients opened the door for alternative methods of building procurement which changed the relationships of those involved in building.
Adversarial attitudes still exist and the Government is exerting pressure on the industry to tackle this problem.
But the industry itself can generate change.
The Construction industry Council is becoming increasingly influential and now speaks on behalf of all industry professionals.
The industry still has problems but I sense an increasing willingness for its component parts to work together for the common good.
Would this be an opportune time to suggest a move to help reduce the fragmentation of the industry?
Suppose a Royal Society of Building were formed as the professional home for all the professionals involved in building.
The institutions which joined would retain their identity and members would retain their existing designations as well as receive new ones.
All resources would be pooled which would greatly enhance the services which could be offered to members of the new society.
Perhaps this is an idea too early for its time, or perhaps not.
What do you think — do let me know.
Rocking the boat
The last thing the construction industry needs right now is instability.
Yet the Cabinet reshuffle has once again set the boat rocking by bringing in a new Secretary of State for the Environment — the third change in the DoE hot seat in the last 18 months.
Only time will tell if John Gummer has the political clout — or inclination — to throw real weight behind the construction industry as it struggles out of recession.
For now we can only hope that both he and the government appreciate the industry's need for a firm and steady hand at the tiller.
We have suffered too much rough weather over the last few years to fall victim now to storms in the Cabinet.
Robert Wharton becomes CIOB President
Robert Wharton F was formally sworn in as the new President of the CIOB at the Institute's Annual General Meeting on June 30 at its headquarters building in Englemere, Ascot.
Mr. Wharton is a founding partner of the multi-national High Point plc consultancy organisation, and has moved into a non-executive role as Deputy Chairman of the group in order to devote more time to his Presidential activities.
He has a long involvement with the Institute stretching back over four decades and until recently was Chairman of the Membership Board as well as being Senior Vice President.
Membership development will be one of his key priorities during his year in office.
He has said one of his main goals will be to encourage promotion of the benefits of membership.
.
Robert Wharton [centre], CIOB President, presenting a BS5750 certificate to BBS Construction recently.
He is shown above with the company's Managing Director Peter Bowles M [left]and Tony Booth, Director
High profile speaker for the Duke of Edinburgh Lecture
Newly elected Welsh Secretary John Redwood MP addressed CIOB members and guests recently at the 14th Duke of Edinburgh Lecture.
Mr. Redwood, who was Minister for Local Government and Inner Cities before the latest Cabinet re-shuffle, is an enthusiastic supporter of public and private partnerships in the rejuvenation of urban areas.
His lecture, on Building and the Built Environment, took place at the Royal Garden Hotel in London.
Delegates explore environment
The Chartered Institute of Building together with John Horwood Consultants Ltd and Aspects International Ltd recently held a one-day awareness seminar on the requirements and effects of the Environmental Protection Act.
Delegates explored the implications and responsibilities which the act poses for companies.
A further seminar will be held at CIOB Headquarters on October 5.
VIP status for members
CIOB members, who make up the single biggest group of professional visitors to Interbuild, are to be offered complimentary Select Gold membership at the show.
Organisers have given presentations to several CIOB regions on the plans for Interbuild ‘93.
Select Gold provides access to VIP facilities such as separate entrances, a clubroom and pre show information pack.
Interbuild is at the NEC in Birmingham from November 28 to December 3.
PM backs CBC scheme
The Prime Minister, John Major, has thrown his weight behind the Chartered Building Company Scheme by welcoming what has been termed the ‘citizens charter for construction’.
In a letter to the Institute, Mr. Major offers his congratulations to Bovis Construction Ltd on becoming the 200th company to join the newly launched Chartered Building Company Scheme, which he calls ‘a testimony to the British building industry in its determination to achieve ever improving standards’.
The scheme, launched by Michael Howard in May, has so far attracted a large number of national and other contractors, and has been given widespread support from both Government and consumer associations.
‘This validation from the Prime Minister has come at an important time for the industry as it strives to get up off its knees,’ said Keith Banbury, Chief Executive.
‘The Institute is greatly encouraged by the success of the scheme to date and the PM's support will give us added impetus’.
Mr. Major's letter commends the scheme as one which ‘will encourage higher standards’, and lead to ‘a greater recognition of the professionalism which is the hallmark of the industry.’
‘I am also pleased to know,’ said Mr. Major, ‘that the scheme is clearly linked to the Citizens Charter and is being seen as a ‘Charter for Construction’.
Your response to the Charter initiative will do much to ensure the industry's place as one of the world leaders in building’.
A series of CBC promotional days were held throughout the country during June to promote the scheme.
The promotions brought valuable publicity on radio stations and in newspapers all over the UK, and have led to an increase in enquiries about the scheme.
.
John Major meets the CIOB: from left John Trussler, CIOB Past President; Anne Trussler; John Major; Rachel Banbury; and Keith Banbury, Chief Executive
Christopher Laing becomes NPFA Chairman
Christopher Laing, Immediate Past President of the CIOB, has been elected as Chairman of the National Playing Fields Association [NPFA], the charity of recreational space.
He succeeds Gyles Brandreth MP who led the charity for four years.
Honour for Institute Fellow
Dr Dennis Strongitharm F has been awarded Honorary Life Membership in recognition of his outstanding service to the Institute.
Now an education and training consultant, Dr. Strongitharm has made a substantial contribution to building education and has worked tirelessly for the Institute for almost 30 years.
Until 1988 he was Chief Inspector of Further & Higher Education of ILEA.
Bank Watch prompts questions in the House
The Institute's Bank Watch initiative is to be championed in the House of commons amid continued concern about the attitude of banks towards the construction industry.
A new survey recently published by the CIOB found that three quarters of the members surveyed believed that the banks have a negative policy towards the construction industry.
The survey, part of the CIOB's Bank Watch campaign, caused Liberal Democrat spokesman on Housing, Nigel Jones, to table questions in the Commons.
‘These statistics show a worsening of relations between banks and construction that can only be detrimental to the country pulling out of recession.
I will be asking the Government to intervene between the banks and the building industry to establish if there is a national banking policy against the construction industry’.
As well as political action, the CIOB is also in the process of talking to the main clearing banks.
The BEC has accepted an invitation to attend the talks.
‘We intend to establish what the attitude of the financial institutions is to the industry,’ said CIOB Commercial Director Julian Barlow.
‘This is the first quantitative review of builders and the banks and the results are highly worrying’.
New Membership Board Chairman
Bernard Axford F has been appointed as Chairman of the CIOB Membership Board to replace Robert Wharton, the Institute's new President.
the appointment took place following a meeting of the Board on June 8.
NEWS IN BRIEF PRIZE:The Midland Study Centre prize for excellence in Construction Project Management has been won by Adrian Wheeler M. He started the MSc in Construction Project Management at the Centre, which is at the University of Central England, in 1990 sponsored by Dudley Health Authority where he was employed as capital works officer.
TRADE:The gradual improvement in trade has held for the first four months of 1993 according to the Builders Merchants Federation.
The latest survey of its members shows that, nationally, sales during April — compared with April last year — were 1.9 per cent up.
Sales for the three months ending April were 1.6 per cent more than those for the same quarter in 1992.
CONFERENCE:The Faculty of the Built Environment at the University of Greenwich has organised a conference on construction opportunities in Russia.
The two day event, which will take place on July 13 and 14 at the Church Hall Conference Centre in Westminster, London, will offer a range of seminars and workshops with eminent British and Russian speakers.
PAPER:A new BRE paper, ‘Information paper 11/93: Ecolabelling of building materials and building products’, summarises recent developments and the difficulties involved in developing an environmental labelling system for building components.
The paper describes the EC Ecolabelling scheme and identities similar schemes operating in other countries.
CORRECTION:Our June feature on redundancy may have given some readers the impression that redundancy pay is based on full pay, which is incorrect.
The total pay which is reckoned is subject to a limit which is reviewed annually.
CIOB Launches Campus journal.
A new magazine for student members of the CIOB is being launched in October.
Campus Construction, believed to be the first journal of its type for students of construction, is being published by the Institute's Commercial Directorate and will initially appear three times a year.
The launch follows 12 months of development and consultation with students and academics.
The editorial contents will be designed to provide a back-up to course work and a bridge between the college experience and the realities of working on site.
A referred section of academic papers will form a central part of the magazine.
The journal's editorial advisory panel is being chaired by Professor Michael Romans F, CIOB Vice President.
‘The CIOB identified a need for this magazine and has taken action to meet that need.
Campus Construction is a completely new concept for students with new material and new ideas’, he said.
European and international coverage is to be given a high profile in the magazine, reflecting the Institute's global membership.
‘I particularly welcome the international dimension of the proposed magazine’, said Michael Brown, Director of Education.
‘It recognises that the student membership of this Institute now spans 50 countries around the world’.
Dr. Richard Fellows F has agreed to head the Referee Panel.
Students will receive Campus Construction instead of chartered Builder.
they can, however, opt to receive Chartered Builder as well for an annual subscription of £5.00.
Campus Construction will also be available to other members for £5.00 per year.
Field narrows in BMYA adjudication process
Interviews have now been held in Categories I and III of this year's Building Manager of the Year Awards and the adjudicating panel is well on its way to a final selection The final results of the Awards, sponsored by Chaffoteaux et Maury and organised by the CIOB with Building, will be kept under wraps until the Awards Dinner at the Royal Lancaster Hotel in London on October 7.
This year's judges were: John Yadoo F [chairman], a past Chairman of the London Region; David Bateman F, Deputy chairman of the Institute's Building Management Committee; Victor Michael F, chairman of the CIOB Facilities Management Committee; Ian Wylie F; John Shiner F; and Ken Spry F, a Past Chairman of Southern Region.
Patrick Cullimore F, Practice Development Manager at the CIOB, organised the judging and Ron Ridout F, Technical Services Manager, is Secretary of the Category III judging panel.
The sponsors of the BMYA, Chaffoteaux et Maury, have announced the appointment of Brian Price as Managing Director of the UK company.
Focus on facilities management
The CIOB recently played host to a group of senior executives in the field of facilities management at its first seminar on the subject.
Entitled Facilities Management — The Total Product, it was organised by the Facilities Management Committee under the Chairmanship of Vic Michel F. the event drew interest from a wide range of public and private sector organisations.
Market Trends
Despite a slight drop in new construction orders in May, compared with April, there has been an overall nationwide upward tend in the five months since last December, according to the latest figures prepared exclusively for Chartered Builder by Bournemouth based Glenigan Limited.
At £1,622 million, the May figure was less than two percent down on the April total of £1,651 million.
This was largely attributable to the fall in the industrial sector in the month.
May declined 58 per cent, from £445 million in April to £188 million.
The South, which incorporates London and the Home Counties, fared particularly badly, plummeting from £278 million in April to just £22 million in May.
However it should be borne in mind that this is a particularly volatile sector of the market and April's figure was the peak monthly performer since last August.
The regional picture for the month was patchy.
The South West, Midlands and East Anglia all turned in improved figures, while the other four regions each fell back.
Residential work declined for the third successive month, although it has to be said that the average monthly value since the start of the year is higher than for the last five months of 1992.
The work out to tender topped the £2,000 million mark in May for the third time since August of last year.
At £2,077 million it was just over 26 per cent up on April, and 52 per cent up on the corresponding month in 1992.
Every category recorded an improvement and only the South West and East Anglia fell back from the April figures.
The North, Wales and Scotland each recorded significant percentage increases during the month.
The overall national trend in the work out to tender continued to display its upward trend from the middle of 1991, albeit somewhat erratically.
Conversely, work at the plans approved stage continued its three-year plus decline.
In May, work at the plans approved stage dipped by 38 percent, from £1,381 million to £859 million, to its lowest level this year.
Every region reported a decline when compared to April's figures.
Commercial work showed the largest fall, from £707 million in April to £185 million in May, a decline of nearly 74 percent.
The work at early planning also fell back during the month.
The May figure of £6,659 million was a 24 percent decline from April's £8,728 million.
This is the second successive monthly fall, following the encouraging month-on-month improvements between December and March.
However, when compared to the same month last year, the May value is a 49 per cent improvement, and the trend from the beginning of 1992 remained upwards.
STRATEGIC PLAN
Two years ago the Chartered Institute of Building embarked on a five-year Strategic Plan to develop a more influential role in the building industry in both the United Kingdom and overseas.
The plan has ten key priorities with specific action points that provide a framework for the Institute's activities over each 12-month period.
They represent the Institute's continued commitment to enhancing its reputation, growing in membership, increasing the resources at its disposal and raising the status of the industry.
Here we review the significant progress made during Year Two of the plan, and look ahead to the action that will be taken during Year Three.
1 Wider recognition
In the UK there remain very few barriers to formal recognition of the Institute's qualifications.
The most important task now is to promote to potential employers the benefit of employing members of this Institute.
Overseas, submissions have been made to the Governments in the Republic of Ireland and Hong Kong followed by a series of meetings.
In both countries considerable progress has been made towards a favourable outcome.
Action plan
Wider recognition is to be sought with:
The Governments of the Republic of Ireland, Hong Kong, Malaysia and Singapore.
PS
The DOE Works Service and local government in Northern Ireland.
PS
The Bar Council, to allow members direct access to barristers.PS
Banks, building societies and insurance companies in relation to building survey work.PS
Housing Associations.PS
2 Professional Services
The development and successful launch of the Chartered Building Company Scheme is one of the most significant achievements of the Institute in recent years.
A Consultant's Register has been published for the first time, and the Technical Information Service successfully relaunched as the Construction Information File.
Considerable enhancements are being made to the services in the Library and the Bookshop through new computer systems.
Action Plan
Increase the number of chartered Building Companies and continue to promote the benefits of employing such companies to clients of the industry.PS/C
Undertake a comprehensive survey of members' professional activities and interests as a basis for involving a larger proportion of members in Institute affairs.PS
Identify the Institute's future role in building research and priorities for action.PS
Help prepare members to take on new responsibilities arising from the Construction [Design and Management]Regulations.PS
Continue to develop the profile of the Institute and its members in Project Management.PS
Implement the first stage of proposals for the further development of information technology in the Information Resource Centre.PS
Assess the level of management skills amongst specialist and trade contractors in order to determine the Institute's role in developing these.PS
Help the Regions and Branches develop a higher profile for professional services activities in their areas.PS/C
3 Education and training
Considerable progress has been made in the development of the Institute's new professional examinations.
The CIOB is now a joint awarding body with the CITB for accredited NVQ's and SVQ's in Building Site Supervision [level 3]and Building Site Management [level 4], and the SMETS curriculum has been revised to support these qualifications.
The Institute's new accreditation requirements have been approved and a register of accreditation visitors set up and training commenced.
Action Plan
Approve, publish and promote the curriculum and assessment requirements of the new modular professional examinations and graduate training programme.
E
Approve, publish and promote the new exemption policy and procedures for Masters Degree programmes.E
Publish and promote the revised curriculum requirements for the Site Management Education and Training Scheme.E
Establish the joint awarding body arrangements for the Scottish and National vocational Qualifications in Building Site Supervision [level 3]and Building Site Management [level 4].
E.
Promote these S/NVQ's and explore the diversity of opportunity for their implementation.E.
Commence a review of the exception status of external qualifications against the requirements of the new modular professional examinations.E
Develop strategies with Regional CPD Officers for the furtherance of continuing professional development.E
Implement proposals of the Membership Growth Working Party.
E
Review the effectiveness and potential of the Institute's regional promotional network.E/C
Promote the benefits of student membership.E/C
Campaign to reinstate members who resigned or were terminated during the recession.E
Identify new areas for student work placements.E
4 Future framework
The title of the Institute and corporate members has been reviewed and following a consultation exercise with members the decision has been taken that a change would be inappropriate.
A Code of Practice for Project Management has been published and proved to be one of the most successful Institute publications in recent years.
It has helped to reinforce the important contribution the Institute and its members can make in this area.
Action Plan
Formally press Privy council to allow the use of membership designations by non-corporate members.CE
Develop the role of the Institute as a professional body for those involved in Facilities Management.PS
Implement the –Special Examination– for an eminent person's route to Institute membership.E
Establish a Women in Building Consultative Committee under the Membership Board.E
5 Environmental issues
The importance of environmental issues has been raised by a series of articles in Chartered Builder.
At the same time the Institute has obtained DOE funding for two research projects — one directed at reducing waste materials on building sites and improving recycling, and the other for the development and publication of a loose-leaf Environmental Site Handbook.
Action Plan
Complete the research project directed at reducing waste materials on site and improving arrangements for recycling, and publish results.PS
Publish the Environmental Site Handbook.
Review the implications of BS7750 on Environmental Management for Institute members.PS
6 European dimension
The Institute has been instrumental in the establishment of the European Council for Building Professionals.
Contact has been made with professional and educational institutions in many of the other Member States and CIOB members are now seeking recognition through the First General Directive in a number of countries.
Procedures for EC migrants seeking membership of the CIOB has been finalised.
Action Plan
formalise procedures for EC migrants  seeking membership of the CIOB.
E
Assist in the development and activities of the European Council for Building Professionals.PS
Draw up a series of information sheets to assist members wishing to work and obtain recognition for their qualifications in other Member States.
PS/E
Develop the Institute's profile in the key Member States of the EC.
PS/E
Develop the role of the Information Resource Centre as a source of information about Europe.
PS
7 International influence
An international reciprocity agreement has been signed with the American Council for Construction Education [ACCE]and arrangements made for developing Institute Membership in the United States.
The Institute now has its first two corporate members in China and has a number of other students in that country sitting its examinations.
A Working Party to review the Institute's international role has been set up and its work is nearing completion.
Action Plan
Finalise the Report of the International Working Party, seek National Council's agreement on how to proceed, and begin to implement the resulting policies.
CE/E
Review international reciprocity agreements against revised policy.
E
Encourage international Branches and Centres to develop strategies for enhancing the profile of the Institute, and promoting membership growth.
E/C
Promote student, graduate and corporate membership in the USA and establish arrangements for the administration and conduct of professional interviews.
E/C
Support the American Institute of Constructors in developing the Certified Constructor qualification.
E
In china, assist in the development of courses leading to Institute membership.
E
8 Public image
Media coverage of the CIOB has increased significantly and for the first time coverage has been obtained at national level on television, radio and in the press.
The Institute's political profile has also risen with senior Government Ministers now regularly attending Institute events and also attendance at the Conservative Party Conference.
A regional PR strategy has been developed with the help of nationwide seminars.
Significant sponsorship has been attracted to the Building Manager of the Year Awards, and the profile of this event has risen considerably.
Action Plan
Implement regional PR/Press initiative put forward by Regional Press Working Party.
C
Establish, on a rotational basis, PR surgeries to assist regional officers.
C
Continue to develop the profile and financial independence of the Building Manager of the Year.
C/PS
Launch and establish a separate student publication.C
Examine the role and participation of the editorial boards for all the Institute journals.
C
Review existing, and develop new, promotional literature/material.
C/PS/E
9 Pan-industry links
The Institute has played a major part in the development of the Construction Industry Council and the policies it has developed on the key issues affecting the industry.
At the same time close links have been maintained through Presidential and staff meetings with other professional bodies and trade associations.
Action Plan
Continue to support the Construction Industry Council in its increasingly influential role with Government.
ALL
Work with other institutions to implement the Government, proposals for Approved Building Inspectors.
PS
Continue to develop effective links with trade and other organisations at member and staff level.
ALL
10 Administration
The Institute has become the first professional institution to be registered for its headquarters administrative operations under BS 5750.
A Benevolent Fund has been established and been able to help an increasing number of members facing hardship.
A new computer system has been installed which will eventually bring together the membership data base, accounting system, and word processing facilities.
Action Plan
Finalise transfer to new computer system, thereby integrating main Institute IT needs.
FA
Develop and maintain a process of improving efficiency and effectiveness of Institute operations helped by on-going support of/from BS5750.
ALL
Undertake a job evaluation exercise of all staff at Englemere.
FA
Train and develop all employees with respect to objectives of the Strategic Plan.
ALL
Prepare a business plan for the development of commercially related activities.
C
Review publishing policy.
C
VIEWPOINT
The search for energy efficient buildings may have put technical advancement before the needs of occupants, argue Professor Thomas Campbell and Ronald Campbell of the Building Services Centre at Glasgow Caledonian University.
Intelligent Buildings Too smart for their own good?
One of the seemingly least observed phenomena of the post war era has been the rise in the white collar workforce and the corresponding provision of modern commercial office accommodation that has changed the industrial landscape.
As the number of clerical factories has increased, so too has the sophistication of building and maintenance techniques, with the consequence that some buildings are now regarded as ‘smart’ or ‘intelligent’.
However some would argue that such definitions are misplaced or misleading since there is an important variable missing from these models, the link between motivation and productivity.
For those involved in the built environment what may be required in a shift towards a design approach that combines the skills of the architect with those of the surveyor and the building services engineer.
All of the building professionals should be involved from the early design stages to ensure that the finished product matches the needs of the occupants.
Cognisance should also be taken be taken by these professionals of the relevance of those aspects of management theory which place considerable weight on the human side of production.
There is a mistaken notion that building intelligence relates to technological sophistication and energy saving rather than the provision of an optimal comfort environment for the occupants.
Both building professionals and production managers are concerned with providing a working environment that optimises productive capacity.
Although building professionals may not have to manage workers in the building, this does not mean they can ignore the elements of motivation and job satisfaction.
Manufacturing managers are aware of the need to motivate the workforce and of the profusion of management theories, from Taylor's scientific management to Demming's 2 fourteen points.
The traditional role of the building professional, however, has been to provide commercial buildings with services related to basic environmental control solutions and low running costs, especially if it is speculative development.
Consider the use of building energy management systems [BEMS]which control the office environment.
It is claimed that such systems satisfy heating requirements at a reasonable cost.
The systems work even more efficiently when the building structure is sealed and most of the air is re-circulated.
The windows are not designed for ventilation, but to admit daylight and control solar gain.
Under such circumstances it is much easier to satisfy the comfort recommendations: CIBSE 3, for sedentary populations engaged in light activities.
Add to this the development in artificial lighting where the emphasis tends to be on cost saving and it is not surprising to find that this preference has more to do with the building professional's training than satisfying the needs of the occupants.
Perhaps the most controversial development has been the introduction of centralised control systems that deny the occupants the choice of temperature, lighting and ventilation control over their immediate environment.
In effect the building professional has developed a system that is technically cost effective and sophisticated, though not necessarily one that optimises human comfort.
If it fails this latter test then it is difficult to attach the label of intelligence to it, for surely the raison d'etre of a commercial building is the provision of an environment that maximises comfort and organisational efficiency at a reasonable cost.
On the question of cost it is estimated 4 that the cost of providing an efficient workspace is around £12P/m.sq. per annum whereas the same workspace has to generate revenue in the region of £2000 to £4000 per annum.
The building professions are now questioning this rush to implement sophisticated technical systems that may not be advantageous for the occupiers.
Industrial managers and behavioural scientists have long been aware of the need to introduce choice and control in the workplace.
A classic experiment in the U.S. by Glass and Singer 5 demonstrated that people will perform more productively if they have more control over their environment.
Other studies 6 suggest that lack of choice and control are demotivators and recent surveys 7 seem to confirm that the absence of local light switches and thermostats, as well as windows that cannot be opened, detracts from occupant satisfaction.
In the UK there are cases where office workers have to be allowed extended breaks in summer because their building's machinery was unable to handle the increased heat generated by its glass facade.
If it is accepted that the office has become the most common working environment for the majority of the population then it seems increasingly important that those involved in the design, construction and maintenance of them have an understanding of modern management techniques and their implications for employee efficiency.
Perhaps then a change in emphasis away from technological advancement for the sole reason of energy saving and control, to technological advancement for occupant satisfaction and concomitant increased productivity is what is required.
INSURANCE
Ten steps to peace of mind
Insurance expert John Carrier provides a step-by-step guide to getting the right cover for your building operations at the right price.
If you use woodworking machinery does your insurance policy cover you?
Is there a maximum height of working above which your policy does not operate?
Is demolition work covered?
How is your insurance affected if you use blow lamps or hot air guns?
If you are unable to answer any of these questions, perhaps it is time you considered your insurance requirements.
When you are looking for insurance cover or considering the renewal of an existing policy the first thing you should consider is who to insure through.
You can either deal directly with an insurance company through one of its tied agents or you can deal with an independent intermediary [a broker or agent].
The easiest way to find the wide range of cover you need at a competitive price is with a policy which packages together a number of covers and is specially designed for a certain group such as self-employed tradesmen.
An intermediary will provide information on the best overall deal for you and work to obtain the most competitive premium from the wide range of insurers and policies on offer.
This expertise and independence can save you both time and money.
An added benefit is that if you need to make a claim you know it's part of the intermediary's daily routine so they can help you to minimise inconvenience and disruption to your business.
If you deal with a tied agent or direct with an insurance company you can ask how the cover offered meets your requirements, but you will need to shop around to determine the best option for you in terms of cover and price.
Because of the advantages of dealing with independent intermediaries, some insurance companies, such as NIG Skandia, have made the strategic decision to deal solely through intermediaries.
This puts a healthy pressure on the insurer to provide good quality policies and back them up with a fast and fair administrative and claims service.
Choosing a policy
When you are reviewing your insurance needs there are a number of important points to consider:
1
Think about what cover you require.
If you have employees you are required by law to insure against your legal liability for injuries to employees happening at work.
You will need public liability insurance to cover you in case you or one of your employees accidentally injures someone or damages property.
You may also need cover for tools or equipment used by you and your employees.
2
What policy limits apply?
These are the maximum amounts the insurance company will pay for a claim per section.
These may be fixed or you may be able to choose limits which reflect the size of your business.
3
Most policies for tradesmen are subject to excesses [excluding the employers' liability section].
This is the first amount of any claim you will have to pay yourself.
check what excesses apply to the various sections of the policy — these will differ from insurer to insurer.
4
Make sure you understand any exclusions or special conditions that apply to your policy.
For example, injury or damage caused by the use of woodworking machinery [other than portable tools]may be specifically excluded unless you ask for it to be included and pay an additional premium.
Ask your intermediary for a full explanation of cover if you're not sure.
5
It's important that you give an accurate description of your occupation to your intermediary or insurer as this will affect your premium and the terms and conditions of your policy.
You must also remember to tell your insurer if the nature of your work changes in any way or you could find that your policy is inoperative should you need to make a claim.
6
Find out what steps the insurance company will expect you to take to protect your property and minimise risk.
For example, cover is unlikely to operate for tools and equipment if left unattended and not securely locked up.
Any requirements should be communicated to your staff.
7
Does the policy offer any extra benefits?
Some policies include use of legal assistance helplines which provide practical informed advice on any commercial legal problem related to your business.
8
Making a claim may be the last thing on your mind but it is a good idea to ask your intermediary about the quality of the claims service given by an insurance company.
The speed with which the insurer deals with claims could be vital to your business survival.
9
How do you want to pay your premiums?
Paying insurance premiums by instalments will help your cash flow and most insurers offer ways to spread the cost.
The credit terms and cost differ from company to company so it is important to compare the total amount you will pay.
10
Make sure you are insuring with a reliable insurance company.
All UK insurers must be approved by the DTI who monitor their financial health to ensure adequate solvency margins and stability.
Most companies are also members of the Association of British Insurers.
John Carrier is assistant General Manager for NIG Skandia, a member of the Association of British Insurers.
The company specialises in commercial, motor and home policies.
EDUCATION & TRAINING Source Book — Part Four
NVQs — qualifications of competence
Studying Euro-speak — preparing students for Europe
the Directory — course and colleges
MAINTENANCE ROUTE TO RECOGNITION
A specifically maintenance orientated course of study is offered by the CIOB's Diploma in Maintenance Management.
Ian Barker, who recently completed the course at Wigan College, said the course has given him both invaluable background and new direction in what is too often seen as the poor relation of the building industry.
‘The importance of maintenance as a specialist element within the sphere of building is undeniable and yet so often we are portrayed as unprofessional and given little credence.
The Diploma in Maintenance Management is a start.
By creating a recognised academic route the professionalism we deserve can be achieved,’ he said.
Training on television
Trafalgar House Construction's Open Learning Centre is using a television-based management training resource as a key element in the development of management skills and work based competence.
Executive Business Club [EBC]broadcasts one hour of management training programming a week, 50 weeks a year, via BBC Select, the subscription television service.
Each EBC member receives a licence to copy programmes.
For Trafalgar House, whose Open Learning facility is open to 1000 staff throughout the country, this was a major benefit.
Mike Johnson, Trafalgar House's Open Learning Manager, said ‘The benefit of EBC is that it builds into a permanent resource library that can be continually used and referred to’.
‘It is an inexpensive way of providing managers with the training they need’.
New curriculum nears completion
Consultation with the Institute's Regions on the new educational framework has been completed.
A third draft of the document is now being produced and this will go through the Institute's approval procedures before being put forward for ratification by National Council in October.
The new educational framework, which has been through an extensive consultation process with practice committees and the Regions, will replace the current Member Part 1 and 11 examinations and will be phased in from September next year.
It provides a modular course of study with a total of 360 credits which candidates must gain in order to qualify, and is equivalent to an honours degree.
Seventy five per cent of the modules will be common to all courses but at the professional studies level candidates will have a choice of four study routes to follow: construction management, commercial management, facilities management and project management.
Around 50 academics have been involved in developing the new curriculum.
Revised policy for CIOB accreditation
Exemption for all or part of the CIOB professional examinations is offered to appropriate cognate degrees, non-cognate degrees, masters degrees and sub-degree level vocational programmes of study.
The Institute has introduced a revised policy for accrediting external courses which allow full exemption from its own professional examinations.
Changes in the structure of higher education have required professional institutions such as the CIOB to set up rigorous accreditation systems to verify the level and appropriateness of academic awards for which full exemption is sought.
The process requires educational establishments to provide accreditation documentation and permit an accreditation visit by the CIOB to the establishment.
When accrediting courses the CIOB looks at curriculum content and delivery, but focuses on the educational outcomes.
Therefore it will not normally proceed with an accreditation visit until at least one cohort of students has completed the course of study.
Teaching establishments should register their intention to seek accreditation for a new course as soon as possible so that Candidate Status may be approved and a provisional date for an accreditation visit booked.
US interview structure takes shape
Moves towards increasing CIOB membership in the United States are continuing with the establishment of training programmes for the people who will carry out the professional interviews.
Ongoing promotion of Institute membership is bringing in a steady stream of enquiries from potential members.
Cheryl Harris, Executive Director of the American Institute of Constructors, is the CIOB's Professional Interview co-ordinator in the US.
IN BRIEF UNIVERSITY STATUS: The Privy Council has granted Luton College the power to award its own research degrees and the college will now be applying for a change of title to the University of Luton.
The move follows approval in 1992 for the college to award its own taught undergraduate and master degrees and was the final hurdle to overcome in the college's bid for university status.
PROPERTY CHAIR: A new Chair in Property Development and Asset Management is to be sponsored in the Department of Surveying at the University of Salford by the RICS North West University Trust.
The holder of the new Chair will lead a team who will research the area and create a new undergraduate Honours Degree programme in Property Development and Asset Management with European Studies.
FACILITIES: Lloyd's, WS Atkins and Balfour Beatty are among several big names who have collaborated with the North East College of Technology [NESCOT]in Epsom to develop a package of advanced courses in facilities management.
From October this year NESCOT's Faculty of Construction will be offering HND, BSc [Hons]and MSc courses in Facilities Management, all on either a full or part-time basis.
The aim is to create a full-time route into facilities management for school leavers and to provide those already working in the p profession with a means of gaining specialist qualifications.
SPECIAL FOCUS:EDUCATION AND TRAINING
NVQs QUALIFYING MANAGEMENT COMPETENCE
The recent launch of National Vocational Qualifications for site managers and supervisors has provided an important new measure of competence at the actual work-face.
Together with existing course-based awards, they offer the best means yet of identifying those who are qualified to do the job in every sense of the word.
The building site has become the latest testing ground for construction professionals with the launch of National Vocational Qualifications [NVQs]for site managers and supervisors.
The NVQs, which have been pioneered by the CIOB with the support of the Construction Industry Training Board [CITB], provide the first ever nationally recognised assessment of management and supervisory competence on site.
They were given the go-ahead for England and Wales by the National Council for Vocational Qualifications [NCVQ]in June, and as we went to press were awaiting final approval from the equivalent Scottish body, SCOTVEC, and Northern Ireland.
They are the latest development in an initiative which began in 1975 when a group of industry representatives launched the Site Management Education and Training Scheme.
Since then the CIOB has played a leading role in developing and launching qualifications for construction managers and supervisors — namely the Site Supervisory Certificate, Site Management Certificate and Site Management Diploma.
These are all course awards, based on training and assessments such as tests of knowledge, simulated skill tests, projects and assignments.
the launch of the new NVQs, however, has brought a totally new type of qualification within reach of managers, one based on an assessment of occupational evidence provided by the candidate to prove job competence.
Assessment
Instead of sitting an examination or preparing a project, the candidate will be assessed on physical items of work such as project programmes, site diaries, orders and observations of site performance.
Attainment of the competence award is not limited by any specific time period or course length, so candidates will be able to come forward for assessment whenever they have accumulated the required evidence of competence against national standards.
The NVQs are not designed as alternatives to the course awards, and candidates will not need any formal qualifications to apply for assessment.
Instead they are seen as a complementary qualification which can stand alone or be combined with a certificate and diploma or other building qualification to provide all round evidence of competence.
Candidates can also choose to take a course and, at the same time, begin to gather evidence of competence for assessment.
NVQs are part of a government scheme to establish a national framework of qualifications across all industries.
They are awarded at five levels with an overlap on Level Three so that Levels One to Three cover craft skills and Three to Five cover technical, managerial and professional tasks.
The NVQs being awarded by the CIOB and CITB are at Level Three for supervisors and Level Four for managers.
Role
The CIOB's ongoing role is to approve and accredit NVQ assessment centres all around the country, and to quality assure those centres to ensure that standards are maintained.
The CITB will administer the NVQs and keep records of units achieved by candidates.
As well as the significant contribution made by the CIOB and its members in the development process the work has been funded by the Employment Department and the CITB.
Although many of the   assessment centres are expected to be linked to colleges and universities, they are also likely to be set up by private consultants, individual companies and even groups of companies working together.
The actual assessment process is modular and candidates can build up credits for the individual units [above and below]which make up the NVQ.
Once registered the candidate prepares a plan of action for obtaining evidence of existing competence and achieving the outstanding competence needed to complete the NVQ.
This may involve further training or the gaining of occupational experience in new areas.
Once collected, the evidence is presented to the assessor and the candidate attends an interview at which his or her competence is judged.
Flexibility is a key part of the actual delivery of the qualifications.
The roles of assessment centre manager, adviser and assessor can be combined in a number of ways to provide candidates with easy access to the support they need to qualify.
A large company, for example, could take on responsibility for all three roles.
The personnel or training manager would administer the programme and the candidate would be supported by his or her line manager.
Assessment could then be carried out by another manager who is either more senior or who is removed from direct line management of the candidate.
The evidence required includes testimony from various managers, a portfolio of documentary evidence and reports, a site visit by the assessor and an interview — sometimes on site.
In a small firm the programme could be administered by a company director, with the candidate again being supported by a line manager.
Assessment, however, would be carried out by an external assessor who would look at testimonies from the line manager and company director, and a portfolio of documentary evidence and reports.
The assessor would also carry out a site visit and interview with the candidate.
Feedback
The standards for the NVQs were circulated widely throughout the industry for consultation and discussion during the development phase, and later presented at a number of national CIOB seminars.
Intensive assessment trials followed involving employers, CIOB course centres and trial candidates to highlight areas of concern and iron out any potential difficulties in the collection of occupational evidence.
The trials revealed a number of essential conditions that need to be met by all employers, assessment centres and candidates participating in the occupational competence assessment.
Employers need to be committed to providing candidates with access to and use of workplace evidence; opportunities for additional experience; testimonies of their performance; counselling and support; and, ideally, a development programme for achieving the required competencies.
The centres organising the assessment need to provide an induction process for employers and candidates; give the candidate advice on the process and guidance and counselling during the gathering and assembly of evidence; and provide assessment facilities for assessing prior and ongoing competencies.
The key requirement for the candidates, apart from access to and use of workplace evidence, is the ability to access, assemble and present the all — important evidence.
Information
Full details of the NVQs are being given in the CIOB's continuing series of seminars for centres and other interested organisations.
Further seminars are planned for the Autumn, which will include an employer awareness programme.
The NVQ standards were researched, developed and produced by John Trill F of John Trill Associates, which provides consultancy services for organisations wishing to implement occupational standards.
SPECIAL FOCUS: EDUCATION AND TRAINING
STUDYING EURO-SPEAK: Construction education and the EC playing field
Building students preparing for a career in Europe need much more than just a grounding in languages, says John Watson, student representative for the CIOB's Northern Counties Region and press officer for the Tyneside Centre.
Here he calls for unified action from education and industry to ensure that the UK's future professionals are not left in the cold.
‘Acquired language abilities can be of little or no use when it comes to examination of detailed tender documentation or foreign standard forms of contract’.
As the UK construction and property markets continue to struggle in the depths of recession, spare a few thoughts for those ‘built — environment’ graduates soon to be released into the careers market.
1993 marks the commencement of full integration of EC member states and many construction graduates are considering, for the first time, the prospect of a long-term career in Europe.
Students need to be prepared for these careers which involve direct interaction with other EC member states.
But how can UK students prepare for a ‘Euro career’?
Are educational establishments really geared up for the European challenge, and do our current measures go far enough?
The obvious requirement is competency in another European Language.
Most educational institutions fulfil this need, and many view intensive language programs [extra curricular to the first year degree courses]as the most appropriate medium to do this.
Many prospective employers view French, German, Spanish or Russian as the most practical vocational skills although these are often only required for communication and conversational situations as opposed to fluency.
It is a fact that acquired language abilities can be of little or no use when it comes to examination of detailed tender documentation or foreign standard forms of contract.
In the contractually — orientated construction and property industries this is the time to hire in real experts.
More awareness also needs to be integrated into the educational framework and programs.
Details of new or innovative products and of variances in European working practices, processes and technologies must also be examined.
The utilisation of established links between educational and professional institutions, and of mutual exchange programs, also needs to be reviewed.
Too few construction students are involved with the COMETT programme [offering European industrial placements], or the ERASMUS programme [offering European study exchanges].
The Chartered Institute of Building has recently addressed these issues through its Northern Counties Region's European Initiative.
The establishment of common exchange visits focusing on mutual recognition of professional qualifications, and the academic and professional development of inter-European ‘live projects’ has highlighted massive potential job opportunities.
Another issue which needs to be addressed is the restriction on building and construction students wanting to attend European awareness — raising events.
Although this is largely a question of over-priced business lunches, clearly out of the price range of most students, it is imperative that the ‘professionals of the future’ are not excluded and are allowed to establish early formative contracts.
The CIOB's Tyneside Centre Students Society is actively attempting to remedy this by staging lectures, such as the recent event with the Euro MEP for Tyne & Wear, Alan Donnelly.
The mixed attendance of over 60 construction professionals and students is evidence of the demand for such events.
The construction industry, despite its boom — bust nature, will regain confidence and is well placed to become a primary European export industry for the UK.
The provisions of the Maastricht Treaty will assist this move provided that the Protocols on Social Policy are fully integrated.
Any exclusion of the Social Chapter will mitigate future employment prospects for construction students because total integration of safe working practices and Health & Safety provisions is a cornerstone of our industry.
Indeed many builders feel that UK exclusion will hinder the transfer of construction workers throughout the EC and that it is only a matter of time before, say, a German worker brings a case to the European courts on the basis of discrimination in employment rights when working in the UK.
A more unified European climate offers building and construction students significantly better career prospects than they have been privy to in recent UK history.
Opportunities in other member states provide more attractive starting salaries, increased ‘Euro — awareness’ and significant personal development.
Most importantly, UK students will have the ability to compete with other EC students in more than one language, which means they will be playing on a level field.
It is up to the professional institutions, employers' organisations and educational establishments to answer these needs.
Students are willing to learn but the sooner that a collaborative and cohesive range of strategic plans is in place, the sooner we will all be able to move confidently into Europe....
John Watson is currently studying on the final year of the BSc Hons course in Building Management at the University of Northumbria at Newcastle
When the new awards are accredited the relationship between the courses and the competences awards will be as shown above.
Some candidates may choose to take a course and gather evidence of competence in parallel.
Candidates can start the process of gathering available evidence of competence during courses and have it assessed.
Subsequently, candidates can gather remaining evidence for the competence qualification
Hard hats.
Steel toe-caps.
Drag boxes.
AND hepworth clay drainage.
Hepworth BUILDING PRODUCTS
There are some site precautions you have to take by law.
Then there are others which are just common sense.
When you can't afford to take a risk with quality, Hepworth clay drainage systems are the preferred choice whatever the installation.
And where proven strength and reliability are called for, clay drainage is its own guarantee.
Being on the safe side doesn't mean throwing financial caution to the wind.
Advanced manufacturing techniques mean that clay is no more expensive to use than any other drainage material.
So whatever the installation is deep or shallow, civil or residential, make sure you use the drainage system which always has and always will protect your reputation.
Hayworth clay drainage.
HEPWORTH.
ALWAYS RIGHT ON SITE.
FITTINGS AND FINISHES
Paint selection in print
The new Permoglaze Specifiers Guide is the third in a series of tailored guides for specifiers produced by Akzo.
Following the style of the Sikkens Specifiers Guides to Woodstains and Paints and the Sandtex Specifier's Guide to Masonry Coatings, the new guide offers a step-by-step outline to the preparation of substrates for decoration, and the identification and selection of systems and products to achieve the desired finish.
Universal dimming system bridges market gap
A new universal dimming system, the MD range, has been introduced by Multiload Technology Ltd.
Designed to bridge the gap in the market between basic domestic dimmers and the more technically complex and expensive systems, the range is currently used for prestige commercial and architectural lighting.
The aim behind the range is to incorporate well-proven, state-of — of-the-art circuitry into a simple, straightforward and universal dimming system which will allow increased design and application scope at a very attractive price.
High performance from steel partitioning system
Leading partitioning manufacturer and supplier Keysan Ltd has announced a new fully relocatable steel partitioning system which is totally compatible with the company's newly launched T80 storage wall.
The new system is designed to high quality standards to appeal to large corporations and blue chip companies such as banks and building societies.
It can be used to create a uniform look at a competitive price, while maintaining flexibility for all styles of office layout.
Finishes come in vinyl, steel, melamine or real wood veneer available in either American Red Oak, Maple or Cherry.
Work as usual during refurbishment contract
The refurbishment of one of San Francisco's largest hotel, office and retail complexes is being carried out while guests, shoppers and office workers carry on business as usual, thanks to Ultra-Lite lightweight stone panels from Stone Panels Ltd.
Both the exterior facade and sixties-style interior of the Embarcadero Centre are being remodelled in French limestone, at an installed cost of 40 per cent less than the original estimates for cladding in dimensional stone.
At one sixth the weight of its dimensional stone equivalent, Ultra-Lite allows real marble or granite to be used for cladding applications which would otherwise be prohibitive due to weight or cost considerations.
Lighting the Tate
The Nomura Room at the Tate Gallery has recently undergone complete refurbishment, including a brand new lighting installation completed with lamps from Osram.
SVM Partnership, who designed the new room, recommended Osram lamps for the installation.
The company's compact fluorescent lamps were used in recessed ceiling luminaries with mirror reflectors, offering an efficient light source with long life and cool running.
Celestial star for bathroom range
Celeste is the latest collection of luxury bathroom fittings from Pegler and features sleek, sculptured contours to harmonise with to-day's bathroom suites.
To complement the styling, mixers are offered in four surface finishes, sparkling chrome, pure white, luxurious goldline and ‘graphite gold’.
The range of fittings is extensive and flexible, with four product options for the basin alone.
The dual controlled taps and mixers incorporate the latest ceramic disc operation.
PRODUCT FILE
Guide to going green
An easily accessible design guide has been launched to help in identifying the environmental impact of the systems and materials used by the construction industry.
Entitled ‘The Green Construction Handbook’, the guide was commissioned by JT Design Build.
It has been such a success within the company over recent months that JT Design Build are now making it available throughout the construction industry and to the industry's clients.
the cost if £25.00 plus £1 postage and packing.
Board provides drainage and protection
Waterproofing manufacturer RIW has launched a high density polyethylene corrugated board designed to drain ground water away from foundations and underground structures, while also acting as a protection board.
Called Double Drain, the board is designed primarily for use on vertical walls and structures in areas where there is a high water content in the ground.
By channelling water away from the structure to drainage channels the board renders any granular fill layer unnecessary.
Clay paver has shades of old York
A new flexible clay paver, the Wakefield Buff, has been launched by Redland Bricks.
The new product was created when Redland was asked to develop a paver for the Wakefield Cathedral Precinct scheme which would exactly match Wakefield Cathedral's Yorkstone fabric.
Now available as a standard product, the wire-cut paver comes in mellow buff tones which blend well with natural stone or make a striking contrast with darker pavers.
Old trooper gets design update
A redesigned rooftile with a softer, improved profile is now on the market from forticrete Roofing Products.
The Centurion now has a smoother profile and a lower step height, enhancing the tile's aesthetic appeal and also further increasing its resistance to windlift.
Special design features enable it to be laid to a rafter pitch as low as 12.5 degrees, yet still remain effective against wind-driven rain.
This is made possible by a patented transverse barrier on the upper surface of the tile, checking the flow of water.
Boiler approved for longer flues
Vaillant Thermocompact wall-hung gas boiler models VC 112E and 182E are now fully approved — BSI Kitemarked and British Gas service listed — for installations with flues up to a nominal five metres in length.
The previous maximum flue length for the 10.5kW and 18kW output boilers was three metres.
For operations above this and up to the new five metre maximum, the installer simply removes a push-fit restrictor from the appliance.
This ensures optimum boiler performance and efficiencies are maintained at all flue lengths.
New user-friendly current measurement
Conventional clamp ammeters read zero when placed around single or three phase cables carrying balanced currents.
The nett magnetic effect from contra-rotating magnetic fields can be so small as to get buried in noise.
Now a new invention, the Watsonlinc meter, will save precious time for electricians who, at present, have to access cable ends to take a reading.
Instead the new meter allows them to read current anywhere along the cable length.
Paraphone Ltd is licensing out the manufacturing and marketing of several aspects of this technology worldwide.
Multi-purpose strip offers versatile fixing
Halfen Spiro Strip, now available from fixings specialists Halfen Fixing Systems Ltd, comprises stainless steel strip twisted to form a continuous helical section to create a highly versatile, multi-purpose fixing and reinforcement building component.
The strip combines the strength and corrosion-resistance of austenitic stainless steel with secure anchorage into mortar or concrete, provided by the helical shape.
LETTERS
From product business to people culture
I was greatly encouraged by Herb Nahapiet's article in your May issue, introducing the research done at Bath.
The title, ‘Future Shape of a People Business’, reinforced my own belief that we have experienced a three-stage evolutionary cycle.
My first impression of building 30 years ago was that it was a product business.
Quite soon after that, the agenda started to emphasise plant, productivity, procurement methods and management itself.
We were then in the process phase.
Herb Nahapiet is saying that we have now, at least in the more forward looking and enlightened niches, reached the people stage.
I see the move into the people stage in building as a particular manifestation of the post — industrial culture, into which Western European societies will increasingly move.
The potential growth areas mentioned by Herb Nahapiet of repairs, maintenance and refurbishment, and partnering and joint ventures, are much more deeply embedded in the lives of people than were the products of the socially aggressive development style of the last quarter of a century.
I particularly welcome the comment which you yourself highlight which draws attention to the importance of mutual trust: ‘Clients will increasingly look for an ongoing business relationship based on mutual trust when awarding contracts’.
If that is to be so, we have to learn to understand trust we understand, say, concrete and contracts.
To this end, I contributed a brief paper, ‘Building Trust ‘, to the 1990 conference of the Association of Researchers in Construction Management [ARCOM].
A fuller treatment of trust the industry is due to appear soon as a CIOB Construction Paper.
In a paper to the 1993 ARCOM conference my colleague Margaret Hawke will be reflecting on how we perpetuate mistrust through the culture we express in the industry press.
If people and the building of not only buildings but mutual trust are to the fore, then education needs to be fundamentally different from what it was in the product and process phases.
The professional debate needs to take place on different ground and the professional service, although it may have buildings among its outputs, will have to have deep human and social insights among its inputs.
We live in exciting and challenging post-industrial times!
Up-to-date with Design & Build
The writer of the article in the June issue ‘Construction Industry — Its ailments and cures’ makes it clear by his comments that he is not up-to-date in his knowledge of our industry.
It was in the past that the developer/building owner [D/BO]said what he wanted.
The architect then showed on paper what he thought would meet those needs, with both of them relying on the practical knowledge and experience of the builder to know how the works would have to be carried out.
Under traditional contracts should the D/BO or the Architect realise after the Contract had been let that alterations would be necessary to meet the stated needs, a claims situation arose — and the builder never had to meet the cost.
Nowadays, under ‘Design & Build’, it is the man with practical experience and knowledge who guarantees that the project will meet the D/BO's needs for the previously agreed cost — and it is the builder who tells the architect what to show on the drawings [as he pays the fees].
D/BOs find many advantages in ‘dealing with one man’, especially when they find this type of contract eliminates two of the most ‘controversial’ areas of construction dispute.
CIOB Focus
Professional Services Board
Environment
Obituary
New Members
Regional News
OBITUARY
Lawrence Pearson was an outstanding man by any standards who gave prodigious service to the building industry, resulting in him being invested with the Order of the British Empire in 1976.
The family firm of M. Pearson & Son Ltd was started by his father in 1922 and built up by Lawrence to be one of the largest family companies in the North East.
By the early seventies the firm was employing over 1,000 operatives covering every aspect of building works.
At the same time he took a very active part in the National Federation of Building Trade Employers, including being National President in 1966.
Starting in 1980 Mr. Pearson became deeply involved in a farming venture but despite the creation of a highly successful Holstein show herd this investment unfortunately was largely responsible for all G.M. Pearson & Son Ltd, interests being put into Receivership in July 1986.
This regretfully brought to an abrupt end his continuing work for the Building Employers Confederation as well as destroying a lifetime's work in building up a family company.
Both he and his wife Margery had a long association with the Lake District.
It was tragically whilst travelling there on Thursday 25th February 1993 that their car ran off the road and both died as a result.
Both will be greatly missed by the large number of friends they made within the building industry and in many other walks of life.
MEMBERSHIP
Admission to Members
It is with great regret that we record the death of the following member.
FELLOWSHIP
Those in the Member class wish to transfer to Fellowship are reminded that the next meeting of the Fellowship Committee will be held on 29 September 1993.
To be eligible for transfer, applicants must:
be at least 35 years of age on the date of making application
have been in the Member class, normally 5 years
have been in what the Institute shall deem to be a very responsible position for at least 5 years
.
In order to be considered at the September meeting, members should submit their applications on Form M6 not later than 27 August 1993.
Application forms can be obtained from the Membership Development Manager at Englemere.
Successful candidates will be recorded on the court and social page of the Times.
REGIONAL FOCUS
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES BOARD
The Professional Services Board held lengthy discussions on the first draft of the Report by the Curriculum Development Group on the CIOB New Education Framework at its May meeting.
Chairman David Deas F thanked the Practice Committees for their hard work in contributing comments, which he is taking forward to the Institute's Policy and Finance Committee.
the computing and Facilities Management Practice Committees were also thanked, for their sponsorship of three recent successful seminars.
Two of the Practice Committees have vacancies.
The Building Management Committee seeks Chartered Builders who are experienced managers in the industry and the Facilities Management Committee has a vacancy for someone with a dual CIOB/CIBSE qualification.
Any volunteers are asked to contact David Young who is the staff member responsible at Englemere.
ENVIRONMENT
Agreement reached on EC environment rules
The Environment Ministers of the EEC have reached agreement on the ECO Management and Audit Scheme.
The scheme aims to promote responsible environmental management in industry.
Companies which choose to participate will have to fulfil a number of objectives which include drawing up an environmental policy; carrying out an environmental review and audit; issuing environmental statements for their sites; and having their system accredited by an independent verifier.
Companies which meet criteria will be allowed to use a logo containing a statement of their participation.
Companies which comply with BS7750 [Environmental Management]will be considered to comply with the regulation, subject to specific requirements.
The regulation will come into force early in 1995.
SCOTLAND
Cabinet Minister is guest of Scottish Branch
The Secretary of State for Scotland, Ian Lang, was the principal guest at the recent Scottish Branch Annual Dinner.
He gave an impressive speech to a receptive audience of 250 members and guests, including the then CIOB President Elect Robert Wharton and representatives of all the professional bodies prominent on the Scottish Construction scene.
Another high profile guest was the Lord Provost of Glasgow, Robert Innes.
Mr. Wharton presented Scottish Branch Graduate Awards to Shirley Craig of Glasgow Caledonian University, Andrew Brown of Napier University and Bruce Malcolm of Heriot-Watt University.
Membership Examination Awards were presented to Ian Jardine and Fergus Shaw.
The Scottish Branch Student Award was presented to Dale Carnochan.
Dundee student group stages main event
The CIOB student group at Dundee Institute of Technology held its main event of the year in May.
The event took the form of a social night and talk, and was attended by Dundee students and a group of French building exchange students.
Members and guests [shown above]heard talks on opportunities in Europe, and on the buildings and architecture of Dundee.
IRELAND
DMX course plans for Irish members
The Irish Branch [South]is considering running a Direct Membership Examination [DMX]course on a part-time basis, commencing in September/October 1993.
To be eligible, candidates should be aged 36 years or over and have worked in construction for a number of years at a senior level.
Anybody interested should write to: The Membership Officer; CIOB; 47 Seafield Court; Killiney; Co.
Dublin to arrive by 16th July 1993.
NORTHERN COUNTIES
Golfers put the CIOB on course
The Northern Counties Region held its annual golf competition at Blackwell Grange Golf Club, Darlington, recently, and used the event as an opportunity to market the CIOB in the North.
Potential, past and present sponsors were invited to take part and over dinner Chairman Mike Dickinson M outlined the forthcoming sponsorship opportunities for companies in the North.
These include the Northern Building Exhibition, the Student Challenge and the programme of events booklet.
Trophy winners on the day were Alex Hunter F, and Mr. G. Burton F. Mr. Hunter is shown above [left]receiving his award from Mike Dickinson.
YORKSHIRE
Yorkshire Region takes up Playsafe initiative
To highlight the dangers of playing on building sites the Yorkshire Region and Laing North East teamed up to hold a ‘Playsafe’ competition recently.
Roundhay School in Leeds won first prize in the poster section.
The competition, which was run in conjunction with the CITB, Sheffield Hallam University and Leeds College of Building, called on all schools in the region to produce a poster and projects to address site safety and the dangers facing children who play on building sites.
The competition left judges with the difficult task of choosing between projects ranging from video presentations, models and illustrated books to a site diary of the construction of a school.