

COMMUNITY LAUNDRY
A free laundry service for people who require frequent changes of bed sheets
What is the Community Laundry Service?
The aim of the Community Laundry Service is to help people who are incontinent or have other medical conditions and are living at home to cope with the practical problem of laundering bed sheets.
Through the Service, an initial supply of sheets is discreetly provided and thereafter a fresh supply is brought on a regular basis to each home, and the used sheets are taken away to be laundered.
There is no charge for the service.
The Service is run by Lothian Regional Council Department of Social Work and Lothian Health Board.
Who can receive the Service?
Anyone who needs the service can apply.
Here are some of the people who are benefiting from it.
Mr A is 75 and he and his wife live in an upstairs flat.
He recently underwent an operation but now he is incontinent.
Mrs A discovered that the local launderette and laundry would not take their things, and they have very limited washing and drying facilities themselves.
Mr A was receiving medical help and his doctor suggested that the Community Laundry Service night help.
This has been arranged, and Mr and Mrs A find that the regular supply of fresh sheets is a big help in solving practical problems.
Mrs B is an 86-year-old widow, living alone in a two-apartment flat.
For the past year, she has suffered from incontinence, but her kind next-door neighbour has done regular washing for her.
Now the neighbour has to move to Glasgow.
She has told the local Home Care Organiser about Mrs B and the Organiser has arranged for a Home Help for the old lady, and is now arranging for the Community Laundry Service to be provided.
Mr C, in his 40s, suffers a severe skin condition which flares up regularly.
Treatment involves using a very messy ointment which marks the sheets.
Mr C worries about the extra work this causes his wife.
The Community Laundry Service can help by providing clean sheets while his skin is bad, but can be stopped when the condition settles down.
It should be noted that the Community Laundry Service is not only for the comfort and hygiene of incontinent elderly people, it can be offered to members of the public of all age groups who for whatever medical reason need frequent changes of sheets (bed sores, skin conditions, night sweats, acute bleeding episodes of a frequent nature).
How do you Apply?
To apply for the Community Laundry Service, you should contact your local Social Work Office or your Family Doctor, Health Visitor or Community Nurse.
You will receive a visit from a member of staff from the Department of Social Work or Health Board who will, if the service seems appropriate and helpful to you, make an application to the Panel who organises the Scheme.
This Panel is made up of Social Work and Health staff who will decide if you should receive the Service.
If they decide that you should, then you will be given a date for the start of the Service, and the Scheme's driver will make the first visit to you, bringing a new supply of fresh sheets at a convenient time.
Thereafter dates and times of collection and delivery will be arranged with you.
If they decide that the Community Laundry Service is not appropriate for you, alternative help may be suggested.
Is there any other help available
Health Board Services
There are many ways in which help can be obtained for those who are incontinent.
Ask your Family Doctor, Health Visitor or Community Nurse what other services are available.
Social Work Services
The Department of Social Work provides a range of services from its local Offices based in the community.
Social workers try to help individuals and families by offering support, advice and practical assistance.
Home Helps give care and practical support to enable people to stay in their own homes; their work includes helping with domestic tasks, shopping, preparing special diets, washing and ironing, making beds, advising on how to keep warm and safety in the home.
Occupational Therapists are specially trained to deal with the problems of disabled people and try to make life as easy as possible for them.
Contact your local Social Work Office about these services.
Further information about the Community Laundry Service is available from:
your local Social Work Office (listed in the telephone directory under Social Work) or contact your family doctor.
Open Access
ACCESS TO PERSONAL FILES
INFORMATION FOR THE PUBLIC
Your legal rights and how your privacy is protected
What's ‘Open Access’?
The Social Work Department provides a wide range of services to the public.
In order to be able to help effectively, we need to hold personal information on file.
Sometimes this is very sensitive — such as the details of complicated family or personal difficulties, and at other times it is as simple, yet vital, as whom to contact is the Home Help calls and receives no answer to the doorbell.
The intention behind the Social Work Department's ‘Open Access’ policy, agreed by the Regional Council in January 1988, is that clients will have access to the information we hold about them, as an everyday part of our work with them.
Why?
Openness and honesty are central to the work which all Social Work Department staff do with and for the public.
Access to information held about them will help clients understand better the processes in which they are involved, and to participate in decisions that critically effect them.
Besides this, both the Data Protection Act (1984), which applies to computers, and the Access to Personal Files Act (1987) give people a statutory right of access to information held about them by the Social Work Department.
The Access to Personal Files Act (1987) will be implemented on 1st April 1989.
What will clients see?
Departmental staff are encouraged to share information as recorded, and other information as it  comes to hand.
Naturally we will exercise discretion, but we wish to make the sharing of information normal, rather than leaving it up to the client to make the case for access.
Safeguards for information sources
Seeing their own information does not entitle a client to invade someone else's privacy.
Clients will not be allowed access to information about other private citizens which is in their file — either descriptive material or the fact that someone is the source of a report — unless the other person is happy that it can be shared.
This includes information about their husband/wife, parents etc.
We will respect the confidentiality of such third parties' information provided to us by other professionals and agencies.
It will be usual practice for information which the Social Work Department receives after 1st April 1989 to be shared in a responsible and sensitive way, with the client to whom it relates, UNLESS the person providing it specifically requests that we do not do so.
We must, however, formally seek the consent of health professionals to the sharing of personal health information contained in a Social Work Department file.
Formal consent must also be sought from the Reporter to the Children's Panel if we propose to share certain information provided by the Reporter.
How will the clients get Access?
Access will not be limited to formal applications made under the Act but we will be seeking to develop ‘live access’ that means by sharing information as it becomes part of the file.
As a result the proper involvement — or ‘informed consent’ of the client will be a real one.
What then?
Occasionally it will be necessary to decide to refuse or delay access to certain items of information.
The criteria for deciding this are strict, as the Department wishes to use this option as rarely as possible.
If we do decide to refuse or restrict access clients will have a right to have this decision reviewed, and will be advised on how this can be done.
Clients will also have the right to request that information they consider to be inaccurate is corrected.
If after discussion we agree to differ, both versions will be recorded.
Another leaflet is available for clients of the Social Work Department.
The Innocent Railway
INTRODUCTION
Early in 1981 the Regional Council decided that various disused railway lines should be acquired and that a programme should be prepared for converting these for use by cyclists and pedestrians.
This leaflet describes the Innocent Railway Path in south east Edinburgh and various connecting links provided by Lothian Region and the City of Edinburgh District Councils.
HISTORY OF THE ‘INNOCENT’ RAILWAY
The route follows that of one of the earliest British Railways — the Edinburgh and Dalkeith, the first railway into Edinburgh.
It was planned in 1824–26 and constructed in 1827–31, between St Leonards and collieries near Dalhousie.
James Jardine, an Edinburgh Civil Engineer, designed and built the railway.
Double track rail 4′6 inches (1.37m) wide was laid throughout.
The wagons were hauled by horses, but with stationary steam engines to haul trains up an inclined plane into St Leonards Depot.
Developed for carrying coal and agricultural produce a passenger service was rapidly initiated using wagons, open carriages and converted stage coaches.
From 2 June 1832–1845 it carried 200,000 to 300,000 passengers per year — more passengers per mile than the Liverpool and Manchester railway.
Coal traffic was about 300 tons a day.
After a reference by Dr Robert Chalmers to ‘the innocence of the railway’ because of its pastoral and innocent appearance in comparison with the more sophisticated railways using steam locomotives where any accidents were likely to be severe, it became known as the ‘Innocent’Railway.
As there were no intermediate stations passengers joined and alighted where they wished.
A branch to Fisherrow was opened in 1834 and those to Dalkeith and Leith in 1838.
Bus connections were provided (fare 3d) from St Leonards to North Bridge, Fisherrow–Musselburgh and Dalkeith–Newtongrange.
In 1845 the line was bought by the North British Railway for £113,000, the gauge changed to 4′ 8½ inches (1.43m), and the horses and inclined plane replaced by steam locomotives upon reopening in July 1847 when it was also connected via Portobello to Edinburgh Waverley, and the route past Dalhousie was eventually extended to Carlisle to form the ‘Waverley Line’.
As passengers now had an alternative terminus in central Edinburgh the passenger service to St Leonards declined and was finally discontinued on 30 September 1860.
Goods traffic to St Leonards continued until 5 August 1968.
Interesting features of the original work which still exist are:
Inclined Plane
1,160 yards (1,060m) long, gradient 1 in 30 (3%)
This extends from St Leonards Depot, through the tunnel to the stables area located about 600 yards (550m) beyond the eastern portal.
It was constructed in 1827–29 and equipped in 1830
31 with two 25 HP steam engines at the top of the incline.
Descending trains were counter balanced by ascending trains.
Tunnel
566 yards long, 20′ (6.1m) wide with semi-circular roof 15′ (4.6m) high at the centre.
This was constructed in 1827–29, and lined in Craigleith Stone.
It was one of the earliest railway tunnels in the world.
Stone Block Sleeper from Iron Chair and Rail
This is built into the south wall about 50m east of the observation platform near Duddingston Loch.
Cast Iron Bridge over the Braid Burn
This was made and erected in March 1831, and painted by the Shotts Iron Co for £133.10s.0d. (£133.50).
It originally extended over the full width of the Railway between the boundary walls.
The cast iron beams, which are curved in top elevation, are of ‘L’ and inverted ‘T’cross-section.
They are of outstanding interest, being among the earliest surviving examples of their type anywhere in the world.
CONVERSION TO CYCLETRACKS
The 1.5km long section of route between Duddingston Road West and the southern portal of the railway tunnel was opened as a cycletrack on 11 August 1982.
Progress on other sections of route has been as follows:
Other sections on which it is hoped to complete work in the next few years included:
For most work completed prior to 1989 construction was carried out for the Regional Council by teams employed under the Special Measures Programme of the City of Edinburgh District Council with financial support from the former Manpower Services Commission.
Contractors since then have included .
USE OF THE CYCLETRACK
The route has been constructed for joint use by cyclists and pedestrians, although it will occasionally be used by motor vehicles for maintenance or emergency purposes.
Cyclists are asked to be aware of pedestrians and to take special care when approaching them, particularly elderly, disabled or blind people and young children.
A bell may be used to warn of a cyclist's presence.
Cyclists should take particular care entering the route or emerging on to the road at the accesses.
Some cyclists may prefer to dismount in order to make these turns, especially when crossing a road.
The ‘slot and bar’ access has been designed to allow cyclists to negotiate it at low speeds or dismounted.
In a few instances the height difference between the route and the surrounding ground has meant that steps have had to be installed.
Here there is usually a ramp or board up which cyclists may push their bicycle.
CONSTRUCTION
The disused railway bed has been almost completely overgrown following the closure of the railway.
This has been cleared over a width sufficient for the new track, but leaving those bushes and trees which were to be retained to form part of the landscape of the line.
Thus a rigid, straight alignment has been avoided.
The track is generally 3 metres wide allowing for use by both cyclists and pedestrians.
On either side of this a further half metre has been cleared of obstacles which could catch and upset a cyclist riding near the edge of the track.
Gates or pens for pedestrian access and ‘slot and bar’ for cyclist have been installed to limit access to the intended users and keep out motor cyclists, cars and other unauthorised motor vehicles.
The cycle track was first formed with a 100mm thick compacted layer of old railway ballast, surfaced with a 25mm thick layer of fine crushed whin stone.
This surface is generally satisfactory for modest numbers of cyclists riding at moderate speeds and for use by pedestrians and people with prams and wheelchairs.
However, with experience of rather higher levels of use an asphalt surface has now been added to reduce annual maintenance costs.
The drainage system over some sections of route has had to be refurbished or renewed.
An observation platform has also been constructed, about 250 metres west of Duddingston Road West, to provide a view over the Bawsinch Bird Sanctuary and to the Cedar of Lebanon tree on the skyline.
TRAFFIC SIGNS FOR CYCLISTS
Cyclists, like other road users, must obey the traffic signs erected generally as required along roads.
Some signs have been erected in Edinburgh specifically to help cyclists, as follows:
SAFETY
In recent years cycling has grown in popularity and regrettably the number of accidents involving cyclists has increased to approximately 250 per year in Lothian Region.
Within Edinburgh three quarters of accidents happen at road junctions so take special care when travelling to or from this cycle track.
Bicycle riders are exposed and vulnerable, and when they are involved in accidents their machines give them virtually no protection.
Wear a helmet, especially if using fast roads.
Cyclists, this special cycle track will help you make your journey safer.
There are other steps which can be taken in addition to help further:
keep your bicycle in good working order and fitted with suitable reflectors
follow the rules that apply to other road users, observing the warning signs and those giving orders, traffic lights, pedestrian crossings, one-way streets and the requirements of the Highway Code
keep a good look out all around
signal clearly and in good time before making any turn or changing lanes
do not make sudden swerves, particularly around parked vehicles, or zig-zag moves which surprise other road users
take particular care when cycling in or alongside traffic queues
wear bright clothes and use bright lights at night.
A reflective and fluorescent belt, arm-band, slipover or jacket can help you to be seen better.
CYCLING ORGANISATIONS
Organisations for cyclists in the Edinburgh area include:
THE PALACE OF HOLYROOD HOUSE
The Abbey of Holyrood (now ruined) was founded in 1128 by David 1.
The guest house for the abbey became the nucleus of a royal residence.
Between 1493 and 1501 James IV began building what are now known as the Historic Apartments in the northwest corner of the Palace.
The majority of the Palace, including the State Apartments, were begun under Charles II in 1671.
The Palace is still in regular use as a Royal residence and contains many treasures, including some of the personal belongings of Mary Queen of Scots, which may be seen throughout most of the year.
ARTHUR'S SEAT
Arthur's Seat is one of the remnants of a long extinct volcano.
R. Louis Stevenson remarked ‘it is worth a climb even in Summer to look down upon the lock from Arthur's Seat, but it is tenfold more so on a day of Skating’.
CRAIGMILLAR CASTLE
The central tower house was built by Sir Simon Preston who acquired the barony of Craigmillar in 1374.
After Rizzio's murder in 1566 it became the residence of Mary, Queen of Scots.
It was also a favourite resort of other Stuart monarchs.
DUDDINGSTON LOCH
Bawsinch Nature Reserve was bought in 1971 for £1,000 by the Scottish Wildlife Trust to provide a buffer zone for Duddingston Bird Sanctuary and provide additional habitats.
DUDDINGSTON
Duddingston village owes its existence to a church built by monks from Kelso in 1143.
Parts of the Norman building may still be seen today.
Note the jougs collar and louping on stone by the entrance to the churchyard.
Another historic building is the house in The Causeway where Bonnie Prince Charlie resided before his victory in 1745.
It is said that James VI frequented the Sheep's Head Inn and in 1580 presented an embellished ram's head and horns for adorning the bar.
NEWCRAIGHALL
Newcraighall was a mining village for more than 150 years up to 1968.
The houses on the north side of Whitehill Street date from about 1800.
The mine roads eventually went out several kms under the sea and in the 1920's, the 1,000 employees produced over 250,000 tons a year.
FURTHER INFORMATION
The District Council and the Regional Council have jointly published a free leaflet ‘Cycle Routes in Edinburgh’ which is obtainable from the Department of Highways .
SPOKES, the Lothian Cycling Campaign, have produced a more detailed map covering most of Edinburgh showing various kinds of facilities and advisory routes for cyclists.
This is available at a price of £1.50, from their office c/o .
Some leaflets have been published by the Department of Transport for public information.
In recent years these have covered topics such as traffic signs for cyclists, and high visibility equipment for pedestrians, cyclists and motorcyclists.
Copies may be obtained from Police Headquarters.
There are several publications on the history of existing and former railways in the area and details of places of interest near the routes shown in this leaflet.
Some of these may be available in local libraries:
WHAT CAN CLARENCE DO FOR YOU
Looking after Lothian's roads, pavements and public places if the responsibility of Lothian Regional Council.
It is an enormous task with over 3700 kms of roads and footpaths to care for as well as around 380 sets of traffic lights, 120,000 street lights, and around 100,000 road gullies.
CLARENCE is the Customer Lighting And Roads Enquiry Centre, a service centre set up to allow you to quickly and easily report any road and lighting defects and hazards.
You can call CLARENCE free on .
CLARENCE is here to help you report a wide range of daily faults and hazards.
This one number is all you need to know to get help with:
ROADS AND PAVEMENTS
Damaged pavements and potholes on the roads can cause injury to pedestrians and damage to vehicles.
It is an even greater danger to children, older people and cyclists.
To arrange repairs call CLARENCE on .
STREET LIGHTS
Broken street lights make our streets dark, causing even the shortest journeys to be more worrying.
If you see a street light out of order — either due to vandalism or malfunction — get it fixed by calling CLARENCE on .
REMEMBER — Live electrical wires can kill.
If you see exposed wires on street lights, call CLARENCE immediately and we will make this repair a top priority.
TRAFFIC LIGHTS
When these are out of order they cause delays, traffic jams and accidents.
When you call us on  and tell us of any defective traffic signals or pedestrian crossings, we will get things moving again.
BLOCKED ROAD DRAINS
Blocked gullies are a problem as rainwater causes flooding when it can't drain away.
If you see a problem call CLARENCE on .
As there are so many potential areas, we need your help to let us know of any faults or hazards you see.
By calling CLARENCE free on  you can get the resources of Lothian Regional Council's Highways Department at your disposal to solve the problem.
We all want to walk, cycle and drive safely and comfortably in Lothian Region and CLARENCE can help us achieve this.
So, when you see a problem, don't ignore it — report it to CLARENCE!
HOW TO REPORT A FAULT
When you see a problem take a note of what it is and where it is.
Then call CLARENCE on  and our staff will ask you a few brief questions as to the type of problem and its location.
The freephone number is open between 8.00am and 5.00pm and your call is free.
Our staff are highly trained in using the CLARENCE system and will quickly get information from you on the type of problem, its location and how urgent it is.
From this information, a repair will be scheduled.
When we take your details, your complaint will get a unique reference number.
Alternatively, simply complete all sections of the enclosed fault repair card, tear it off and post it — no stamp needed — to CLARENCE and we will do the rest.
To date, calls to CLARENCE have resulted in 97% of faults being repaired.
We need you to continue to help us by telling us of potential hazards you see in the community.
The enclosed card will help you remember the CLARENCE number, so please carry it with you in case you need to call us.
CYCLE ROUTES IN EDINBURGH
CYCLING POLICIES
The Regional Council is aware of the need to cater for cycling which is becoming more popular with adults and children for recreation and travel for work, school and other purposes.
One policy of the Regional Council is to introduce measures to improve conditions and facilities for pedestrians and cyclists.
This is being expressed by the current programme of cycle track construction on its disused railways and adoption of the strategies set out in the Lothian Cycle Route Project Report as the basis for the development of cycle facilities in Lothian.
Opportunities for the introduction of other cycle facilities are sought during the development control process or with other new road or traffic management schemes.
Edinburgh District Council concurs with this approach, having also constructed a number of cycle tracks on disused railways, and agree to the use of some routes in parks.
It also hosts a Cycle Co-ordination Group at which cyclists are able to raise matters relating to cycling policies.
Both Councils take account of the needs of cyclists in transport policies, Structure Plans, the development of Local Plans, and in consideration of planning applications for new development.
In addition to the facilities listed in this leaflet other routes in each of the District Council areas within Lothian are being investigated.
When completed they will be publicised in the local press and elsewhere.
SAFETY
In recent years cycling has grown in popularity and the number of accidents involving cyclists has increased.
Most accidents to cyclists happen at road junctions.
Bicycle riders are exposed and vulnerable, and when they are involved in accidents, their machines give them virtually no protection.
Wear a helmet, especially if using fast roads.
Motorists, please remember that cyclists (and pedestrians) are road users too and that they are easily hurt.
Keep a good look out for them, give them plenty of clearance (they may be moving faster than you think) and let them make their moves in safety.
Take special care with young cyclists; they may make mistakes through inexperience.
Cyclists, the special facilities, where they are available, will help you to make your journey safer.
There are other steps which can be taken in addition to help further:
keep your bicycle in good working order and fitted with suitable reflectors
follow the rules that apply to other road users observing the warning signs and those giving orders, traffic lights, pedestrian crossings, one-way streets and the requirements of the Highway Code
keep a good look out all around
signal clearly and in good time before making any turn or changing lanes
do not make sudden swerves, particularly around parked vehicles, or zig-zag moves which surprise other road users
take particular care when cycling in or alongside traffic queues
wear bright clothes and use bright lights at night.
A reflective and fluorescent belt, arm-band, slipover or jacket can help you to be seen better.
Many of the cycle tracks are available for use jointly with pedestrians.
Cyclists are asked to be aware of pedestrians and ride considerately.
Take special care when approaching them, particularly elderly, disabled or blind people and young children.
Use your bell to warn of your presence — not to harass people.
Take particular care when entering or leaving the tracks, and watch out for both pedestrians and traffic.
Please note that where an area is marked for cyclists (as in Middle Meadow Walk) pedestrians have not been physically excluded from it and may use it; also children or dogs may run on to it unexpectedly.
Public right of passage by bicycle is permitted on cycle tracks (usually specially designated and signposted), and generally on road carriageways (except where subject to motorway, special road or specific traffic regulation orders prohibiting bicycle use).
However, under the Roads (Scotland) Act 1984, riding of bicycles on footways associated with road carriageways or footpaths is not allowed.
Where any footway or footpath is open for use by cyclists, it will have been designated as a cycle track and be suitably signposted.
CYCLE PARKING
‘Sheffield’ type parking stands have been placed at several public cycle parking places in central Edinburgh marked overleaf by .
Cycle parking stands are also being installed, where space permits, at most rail stations, libraries, swimming pools, and other District Council recreational and cultural centres, and at some new commercial developments open to the public.
CYCLE HELMETS
The mail-order scheme for cycle helmets run by the Scottish Road Safety Campaign has now been taken on by the ‘Hard Helmet Scheme’.
A leaflet giving details of how to obtain protective cycle helmets for children and adults is available from  .
Samples may be seen at the Police HQ .
SHARED BUS LANES & OTHER FACILITIES IN EDINBURGH
FURTHER INFORMATION
The routes along the Water of Leith are described in a series of leaflets issued by the City of Edinburgh District Council,
The Department of Highways, also issues leaflets on some converted railways in Edinburgh and elsewhere in Lothian Region.
Some leaflets have been published by the Department of Transport for public information.
In recent years these have covered such topics as traffic signs for cyclists and high visibility equipment for pedestrians, cyclists and motor cyclists.
Copies of the leaflet about the latter may be obtained from Police HQ .
TRAFFIC SIGNS  FOR CYCLISTS
Cyclists, like other road users, must obey the traffic signs erected generally as required along roads.
Some signs have been erected in Edinburgh specifically to help cyclists, as follows:
Signs giving Information and Directions
FACILITIES FOR CYCLISTS
Cyclists are able to use nearly all the public roads in Lothian Region; only the M8 and M9 motorways and the West Approach Road are prohibited.
Not all roads are particularly attractive for use by bicycle.
However, there are a number of facilities for use by cyclists which have been opened in Edinburgh.
Please note that many of these facilities are for shared use with pedestrians.
Cyclists are asked to ride carefully and considerately (see section on SAFETY).
These have been provided by Lothian Regional Council, or the City of Edinburgh District Council.
They are marked on the map overleaf and are as follows:
WATER and SEWERAGE SERVICES in LOTHIAN
Our Commitment
to ensure an adequate supply of wholesome water for domestic, commercial and industrial purposes
to ensure an adequate system of sewerage and sewage treatment and disposal
to provide appropriate infrastructure to support housing and industrial developments across the Region
to maintain existing facilities and infrastructure
to comply with environmental standards set by the European Community and the Forth River Purification Board
An Essential Service
Water is an essential service.
Whether it is used for drinking, bathing, preparing food, cleaning, fighting fires or turning the wheels of industry — we all take a readily available supply of water for granted today.
However, as recently as the 19th century, the lack of clean water, together with inadequate sanitation, led to diseases such as typhus, typhoid and cholera.
We have come a long way since then, thanks to the vast amount of public investment over the last century.
Our forefathers had the vision to plan ahead for the future.
Reservoirs like Talla created at the beginning of the century and, more recently, Meggett in the 1980s guarantee supplies well into the next century.
Today, a supply of clean and safe water is available at the turn of a tap to 99 per cent of Lothian's population.
The improvement in public health has been immense.
A wide range of recreational and leisure activities such as swimming, fishing, windsurfing and sailing are also available for people to enjoy.
The nine Regional Councils and the three Islands Councils have been responsible for water, sewerage and sewage disposal since local government reorganisation in 1975.
These functions were previously carried out by regional water boards and local drainage authorities.
The work of Lothian Regional Council's Water and Drainage Department often goes unseen.
Behind the simple action of turning a tap, however, lies a vast network of pumping stations, treatment works, laboratories, reservoirs, pipes and people — from engineers, scientists and maintenance workers to administrative staff — all working to ensure a high quality water supply.
We believe that the service of the Council provides is second to none and we are proud of our record in meeting the needs of the Region's population and businesses.
The Council is continuing to invest — within tight financial constraints — in the Region's water and sewerage network to ensure that Lothian's future needs are met.
The future of the water industry in Scotland is, however, uncertain at this time with the Government considering alternative options for providing these services.
How are your services funded?
Water — Domestic users pay a community water charge (£30 for 1992/93).
Non-domestic users are charged either on a metered basis (40.4 pence per cubic metre for 1992/93) or through a non-domestic water rate (3.4 pence in the £ for 1992/93).
Sewerage — An amount for sewerage is included in the community charge for domestic users (equivalent to £26 for 1992/93) while non-domestic users pay a non-domestic sewerage rate (2.7 pence in the £ for 1992/93).
The Region's Investment Needs
£350 million needs to be spent by the Council by the year 2000 to ensure that it meets its statutory responsibilities — this is £165 million, or 90% more than the level of investment allocation likely to be approved by the Scottish Office in this period.
Meeting the European Community Urban Waste Water Directive alone will require an additional £76 million expenditure — to end sludge dumping at sea, to provide secondary sewage treatment at Edinburgh Sewage Treatment Works and to construct the Almond Valley Trunk Sewer.
Failure to meet statutory requirements could result in legal action against the Council by the EC, the Forth River Purification Board and the Government.
Water charges will be required to increase to meet these investment needs whatever option is chosen.
SOME FACTS
99 per cent of people live in houses with piped mains water supply
97 per cent of homes are connected to a public sewer and the remainder to septic tanks serviced by the department
62.5 million gallons of water are used each day in Lothian
the average daily consumption is 83 gallons of water per person
the Council's Water and Drainage service has an annual gross revenue budget of £60 million and employs 850 people to manage:
the Regional Council earns in excess of £3 million a year from its Trade Effluent Control Scheme
the average daily cost per household for the supply and disposal of water is 27.5 pence compared to 47 pence in England and Wales
in Lothian the average household bill for water and sewerage services in 1992/93 is £100 compared to £169 for England and Wales
THE FUTURE OF THE SCOTTISH WATER INDUSTRY
The Government's consultation paper Water and Sewerage in Scotland — Investing for our Future (November 1992) lists 8 options.
These are:
1
place the services with the proposed single-tier local authorities — i.e. between 15 to 51 authorities depending on the future structure of local government.
2
create joint boards of the proposed single-tier authorities.
3
a lead authority structure — one authority would be given responsibility for water and sewerage services for its own and surrounding areas.
4
create new water authorities — outside the sphere of local government with members specifically appointed by the Secretary of State.
5
create a new national water authority.
6
joint local authority/private sector schemes — ownership and ultimate responsibility would lie within the public sector but the day-to-day running of the service would be contracted out to the private sector through competitive tendering.
Alternatively, major capital projects would be undertaken by private sector contractors who would finance and build the assets in question, operate them for a specified period in return for an agreed fee and then transfer them to the commissioning authority.
7
one or more public limited companies — local authority assets would transfer out of local authority ownership to one, two or three public limited companies.
This would be done either through shares floated on the stock market, trade sale (with shares disposed of as a block to a single purchaser) or a management/employee buyout.
8
franchising — management and day-to-day operation of the services would be carried out, under contract, by a body separate from that owning the facilities.
The franchisors (‘owners’) and the franchisees (‘operators’) are likely to be private companies.
Water and sewerage services were privatised in England and Wales in 1989 and are provided by ten Water Supply and Sewerage Companies together with 29 Statutory Water Companies
SOME FACTS
individuals and employees hold less than 20% of shares in these companies
the privatised companies have greater access to investment funds are not subject to the same financing restrictions as the public sector water industry
a substantial increase in investment in the water industry has occurred since 1989.
However, the majority of this new investment (60%) has been paid for by consumers and not shareholders
water charges have increased by almost 50% since 1989 (compared to an increase in the Retail Price Index of 11.1%).
The regulatory body OFWAT estimates that increases in charges of up to 86% can be expected between now and 2004 if all national and EC standards are to be met
there has been an increase in water metering.
Meters cost the consumer at least £200 depending on the type of dwelling
the number of consumers cut off for non-payment rose to 21.286 in 1991/92 — an increase of 177% from the previous year.
Summonses for non-payment are now running at a million a year
complaints to OFWAT have increased 131% from 4,613 in 1990 to 10,635 in 1991
Further Information
Information about the quality of Lothian's water is available in the Council's Water Quality Annual Report which shows the excellent quality of Lothian's water supply.
If you would like further information about the services provided by Lothian Regional Council's Water and Drainage Department, please contact:
YOUR VIEWS ON THE FUTURE OF SCOTLAND'S WATER
The Government has invited comments on its proposals.
The Regional Council will be responding to the consultation paper and other interested parties are asked to submit their views in writing by 29 January 1993 to:
CYCLE & WALK IN LOTHIAN
Walking is a natural exercise for most people, and over the last six years the Health Education Department of Lothian Health Board with the help of SHEG, and the Recreation & Leisure Departments of East Lothian, Edinburgh, Midlothian and West Lothian, have promoted this to encourage family and friends to Walkaboutabit.
This year the Highways Department, Lothian Regional Council and Health Education Department of Lothian Health Board have co-funded a booklet to include cycling.
The booklet describes a few of the routes suitable for walkers and cyclists.
We ask both groups to be aware that the paths have a dual purpose and to show consideration for each other.
Remember to follow this country code and encourage others to do so:
Leave nothing but goodwill, Kill nothing but time, Take nothing but photographs.
Further copies of this booklet may be obtained from Lothian Regional Council,
EAST LOTHIAN
1.
Haddington — Longniddry Walkway/Cycleway
This now disused railway line, the Longniddry to Haddington branch, was constructed by the North British Railway Company and opened in 1846.
It was closed in 1968 by British Railways and subsequently purchased by East Lothian District Council in 1978, and was made suitable for cycling and walking during 1986/87.
The 7 kilometre walkway has a good cycling surface and at no point does it cross the road.
This line has a similar nature conservation value as Pencaitland but if anything, the views are more spectacular from the elevated embankments.
On sunny summer days it is possible to enjoy the dancing of the butterflies on the wild flower-rich embankments.
It may be possible at certain times of the day to observe roe deer in adjoining fields.
2.
Pencaitland Railway Walk
You can cycle/walk 12 kilometres along the disused railway line from West Saltoun, through Pencaitland and Ormiston to Crossgatehall.
There are picnic areas along the way and a number of locations where you may join the line.
The route passes through farmland normally inaccessible where there is also evidence of East Lothian's mining past not normally easy to see.
The track has been used as a walkway since the closure of the line and this use has been regularised by way of purchase by the local authorities.
The track can be used by horse riders.
walkers, naturalists, birdwatchers, wheelchair users, cyclists and children.
On the grassy banks along the track, wild flowers such as cranesbill, knapweed, strawberry and wild vetches abound.
Some plants and animals are becoming scarce in the intensely farmed parts of East Lothian but here is a chance to ensure that you will see them.
The banks and cuttings have been left ‘wild’ for so long that they are rich in plant life with tremendous variation which is reflected in the 60 different bird species that may be seen along the line.
The track is in fact a ready made nature reserve.
The steep inclines and bankings are also clothed in a wide variety of trees and shrubs, providing a natural linear corridor for wildlife.
Cycling on the road connects you to the line at Whitecraig and thereafter by the River Esk Walkway to Musselburgh.
Along the River Esk at Musselburgh
This is a 5 kilometre route along the banks of the River Esk.
The old mills and the Roman fortifications have gone but the bridges, the stories and the tranquillity still remain.
As the Esk flows seaward it passes through a rich variety of scenery.
The wilder aspects of the grove and the more formal stretch in the town are all within easy walking or cycling distance.
The river and its banks are a haven for wildlife amongst the hustle and bustle of the town.
Starting from the Fisherrow sands there are The Lagoons.
These were built to hold waste ash pumped from Cockenzie power station in the east creating new land.
Rennie's bridge carries the A1 and was built by John Rennie, one of Britain's greatest ever civil engineers, born in East Lothian.
The Roman bridge connects the Roman fort at Inveresk to the harbour.
Wallace, Edward II's forces, Mary Queen of Scots, Bonnie Prince Charlie and Cromwell's cavalry have all crossed the river here.
On past St Michael's Kirk.
There has been a church on this site since 519 AD.
Inveresk is an attractive village which has taken its name from the river.
Magnificent Georgian houses are clustered together while their large and colourful gardens sweep down to the river.
Every 21 years for about 300 years, the Riding of the Marches takes place.
A Town Champion is appointed to protect a Turf Cutter and Officials on their journey around their marches.
At each boundary mark, a turf is cut, thrown over the shoulder to the shouts of ‘It's a oorain’.
The cycleway is signposted to the Duke's Dyke at Cowpits and thereafter to Whitecraig.
Further details for routes in East Lothian can be obtained from the Leisure, Recreation & Tourism Department of East Lothian District Council by telephoning .
EDINBURGH
Water of Leith
The Water of Leith rises in the Pentland Hills and flows for a distance of 36 kilometres to meet the Firth of Forth at Leith.
From its source among heather covered moorland and rough pasture above East Colzium, the Water of Leith flows into Harperrig, one of Edinburgh's compensation reservoirs.
These were constructed to augment the power required by the extension of new industries further downstream.
The Water of Leith must once have been a clear and sparkling river.
An Act of Scottish Parliament in 1617 decreed that the standard pint jug was to contain ‘three pounds seven ouncches troye of cleane rynand water from the Water of Leith’, but later it deteriorated.
As the New Town grew and villages outside of the city expanded in association with the establishment of industries along its bank, the Water of Leith became too convenient as a ready made drain and rubbish dump.
Acts of Parliament were obtained in 1896 to authorise the construction of sewers down the length of its valley and these relieved the overburdened river of much of its unpleasantness.
Thanks to these acts, to the more recent endeavours of the Forth River Purification Board and to the occasional activity of groups of young volunteers, the Water of Leith today, though not yet as sparkling as a highland burn, is sufficiently clean to maintain its annual stock of trout.
The Water of Leith valley and its tributaries, especially the Bavelaw Burn, provide the principal wildlife corridor between the uplands of the Pentland Hills and the lower Water of Leith valley and the central urban area.
The importance of this corridor can be judged from the variety and number of different trees, shrubs, and other flowering plants recorded in one particular place by the Lothians Branch of the Scottish Wildlife Trust, namely a total of 147 different plant species, as well as a variety of birds and evidence of roe deer and badgers.
The following routes follow the Water of Leith,(4–7):
4.
Balerno to Juniper Green
Balerno is the terminus of the chain of villages linked by the river valley which skirts along the northern slopes of the Pentland Hills.
It nestles on the west bank of the Bavelaw Burn near its confluence with the Water of Leith.
Blaeu's atlas of 1667 shows a place called Byrney said to mean ‘well-sheltered place’.
The village was originally the centre of the local community.
The name Currie is possibly a corruption of the Latin word Coria, a meeting place, or from the Gaelic Curagh, a mossy dell.
Currie Brig unites the two parts of the village, the kirk, school, schoolhouse and farms to the south with the farms and settlement on the north bank and along the Lanark Road.
Currie was a small community centred on the town farms.
In the early days (1600–1720) farms were self-contained and self-supporting.
Turnpike roads developed and people left the farms to build them.
Lack of labour hastened the coming of the steel plough (c.1775), but this in turn reduced the number of men required on the farms.
Soon another change came as wrights and blacksmiths began to work locally and this was speeded up by the coming of industry attracted by the water power of the Water of Leith.
With the coming of steam power and mechanisation by the 1840s, machines were working in some mills and life was very different.
No longer were people in small communities sharing the necessities of life, but they were using money for everything.
Juniper Green (whose name may have originated from the floral emblem of the Murray family) developed with an influx of specialised workers attracted by the growth of the mills.
The Balerno Branch Railway opened in August 1874 and this assured prosperity for these villages.
Although life was hard and the conditions poor, shiftwork was plentiful at the mills.
Major relaxations consisted of bands, societies, galas and of course, regular church attendance.
The hamlet of Blinkbonny grew up during the late 19th and early 20th century alongside Blinkbonny Farm.
Millworkers' houses were erected by the owners of Kinleith Mill, along with other houses for the use of quarry workers who came to work at Torphin Quarry.
At the turn of the century there was increased agricultural production in the area, but with improved methods, less labour was required.
There was a gradual reduction in the mills' labour force and the coming of ‘dormitory dwellers’ and the need for more services.
The period 1921–1951 brought great changes with the building of more council houses and the beginning of the private building along Lanark Road.
More recently the population has increased and continued to expand rapidly.
In March 1972, the centre of Currie was designated a Conservation Area, and Balerno Village was designated a Conservation Area in December 1974, by the local planning authority.
Roseburn–Stockbridge
This route following part of the Water of the Leith has been promoted by the City of Edinburgh District Council.
It links the waterside path through Roseburn Park to the Roseburn–Craigleith cycle track, the National Gallery of Modern Art, and the waterside path through Stockbridge to Inverleith.
The granary of the former Bell's Mill has been incorporated into the modern hotel at Belford.
The area behind Donaldson's School is designated a wildlife site by the Scottish Wildlife Trust.
The most common species of trees along the path are elm, lime, ash and sycamore.
In the woodland or amongst the ivy, grey squirrels are often found.
Common bird species include dunnock, wren, blue tit, robin, blackbird, greenfinch and willow warbler.
Mallard duck, grey wagtail and occasionally kingfishers frequent the waterside.
6.
Juniper Green to Slateford
Three separate villages developed along this section of the Water of Leith — Juniper Green, Colinton and Slateford.
The village of Juniper Green may take its name from the Juniper bushes which once covered the lower slopes of the Pentlands.
Alternatively the name may come from the Murray family who owned the Woodhall Estate.
The family floral emblem included the Juniper.
The village was first mentioned in records of 1707 developing as a result of the increased industrial use of the river.
The Colinton area has been settled for centuries and the village was a centre of the milling industry in the 18th and 19th centuries.
The remains of Colinton Castle built in 16th and 17th centuries including the fine dovecot can still be seen in the grounds of Merchiston Castle School.
The Foulis family who originally built the castle replaced it in 1806 with the Mansion House now a part of the school buildings.
Slateford village took its name from the predominating rock of the area and the ford which was a major crossing point of the river.
The ford was crossed by a mill dam and consequently was extremely difficult and dangerous and thereby occasioned several unlucky accidents.
7.
Canonmills/Warriston to Coburg Street/Sandport Place
The 2 kilometre long Warriston to Coburg Street walkway forms part of the Water of Leith Walkway, and was officially opened on 15th June 1982.
The walkway follows the disused railway line from Warriston Crescent, past Warriston Cemetery and Bonnington Mills to the newly created Coalie Park in North Leith.
The railway line was built by the North British Railway Company to Leith Citadel Station in 1849 at the height of the Victorian railway boom.
However, traffic on the line declined in the 20th century and both it and the Citadel Station were eventually closed to passenger services in 1947, although the larger North Leith Station did not close to passengers until 1962.
Edinburgh Corporation purchased the Junction Bridge Railway Depot (now Coalie Park) in 1968 from British Rail, and acquired the railway line to Warriston in 1980 with the approved aim, following public consultation, of creating the walkway.
Work on landscaping the disused railway line, funded by the Scottish Development Agency, was started in June 1980 and included in Coalie Park a boat launching area on the impounded stretch of the Water of Leith.
One of the old stations, complete with platform, can still be seen east of Newhaven Road Bridge.
This bridge and others along the walkway have been cleaned and made safe.
Care has been taken in the landscaping and improvement works to retain the existing birch and elder scrub, and augment it with birch, alder, ash, poplar, oak, willow, rowan, lime, crab apple, gean and bird cherry.
These, together with a variety of shrubs and woodland plants, provide and attractive and valuable semi natural habitat.
Birds to be found on the river or along the walkway include coot, swan, black headed gull, common tern, grey wagtail, robin, blackbird, thrush, great tit, blue tit and house sparrow.
The wetter, wooded stretches of the walkway support a variety of fungi in Autumn.
The walkway provides an interesting and diverse route from the woodland area of Warriston through the former industrial area of Bonnington, along the enclosed cutting to the river bank at Coalie Park.
Whilst not following the Water of Leith for all its length, taking a more direct path than the winding river, the walkway allows access to the river at various points, and is a valuable link between Warriston and North Leith.
8.
Roseburn–Craigleith–Silverknowes/Granton Cycle Path
This route follows railway lines built to take freight to West Granton Harbour (in 1861), Leith Docks (1864).
Passenger services began in 1879 and were extended to Barnton in 1894.
Barnton station closed to passengers in 1951 and most other sections were closed in the 1960s.
The last section near Granton Gas Works was closed in 1986.
Lothian Regional Council began acquiring the various disused lines in 1981 and the programme of converting them to cycleway/footpaths will be continuing until the early 1990s.
The whole route is a valuable wildlife corridor.
Between Roseburn and Craigleith there is a young woodland of ash and sycamore, tall herb and elder bushes.
From Craigleith towards Davidson's Mains bramble bushes are more in evidence together with some gorse.
In the other direction from Craigleith the route is fringed by rough grassland with some areas of hawthorn, elder and nearer Granton Road, mixed semi-natural woodland.
9.
Granton–Cramond
This 5 kilometre route currently extends from West Shore Road, following the shore along the Granton–Cramond promenade, to Cramond village itself.
From here, the River Almond Walkway extends alongside the river to Braepark and Cramond Brig.
Because of a steep flight of steps this is not easily negotiated by bicycle.
A suitable exit point is at School Brae to reach Gamekeepers Road.
There are fine views across the Firth of Forth and to the Forth Road and Rail Bridges.
10.
Balgreen to Corstorphine Road
This path forms a 1.5 kilometre off-road route between Balgreen Road and Corstorphine on the line of a disused railway.
For the first part of the route, the embankment gives views across Carrickknowe golf course and the nearby allotments.
It then passes through the site of the former station at Traquair Park East and progresses via housing developments to Station Road, Corstorphine.
11.
Holyrood Park–Brunstane: Innocent Railway Path
This route follows the former Innocent Railway for part of the way and then the Niddrie Burn to Brunstane.
Some sections have been promoted by Lothian Regional Council and others by the City of Edinburgh District Council.
Those sections between Duddingston Road West, Duddingston Row and Duddingston Park South should be completed during 1989.
The railway was opened in 1831 to bring coal by horsedrawn train from the Duke of Buccleuch's Collieries south of Dalkeith into Edinburgh.
A stationary engine was used for the final haul up the tunnel into St Leonards Goods Yard.
Between the path and Duddingston Loch lies Bawsinch, a Scottish Wildlife Trust Reserve.
In this section part of the original bridge over the Braid Burn may be seen.
Compare the wildlife and trees/bushes near Prestonfield and Duddingston golf courses with those in the Bingham Neighbourhood Park.
12.
Easter Road to Seafield
The idea to promote an urban walkway/cycleway on the disused railway line from Easter Road to Seafield goes back to the Leith Local Plan reports of the 1970s.
In October 1979 the Planning and Development Committee approved the acquisition of the necessary land, and proposals for the creation of a walkway cyclepath were developed.
The former freight line which the walkway now follows was opened by the Caledonian Railway in August 1903, linking Newhaven and Seafield in a large loop, via Restalrig Goods and Mineral Station which was on the west side of Restalrig Road.
Along the length of the railway line were timber yards, rope works, maltings and an iron foundry.
Most of these industries have closed down and only a few survive as a reminder of the type of activity found adjacent to the railway in past years.
Some of the places of interest on the route are:
Thornside Industrial Development which houses nine units funded by Scottish Development Agency;
Quarry holes where stone was used for surfacing Leith Walk at the end of the 19th century;
Hawkhill Recreation Ground which was used for recreational purposes as long ago as 17th century;
Eastern General Hospital which was a poor house until upgraded as a hospital in 1932;
Leith Links where in 1560 the English army besieged the town of Leith.
The pathway at Seafield Baths enters Old Leith Conservation Area, one of the most important in Edinburgh District.
The Conservation Area includes 130 listed buildings and is recognised as ‘outstanding’ by the Historic Buildings Council.
13.
Newbridge to Queensferry Cycleway
Beginning at Newbridge, the route is constructed on the disused railway line for a distance of about 7km, with access at most road crossing points eg Kirkliston, Carlowrie, Dalmeny.
The route passes through farmland and woodland in both cutting and embankment, with views over the surrounding countryside.
At one point the path crosses the River Almond, and will eventually link up with the Almond Walkway once it is extended to this point.
As the route approaches Queensferry, the rail and road bridges come into view.
The path runs below one of the land arches of the rail bridge with a steep flight of steps leading to the Hawes Inn and Hawes Pier on the Firth of Forth.
A second exit at this point leads via a short path to Dalmeny station.
At South Queensferry, the path ends at Stoneycroft Road by The Loan, but future extension is planned to link up to the Port Edgar area.
For further details of the Edinburgh routes can be obtained from the Planning Department of Edinburgh District Council by telephoning .
MIDLOTHIAN
14 Penicuik to Bonnyrigg Railway Footpath/Cycleway
This 10 kilometre long footpath/cycleway begins at Eskbridge Station at the foot of Kirkhill Road in Penicuik.
It follows part of the old Edinburgh to Peebles Railway line which closed in 1969.
Turn left along the track and walk past the sewage plant (things get better after this!).
Further along on the left a gate provides entrance to the attractive woodlands of the Old Beeslack Estate which adjoin the new Beeslack High School.
Returning to the railway gives you views of Glencourse Barracks on the hill.
All along its sides the railway is flanked by grass verges and small scrubby bushes which make it an ideal habitat for wild flowers and birds so keep looking for these as you walk along.
Proceeding along the track brings you to Auchendinny Station beyond which is a tunnel (advisable to bring a torch) which leads out into the yard of Dalmore Paper Mill the sole survivor of a once flourishing industry along the Esk.
Proceed past the mill and another tunnel will be visible.
Head through here and out again into open countryside.
You will cross the Firth Viaduct from which you have fine views of the Pentland Hills.
Continue on the line until you see a bridge crossing it; there is an exit here which leads down into Roslin Glen Country Park.
This area was once the site of a Gunpowder Mill and a lot of the old ruined buildings remain around the river including the Weir and the Old Mill Lade.
The Tin Tunnel ran along the stretch of railway above Kirknettle Mill to the bridge for approximately two hundred metres.
This was to prevent sparks from train wheels and engines reaching the gunpowder stores.
Rosslyn Castle Station was the main station for the mill during the war.
The original sign formed in sea-shells is still visible beside the track.
Continue on to Rosewell and Hawthornden Station.
Rosewell was built by the Lothian Coal Company to house miners.
Near Hawthornden Castle is Ben Jonson's Tree; the newly appointed Poet Laureate, Ben Jonson walked from London to Hawthornden in 1618 and met the Poet Drummond under this particular tree.
Bonnyrigg Station marks the end of the route.
You can do this route in two parts Penicuik to Roslin Glen, and Roslin Glen to Bonnyrigg.
Further details of this route in Midlothian can be obtained from the Recreation and Leisure Department of Midlothian District Council by telephoning .
WEST LOTHIAN
Linlithgow to South Queensferry
The route starts in Linlithgow Station from which there are regular train services to Edinburgh, Glasgow and Stirling.
The Royal and Ancient Burgh of Linlithgow is the birthplace of Mary Queen of Scots, and former county town of West Lothian.
The Palace, St Michael's Church, and the many historic buildings and monuments along the High Street line the south shore of Linlithgow loch which enhances one of Scotland's most historic towns.
From the station, the route heads east along the B9080, passing the old St Magdalene Distillery before leading into open country.
After 2 kilometres, turn left and follow the signs to the former shale mining village of Philpstoun.
This minor road runs parallel to the Union Canal which it crosses by a narrow humped back bridge.
The canal opened in 1822 and soon became one of the busiest routes in Scotland, transporting coal from central Scotland to Edinburgh.
Cycling is not officially permitted on the narrow towpath, however walkers can join it in Linlithgow at the canal basin at the top (south end) of Station Road.
After passing through Philpstoun, shale bings are visible to the right.
Like many other West Lothian settlements, the village grew around a shale oil refinery.
Turn right at the B8046 and continue underneath the motorway to join the A904.
A detour of 2 kilometres to the left is worthwhile for a visit to The Binns, a National Trust for Scotland property which is the former home of the Dalyell family.
The more energetic might consider extending this detour to visit Blackness, a 3 kilometre descent down the B9019.
Once the thriving port of Linlithgow, Blackness is a picturesque village with a heavily fortified castle.
To continue on the main route, turn right onto the A904 and after 1 kilometre turn left for Abercorn.
A tree lined lane descends to this peaceful village which is beautifully situated in woodland above the banks of the Forth.
The cycle route turns sharp right and passes the West Gate entrance to Hopetoun House, Scotland's finest Adam mansion and home of the Marquess of Linlithgow.
The house and most of the surrounding parkland is open to the public at advertised times only.
Ascending the hill past the hamlet of Parkhead, there are extensive views across the Forth Valley and the Bridges.
Turn right onto the main roads A904, B924 to Queensferry past Digitals new factory where semiconductors are fabricated.
In due course it is hoped to negotiate a quieter route onto Society Road in Queensferry.
Further details of this route in Midlothian can be obtained from the Recreation and Leisure Department of West Lothian District Council by telephoning .
16.
Livingston Village–Craigshill–Mid Calder
The 5 kilometre long footpath/cycleway begins at the old Livingston village close to the Kirk of Livingston which was rebuilt in 1732 on a site first consecrated in the 12th century.
Beyond the west end of Kirk Lane lies a path to Livingston Mill, open to the public for displays of farm life.
Toward the heart of the village one might see some Pipistrelle Bats flying aerobatically around the Kirk taking insects.
Livingston Village grew up around an early crossing point on the River Almond at the site of the first bridge in the area.
This carried the Edinburgh to Glasgow Turnpike Road until 1764.
Indeed, the Livingston Inn was built as a coaching Inn in the mid 18th century to service this road.
As you travel eastward the route joins the River Almond where dippers and herons are familiar sights.
You may also see one of the kingfishers that have nested on the river bank.
Moving on, Almondside Park comes into view.
This area has been developed by the Development Corporation with facilities such as a 9 hole pitch and putt course, a trim course, a BMX track, a skateboard park, a bowling club and other recreational facilities.
There is also a small car park here.
After leaving Almondside Park, Howden Bridge quickly comes into view.
This two-arched stone bridge was built in 1764 and allowed the Turnpike Road from Edinburgh to Glasgow to cross the Almond near Mid Calder.
Moving on under the Almond Bridge (which is the largest bridge in the town being 300 metres in length and 20 metres high) you enter Almond Park which covers 30 hectares (75 acres) and is south facing.
The upper part of the slope has been used for housing which takes full advantage of the views and the sun.
You leave Livingston by crossing the River Almond and entering Mid Calder which was a significant centre in the past, as this was where the old Ayr road met the Edinburgh to Glasgow Turnpike.
Between the river walk and the village rises a conical hillock known in the past as ‘Cunnigar’ or the ‘Witches Hill’it offers good views to the north and is one of several Bronze Age earthworks along this stretch of the river.
Further details of this route in the Livingston area can be obtained from Livingston Development Corporation by telephoning tel;.
PLACING IN SCHOOLS APPEALS PROCEDURE
Information for Parents
1.
REFUSAL OF YOUR CHOICE OF SCHOOL
The letter which you received from the Director of Education will have told you the reason for the Council's decision to refuse a place at the school(s) you wanted your child to go to.
As you have decided to appeal against this decision by making a ‘reference’ to an Appeal Committee which will look at your case independently, the purpose of this leaflet is to tell you how to make your reference, the things you will have to do, and the people you should expect to come across.
2.
YOUR APPEAL
It is likely that you will already have written in with your Appeal and received an acknowledgement together with this leaflet.
There is no required form a reference should take, but your letter should have included:
your name, address and telephone number
the name of your child
the name of the school concerned
the date of the Council's letter
If you have not included any of these, the acknowledgement from the Clerk to the Appeal Committee will ask for details.
Your letter does not have to have said why the Council refused your request, because this information will be given to the Appeal Committee.
You may, of course, add to your letter later in writing or say more about the case at the Appeal Committee hearing.
Please remember that you can only appeal once a year.
3.
ARRANGING THE HEARING
The Council's Depute Chief Executive has been asked to act as the Clerk to the Appeal Committee in Lothian.
He will acknowledge receipt of your reference within 5 working days.
Please note that the legislation requires that all of the placing request appeals for one particular school should be heard at the same meeting.
The likely date for your case to be heard will be approximately one month after receipt of your original appeal letter, if your case is the only one for a particular school.
The likely date for your case to be heard will be approximately six weeks after receipt of your original appeal letter, if it is one of a number for a particular school.
The Clerk will tell you the date, time and place of the hearing of your appeal as soon as possible after the meeting is arranged.
4.
FURTHER INFORMATION
Both you and the Council can ask the Appeal Committee to consider extra information about your case, but if it is in written form, it should be sent to the Clerk at least 10 days before the meeting.
Both you and the Council must give each other copies of any additional information.
5.
PREPARING FOR THE HEARING
The Clerk will tell you the date, time and place of the hearing of your appeal.
Before the hearing takes place, you have to decide how you want to tell the Committee about your reasons for appealing.
The sort of things which you will need to decide upon are noted below; it is not essential that you do any of these things, because even if you do not give written arguments, or you do not attend the hearing or send a representative, the Committee will consider the information given to them by the Council and then reach a decision on your case.
You can go to the hearing and speak to the Appeal Committee yourself.
You can take up to three people with you, and if you do not wish to speak yourself, you can ask one of these people to speak for you.
If you cannot go yourself, you can ask somebody else to go in your place and speak for you.
You can put your arguments in writing beforehand.
You can do this even if you also want to go and speak, or ask someone else to speak for you.
6.
WHO IS ON THE APPEAL COMMITTEE?
In Lothian, the Regional Council has established an Appeal Committee comprising five people.
However, in certain circumstances the membership of the Appeal Committee may be reduced from five to three members.
The five people are:
3 members drawn from the Regional Council or from the Education Committee;
1 member drawn from a panel of parents of pupils of school age nominated by the Lothian Federation of Parents and Parent-Teacher Associations;
1 member, who will be the Chairman, drawn from a panel of suitably qualified people with experience in education or acquainted with educational conditions in Lothian.
None of these people will have had any involvement in the decision to refuse your placing request.
Also, no person can be a member of the Appeal Committee if they are a parent or a teacher at the school concerned.
7.
WHAT HAPPENS AT THE HEARING?
When the hearing starts, the Chairman will say how the Committee intends to conduct the proceedings.
Normally what will happen will be that:
The Council's Case
The person speaking for the Council, normally one of the Director of Education's staff, will say why your request has been refused.
Other people may be asked to speak, in support of what the Council has decided.
Then you, or the person you have asked to speak for you, can ask questions as can the five members of the Appeal Committee.
Your Case
Next, it is your turn to present your case.
Either you, or the person speaking for you, can tell the Appeal Committee why you think your child should get a place in the school you want, and why you think the Council should not have refused.
You can also ask people to speak in support of what you say.
But  if you have written down your reasons and sent them to the Appeal Committee and the Council beforehand, you can say, if you want, that you have nothing to add to your letter.
After that, the person speaking for the Council may ask questions as can the five members of the Appeal Committee.
Summing Up
Finally, the person speaking for the Council will sum up their reasons; and you, or the person speaking for you, may sum up your reasons.
ADJOURNMENT OF THE HEARING
It is possible that the hearing of your reference may be adjourned.
This would happen in the following circumstances:
If some of the Appeal Committee members do not turn up, or if an Appeal Committee member has to leave before the end of the hearing, the hearing must be adjourned.
A hearing may be adjourned if either you or the Council say anything to the Committee, or produce something in writing which the other did not know about beforehand, and it is so important that you or the Council want time to think about it before proceeding.
Both you and the Council can ask the Committee to adjourn and fix a later date for carrying on with the rest of the proceedings.
But the Committee do not have to agree to this if it thinks that the new information is not important.
If the Appeal Committee needs further information or advice, the hearing must be adjourned.
For example, it may be that some legal point has arisen and the Council has a duty to provide legal advice if required.
Where the Appeal Committee is satisfied that either you or the Council requires to get further relevant information or advice for the presentation of the case, then it must adjourn the hearing.
If either you or the Council's representative are prevented by exceptional circumstances from attending the hearing, then the hearing must be adjourned if it is reasonable to do so.
A hearing might be adjourned in order to be combined with another similar reference dealing with the same school and the same stage of education.
9.
WHO ELSE WILL BE AT THE HEARING?
The hearing will be held in private.
Apart from the people speaking for you and for the Council, and the Appeal Committee members themselves, only a limited number of people may be at a hearing.
For example, the Clerk to the Committee will be there, an official from the Scottish Council on Tribunals may be there, as might other Regional Councillors who are interested in your case.
However, members of the public cannot be there.
10.
HOW LONG WILL A DECISION TAKE?
This depends upon whether the Appeal Committee decides that it will have to adjourn the hearing and carry on with it later because some new and important information has been produced, or because the Committee want you or the Council to give it more information.
The Committee must give its decision within 14 days of the end of the hearing.
It must also give the decision in writing to you and the Council, and the reasons for it.
In Lothian, the Chairman will tell you at the end of the summing up of your case what the Committee proposes to do.
If the Chairman disagrees with the Council and says that it should not have refused your request, then the Council must let your child have a place in the school your asked for.
11.
APPEAL TO THE SHERIFF
Having heard all the evidence, the Committee may still decide to agree that the Council was right to refuse your child a place in the school you wanted.
If you still feel very strongly that the Council should have given your child a place, you can appeal to the Sheriff against the Appeal Committee's decision.
But you must do this within 4 weeks of receiving the Appeal Committee's decision from the Clerk.
12.
ADDITIONAL DETAILS
It is hoped that this leaflet answers any questions you may have about the appeal procedures.
Any further information can be obtained in writing from:.
LOTHIAN ARTS
THE ARTS IN LOTHIAN REGION
THE ARTS
are a major area for personal growth
bring a community together
are important to employment & economic development
are stimulating for all people in society
Experiencing the arts through education provides the basis for a lifetime of enrichment and personal development.
Lothian Region is justly proud of the breadth of opportunities which our arts policy offers in schools, colleges and community education centres.
These will be extended by the opening of a Regional Arts Centre on the site of the former Leith Academy.
Outlined on this page are some of the opportunities provided through the Education Department, which give our young people the best arts experiences in the country.
I hope you will find the following information useful.
MUSIC
All types of music available regionally
Primary and Instrumental Specialist staff
Standard Grade/Higher Grade/Certificate in Sixth Year Studies Courses
All pupils make music in class.
In addition, over 11,000 have the opportunity to learn to play an orchestral instrument
Unique scheme for musically-gifted pupils based at Flora Stevenson Primary and Broughton High Schools
21 area/regional bands and orchestras
ART &: DESIGN
Provision for all ages
Primary Specialist Teams
Standard Grade/Higher Grade/Certificate in Sixth Year Studies Courses
Activities in Secondary Schools include: Painting, Ceramics, Sculpture, Print-making, Screen-printing, Jewellery, Photography and Graphics.
Computer-aided Design and Video Production
DANCE
Growing part of Nursery and Primary Curriculum
An option in Standard & Higher Grade PE Courses
Lothian Region/Scottish Ballet Dance Artist in Residence
National, folk, social, contemporary and theatre forms of dance
DRAMA
Provisions for all ages
New Standard and Higher Grade Courses
Primary Dance Centre
Theatre-in-Education team
Lothian Youth Theatre
COMMUNITY EDUCATION
A full range of evening classes in all arts is available
Community Centres offer many arts courses and clubs
St Bride's Centre — full community and arts programme, dance, film festival, an excellent performance venue
Edinburgh Youth Theatre
NATIONAL FESTIVALS &: COMPANIES
Lothian Region support given to National Festivals & Companies, leading to workshops and visits to schools by major companies
Lothian Region sponsored events allow schools to attend first-class performances in all the arts
FILM &: MEDIA
Educational projects and activities led by Lothian's Development Officer at the Filmhouse, Edinburgh
BURSARIES
Support given to young people from Lothian for national arts courses
THE ROSEBURN–CRAIGLEITH–CREWE TOLL CYCLETRACK
INTRODUCTION
Many cycle routes are now being established in Edinburgh and the surrounding area on former railway land.
HISTORY OF THE GRANTON, LEITH AND BARNTON BRANCH RAILWAY LINES
Following an agreement between the Duke of Buccleuch and the Caledonian Railway a branch line was constructed from Slateford, on the main Carstairs–Edinburgh (Lothian Road) line, through generally open countryside, to West Granton where the Duke owned the Harbour.
This opened to goods traffic on 28 August 1861.
Three years later a branch was opened off this from Crewe Toll eastwards to Leith station, sited near Lindsay Road.
When it opened on 1 September 1864 an extra junction was provided from the main line at Dalry to what became known as Coltbridge junction.
That lay on the east side of Russell Road, now partly occupied by the Sauchiebank Industrial Estate.
Passenger services to Leith started on 1 August 1879 from Lothian Road and calling at Murrayfield, Craigleith, Granton Road and Newhaven.
Employees of the West Granton Gas Works got a passenger service from 1 November 1902.
Extra stations were opened at Dalry Road on 2 July 1900 (between Dalry Road and Dundee Street) and on 1 December 1934 at East Pilton as a result of housing development in the area.
A further branch line, for passengers, was opened from Craigleith via a station at Davidsons Mains to Barnton on 1 March 1894 (and House o' Hill was opened on 1 February 1937).
The Leith line had another branch added on 1 August 1903 to South Leith Docks from Newhaven via Bonnington, Leith Walk and Seafield.
Connections were also made with the North British Railway branch lines at Granton and Seafield, and with the Edinburgh and Glasgow Railway at Wester Dalry (along the spur now occupied by the western part of the West Approach Road).
In 1923 the line became part of the London, Midland Scottish Railway.
On 5 May 1951 passenger services were withdrawn from Barnton although coal was still conveyed to Davidsons Mains.
Passenger services on the Leith Branch Line ceased on 30 April 1962 with goods services closing in stages in 1965 (Crewe junction–Pilton West), 1966 (south of Newhaven–Seafield), 1967 (west of Newhaven–Crewe junction–Coltbridge junction), 1968 (east of Newhaven–Leith), 1986 (north of Pilton West–Granton).
CONVERSION TO CYCLETRACKS
Early in 1981 Lothian Regional Council decided that various disused railway lines should be acquired and that a rolling programme of cycleway/footpath improvement schemes should be prepared for this land and for other former railway land owned by the Regional Council.
The 1.8 km long Maidencraig Crescent–Silverknowes section of route was opened as a cycletrack in November 1983.
Progress on other sections of route has been as follows:
Other sections which it is hoped to complete work in the next few years include:
For most sections construction has been carried out for the Regional Council by teams employed under the Special Measures Programme of the City of Edinburgh District Council, with financial support from the Manpower Services Commission.
The section from Crewe Toll northwards to West Granton Road was built by volunteer labour organised through SPOKES, the Lothian Cycling Campaign Organisation.
USE OF THE CYCLETRACK
The route has been constructed for joint use by cyclists and pedestrians, although it will occasionally be used by motor vehicles for maintenance or emergency purposes.
Cyclists are asked to be aware of pedestrians and to take special care when approaching them, particularly elderly, disabled or blind people and young children.
A bell may be used to warn of a cyclist's presence.
Cyclists should take particular care when entering the route or emerging on to the road at the accesses.
Some cyclists may prefer to dismount in order to make these turns, especially when crossing a road.
The ‘slot and bar’ access has been designed to allow cyclists to negotiate it at low speeds or dismounted.
In a few instances the height difference between the route and the surrounding ground has meant that steps have had to be installed.
Here there is usually a ramp or board up which cyclists may push their bicycle.
CONSTRUCTION
The disused railway bed has been almost completely overgrown following the closure of the railway.
This has been cleared over a width sufficient for the new track, but leaving those bushes and trees which were to be retained to form part of the landscape of the line.
Thus a rigid, straight alignment has been avoided.
The track is generally 3 metres wide allowing for use by both cyclists and pedestrians.
On either side of this a further half metre has been cleared of obstacles which could catch and upset a cyclist riding near the edge of the track.
Gates or pens for pedestrian access and ‘slot and bar’ for cyclists have been installed to limit access to the intended users and keep out motor cyclists, cars and other unauthorised motor vehicles.
The cycle track was first formed with a 100mm thick compacted layer of old railway ballast, surfaced with a 25mm thick layer of fine crushed whin stone.
This surface is generally satisfactory for modest numbers of cyclists riding at moderate speeds and for use by pedestrians and people with prams and wheelchairs.
However, with experience of rather higher levels of use an asphalt surface has now been added to reduce annual maintenance costs.
The drainage system over some sections of route has also had to be refurbished or renewed.
On the 85 m long viaduct over the Water of Leith and at other bridges over local roads the original parapet has been raised for reasons of public safety, and lighting is being provided on sections of route in built-up areas.
TRAFFIC SIGNS FOR CYCLISTS
Cyclists, like other road users, must obey the traffic signs erected generally as required along roads.
Some signs have been erected in Edinburgh specifically to help cyclists, as follows:
SAFETY
In recent years cycling has grown in popularity and regrettably the number of accidents involving cyclists has increased to approximately 250 per year in Lothian Region.
Within Edinburgh three quarters of accidents happen at road junctions so take special care when travelling to or from this cycle track.
Bicycle riders are exposed and vulnerable, and when they are involved in accidents their machines give them virtually no protection.
Wear a helmet, especially if using fast roads.
Cyclists, this special cycle track will help you make your journey safer.
There are other steps which can be taken in addition to help further:
keep your bicycle in good working order and fitted with suitable reflectors
follow the rules that apply to other road users, observing the warning signs and those giving orders, traffic lights, pedestrian crossings, one-way streets and the requirements of the Highway Code
keep a good look out all around
signal clearly and in good time before making any turn or changing lanes
do not make sudden swerves, particularly around parked vehicles, or zig-zag moves which surprise other road users
take particular care when cycling in or alongside traffic queues
wear bright clothes and use bright lights at night.
A reflective and fluorescent belt, arm-band, slipover or jacket can help you to be seen better.
CYCLING ORGANISATIONS
There are several organisations for cyclists in the Edinburgh area including:.
FURTHER INFORMATION
The routes along the Water of Leith path, to which this cycletrack is connected at Coltbridge viaduct, are described in a series of free leaflets issued by the City of Edinburgh District Council Planning Department .
There are two publications covering cycle facilities in Edinburgh.
The District Council and the Regional Council have jointly published a free leaflet ‘Cycle Routes in Edinburgh’ which is obtainable from the Department of Highways,
SPOKES, the Lothian Cycling Campaign, have produced a more detailed map covering most of Edinburgh showing various kinds of facilities and advisory routes for cyclists.
This is available at a price of £1.50, inclusive of post and packaging, from their office c/o St Martin's Church,.
Some leaflets have been published by the Department of Transport for public information.
In recent years these have covered topics such as traffic signs for cyclists, and high visibility equipment for pedestrians, cyclists and motorcyclists.
Copies of the leaflet about the latter may be obtained from Police Headquarters, Fettes.
There are several publications on the history of the Caledonian Railway, some of which may be available in local libraries.
LOTHIAN REGION STRUCTURE PLAN 1993
A GUIDE TO POLICIES AND PROPOSALS
Introduction
If you are concerned about how Lothian Region might change over the next fifteen years or so, this leaflet will be of interest to you.
Lothian Regional Council has issued a Draft Structure Plan for consultation which will replace the current Plan approved in 1986.
The new Plan will guide the way that the Region will change into the next century.
People living and working in Lothian, visitors, those wishing to invest in the area, and those providing services, will all be interested in what the Plan has to say.
The Plan is only a proposal at this stage and the Regional Council wishes to receive as many views as possible before coming to a decision.
What is the Structure Plan?
Government requires the Council to prepare this important document.
It sets out the Regional Council's policies for the use of land and for transport.
In doing so, it lays the foundations for achieving a better environment, assisting the economy and improving the quality of life up to the year 2005.
It indicates how the challenge of providing for homes and jobs can be met, while still conserving the best of our environment.
Broad areas where change is expected to take place are identified.
However, it is not the Structure Plan's job to show specific sites for development.
Local plans, prepared by the District Councils, will identify specific sites for the broad amounts of development in the Structure Plan.
How can I get involved?
The Regional Council wishes to encourage widespread awareness of the Draft Structure Plan and invites people to submit their views.
It is not possible to explain the reasoning behind the proposals or their details in this leaflet — these are in the Plan itself.
This leaflet summarises the Plan and explains how you can find out more to enable you to submit your views by the middle of August 1993.
Your choice for Lothian Region
The Region's population is set to grow.
Changes in lifestyle and increasing numbers of households also mean that more homes will be required.
The labour force will increase.
Some of the land that will be needed for new houses and businesses is already available, but a lot of new land is also required.
The role of the Structure Plan is therefore to identify where to build new homes and businesses, taking account of planning objectives.
Many of these objectives conflict and it is not possible to achieve them all.
The Plan is therefore about making choices.
The Plan has also been constrained by the need to make the best use of existing and proposed investment in drainage works, transport facilities and schools.
Investment is required to tackle existing problems, but in doing so scope for new development will be created.
The Plan sets out a vision to improve the quality of life.
Its strategy builds upon the Region's strengths, tackles the problems of deprived areas, accommodates new development, cares for the environment and, above all, puts people and their communities first.
What are the Plan's objectives?
The following objectives are developed in the Plan's detailed policies and are reflected in its overall strategy to meet future demands.
improving the natural and built environment;
spreading economic opportunities;
protecting urban areas from overdevelopment;
helping to regenerate disadvantaged areas;
promoting improved public transport and managing traffic;
making the best use of infrastructure.
The Strategy
The strategy emphasises measures to improve the quality of existing urban areas.
Although new housing will be encouraged within these areas, important open spaces and the amenity of residential areas will be protected.
A key goal in improving quality within Edinburgh is to prevent the further deterioration of the city's environment as a result of traffic growth.
Travel demand will be influenced through a number of short and long term measures.
Another aspect of improving quality will be to focus on the many areas where problems of poverty and unemployment will persist if special measures are not taken.
These include some of the city's peripheral housing areas and parts of the other Districts.
The Plan will complement programmes of community regeneration already aimed at these areas.
If the Region's urban areas are not to be overdeveloped, greenfield land will be required for housing and businesses over the next fifteen years.
The strategy proposes that the majority of this land should be found beyond the Edinburgh Green Belt, in areas accessible to jobs and public transport, and where the best landscapes will not be affected.
A Green Belt around the city will remain an important planning policy.
The recreational potential of some of the green ‘wedges’ will be assessed and environmental improvements elsewhere in the Green Belt will be encouraged.
However, Edinburgh will generate most of the housing demand in the Region.
To meet some of this demand close to the city, where housing can be better served by public transport, and where journeys to work will be shorter than from more remote areas, some Green Belt land, for example to the south east of the city, will be developed.
This will be linked to improvements in the existing communities.
Although jobs will continue to be concentrated in the city centre, South Gyle and in West Lothian, the strategy proposes new land to attract jobs to East Lothian, Midlothian and east Edinburgh.
Some new land for businesses is also proposed in central West Lothian, including sites for high-technology industry.
The strategy foresees this part of the District, around Livingston, developing as a more self contained area for housing and jobs.
In summary, the Plan identifies three core areas for the majority of land for new housing and businesses.
These are south east Edinburgh/north Midlothian, central West Lothian including Livingston, and the western part of East Lothian.
Some development is also proposed in south Midlothian, Currie, North Berwick, Dunbar and west West Lothian.
In case building increases and further developments are needed, the feasibility of new settlements near to Kirknewton, Winchburgh and Longniddry will be looked at, but no decisions will be taken about these until detailed studies are completed.
Environment
Protecting and improving the environment lies at the heart of the Plan's strategy.
As well as planning transport and development together, the Plan seeks to conserve the best of our towns and countryside.
In urban areas this means protecting the elements that make them attractive, whilst seeking to improve those areas that would benefit from regeneration.
Outside urban areas, development in the newly defined Green Belt will be strictly controlled.
The open countryside will be protected, but recreation and nature conservation will be encouraged.
Transport
Development has been located in areas that name the most effective use of bus and rail networks.
Also, to make a start in tackling traffic problems, the strategy promotes measures that can be achieved quickly, while safeguarding more ambitious long term proposals.
Short term measures include improved routes for buses on the city's main radial roads, traffic calming, investigating park and ride facilities, as well as Scottish Office proposals to extend the M8 to the City Bypass, a northern bypass of Dalkeith, and dualling the A1.
There are also plans to upgrade the rail system with a new station at Wallyford, and sites for new stations will be safeguarded elsewhere.
In the longer term, provided finance becomes available, the Plan proposes a new Light Rapid Transit system to eventually run east to west and north to south across the city.
In the meantime, the Plan will safeguard the routes.
Other safeguarded longer term schemes include Scottish Office proposals for a second Forth Road Bridge and other improvements to main roads.
Shopping
The Plan aims to improve the quality of the environment in existing shopping centres.
Proposals to increase the range of shopping facilities available in these centres will be encouraged, provided their impact on other centres is acceptable and in Edinburgh city centre, where they do not affect the centre's environment.
If new shops cannot be provided in these centres, completely new centres will only be considered where strict conditions can be met.
Lastly, local plans are asked to identify two new sites for retail parks, one to be located in north Edinburgh and the other in the western half of West Lothian.
How can I find out more?
There are several ways that you can find out more and let the Regional Council know what you think about the Draft Structure Plan:
Visit the Exhibition about the Plan
An exhibition and participation desk where staff will be on hand to answer questions is available at  from 31 May until 30 July and will be open between the hours of 9.00am–4.30pm.
Monday to Friday.
Small local exhibitions are also being held at the following locations and staff will be available at selected times to answer your questions.
Watch your local press for details:
Telephone the Participation Desk
The telephone number for the participation desk is  and if you have any questions about the plan a member of staff will be on hand to help you.
Read the Draft Structure Plan
The Draft Plan consists of a ‘Written Statement’ describing the strategy and policies, a ‘Key Diagram’showing how the proposals affect different parts of the Region, and a ‘Report of Survey’with background data.
Copies are available for inspection at all local libraries throughout the Region and at the Participation Desk.
Copies of the Plan can also be purchased at a cost of £5 (Report of Survey £5 extra).
Please telephone the participation desk to obtain a copy..
Write to the Director of Planning at the following address:.
All comments should be submitted by Monday 16 August 1993.
What happens next?
All comments about the Structure Plan will be carefully considered by the Regional Council and, if adjustments to the Plan are considered necessary, these will be made before the Plan is finalised and submitted to the Secretary of State.
It will be assumed that all responses can be published unless you indicate otherwise.
In any event, all responses will be summarised in a report on the public consultation exercise.
When the final Plan is submitted to the Secretary of State, there will be a further period to submit representations or objections about the finalised Plan to him.
DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL WORK
MEALS ON WHEELS
WOMEN'S ROYAL VOLUNTARY SERVICE
Meals on Wheels are provided as a integral part of the Social Work Department's Home Care Service.
The aim is to assist elderly and housebound people to be as independent as possible within their own homes.
The Women's Royal Voluntary Service (WRVS) plays a major role in organising and delivering these meals to the homes of elderly people.
WHO MAY BE ELIGIBLE FOR THE SERVICE?
those who are unable to cook for themselves because they are disabled or frail or have become very forgetful;
those who have no other person available to assist;
those who cannot get out to attend lunch clubs, etc.
HOW TO APPLY
Any person can apply for the Meals on Wheels Service.
Requests are often received from Doctors, Hospitals, Social Workers, or from a friend or neighbour who knows of someone who may benefit from the service.
Individuals can apply for meals themselves — all applications are given the same consideration.
WHERE TO APPLY
Applications are made to the Home Care Organiser in the local Social Work Department Office.
Each application is looked at carefully to make sure that those in most need will receive the service.
The Organiser will visit the person at home to establish whether or not Meals would be the answer to the problem.
Thereafter, a regular visit will be made to ensure that a meal continues to be necessary as there are many others in need of this service.
WHAT MEALS ARE PROVIDED?
The meals, which are prepared in Social Work Department or Education Department kitchens, are transported in heated containers to individual homes; usually a nutritious two-course meal of meat, two vegetables and a sweet, or perhaps soup, provided in disposable tin-foil containers.
Each WRVS delivery round serves up to 40 people a day over a two-hour period around lunch time.
The rounds usually follow a regular delivery pattern so that the meal will generally be delivered at a regular time.
SPECIAL DIET OR FOOD ALLERGIES
If a special diet is required or any allergies to food are known, it is important to tell the Home Care Organiser at the Social Work Office.
COST AND PAYMENT FOR MEALS
The current cost of the meal will be given on application, and any change in that cost will be given in advance, usually in writing.
It will be appreciated that it is necessary to make payment for meals to the person who delivers when they ask for payment.
It is important, therefore, to have the correct money ready.
DELIVERY OF MEALS
Meals are delivered to approximately 2,500 people in Lothian Region each week.
You will be advised on which days of the week your meal will be delivered.
Meals are not delivered at weekends.
Once meals are being delivered regularly, the WRVS helper will be very concerned if she cannot get an answer when she calls and every effort will be made to ensure that the recipient is safe.
It is therefore very important that the WRVS helper, driver or the local Home Care Organiser at the Social Work Office, is informed when a recipient is going on holiday or attending hospital.
COMMENTS
Comments about food or the delivery of the service can be made to either the WRVS helper/driver or the Home Care Organiser at the Social Work Office.
FOOD FOR THOUGHT
A meal provided through the Meals on Wheels Service will provide one third of the daily intake required for good health, and to ensure that you get most benefit from your meal, it should be eaten as soon as it is delivered to you.
We strongly advise you against reheating your meal at a later time.
Eating sensibly is vitally important for health, and good health will help you enjoy life to the full.
Many ailments which are blamed on old age could be avoided if everyone ate a healthy diet.
When planning your other meals, try to include as many as possible of these goods each day —
SAMPLE MENU
Breakfast: Porridge, glass of fruit juice, toasted whole-meal bread.
Tea: Poached fish in cheese sauce, peas, baked potato, piece of fresh fruit.
YOUR FOOD CUPBOARD
Here is a list of items it would be wise to keep in your cupboard:
SOCIAL WORK OFFICES
Please do not hesitate to make enquiries of the Home Care Staff based in these offices:
PENTLAND HILLS
Land use
The Pentland Hills are viewed increasingly as an area with high recreational potential, lying as they do on the very doorstep of Edinburgh.
What is often forgotten is that many people derive their living from them.
Farming is Britain's major industry and along with forestry is the major user of the hill land.
Other land uses in the Pentlands include:
Agricultural Research
Military Training
Sport and Recreation
Water Catchment and Storage
Mineral Extraction
Settlement
Sites of Special Scientific Interest
Some of these uses are zoned either in time or space or both.
Grouse shooting, for example, occurs only during a fixed period each year, whilst military training is carried out periodically throughout the year.
Water catchment continues the whole year round.
These uses are on land which is also used for farming.
The lower more level land, around Balerno, for example, is good agricultural land.
Much of it is intensively managed grassland carrying a heavy stocking of dairy cattle.
Most of the arable ground is used to produce winter feed for the stock.
Oats, barley, turnips and hay are grown and occasionally kale where there is overwintering of sheep on the low ground.
Farms are fairly small but increase in size nearer the hills.
The largest farms have over 2000 acres of hill land and about 200 acres of arable ground.
The traditional agricultural land use in the Pentland Hills is sheep farming, mainly of pure bred Blackface flocks.
The stocking rate is high compared to other areas of Scotland, one ewe to two acres being fairly normal, with perhaps one ewe to three acres on the poorer ground.
Lambs are either fattened at ‘home’ or sold for fattening elsewhere, according to the amount of arable land attached to the farm.
Often there is a seasonal flow of lambs within large or linked enterprises, the lambs being fattened or ‘finished’ on the richer lower ground farms away from the hills.
The lower hill-slope fields show signs of reverting to a semi-natural state.
Colonies of rushes can be seen growing in damp hollows along the lines of the old tile drains.
This points strongly to the decreasing profitability of upland sheep farming in that the labour and machinery costs of maintaining the drainage system cannot be justified against the potential income from the land.
A certain amount of diversification has occurred in the hill farms in that an increasing number of beef cattle are now kept, herds varying from 15–60 cows per farm.
Various breeds are kept with ‘Blue Greys’, ie Shorthorn/Galloway cross bred with Aberdeen Angus bulls, being one of the most common.
Commercial forestry is of small importance in the Pentlands area generally, the only significant forest being the newly planted West Cairns Plantation to the south of Harperrig Reservoir.
This was planted by the Forestry Commission in 1972.
Some private planting has been carried out around Baddinsgill above West Linton.
The main interest of planting in the area lies in the well planned system of shelterbelts.
These belts, mainly of deciduous trees such as beech, sycamore and oak were planted over 150 years ago, and mark a high spot in land use planning and indeed in agriculture generally.
Modern planting tends to be done in large blocks, not for shelter, but as a crop in its own right.
Thus, the preferred tree species are mostly fast growing conifers such as Sitka, Norway spruce, Lodgepole pine and hybrid larch.
In these days of high land values and intensive land use it is comforting to the conservationists among us to see areas such as Threipmuir Common being designated as a Site of Special Interest and thus being left to nature.
The natural regeneration of pine and birch scrub is a strong encouragement to small bird and animal life.
4.6% of the land area of the Pentlands is used specifically for Agricultural Research.
The Hill Farming Research Organisation and the Edinburgh Centre of Rural Economy carry out important experimentation and scientific study on the slopes around the Flotterstone area.
The army use a large acreage in the northern sector of the Pentlands as a training area and rifle range.
This area is open to the public outside the firing template or even inside when firing is not in progress.
There are thirteen reservoirs in the Pentland Hills.
They contribute 4 million gallons of water daily towards the 42 million gallons used in Edinburgh every day.
In addition they provide compensation water into the burns and rivers ensuring a continual supply to those users who tap straight into them for their supply, eg. industrial users along the Water of Leith.
There are many quarry sites within the area, mostly standing derelict and providing the geologists with ideal study areas.
The largest used quarry is at Torphin on the northern slopes.
Other smaller but nonetheless important uses of land are houses, roads, electricity supply lines, footpaths, water and gas pipe lines.
Increasingly, the use of land for recreation is a feature of the Pentland Hills.
Over 700 acres on the northern slopes are set aside specifically for public recreational use, ie Hillend and Bonaly Parks which are under consideration for designation as Country Parks.
There are nearly sixty miles of footpath rights-of-ways, and four golf courses.
It can be seen that considerable pressure is being put on the land by these many uses.
The pressures on the hill-land affect the wildlife most of all, hence the need for conservation areas.
There can be no doubt that by cooperation and good management policies, this pressure can be eased to soften its effect on any one land user.
Of course the most important issue of all is retaining the intrinsic beauty of the hills, not only for us, but for future generations.
Pentland Hills Ranger Service
The Regional Council, with the advice and financial assistance of the Countryside Commission for Scotland, has formed a Ranger Service.
The Rangers will help the area and visitors by advising, guiding and informing them about the Hills and the many interests to be seen and enjoyed.
At the same time the Service will keep the Countryside Code firmly in front of all who use the hills so that we all develop the ‘good manners’ which will assist, rather than hinder, the work of the farmers and other principal users.
Litter collection, footpath repairs and other ‘odd-jobs’ will be carried out, and the Rangers are available, during the quieter part of the year, to visit and lecture at schools or other organisations.
From the small Countryside Centre at Hillend,() you may have further information about the Hills especially the Countryside Parks of Hillend and Bonaly.
Access
These notes are intended to add enjoyment to your walks and views of the Hills.
You may not assume that you can go anywhere you like — most of the land is privately owned and actively farmed.
Military use for army training and the protection of your pure water supplies demand that, in some areas, public use is restricted.
Good ‘Rights of Way’ do exist and the Public Parks of Hillend and Bonaly also provide opportunities for informal outdoor recreation.
If you wish to visit areas over which there are restrictions, check with the farmer or the water officer or other person responsible; the Ranger Service will be able to advise you.
Please remember to keep dogs under control and away from sheep and cattle.
The Pentland Hills are covered by the following maps:
SIGHTHILL BYPASS 1986
INTRODUCTION
The arguments in favour of the provision of an outer bypass for Edinburgh, designed to a high standard, are so overwhelming that Lothian Regional Council is maintaining a continuing construction programme aimed at completion of the entire bypass by 1990.
Following a route which will be some 23 km (14 miles) in length, the City Bypass commences at Glasgow Road (A8) immediately west of the bridge over Edinburgh/Aberdeen railway and follows a generally south-easterly alignment terminating at its junction with the Musselburgh Bypass close to Old Craighall.
The entire project, together with the Musselburgh and Portobello Bypasses, has an estimated overall cost of £126 million, a proportion of the City Bypass costs being met by Central Government.
The second of five sections of City Bypass to be constructed, the Sighthill Bypass forms a much-needed link between Glasgow Road and the northern end of the Colinton Bypass upon which construction work began in 1979.
Completion of this latter 5½ km (3½ mile) section in 1981 gave considerable relief not only to the residents of the Colinton area, who, for some time, had been experiencing increasing traffic congestion in and around Colinton Village, but also to drivers attempting to avoid the city centre.
Construction of the Sighthill Bypass commenced in September 1984 and with work substantially complete by the end of 1986 it is being opened to traffic some nine months ahead of programme.
Meanwhile, site work on the Burdiehouse Section is well advanced with that for the Millerhill and Gilmerton Sections due to start later in 1987.
DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION
This project has been conceived and designed by engineering staff in the Regional Council's Department of Highways with assistance being given by ScotRail and Messrs J B Schofield and Partners in the design and construction supervision of the two bridges carrying the Edinburgh/Carstairs railway over the Sighthill Bypass and associated roadworks and in the temporary diversion of this railway.
These bridges were constructed by Messrs French Keir Ltd in advance of the main roadworks.
British Waterways Board have advised on the construction of the Union Canal aqueduct which was designed by Messrs Scott, Wilson Kirkpatrick & Partners.
The actual work of constructing the Sighthill Bypass was undertaken by Messrs Balfour Beatty Construction (Scotland) Limited under the terms of a contract valued at just under £13 million and supervision of this work was provided by Department of Highways staff, the Director of Highways being the Engineer for the Works.
The new road is a dual 2-lane carriageway, 9.3 metres wide incorporating 1-metre-wide hard strips at each edge.
A single 9.3-metre-wide carriageway realignment of the Edinburgh/Kilmarnock road (A71) has been provided with localised dualling where required at junctions west of the Bypass.
From the Bypass east to the city limits, the A71 has been built as a dual carriageway, 7.3 metres wide.
GEOLOGY AND GROUND CONDITIONS
The route is underlain by sedimentary rocks of the Lower Oil Shale Group of the Calciferous Sandstone Measures of the Carboniferous Series with igneous intrusions in places.
Bedrock does not outcrop anywhere but is nonetheless in a highly weathered condition throughout the site.
Overlying the bedrock is a highly variable thickness (between 1 m and 20 m) of glacial and post-glacial deposits, most of which are heavily over-consolidated and commonly known as ‘boulder clay’ or ‘lodgement till’.
Over the northern section of the site, fluvioglacial silty sandy gravels are encountered, sometimes overlying the boulder clay and sometimes resting directly on bedrock.
In turn, the gravels are themselves overlain by alluvial silty uniform sands around the junction with A8 and by lacustrine silty clay, peat and silt, associated with the former Gogar Loch, around the Gogar Burn and along South Gyle Broadway, and special measures had to be taken during the construction of embankments in these areas in order to avoid over-stressing the sub-strata and to accelerate the anticipated settlements.
Isolated pockets of alluvium and fluvioglacial material were encountered in various small valleys along the route which had been formed as glacial melt-water channels.
GENERAL ROUTE DESCRIPTION
From its terminus at the new roundabout on Glasgow Road, the Sighthill Section follows a gently curving alignment in a southerly direction for some 4.7 km (3 miles) until it connects with the northern end of the Colinton Section close to Clovenstone Roundabout on Westerhailes Road.
The route lies predominantly within agricultural land of good quality apart from a section to the south of the Edinburgh/Carstairs main railway line where it is flanked by residential developments.
A total of 18 structures have been built enabling the new road to cross a variety of obstacles including two railway lines, a major road and a canal.
In addition, ramps have been added to the existing footbridge over Glasgow Road at Gogarburn Hospital to help those in wheelchairs or with prams to cross this road safely.
In addition to the construction of the bypass, a new road linking the South Gyle Industrial Estate to A8 (Glasgow Road) has been provided as has a diversion of a section of A71 (the Edinburgh to Kilmarnock road) which gives relief from fast-moving heavy traffic to Hermiston Village.
A short length of new road linking Westburn Avenue to Baberton Mains Hill has been built passing beneath the Edinburgh/Carstairs railway which itself was diverted temporarily to facilitate the construction of this bridge and a larger one carrying the railway over the new bypass.
JUNCTIONS
To provide access to and from the Bypass it was necessary to provide five junctions — these are briefly described this:
Junctions with A8 Glasgow Road
Extremely heavy traffic flows on Glasgow Road dictated that very special consideration had to be given to this junction situated at the extreme north end of the Sighthill Bypass.
In addition the proximity of the flight-path for the second runway at Edinburgh Airport placed stringent height restrictions on the form of this junction leading to the selection of a large surface-level roundabout.
The asymmetric shape of the central island was necessitated as a result of the provision of a new dual-carriageway connection to South Gyle Industrial Estate.
Junction with A71 Calder Road
As with the Glasgow Road junction, the projected heavy traffic flows through this junction and also the requirement for traffic movement on to and off the bypass in both north and south directions pointed to the need for an intersection catering for all traffic movements.
This was achieved using a grade-separated interchange with A71 traffic flowing through a new roundabout at ground level and the bypass traffic passing beneath in a cutting formed in very stiff boulder clay.
Full slip-road provision gives multi-directional access.
Baberton/Westburn Access
From the north, the access to Baberton and Westburn/Westerhailes is adequately provided by the Calder Road interchange and local road network.
Hence there was only a requirement for access from the south and this has been provided by utilising the existing slip road from Clovenstone Roundabout on Westerhailes Road for traffic joining the bypass and travelling south and by forming a new connection into Baberton Mains View for northbound traffic leaving the bypass.
This junction is intended for use by local traffic only and will be signed to local destinations, longer-distance traffic being directed to leave the bypass via the Calder Road interchange.
A71 and Riccarton Mains Road
The close proximity of this junction to that between A71 and the link to Hermiston Village and Gogar Station Road created a ‘staggered T’ effect and due to the relatively high speed of traffic on the re-aligned A71 compared with the original flows through Hermiston Village, a section of this new A71 was widened locally and a central reserve created to form a short stretch of dual carriageway thus providing for safer turning movements within the junctions.
A71 and Cultins Road
Access to Cultins Road had previously been taken from the small roundabout immediately east of the Union Canal.
With the extension westwards of the Calder Road dual carriageway, access to and from Cultins Road is now via the east-bound carriageway of Calder Road.
Baberton/Westburn Link
The alignment of the bypass through the Baberton/Westburn areas required the permanent closure of Baberton Mains Terrace — thus the housing area at Baberton would have only one entry point.
Clearly this was unacceptable both from an amenity point of view and for access by emergency services.
Therefore a new link road was created joining Westburn Avenue to Baberton Mains Hill by passing beneath the Edinburgh/Carstairs railway line.
STRUCTURES
As well as construction of the eighteen individual structures, temporary diversions of almost 800 metres of the Edinburgh/Carstairs railway line and 150 metres of the Union Canal were required.
Edinburgh/Carstairs Railway
Diversion of the railway permitted the construction of two bridges, one with a steel deck, the other concrete, to allow the railway to pass over the bypass and the new Baberton/Westburn link road.
This section of the project was undertaken in advance of the lain roadworks contract.
Union Canal Aqueduct
Continuing demand in Edinburgh for water from the Union Canal made it necessary for the new aqueduct, which would eventually carry the canal over the bypass at Hermiston, to be constructed without interruption to the flow in the canal and the contractor elected to use an open channel diversion capable of passing 237 litres per second.
In addition an on-site back-up pumping arrangement with a similar throughput was required to be on permanent standby in order that continuity of water level was maintained on either side of the diversion.
The four-span concrete structure is post-tensioned and is the second aqueduct to be built by Lothian Regional Council for this canal in recent years.
The aqueduct was designed to British Waterways Board specification by Messrs Scott, Wilson, Kirkpatrick and Partners.
The overall length of the aqueduct is 94 metres and provides a navigable waterway 4 metres wide and 1.5 metres deep.
Also included are 2-metre-wide walkways on either side of the canal cantilevered out from the main trough.
Edinburgh/Glasgow Railway
Because of the density of traffic on this railway and its high operational speed most of the construction work had to be carried out during possessions of the track.
These possessions were only available from midnight on Saturdays to 7.30 am on Sundays and thus much concentrated effort was required from the contractor during these periods.
Special precautions were taken to ensure the stability of the track during excavation for the foundations of the structure.
Reinforced concrete abutments support precast ‘U’ section prestressed beams on individual rubber bearing pads over a clear span of 13.6 metres.
A thin reinforced concrete slab over the beams provides support for the bituminous carriageway surfacing and an in situ concrete high-containment barrier protects the railway from errant vehicles.
General Structures
Other major structures include two curved four-span in situ reinforced concrete bridges carrying A71 traffic across the bypass interchange, and a similar bridge (though straight) supporting Westburn Avenue at its crossing point.
Bridging Baberton Mains View is a single-span structure carrying the bypass and constructed using pre-cast beams on reinforced concrete abutments to support the deck.
A similar arrangement was used to bridge the Union Canal at Calder Crescent where the re-aligned A71 crosses the canal.
Miscellaneous structures include 3 culverts for the Gogar and Murray Burns.
one of which incorporates a bridleway, a farm accommodation bridge, an agricultural underpass, two footbridges and various retaining walls.
In addition, ramps have been added to the existing footbridge at Gogarburn Hospital to facilitate is use by those with wheelchairs and prams.
TUNNELLING
Diversions of existing deep foul sewers were undertaken using a combination of pipe-jacking and mini-tunnel techniques over a total length of 455 metres — the longest drive being 342 metres of 1-metre diameter mini-tunnel beneath both new and old A71 and the Union Canal.
Design work associated with the tunnelling operations was undertaken by the Regional Council's Department of Water and Drainage.
ENVIRONMENTAL CONSIDERATIONS
To alleviate many of the problems often caused by the intrusion of new roads into the landscape, a major programme of planting is being undertaken to provide densely wooded areas, shrub groups, waterside planting and specimen tree groups.
This work is being designed by the Regional Council's landscape consultants, the Turnbull-Jeffrey Partnership and carried out under a series of contracts aimed at completion by Spring 1988.
Already the new roundabout on Glasgow Road is a striking example of the high standards being sought.
The interior of Hermiston Village, once torn apart by unremitting heavy traffic has now been bypassed by the realignment of A71 and this has provided an opportunity to improve the local environment immeasurably by the adoption of various hard and soft landscaping measures.
PROJECT COSTS
Taking into account the effects of inflation, the estimated cost of the Sighthill Bypass is £20.4 million.
This estimation includes items such as design charges, land acquisition, public utility diversions, advance bridgeworks, construction, tunnelling, landscaping and planting, main roadworks, structures, road signs and accommodation works such as fencing, etc.
The scheme is part-financed by the Scottish Development Department.
FACTS AND FIGURES
In under 2½ years, contractor Balfour Beatty Construction (Scotland) Limited who were awarded the £12.6 million roadworks contract have excavated approximately 40,000 cu m of rock and 500,000 cu m of coil, and have compacted 450,000 cu m of fill of which about 200,000 cu m was imported.
Bridgeworks involved the fixing of some 1,300 tonnes of reinforcement and the pouring of 11,500 cu m of concrete.
The temporary diversion of the Union Canal had to guarantee passage of 4½ million gallons of water a day with a similar standby capacity, whilst the Edinburgh/Carstairs railway was temporarily diverted over a length of almost 800 metres.
A total of over 12 km (nearly 8 miles) of fencing, 43 km (27 miles) of kerbing, 6 km (4 miles) of safety barriers, 27 km (17 miles) of drains and 17 hectares (42 acres) of asphalt surfacing have been provided.
Under separate landscaping contracts, some 2,500 trees, 200,000 forestry transplants and shrubs and 4 km (2½ miles) of hedging will ultimately be planted in a total of 24 hectares (60 acres) which will include 2½ hectares (1 acre) of formal tree and shrub planting.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The Regional Council would like to thank the following organisations for their co-operation during the design and construction of the Sighthill Section of the City By-pass: and all others whose valued contributions have been received.
CITY BYPASS SIGHTHILL SECTION (SOUTHERN)
DISCUSSION PAPER
INTRODUCTION
Lothian Regional Council has decided that the next section of the Edinburgh City Bypass to be constructed as a matter of priority will be the Sighthill Section.
This leaflet is concerned with the southern part of the Sighthill Section only, extending from the Murray Burn to the Colinton Section of the Bypass at present under construction.
The remainder of the Sighthill Section extending northwards from the Murray Burn to the Edinburgh/Glasgow Road (A8) has been the subject of a Public Inquiry and the line of this part of the road has only recently been confirmed by the Secretary of State.
In view of this, proposals for the northern part of the Section are only at a preliminary stage, and are therefore not included in this leaflet.
This leaflet should be read in conjunction with the explanatory drawings and photographic montages illustrating the section of new road under construction, i.e from the Murray Burn to Baberton Mains View.
These will be available for public inspection at an exhibition to be mounted by Lothian Regional Council from 22nd December 1980 for a period of five days.
Further details on dates and times of admission will be advertised in the local press prior to the exhibition taking place.
PUBLIC PARTICIPATION
Please visit the exhibition where members of staff from the Department of Highways will be present to explain the new road proposals in the Westburn/Baberton area.
The Council would welcome any comments or suggestions on these proposals, particularly with regard to the high or low level options for the route in the vicinity of the Baberton and Westburn housing developments, so that public opinion can be reflected in the design of the road where possible.
The Regional Council must obtain planning consent for the new road from Edinburgh District Council before any construction work can begin.
It is hoped to submit a formal planning application in due course when a further public exhibition will be held showing the final layout of the road and the public will again have an opportunity to comment on the scheme at this time.
All correspondence should be sent to the Director of Highways whose address appears at the bottom of the back page.
GENERAL INFORMATION
The proposals for an Edinburgh City Bypass have been approved as part of the Regional Council's Transport Policy, the intention being to provide a rapid and safe route around the city for traffic whose origin and destination lies outwith the City Boundary.
It will also perform the secondary functions of distributing traffic with local destinations and provide some relief to traffic congestion in the city centre.
The Bypass is divided into five sections, namely: and when all sections are completed it will extend from the Glasgow/Edinburgh Road (A8) in the west, to the Musselburgh Bypass in the east, providing a continuous route around the city.
The Colinton Section of the Bypass was approved by Planning Committee in November 1977 and is now under construction with a completion date scheduled for early next year.
The Sighthill Section is required to connect the Glasgow/Edinburgh Road (A8) with the northern end of the Colinton Section and should eventually provide traffic relief to local routes such as Wester Hailes Road which will, on carrying only local traffic, result in increased amenity and convenience.
The remaining three sections will be constructed at a later date to link between the eastern end of the Colinton Section and the Musselburgh Bypass.
LIMITS ON THE CHOICE OF ROUTE
The route for the southern part of the Sighthill Section is rigidly constrained within an area bounded by the housing developments of Westburn and Baberton and the fixed location of the junction with the Colinton Section.
Design Standards for this section will be similar to those for the Colinton Section consisting of dual two-lane carriageways with a central reservation and verges at the shoulders.
The alignment proposed follows the Development Plan Line and development control has affected this part of the route for over 20 years.
Planning consent for both housing layouts was granted in the knowledge of the Bypass proposal.
COMMENTS ON VERTICAL ALIGNMENT
There are two vertical alignments possible for this section of the Bypass.
The road could run between the Westburn and Baberton housing developments on embankment or structure, crossing over Baberton Mains farm access road, the Edinburgh/Carstairs Railway and Baberton Mains Terrace.
Alternatively the Bypass could be set in cutting, and bridge under the farm access road and the railway before crossing Baberton Mains Terrace at existing road level.
As a result of closing Baberton Mains Terrace the low level option would require a new access road to serve the Baberton Housing Estate.
Both high and low level schemes bridge over Baberton Mains View before merging with the northern end of the Colinton Section at present under construction.
CLOSURE OF BABERTON MAINS TERRACE
Three schemes have been prepared based on the low level vertical alignment showing possible routes for a new access to the Baberton Estate.
All are included in the exhibition and it may be helpful to examine the proposals with the aid of the drawings and photographs on display.
(i) Scheme L1
Access via a new railway underbridge some 300 metres to the west of the Bypass/Railway crossing with a new road provided to connect the estate roads with Westburn Avenue by following the line of the existing Baberton Mains Farm Access road and crossing over the Bypass by means of a new road bridge.
(ii) Scheme L1A
By widening the bridge under the Edinburgh/Carstairs railway and providing a new road alongside the Bypass connecting the severed Baberton Mains Terrace as directly as possible with Westburn Avenue by joining the line of the existing Baberton Mains Farm Access and crossing over the Bypass by means of a new road bridge as before.
(iii) Scheme L1B
Similar to (ii) except that the new access road after passing below the railway line continues northwards alongside the Bypass and under the line of the Baberton Mains Farm Access road before turning through a reverse loop to join this line and cross the Bypass as before.
PEDESTRIAN ACCESS
The existing footpath on the south side of the Edinburgh/Carstairs Railway will be accommodated adjacent to the new structure required to carry the Bypass over or under the railway.
Pedestrian access for residents in the northern part of the estate should be unchanged whatever scheme is adopted.
It is not intended to provide a pedestrian crossing of the Bypass at the location of the severed Baberton Mains Terrace if the low level option is adopted.
LANDSCAPING
Preliminary consultation with the Edinburgh District Council Planning Department has produced the following guidelines for the scheme landscaping:
1
A consultant landscape architect be appointed to advise on the treatment for the new road and its associated earthworks when the final alignment is known.
2
That the material stockpiled between Baberton Estate and Wester Hailes Road from the Colinton Section be regarded and included in the landscaping proposals for the Sighthill Section.
It should be noted that excess material from this stockpile will be used to form road embankments for the northern part of the Sighthill Section.
3
Where it is estimated that road noise on properties will be greater than the recommended maximum level of 68 dB (A), noise intrusion should be reduced by the formation of earth mounds wherever possible and landscaped as part of the roadworks.
If earth mounds are impracticable due to embankment heights, noise barriers in the form of walling or fencing should be provided and screened by means of earth ramps in addition to large scale planting of trees and shrubs.
4
The play area opposite Westburn Grove will be affected in varying degrees depending on the road scheme adopted.
It is intended that an adequate play area will be provided in the same vicinity within a specially landscaped area between the Bypass and Westburn Grove.
ALLOTMENTS
The high level option will not encroach upon the existing allotment area.
The low level option, because of the extra land requirement for the diversion of Baberton Mains Terrace, will affect the allotment area in various ways depending upon the scheme chosen.
In any scheme where allotment ground is lose, and a residual amount of land is left between the Bypass and the existing allotment boundary fence, this land could be made available to compensate for the loss.
IMPLEMENTATION
Preliminary estimates suggest a cost of between £3.5 million and £7 million at May 1980 prices for the southern part of the Sighthill Section depending on the scheme adopted.
More accurate costs will not be available until the detailed design requirements are known.
The estimated commencement date is 1983, with an anticipated construction period of approximately 2 years.
Within this period, construction will be phased to ensure the least possible disturbance to residents and local traffic.
If you would like to make any comments or suggestions on these proposals please write before 13 October 1980 to:.
MUSSELBURGH BYPASS (REGIONAL SECTION) EAST APPROACH TO LEITH
EXPLANATORY LEAFLET
INTRODUCTION
Lothian Regional Council has agreed that the Musselburgh Bypass (Regional Section) and East Approach to Leith are roads which should be constructed as a matter of priority.
Over the last year or so, design work has been progressed and the Regional Council has now submitted detailed planning applications to the City of Edinburgh and East Lothian District Councils.
These local planning authorities must give planning permission before construction work can begin on these roads.
In September 1978 a discussion paper was published and exhibitions were mounted to ensure that public opinion was reflected in the preparation of the road plans.
This was a worthwhile exercise which gave rise to a number of alterations.
The Regional Council now wishes to have further public exhibitions showing details of the planning applications and how public comment has been taken into account where possible.
This explanatory leaflet provides a brief description of changes made to the original design since September 1978.
Advertisements have been placed in the press giving dates when the proposals can be examined and further public comment made prior to the local planning authorities taking their decision.
The public exhibitions now being mounted and the publication of this leaflet by the Regional Council are intended to augment these procedures.
Please visit the exhibition if you can and send your views to either of the Directors of Administration whose addresses are on this leaflet, before 31 December 1979.
DESIGN CHANGES
Following public comment and prior to submission of the planning applications, many features of the road proposals have been amended.
The road design is now as shown on the photographic montages, and changes made in the design over the last year or so are described.
You will find it helpful to follow the proposals on the map.
1.
JUNCTION WITH OUTER CITY BYPASS
The location of this junction depends upon the alignment adopted for the Millerhill Section of the Outer City Bypass.
The original proposal to have the junction on Old Craighall Road (B6415) has been abandoned.
It is now proposed that the Outer City Bypass will connect to the trunk road section of the Musselburgh Bypass at a point to the east of Old Craighall Road by means of a free-flow junction.
Old Craighall Road therefore will remain unaffected by the Musselburgh Bypass, which will pass over it on a bridge.
There will be no direct connection between Musselburgh and the Musselburgh Bypass at this location.
The final design and location of the junction between the Outer City Bypass and the trunk road section of the Musselburgh Bypass are matters to be considered jointly by the Regional Council and the Scottish Development Department when finalising proposals for these schemes.
The Regional Council has been asked to approve an amended line for the Millerhill Section of the Outer City Bypass, between the Musselburgh Bypass and the A68 at Sheriffhall.
It is intended that priority then will be given to obtaining planning consent for this Section.
CLOSURE OF MUCKLETS ROAD
Lowering of embankment heights and improvements to the design of the Musselburgh Bypass can be achieved if Mucklets Road is closed where these two roads cross each other.
It is proposed therefore that closure of Mucklets Road takes place with provision of a new single carriageway road on the line of the disused railway between Newhailes Road (A6095) and Eskside West (B6415) to act as a replacement for Mucklets Road as an access route to Musselburgh (west).
This new road will be constructed as advance works for the Musselburgh Bypass project and will be funded from savings in costs resulting from the closure of Mucklets Road.
It will link with the new industrial access road to be provided by the Scottish Development Agency from Musselburgh High Street at Mall Avenue via a new bridge over the River Esk to connect to Eskview Terrace.
Pedestrian links on the line of Mucklets Road will be reconnected by means of an underpass beneath the Musselburgh Bypass, and Mucklets Road will remain as two culs-de-sac for farm access purposes.
3.
ALIGNMENT AROUND NEWCRAIGHALL VILLAGE
Following the public consultation exercise in 1978 there was an overwhelming preference for the western alignment around Newcraighall Village, involving removal of Newcraighall Bing as fill for the new road embankments.
The alternative eastern alignment around the village therefore has been discarded.
4.
JUNCTION WITH NEWCRAIGHALL ROAD (A6095)
Two slip roads connecting the Musselburgh Bypass with Newcraighall Road have been incorporated.
These will allow northbound traffic to join and southbound traffic to leave the Musselburgh Bypass for the purpose of serving the Newcraighall industrial area.
5.
DISCONNECTION OF SPUR ROAD TO DUDDINGSTON PARK SOUTH (A6106)
A spur road from the Asda South Roundabout to Duddingston Park South is required on a temporary basis for access to the Asda Superstore during the construction period, after which it will be disconnected.
This decision has been taken in response to fears that the spur road would give rise to increased traffic flows in Duddingston Park South and the Niddrie/Bingham areas.
6.
NIDDRIE/BRUNSTANE BURN WALKWAY
A walkway planned by the City of Edinburgh District would have been severed by the original Musselburgh Bypass proposals.
A pedestrian underbridge to link this walkway beneath the Musselburgh Bypass immediately north of the Asda South Roundabout has now been included.
The pedestrian system connected to this underbridge will provide access to the south side of the Magdalene housing area, the Brunstane Primary School, the Asda Superstore, and zoned housing land in the valley of the Niddrie Burn.
7.
DUAL CARRIAGEWAY PAST ASDA
The section of the Musselburgh Bypass between the Asda South and Asda North Roundabouts is now to be constructed as a dual carriageway.
This section will carry through traffic and local traffic generated by the Superstore, unaided by the spur road to Duddingston Park South.
The increased width of road can be achieved without further encroachment on to the Magdalene housing land.
8.
SEGREGATED PEDESTRIAN SYSTEM AT ASDA NORTH ROUNDABOUT
An improved system for separating pedestrians from traffic has been introduced at the Asda North Roundabout.
9.
PEDESTRIAN ACCESS TO PORTOBELLO EAST JUNCTION ALLOTMENTS
A shallow ramp, suitable for transporting wheelbarrows, will be provided from the waste land south of the Brunstane Bowling Green up on to the old railway embankment.
A similar ramp will lead down from this embankment, to pass beneath the bridge that will carry the new road over the East Coast Main Line railway.
10.
PEDESTRIAN OVERBRIDGE REPLACES SUBWAY AT HOPE LANE
In response to a petition by residents in the area, the proposal to construct an underbridge for pedestrians has been replaced by an overbridge to link Hope Lane to St Mark's Place, Portobello.
This has permitted a general lowering of road levels proposed for the East Approach to Leith at this location.
11.
PEDESTRIAN OVERBRIDGE AT BAILEYFIELD ROAD
A dangerous crossing of the East Approach to Leith for pedestrians, including pupils of Portobello High School, exists at Baileyfield Road immediately north of the bridge carrying the East Coast Main Line railway.
A pedestrian overbridge with ramped approaches is now proposed.
12.
EXTENSION OF EAST APPROACH ROAD TO SEAFIELD ROAD
Much criticism was directed at the original proposal to terminate the East Approach to Leith on Baileyfield Road, with no improvements for the King's Road traffic light controlled junction at Portobello.
A major extension of the East Approach Road has been made so that it connects to the existing four-laned Seafield Road west of the King's Road junction.
The new road design bypasses the residential section of Baileyfield road, passes under Portobello Road thus relieving the King's Road junction, and will discourage eastbound through traffic on Seafield Road from using Portobello High Street.
13.
LANDSCAPING
The Regional Council has appointed a consultant landscape architect to advice on the treatment of the new road and its immediate surroundings.
STRUCTURE PLAN
The Musselburgh Bypass and East Approach to Leith were selected for specific debate at The Examination in Public into the Region's Structure Plan.
The Secretary of State's response to the Region's submission has accepted the need for these road proposals.
The present applications for planning permission constitute the next step in the process whereby the detail of the proposals can be examined by the local planning authorities involved.
IMPLEMENTATION
Extension of the East Approach to Leith to Seafield Road, together with additional design features and inflation, have increased the current preliminary estimate to £12.3 million.
More accurate costs will be available following completion of detailed designs.
It is the intention of the Regional Council to progress the entire 6.4 km (4 miles) scheme from Old Craighall to Seafield Road as a single project, starting early in 1981 and taking three to four years to complete.
Within this period, construction will be phased in a number of contracts.
It will be essential to work closely with the Scottish Development Department to ensure completion of the Regional and Trunk road sections of this project at the same time.
If you would like to make any comments or suggestions on these proposals please write before 13 December 1979 to:.
GILMERTON BYPASS 1989
INTRODUCTION
Since 1979, when construction work began on the Colinton Bypass, the provision of an outer city bypass for Edinburgh by 1990 has been a key element of Lothian Regional Council's transportation policy.
The Bypass which is approximately 23 kms (14 miles) in length follows a route round the south side of the City from the Glasgow Road (A8) west of the Maybury to the interchange on the Musselburgh Bypass (A1) near Old Craighall.
The entire project including the Musselburgh and Portobello Bypasses had an estimated overall cost of £126 million, a proportion of which is being met by Central Government Grant and a European Regional Development Fund Grant.
The Gilmerton Bypass is the fifth and final section to be completed and connects Straiton Road (A701) to Old Dalkeith Road (A68) at Sheriffhall — a distance of some 4.5 km (2.8 miles).
This completes the link between the A8 and the A1 trunk roads.
Construction of the Gilmerton Bypass commenced in February 1988 and with work substantially complete by the end of 1989 it is being opened to traffic some eight months ahead of programme and within the target date of 1990 for the entire Bypass.
DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION
The Gilmerton Bypass has been designed by civil engineering staff in the Regional Council's Department of Highways with specialist advice being given by J W H Ross & Co, Consulting Mining and Civil Engineers, in the treatment of old mineworkings.
Further assistance was given by T A Civils, Consulting Engineers, in the design of a heavy duty geotextile membrane and stabilisation of limestone workings at Straiton.
The construction of the Gilmerton Bypass was undertaken by Miller Construction Ltd under the terms of a contract valued at £11.6 million and supervised by the staff of the Department of Highways with the Director of Highways being the Engineer for the Works.
The new road is a dual 2-lane carriageway 9.3 metres wide with 1 metre hard strips on both sides of each carriageway.
Both Lasswade Road and Gilmerton Road (A7) have been realigned at their junction with the Bypass with single 7.3 metre carriageways being provided.
GEOLOGY AND GROUND CONDITIONS
The site is underlain by sedimentary strata of the Lower and Upper Carboniferous age comprising alternative sequences of sandstone, siltstone, and claystones with occasional bands of limestone, coal and oil shale.
The route also crosses the western limb of the basin forming the Midlothian Coalfield, and consequently the strata dips steeply eastwards in the west and at a shallower angle in the east.
Due to this steepness at outcrop these coal seams are collectively referred to as the ‘Edge Coals’ and comprise about 24 workable beds of coal.
A detailed site investigation confirmed that the limestone and oil shales had been extensively worked to the east of Straiton Road and also identified a number of coal seams near Lasswade Road which had also been worked.
Conventional grouting techniques using a mixture of sand, cement and fly ash were adopted to consolidate the coal workings and the Broxburn and Fells oil shales.
At Straiton, however, a combination of the grout injection method and the placing of a heavy-duty geotextile membrane at rockhead level was used to provide support to the road embankment over the limestone and Pentland oil shale workings.
A total of seven mineshafts were located along the route and were either consolidated by grout injection or capped at rockhead.
Three areas of made ground were present on the line of the road, the most significant of these three being the backfilled quarry area at Straiton which resulted from the extraction of the limestone by opencast methods to a maximum depth of 16 metres.
The backfill in the quarry was varied, comprising areas of clay, weathered shale and domestic refuse and it was necessary to remove all of this material and replace it with suitable granular material.
A second area of made ground was present to the east of Langloan and was thought to be a backfilled clay borrow pit.
The material consisted of loose black ash and claystone fragments with some sandstone and wood.
A minimum of 2 metres of this unsuitable material was removed and replaced with suitable granular material.
The third area was a recently completed opencast coal site at Lasswade Road where mining to a depth of 20 metres had taken place.
To avoid settlement problems at this location a surcharge embankment was constructed and monitored over a period of 8 months.
GENERAL ROUTE DESCRIPTION
From the junction with the Burdiehouse Bypass at Straiton, the Gilmerton Bypass follows a gently curving alignment in an easterly direction to the Sheriffhall Roundabout where it connects with the Millerhill Bypass and the proposed A7 Dalkeith Bypass.
The route crosses through agricultural land minimising land severance where possible, and is carried on embankment from Straiton over the Mineral Railway and Lasswade Road.
East of Lasswade Road the route is in cutting and passes beneath the realigned Gilmerton Road prior to its termination at Sheriffhall.
Three bridges have been constructed — at the mineral railway, Lasswade Road and Gilmerton Road and are, in order to accommodate the Park Burn which crossed the rote in several places, two culverts have been built.
JUNCTIONS
Straiton Road A701
This junction was constructed as part of the Burdiehouse Bypass but two slip-roads have been added to the Gilmerton Bypass which will complete this two-level interchange and cater for all traffic movements.
Lasswade Road
Projected traffic flow indicated that a partial grade separated junction would be required at this location providing access to and from the west.
The two slip roads form T-junctions with Lasswade Road which has been realigned locally to improve visibility.
Gilmerton Road A7
As with Lasswade Road, projected traffic flows indicated that only a partial grade separated junction was required at Gilmerton Road for traffic to and from the west.
However, it was also necessary to provide access to Melville Grange Cottages and Melville Grange Farm.
In order to minimise land take a layout has been adopted which utilises two small roundabouts with a connecting bridge crossing over the bypass to carry the realigned Gilmerton Road.
A joint cycleway/footway has been provided on the eastern side of the junction with cross-over points on Gilmerton Road to the north and south of the junction.
This will obviate the need for cyclists to negotiate the two roundabouts.
Old Dalkeith Road A68
The Gilmerton Bypass terminates at Sheriffhall Roundabout on the A68.
This roundabout was constructed as part of the Millerhall Bypass and has been designed to accommodate the proposed A7 Dalkeith Bypass.
STRUCTURES
Mineral Railway Bridge
The Bypass crosses the mineral railway line serving Bilston Glen Colliery at a large skew angle and the resulting underbridge is a single-span structure with precast concrete beams and in situ reinforced concrete deck supported by reinforced concrete abutments.
A high containment concrete parapet is provided at road level to protect the railway line from vehicles in the event of a road accident.
Lasswade Road Bridge
Lasswade Road Underbridge consists of an in situ reinforced concrete voided slap deck on reinforced concrete abutments.
A number of coal seams are present in this area and the ground below the structure was consolidated by grout injection methods.
Gilmerton Road Bridge
Gilmerton Road Overbridge is a two-span structure which carries the realigned Gilmerton Road over the bypass.
It consists of a central reinforced concrete pier and bankseats supporting a composite structural steel and reinforced concrete deck.
The structure is designed to accommodate possible ground movements from future deep mining.
Drainage Culverts
Two concrete drainage culverts have been constructed to accommodate the Park Burn which crossed the line of the Bypass at a number of locations.
The larger of the two culverts is a 500 metre long 1.65 metre diameter concrete pipe which runs parallel to the bypass between the mineral railway bridge and Lasswade Road.
A smaller culvert, 30 metres in length, crosses beneath Lasswade Road.
SERVICE DIVERSIONS
In addition to the normal diversion of public utility services in Lasswade Road and Gilmerton Road involving the Water and Drainage Department, SSEB and British Telecom, a major diversion of overhead power lines was carried out prior to the start of the roadworks contract.
In total some 4,200 metres of 33,000 volt and 11,000 volt power lines were re-routed along the southern boundary of the bypass.
LANDSCAPING
A landscape design plan has been prepared by the Landscape Development Unit of the Regional Council's Department of Planning.
The plan  fulfils two objectives:
1
To minimise the impact of the road when viewed from the surrounding countryside.
2
To create a pleasant landscape experience for the motorist travelling along the route.
The proposals include using surplus materials from excavations to help integrate new embankments and bridges with the surrounding landforms, and planting of almost 200,000 native trees and shrubs which will form significant areas of new woodland within the Green Belt.
Extensive areas will also be sown with wild flowers.
The landscape contract will be let separately and will commence early in 1990.
PROJECT COST
The overall cost of the Gilmerton Bypass allowing for inflation is estimated at £17 million.
This estimate includes design and site supervision fees, land acquisition, public utility diversions, ground stabilisation, road and bridgeworks, road signs and landscaping.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The Regional Council would like to thank the following organisations for their co-operation during the design and construction of the Gilmerton Bypass: and all others who have in any way contributed to this project.
COMMUNITY CARE MATTERS SPRING 1993
THE CHALLENGE OF CHANGE
The introduction of the new arrangements for Community Care are no longer something to be talked about in the future, but are happening now and involving all of us.
The changes represent an important milestone in the development of social work services.
Change brings both uncertainty and opportunity.
Let us be resolved to take and use the opportunities presented by change to the full.
The culture change we seek to secure is one of ensuring that our new arrangements are needs led rather than service driven.
A great deal of work has gone on over the past few months.
Many staff have worked well beyond the call of duty to try to ensure that the arrangements we need to put in place are both effective for service users and reflect the professional standards that characterise Lothian's work and are important to its staff.
Not everything will be in place by day one.
Some of the technology to support work in the field needs a final phase of development.
The professional framework will be in place — systems have been designed to support the all important task of needs assessments.
In the next few months there will be opportunities for discussion across the Region on community care issues and I hope you will let us have your views.
You can do this, or raise any queries you may have, by contacting your line manager (social work staff) or the person named at the foot of each article.
This newsletter gives an update on current activities — I hope you will find it useful.
We will be issuing further editions during the implementation period and beyond.
PREPARING FOR 1 APRIL
KEY TASKS FOR IMPLEMENTING CARE IN THE COMMUNITY
The Department has subscribed to the CIPFA/ADSS Financial Management and has access to the material produced which is designed to assist Local Authorities in preparing for the changes to be implemented on 1 April this year.
Eight key tasks are identified and work has been underway on these for some time.
This brief outline gives some idea of what has been going on and where we have got to, a brief outline of the key tasks, and the progress made on these.
Key Task 1
Agreeing the basis for assessment systems for individuals
Lead Role
Tasks
1
Philosophy and principles of assessment.
2
Agreed structures and procedures.
3
Interagency arrangements for assessments.
4
Developing eligibility and priority criteria.
A detailed reference text outlining the principles and procedure in relation to assessment is now available in full and in summary form.
Forms for referral, assessment and care plans will be available in March.
Leaflets are being prepared to inform the public.
Work is currently under way in defining criteria to determine eligibility and priority.
An Assessor's Guide will also be produced.
Key Task 2
Arrangements for continuing care for new clients in residential and nursing homes
Lead Role
Tasks
1
Information on current provision.
2
Information on current service usage.
3
Joint strategy for purchasing/providing residential/nursing home care.
4
Agreement on no unilateral withdrawal from service commitments.
A survey of residents in Voluntary and Private Sector Homes has been undertaken and its analysis will provide much of the required information.
The Joint Planning Agreement (1991) outlines Social Work and Health responsibilities for services and establishes an agreement not to withdraw unilaterally.
Initial discussions have taken place on joint purchasing and providing.
Key Task 3
Hospital discharge arrangements
Lead Role
Tasks
1
Policy on hospital discharge.
2
Arrangements for pre-discharge assessments.
3
Arrangements for involving users and carers.
4
How Care Plans are to be effected.
A draft paper on the proposed arrangements is available for comment.
Key Task 4
Clarifying the roles of general practitioners and primary health care teams
Lead Role
Tasks
1
General practitioners' and Primary Health Care Teams' roles in assessment.
2
Mechanisms for General Practitioner and other medical input to the service planning process.
Effective links have been established with the Area Medical Committee and the Royal College of General Practice.
Through this, an agreement has been reached on the role of General Practitioners and other medical practitioners in the assessment process.
Communication has been widened to include local General Practitioners and links established between General Practitioners, Primary Health Care Teams and the Department's Practice Teams.
Key Task 5
Purchasing and charging arrangements for residential and nursing home care
Lead Role
Tasks
1
DSS transfer.
2
Establish a list of providers with whom we will contract for services.
3
Purchasing process including budget management.
4
Financial assessment.
5
Charging policy and review charges.
A survey of providers has been completed from which a list of those with whom we will contract will be drawn.
A revised system of payments to suppliers will be in place by 1 April.
Work is nearing completion on the allocation of DSS transfer monies to Districts.
The charging policy and revised charges goes to Committee in March.
A pro-forma service agreement for purchase of individual places and information on organisations where block purchase arrangements exist will be available for April.
Key Task 6
Financial and other management systems
Lead Role
Tasks
1
Implement revised financial reporting structures.
2
Adapt client information systems to support assessment, etc.
3
Systems for financial assessment and purchasing.
A revised financial assessment system will be available by April, as will a revised system for payments to suppliers.
An accounts retrievable system is now available at Shrubhill and at District Offices.
Computer based systems for monitoring the expenditure of DSS transfer are being explored.
Key Task 7
Training
Lead Role
Tasks
1
Identification of needs.
2
Agreeing Community Care roles.
3
Agree joint training plans.
4
Develop training programme.
Key staff will have completed CC1 and CC2 training by April 1993.
District based training will include Assessment and Care Management, Implementation Training, and Introductory Training of Service Provision Staff.
Key Task 8
Publicity
Lead Role
Tasks
1
Who needs to know what.
2
Plan information distribution.
3
List publicity plan.
4
Monitor usefulness.
Work is in hand on identifying information needs and relevant publicity material is in preparation.
Publicity material will be made available in minority languages, in Braille and on tape.
NEW WAYS OF BUYING CARE
PURCHASING AND COMMISSIONING
The development of purchasing and commissioning roles will be an on-going task for social work departments.
In Lothian, we are concentrating very much on what it is essential to have achieved by 1 April 1993.
The Director has stated a seemingly modest goal: that someone who is assessed as requiring residential or nursing home care on 1 April should be able to receive it with no greater difficulty than s/he would have experienced on 31 March.
In practice there are a number of challenges contained within this statement.
PLACE AVAILABILITY
First of all there is an issue about the number of places which will be available.
At the moment we cannot make precise predictions about the level and type of demand, but we do know that the number of places in residential and nursing home care has declined in the past year.
This is partly a result of the success of the Registration and Inspection Service's efforts to encourage a move to more single room provision.
Although this is welcome, taken together with demographic changes and the likelihood of Lothian Health Board wanting to directly purchase a fair amount of nursing home beds, it underlines the need to maintain a stable market.
FINANCE ALLOCATION
The next question is how the money is being transferred to the Department from the DSS will be managed.
The policy here is to have the vast majority of these funds ‘up-front’, ie to distribute them out to the Districts to be used by Practice Teams for the purchase of individual places for individual users — what we are calling ‘spot purchase’.
There are two reasons for this decision, one pragmatic, and the other a point of principle.
The pragmatic reason is the constraint on our ability to make a precise forecast of what will be required.
The issue of principle is the commitment to a needs led approach.
‘someone who is assessed as requiring residential or nursing home care on 1 April should be able to receive it with no greater difficulty than s/he would have experienced on 31 March.
EFFICIENCY DILEMMA
It would be cheaper, and probably simpler if all the purchase of residential and nursing home places was done by placing block contracts with big organisations, negotiated centrally from Shrubhill.
However this would lock us into a service led system, with very little room for the expression of user choice or the tailoring of services to the individual.
That's why the vast majority of residential and nursing home placements, and virtually all for elderly people, will be made by spot purchase.
The exceptions for which we're working on block contracts are:
A small number of highly-specialised, expensive resources which cater for people with multiple handicaps.
Residential respite care for people with learning disabilities, and possibly also for other user groups.
Emergency accommodation for people who are vulnerable and homeless.
Other emergency places will be spot purchased using the standard method, with the Emergency Duty Team arranging out-of-hours placements.
It's important to be clear that for the moment we are talking about the purchase of places in the private and voluntary sectors: in-house purchasing is not with us yet.
SERVICE SPECIFICATION
Work is going on now to develop service specifications for nursing home care, and for residential care for each of the user groups.
Together with the individual care plan, these will make up the description of the service which the voluntary or private sector home is contracted to provide.
The Voluntary and Private Sectors Services Unit will shortly produce a standard service agreement which sets out the contract conditions.
This will provide an ‘off the peg’ model which practitioners can use for the purchase of individual places.
The addition of the care plan will enable service agreements to be tailored to meet the needs of the individual user.
SIMPLE PRICE STRUCTURE
What price will the Department be prepared to pay for these services?
Whilst many local authorities in Scotland appear to be rolling forward the present DSS rates, we are keen to move away from a flat-rate fee which bears little relation to the intensity of service (and costs incurred) in meeting the needs of different people.
The aim is to establish a simple system with a maximum of five levels of service per user group, alongside bands of charges.
Discussions on all these issues are currently taking place with a small Reference Group of eight residential and nursing home care providers four from each of the private and voluntary sectors.
The Department is committed to giving an indication of the prices which it will pay very soon.
For District staff, the undertaking is that you will have standard service specifications, a model service agreement, and guidance on their use, together with details of prices and payment systems, by mid-March.
As in so many other areas, it's a mistake to see 1 April as the ‘big bang’.
Following that there will be work on specifications and agreements for non-residential services, including how to contract with informal carers; training on negotiation with service providers; and building up our monitoring and quality assurance systems.
Reviewing how the new purchasing process in functioning, and gathering information on need and demand, will also be important.
This will assist in beginning to think about shaping the market in 1994/95 and beyond.
FOCUSSING ON PEOPLE'S NEEDS
ASSESSMENT AND CARE MANAGEMENT
The Lothian proposals for assessing needs have been developed over the past year by the Lothian Assessment and Care Management Steering Group — an interagency group chaired by Lothian Social Work with representatives from Lothian Health Board (medicine, nursing and planning), General Practitioners, District Council housing departments, housing associations, voluntary and private sector organisations and users' and carers' groups.
The detailed work has been undertaken by two subgroups, also multi agency and with practitioner involvement.
GOOD PRACTICE
We are fortunate in Lothian to have good existing interagency links; this has made the development task much easier.
The outcome is a proposed model of assessment which we believe is sound but which now needs to be interpreted and applied in the different single and multidisciplinary settings.
We are also fortunate in that good community care practice is already well in evidence in Lothian; the plan is to build on this and on existing skills and expertise.
We are not starting from square one!
The new legislation does however require clear principles to be part of daily practice.
Community care assessments must focus first and foremost on the person's needs (rather than seeking to fit people in to existing services), must be in partnership with the person and their carers, be flexible, timeous and simple, and multidisciplinary.
There must always be feedback and explanation to the person and their carer and referrer, with a clear means for the user to challenge decisions if they are not satisfied.
In April 1993 we will be implementing:
New arrangements for assessing individual needs.
Formal, coordinated care plans for people with complex needs.
New responsibilities for funding residential and nursing home places in private and voluntary homes.
Care budgets devolved to Social Work Practice Teams as far as possible.
It is also clear that the arrangements won't work effectively unless local community care and health care assessors work closely together.
Local arrangements for this may vary, and good models already operate in some areas.
‘good community care practice is already well in evidence in Lothian; the plan is to build on this and on existing skills and expertise.
We are not starting from square one!’
Along with other Scottish Local Authorities, we are not implementing care management in full in April 1993.
A number of pilot projects in 1993 will research this and bring forward proposals for April 1994.
THREE LEVELS
The Lothian assessment model proposes three levels of assessment:
Initial (simple needs and outcomes
Specialist (eg OT, speech therapy)
Comprehensive (complex needs)
Each request for assessment will be ‘screened’ by an experienced member of staff and a decision made about the best type of assessment to be offered, by whom and when.
A specialist or comprehensive assessment can be arranged without having to have an initial assessment first.
CARE PLAN
People with complex needs may have a Care Plan, agreed with them and reviewed at intervals.
A ‘key worker’ will be nominated to provide a day-to-day link with the person, and a ‘care coordinator’(the forerunner of the care manager) to ensure that the plan runs smoothly.
Specific forms for community care referrals, assessment and care planning are now out in draft and will be amended in the light of comments and ‘trial runs’.
A Summary Paper of the proposals was circulated widely for comment during February; this will be amended and reissued in March.
A substantial and very detailed Reference Manual is also being sent to key management and senior practice staff in all the Lothian agencies.
The new arrangements will be monitored throughout 1993 and reviewed in detail in December 1993/January 1994.
LEAVING HOSPITAL
HOSPITAL DISCHARGE
A key task is to have in place by 1 April, agreed Hospital Discharge arrangements for those requiring community care services.
In Lothian draft policy guidelines have been prepared which, after comment from key professionals and service users, will form the basis for discharge agreements.
Meantime, all Hospital Units are to review their current discharge arrangements.
PRIOR ASSESSMENT
For those requiring assistance, on discharge from acute or long-stay care, needs must be assessed prior to discharge, for health and social care services, including nursing home or residential care, domiciliary day and other support services, and arrangements made to provide these when necessary.
Patients should not be discharged without such arrangements, but nor should beds be blocked unnecessarily.
In acute care there will be pressure from rapid bed turnover, which emphasises the importance of early preparation for discharge.
RISK IDENTIFICATION
Effective discharge depends upon early screening and identification of those at risk.
Where problems can be anticipated, GPs and others should alert the Hospital at or before admission.
Patients' social circumstances should be checked by ward staff to identify those likely to need services, undertake initial assessments and prepare discharge plans in close liaison with social work staff.
The needs of carers must also be taken into account.
Special consideration should be given in information and assessment arrangements for members of ethnic minority groups.
Many patients' needs will be relatively clear.
More complex needs will call for multidisciplinary assessments, careful preparation, and time for patients to consider their future.
Patients should be fully informed about available services, including charges which may be incurred.
They should be discharged with a care plan, containing details of the services organised and names of key people providing those services.
Staff should be given relevant information about patients and their social and medical needs.
TRAINING FOR THE NEW WAY OF WORKING
TRAINING STRATEGY 1992–93
‘Shared Training is essential if progress is to be made towards achieving the vision’, of a seamless service.
The fundamental objective of the Community Care Legislation is to achieve an improvement in Community Care Services by making them more sensitive to the needs of users and carers.
This is the major challenge for the training programme which has a vital part to play in shaping the success of the new arrangements.
PRINCIPLES
There are three fundamental principles underlying the Lothian Strategy:
Collaborative working as outlined in the legislation requires joint training.
Training is locally based and responsive to local operational needs.
Training is an integral part of the implementation process.
In the short term the strategy is aimed at:
1
Giving an introduction to the new legislation.
2
Defining the roles of agencies and individuals within them.
3
Learning about Key Systems and Skills (eg Assessment and Care Management) required to implement them.
The training package bought by the Department to meet this need is the Dundee University Distance Learning Packs CC1, CC2 and CC3.
The objective of this package is to provide an introduction firstly to the new legislation and secondly to the principles of managing and planning community care at an operational level.
The initial phase of the training is as much about learning as it is about skills development and the multi agency study groups system in Lothian which underpin this package is the vehicle for achieving this.
In the longer term the strategy is about influencing pre and post qualifying training as appropriate, and responding to training needs identified by the Districts.
INTRODUCTORY TRAINING
Introductory Training through the multi agency study group system has been organised by the Multi Agency Training Forums in East and West Lothian.
The material used is Dundee Universities Community Care In Context CC1.
In other Districts, District Management staff have organised these multi agency events.
PLANNING AND MANAGING COMMUNITY CARE CC2
Key Management staff in all the Districts together with a range of managers from Health, Housing, Voluntary Organisations etc have all embarked on District based CC2 Seminar Programmes.
The organisation of this has only been possible with the close cooperation and support of District Managers, and their designated staff.
 Feedback on these seminars to date has been encouraging.
Although this programme was focused on change management, and targeted at Senior Management, future Seminar Programmes will run in each District to support staff embarking on CC2 in a multi agency setting.
IMPLEMENTATION TRAINING
In-house Assessment and Financial Management Training has been organised on a District basis for February, March (2.5 days and 2 days respectively per District).
This training is a cascade model.
It is hoped that feedback on procedures will be an outcome as well as the identification of future training need.
Training will be part of a phased process has new procedures are refined and created.
GP Training focusing on Primary Health Care Teams will be organised by the Districts.
Post April 1993, Briefing Sessions will be organised for relevant professionals and agencies both at a District level and Regionally.
Briefings for carers and users will be organised by the Consumer Involvement Officer in each District.
Additional short workshops and courses could be negotiated through the District Community Care Training Fora.
Information on introductory training for Service Provision Staff (Adults) will be available soon.
NEW SYSTEMS TO BACK UP COMMUNITY CARE
INFORMATION SYSTEMS UPDATE
A ‘Community Care Systems Task Group’ was set up in October comprising .
They have helped define the systems requirements for: needs assessment, financial assessment, resources directories, costing care packages, budget management, commitment accounting, payments to suppliers, and invoice generation.
Work is well in hand to ensure District HQ and Practice Teams have access to the Council's mainframe computer financial systems for budget management, payments and invoicing.
A decision is pending regarding a PC system for commitment accounting.
Forms have been prepared for the assessment process, and amendments to the Client Index to support needs assessment are about to be commissioned.
The Client Index system will need to be used in a more standardised way.
Proposals are being drawn up by the CI Development Group chaired by Alistair Dawson — consultation with Districts is planned for March.
This work will also improve the reports available from the system, The Client Index will be ‘networked’ later this year and trials are currently underway in Muirhouse Crescent and Ferry Road Social Work Centres.
Research staff are busy analysing the survey of private and voluntary residential/nursing home providers — this will help to inform the pricing structure for purchasing care.
Work is also well advanced on a needs-based formula for dividing the DSS transfer monies between Districts.
IMPROVING CARE BY ENFORCING STANDARDS
REGISTRATION AND INSPECTION
‘Stocktaking’ is fashionable at the moment.
So applying this concept to the Registration and Inspection Service I can report that since April 1991 we have introduced Guidelines for the Registration of Adult Services.
Through a broadly based consultation process headed up by Planning and Coordination, Standards have been agreed by the Social Work Committee for the Inspection of Homes for Elderly People and for Children, Child minders, Full Day Group Care and Part Day Group Care.
Others are underway for all other Adult Residential Services, Creches, Play Schemes and After School Provision.
The Advisory Committee is up and running.
It has just considered the Annual Report which confirmed that between April 1991 and October 1992 there had been an increase of 10% in the number of single rooms in Adult Residential Homes throughout Lothian.
All Adult Social Work  Department Services have now been inspected and a Children's Home inspection programme is underway.
There are now three fewer Social Work Department Homes and three fewer Private Homes but there are 39 new Voluntary Homes.
The new homes tend to be much smaller and have many more single rooms.
Working to the future we hope to complete the mammoth registration task with childminders.
We also want feedback, so, please let us know your views.
LOTHIAN
THE CAPITAL REGION
NEWSLETTER ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT REFORM AUGUST 1993
ECONOMIC PROSPECTS SERIOUSLY DAMAGED
The proposals in the White Paper on local government reform will jeopardise the strategic, transportation and economic integrity of the city and region which is the basis of Lothian's economic success.
‘In taking the heart out of the Lothians, the Government is also severely prejudicing the ability of Edinburgh to compete on the European and world stage,’ said the Convenor of Lothian Regional Council, Eric Milligan.
‘Over recent years, hugely successful efforts have been made to promote Edinburgh and the Lothians in Europe.
The proposals will seriously undermine Edinburgh's position in Europe,’ he added.
The proposals remove the benefits which a large strategic authority brings to the people of Lothian and fail to take account of local loyalties.
East Lothian is part of Edinburgh's hinterland, yet most of the district is to join with Berwickshire in a new council.
The Regional Council argues that local government in the Lothians should benefit from the efficiency of a larger, strategic authority while also be responsive to local communities in delivering its services.
To read about the Regional Council's view on the best local government system for the Lothians turn to page 4.
Timetable for the changes
July 1993 The White Paper has now been published
Nov' 1993 The Queen's Speech will broadly reveal the content of the Bill for local government reform
May 1995 Elections are due for the new authorities
April 1996 The earliest date for the new authorities taking over
What the White Paper means for Lothian
The White Paper proposes dividing the Region three ways:
The City of Edinburgh becomes a unitary council based on the existing district council boundary.
A council called ‘The Lothians’ would be formed, covering the existing West Lothian and Midlothian district areas plus Musselburgh and Prestonpans.
East Lothian, minus Musselburgh and Prestonpans, joins with Berwickshire.
Why we have sent YOU this newsletter
You may be reading this newsletter as someone the Regional Council has consulted in its efforts to identify the options for reform in Lothian.
Reform will undoubtedly affect all users of local government services: individual local tax payers, businesses, the voluntary sector and community councils, which contribute so much to the regions economic and social welfare.
We decided to send you this newsletter as we now know what the White Paper on local government reform says.
We would urge you to think about the consequences of what it proposes and what it means for you.
If you would like to make your views known, please see the address on page four.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT REFORM:
WHAT THE PAPERS SAY
‘…no convincing intellectual case is to be found in the White Paper for so fundamental a change in the structure of local government.
…
Much of the savings, in the official view, will arise from the new structure's needs for fewer managers, but even that is less than convincing for there is great scope for an increase in bureaucracy, from the need to dispatch the business deriving from the newly acquired functions to the formation of twice the number of existing education, roads and social work departments.’
‘Government plans for a radical shake-up of the local government system are proceeding against the grain of Scottish public opinion, according to researchers at Edinburgh University.
A report undertaken for the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities says the most common response to the Scottish Office's consultation paper on single-tier councils questioned the case for local government reorganisation.
Only 15% of submissions expressed a view on any of the four options for single tier councils put forward.’
‘As the transport and strategic planning authority for the area around Edinburgh as well as within the city itself, Lothian Regional Council is able to take an overview which smaller single-tier councils would lack if the Government abolished the region.
Some other organisations would be needed to pursue — or change — policies currently being developed by Lothian…
Lothian's roles in publishing information about the services of 29 different bus companies, maintaining the region's 4,000 bus stops and issuing maps of cycle tracks and bus routes would presumably have to be done by somebody else in future.’
‘Lothian…has gained greatly from having a council and a local enterprise company with the same boundary.
It makes sense as an economic unit in a way its constituent parts alone do not.
Even Edinburgh no longer has an economy distinct from its Lothian hinterland.
Growing numbers live in the city and travel outwards to work.
Now the democratic dimension to that cohesion is to be lost.’
‘There is no intrinsic reason for another reorganisation so soon after the last, and there is certainly no popular demand for it.
The present system may not be perfect but it has worked pretty well and would be capable of improvement and adjustment without the need to go back to the drawing board.’
‘They (the reforms) have been cobbled together too quickly and with too little attention paid to genuine consultation, too little attempt to build the necessary consensus.’
‘The dismantling of compact and efficient local government units such as Central and Lothian deserves all the criticism it will receive.
…
The benefits of size will be lost and the diseconomies of small scale enhanced.
The system may well increase bureaucracy!’
‘If the (Local Government) Commission continues in this manner, much of the country will be divided into district councils varying greatly in size.
The smallest are unlikely to perform satisfactorily strategic functions like planning and economic regeneration.
In the large conurbations, the creation of unitary authorities has required new quangos and joint boards to handle such issues.
If this is repeated where county councils are abolished, it will do little to enhance accountability, one of the justifications for moving towards single-tier authorities.’
‘The region has benefited in recent years from councillors with experience, awareness and clout…’
THE BEST WAY TO DELIVER LOCAL SERVICES
The Regional Council's response document on local government reform, ‘Making the Right Choice’, argued that the existing two tier local government in Lothian was the best for delivering local services.
But if changes had to be made, the only cost effective alternative was an all-purpose authority for Edinburgh and the Lothians.
The assumption that large authorities are costly and bureaucratic is wrong: it has been proved that Lothian has low management costs and provides an above average standard of service at low cost.
Greatest efficiency comes with fewer, larger authorities.
The report highlighted how businesses had benefited from the existence of the Regional Council.
Its training grant scheme represents a commitment of £3 million that has helped secure inward investment and 3,300 jobs which could otherwise have been lost to other areas.
The £100 million outer city bypass crosses Edinburgh, Midlothian and East Lothian, improving transport links to businesses spread across the region.
Lothian is also a well defined employment centre with nearly 92 per cent of its working population employed within its boundary.
The Regional Council also questioned the assumptions on costs in the Government's paper.
Research undertaken by Coopers & Lybrand revealed there was no significant case in cost terms to justify changing the current local government structure to anything other than a single unitary authority for the whole of Lothian.
Lothian was described in the report as being the right scale: its small size, population density and well developed roads and transport make all parts accessible, even compared to many existing district council areas in Scotland.
ECONOMIC PROSPERITY LINKED TO REGION'S FUTURE
Edinburgh's continued success as a growth capital within Europe can only be planned on a city region scale.
The proposals in the White Paper would prevent this from happening in the future.
‘The achievements will be rent asunder by the Government's ill-informed proposals,’ said Councillor Keith Geddes.
The European Economic research Consortium has reported that Edinburgh had the best prospects of Britain's large cities in the 1990's.
The Regional Council believes this is possible only because of its role in planning strategic land use, economic development and transport.
The Council has encouraged high technology and research-based facilities including Mitsubishi Electric and NEC Semiconductors to come to Lothian.
It played an important part in attracting investment from Digital UK Ltd, Sun Microsystems Ltd and Motorola, which is expected to create 3,000 jobs.
Transport links have been enhanced by the re-opening of the Bathgate rail line, the electrification of the North Berwick line and the completion of the outer city bypass.
LOTHIAN DOUBLES BUSINESS SUPPORT FUND
Money available in Lothian's Business Support Scheme fund has been doubled to £500,000.
The scheme offers a tailor-made development package involving support for job creation, project development and training.
Businesses targeted for the support are in the small to medium range, employing five to 50 people and must be able to show their viability and potential for growth.
The scheme is expected to support around 250 new jobs during 1993/4.
LOTHIAN PLANS FOR ECONOMIC GROWTH
Planning for economic growth is a vital consideration in Lothian's draft structure plan, the blueprint for planning policy into the next century.
The plan stresses that new land for development has to be located close to transport routes, have access to water and draining facilities and be attractive to businesses.
The majority of new housing and economic development will be concentrated in the core locations of central West Lothian, the western sector of East Lothian, south east Edinburgh and north Midlothian.
WHITE PAPER RAISES FUNDING FEARS
Voluntary organisations which operate at a regional level would be severely disadvantaged by the proposals in the White Paper.
‘They will have no guarantee of funding, will have to re-organise their affairs to take account of the changes and partnerships with the council formed over many years will be lost,’ said Martin Sime, Director of the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations.
Grants worth around £12 million have been awarded to voluntary and arts organisations this year by the Regional Council.
More than 200 organisations working in areas including child and family care, will receive grants during 1993/94 through the Social Work Committee.
Another 200 plus organisations involved in you, adult education and community work will receive Education Committee grants.
Organisations including the Edinburgh International Festival, Edinburgh's Theatre Workshop and the Scottish Chamber Orchestra will also benefit this year from Lothian's annual £13 million package of assistance for the arts.
NEWSROUND LOTHIAN
Lights Out
Council introduces total ban on smoking from 1 January 1994
LOTHIAN REGIONAL Council has taken the first step towards a total ban on smoking from 1 January next year.
A recent decision by the Council's Personnel Committee has established that non-smoking will be the norm for employees at work and the ban will mean:
No smoking indoors on any council premises
An end to all existing smokers' rooms
No smoking in council vehicles
No smoking in private vehicles being used on the council's business when other council employees are travelling as passengers
The Education Committee has taken a similar decision in principle for teaching staff and is likely to finalise the matter later this summer.
Growing concern about passive smoking and recent signals from organisations like the Health and Safety Executive and Lothian Health Board have pointed the way for employers to take positive action to protect non-smokers whilst at work in enclosed areas.
The Council sees a growing reluctance for non-smokers to tolerate smokers and has come to recognise that there are practical problems in the way of a compromise approach.
Employee relations manager George Piechniczek said: ‘This sensitive issue has been extensively debated over the last few years and whilst the trade unions support the principle of protecting non-smokers at work, it has proved difficult to find a practical solution that satisfied all parties.’
When Chesser House in Gorgie was opened, special smokers' rooms were introduced on a trial basis with a ban on smoking operating throughout the remainder of the building.
It has since been accepted that this kind of arrangement cannot be accommodated at most other council buildings.
George said: ‘The majority of staff are non-smokers and of those who do smoke, it is likely that most will have little difficulty in adjusting to the smoking ban.
For those employees who wish some help to adjust to the smoking ban, the Council will be making available information packs and, for those who wish to stop smoking completely, smoking cessation classes.
‘It is important to start thinking about the smoking ban now.
It's no use looking at the date, 1 January 1994, and putting the problem off until after Christmas.
‘There is no magic solution to this issue and employees who smoke will need to harness their own willpower, but the ban could be the kind of incentive that some smokers have been waiting for to help them reduce or stop smoking and improve their general health.’
Arrangements are being made for full details of the policy to be circulated to all employees.
THE HEALTH ISSUE
People are well aware that smoking can lead to cancers and diseases of the heart and lungs.
But only 15 per cent of the smoke from a cigarette is inhaled by the smoker.
The other 85 per cent goes into the surrounding air where non-smokers can breathe it in.
This ‘passive smoking’ means that non-smokers can have problems with eye, nose and throat irritation.
Prolonged passive smoking can lead to an increased risk of lung cancer for people WHO HAVE NEVER SMOKED A CIGARETTE IN THEIR LIVES.
HELP FROM THE COUNCIL
If you would like:
to give up smoking
more information on smoking and health
details of cessation classes
Contact your departmental personnel officer NOW.
Don't wait until December.
MEETING THE CHANGE
It is recognised that there are strongly held views on both sides of the ‘smoking argument’.
However, the council's support for non-smoking is centred on the health issue and the co-operation of all  employees is sought to ensure a satisfactory adjustment to the new standard at work.
Listen up
CLARENCE THE LION is soon to star on Radio Forth's Drivetime slots, bringing roads news to listeners throughout the region.
Councillor Ron Muir, chair of the Transportation Committee, said: ‘Clarence is being developed from a system of complaints into an information service for road users and this is where it ties in with Radio Forth.
‘At the department in Market Street, we have a Ceefax-style television display with roads information which is constantly updated.
The public can see it as they walk by.
Radio Forth will be hooked into this information which will appear on its computer screens.
Then it can be relayed to listeners.’
Clarence on Radio Forth will run in tandem with a series of adverts promoting the service.
The package is scheduled to start in August.
Business as usual
JOHN CARDWELL is Lothian's new regional assessor and has worked his way up the ladder to reach the top job.
His first position was with the old Edinburgh Corporation as a trainee valuer and he has been with Lothian Regional Council since reorganisation in 1975.
He holds a diploma in land economics from Paisley College and is also a fellow of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors.
Prior to his recent promotion, he was a depute assessor.
The Assessor's Department has around 180 full-time staff and its main functions are to compile the valuation roll for non-domestic rates and the electoral register.
A relatively new function has been the valuation banding of flats and houses for the council tax.
John said: ‘There are around 325,000 domestic properties in the region which had to be valued.
These valuations were accurately carried out and completed on time.’
On the horizon, John sees the revaluation of non-domestic properties which takes place in 1995 as a major undertaking for his department, but this forms part of its normal duties.
He said: ‘Apart from being under new management, it's business as usual in the department.’
The Sign of Quality
QUALITY COUNTS in Lothian Regional Council and this has been demonstrated by another successful BS 5750 certification.
British Standard 5750 is only awarded to organisations which have co-ordinated quality control procedures in place.
The latest additions to the Council's lists are DesignCare and BridgeCare.
Based at Brown Street in Edinburgh, DesignCare is part of the Projects Division of the Highways Department.
Its staff of 60 to 70 look after the design and construction of Lothian's roads.
BridgeCare, with a staff of 25 based in Market Street, forms the other part of the Projects Division and attends to the maintenance of existing bridges and retaining walls as well as the design on new structures for roadworks.
Quality auditor Tom Clark is responsible for DesignCare and BridgeCare.
He said: ‘To achieve BS 5750, we had to meet certain laid-down guidelines such as writing documents on procedures and training staff.
‘Manuals were given to staff and we then had to encourage them to work to these procedures in preparation for our own internal quality audit.
It took around six months to get to the quality audit stage and we were then able to invite in the assessor.’
The assessments for DesignCare and BridgeCare were carried out by SGS Yarsley International Certification Services Limited.
Its staff spent around two days interviewing staff and examining files.
The result was the all-important BS 5750 certificate and the entire Projects Division has now quality assurance systems in place.
Tom said: ‘I think that in the past we worked efficiently, but it often depended on the competence of individual members of staff.
As a result of quality assurance, we have procedures in place on subjects such as management of technical information or ensuring that we understand clients’ brief first time.
‘Now the systems are up and running, it is envisaged that there will be less time wasted on abortive work.
The system's audit procedure also allows identification and control of problem areas in the design and communication process.
DRIVING FOR SAFETY
INROADS, the contracting section of the Highways Department, is encouraging its staff to take care with a Safe Driving Challenge.
Sam Keast, assistant commercial manager, said: ‘We are testing our drivers in a serious way, but it's also fun.
The serious part is to promote safe driving across the board.
This has obvious benefits for the public and is also good for us.
Better driving will mean less wear and tear on vehicles and a reduction in accidental damage which will bring down our costs.’
A former senior driving examiner with the Ministry of Transport, Bob Cowe, has been employed on a fixed term contract to teach defensive driving techniques to Inroads drivers.
Bob will also supervise the Challenge which is organised in a series of heats leading up to a final where the outright winner will be presented with the Driver of the Year trophy.
The Challenge involves tests of reversing ability, an assessed drive over a set route and an in-cab examination on the Highway Code and safety matters.
Sam said: ‘Potentially, the savings from our improved standards of driving will be significant.
Tom McCormack, senior depute director of the Highways Department, has taken part and the initiative has been well supported by all our staff.
‘We are looking forward to an increased interest in this initiative in future years with the potential to extend the challenge to other local authorities a distinct possibility.’
Everyone's problem
The Regional Council has just published its policy on harassment in the workplace.
Stuart Gray explained it to Keith Davidson.
‘EVERY SURVEY ever done of any organisation shows that a proportion of its employees have experienced harassment.
But people do not want to complain because of the stresses and strains of going public with that information.
‘We have to assume that Lothian Regional Council is no different.
Just because we have few formal complaints, it doesn't mean we haven't got a problem,’ said Stuart Gray.
Stuart Gray works in the Management and Information Services Department based at George IV Bridge in Edinburgh.
He drafted the Council's harassment policy in consultation with representatives from departments at various levels across the region.
He said: ‘Last year the European Commission issued a code of practice on sexual harassment at work which placed an expectation on public authorities.
In general, the topic has become more prominent in management and trade union circles over the last few years.
‘The final policy has the backing of the trade unions as there is a great deal of common ground between management and trade unions on this issue.’
The policy document has been distributed to senior managers who will brief staff and a guide to the policy is being circulated to all employees.
The guide outlines what harassment is and what can be done to combat the problem both formally and informally.
The Council's policy covers all types of harassment at work while recognising that sexual and racial harassment are the most common.
Stuart said: ‘As part of an attempt to resolve complaints, we are establishing a network of contact officers.
Employees will be able to go to contact officers informally, and in confidence.
Their role will be to provide advice and support aimed at helping employees to stop the problem at source.
‘If the system works, the majority of cases should be dealt with at this informal level and will involve the minimum of stress for the harassed employee.’
Contact officers are being trained for their new role at special classes at Redhall House in Craiglockhart, the Regional Training Resource Centre.
The training stresses the need for confidentiality and will enable them to guide colleagues who are experiencing problems.
WHAT IS HARASSMENT?
In general, sexual harassment is unwanted conduct of a sexual nature.
It could range from unnecessary physical contact to suggestive remarks.
Racial harassment involves hostile or offensive behaviour towards an individual or group because of their race.
This can include anything from racist jokes to actual physical violence.
The Council aims to prevent all types of harassment at work.
It wants to make sure that everyone knows what harassment is, that harassment will not be tolerated and that there is a procedure for dealing with the problem.
If you feel you are suffering from harassment and would like some advice, please check the noticeboard in your workplace where the names and telephone numbers of contact officers should be displayed.
Council answer to European question
THE COUNCIL'S European Liaison Unit has launched a new EC Information Service which is available to all officers and members of the authority.
It provides advice on EC funding for special projects, explanations of Euro-jargon, background reading on any EC topic and even gives out flags, badges and stickers.
Based at 12 St Giles Street, the service is supplied by Alexis Woolley and managed by Joanne Lennon.
It publishes a fortnightly bulletin, European Affairs, which is circulated throughout the Council.
Information in the Bulletin comes from a wide range of publications which are scanned daily to keep readers up-to-date.
The main areas covered are EC Structural Funds, economic and business affairs, legislation, regional and social issues and funding opportunities.
The bulletin also carries details future events and news of recent publications.
Joanne said: ‘The service exists to answer all your European queries.
This might mean that the staff do some research on your behalf, put you in touch with a colleague in another European country or obtain a document for you.’
Alexis added: ‘Recent enquirers have asked about EC policy on AIDS and transport.
Straightforward enquiries can be handled in a matter of hours, or even minutes.
More complicated enquiries might take several days.’
Anyone who wants a copy of the bulletin, or would like further details on the EC Information Service, contact Alexis on  or Joanne or .
Right first time
INROADS STAFF were given the opportunity to star in a video recently alongside rugby internationalist Gavin Hastings and Steve Hamilton from Wheel of Fortune.
The video, Right First Time, will not be appearing in the shops, but is designed to highlight the importance of a team approach to Inroads' work.
Sam Keast, assistant commercial manager, said: ‘It is an important part of our total quality teamwork initiative.
It is not a promotional video but shows the problems that can occur if we don't work together on a job.’
Inroads has had quality assurance systems in place for several years and decided to go one step further by introducing its new teamwork scheme.
Total quality teamwork is designed to encourage staff to communicate with each other.
This should mean more efficient working practices and savings in time and money.
Ray Montgomery, works manager for the east division, said: ‘This is about trying to change the culture of the organisation, devolving power to people on the ground.
The Highways Department will sink or swim on the basis of everyone pulling together.’
Inroads staff had the opportunity to see the video at total quality teamwork evenings which took place in the Banfield Bowling Club near Inroads' McLeod Street headquarters.
Before the official start to the proceedings, staff were entertained by a recording of the Gerry Rafferty song, Right Next Time.
‘Not quite the same as the title of our video, but close enough,’ said Ray.
The video formed a central part of the event, then staff filled in an extensive questionnaire on working practices and an attitude survey.
Results from the questionnaire are being analysed by Kathleen Keenan, a student on placement with Inroads from Napier University.
The conclusions will be fed back in to the teamwork scheme.
Ray was pleased with the response of Inroads staff to the teamwork evenings.
He said: ‘We had around 35 to 40 people each night for nine nights, over a three week period.
‘Invitations went out on a geographical basis so each night we had a good cross section of staff like roadworkers, clerical assistants or estimators.
They did give up their own time to come along and we appreciate that.’
Fighting fires…and sexism
THE LOTHIAN and Borders Fire Brigade has launched a recruitment campaign to attract women into the service.
Chair of the Fire Board, Councillor Bill Axon, said: ‘The Fire Service has been perceived as a male-dominated, macho career where women can't participate, but it has been proven in other brigades that women can take part on an equal footing to males.’
Aside from adverts in the press, the Brigade held two open nights, one in Edinburgh and one in Galashiels, to publicise the campaign.
Bill said: ‘The open nights were designed to answer any questions that women might have had about firefighting.
They were informal and informative and included a women firefighter giving a talk on her personal experience.’
At the open nights, Brigade officers were also available to chat with potential applicants and there were displays showing other aspects of the work such as training and community education.
Lothian and Borders Fire Brigade has around 700 whole time and 350 retained firefighters.
The retained staff are on call in the evenings to respond to emergencies.
Out of this total number of over 1,000 firefighting staff, only two are women.
Both are retained firefighters and work in Borders region.
Lothian has no women firefighters at all.
Bill said: ‘Within ten to 20 years, because of changes in the age structure of the population, it is going to be vital to attract women to ensure that the complement of applicants is kept up.
We want to make it clear that we are talking about a career that is structured so that both sexes can be successfully employed in it.’
Last year, the Brigade received 1,835 applications for employment with only 69 coming from women.
Out of those 69, no women were employed.
Out of the total number of applicants, the rigorous standards applied by the Brigade meant that only around 20 were successful in the long run.
Although women were performing on a par with many of the male applicants, the general success rate for all applicants of around one in 90 told against the relatively small number of women who applied last time round.
Bill feels that the recruitment campaign will have succeeded if it results in a significant increase of women applying to become firefighters.
Blindcraft scores a double century
LOTHIAN REGION opened for business in 1975 and can trace its roots back to the local authorities which existed before that date.
But there is one part of the Region which claims 1993 as its bicentenary.
Blindcraft, which is based at Peffer Place in the city, has a history dating back to 1793 as it was then that the Edinburgh Asylum for the Relief of the Industrious Blind was set up.
Only Liverpool and Paris had such schemes in operation at the time, so Edinburgh's initiative was in the forefront of social policy in the late eighteenth century!
The Asylum taught hand crafts to blind people so they could learn to support themselves.
As the institution developed, an industrial workshop grew up and by 1880, sales had reached the then astounding figure of £18.275.
In 1944, the government began to provide central support for workshops for the blind and disabled people which allowed the Edinburgh factory to invest in its future.
Blindcraft moved to its present home in 1972 and in 1975, the Region took on the role of supervisory authority.
Although Blindcraft is the responsibility of the director of social work, and receives financial support from the Region, it has its own budget and is seen as a business in its own rights.
General manager Bob McManus said: ‘We are unique within the Region as we are a manufacturer rather than a service.
We have our own advisory board made up of members and officials of the council, trade unionists, industrialists and our own management.
The chair is Councillor Jimmy Cook.’
Last year's sales came to £2.4 million which represented a growth of 11.6 per cent on the previous year's figure.
Blindcraft's speciality is beds, but it also manufactures bedroom furniture and wire products such as reinforcing panels for underground roadways in coalmines and shelving for fridges and freezers.
Bob said: ‘We have to generate enough income to pay for our able-bodied staff, our overheads and have enough left over to contribute to the cost of employing disabled people.
‘It is unlikely that the business could be self-supporting as we have a higher level of direct and indirect supervision for our employees.
Blindcraft is a sheltered workshop, so it would be difficult for us to make a profit.’
Profits may not be on the agenda, but quality certainly is and Bob said: ‘We get no favours nor do we want them.
We have to compete in the marketplace.
If we sell a bed and the legs fall off, the customer won't come back.’
The business achieved BS 5750 in 1987 and because of a strict programme of quality awareness and quality management, customers do come back.
Blindcraft employs 85 registered blind or disabled people who were referred to the firm by disability employment advisors in local Jobcentres.
Bob said: ‘When we need someone to do a job, we hire a disabled person and train them.
Skills people bring in are not necessarily the ones they will use as they have to be trained in the needs of the business.
‘We can train people in anything from basic literacy and numeracy to trade skills like welding.
Training and development of people is part of the Blindcraft ethos.’
Blindcraft provides meaningful employment for blind or disabled people who might otherwise be living on state benefits.
It makes a significant contribution to the local economy through its generation of manufactured goods and the fact that its staff pay tax and national insurance.
On its sales last year, the Value Added Tax alone came to over £400,000.
Bob said: ‘If Blindcraft wasn't here, none of this would be happening.’
Blindcraft has its main premises in Craigmillar and has factory shops at  and .
Regional Council employees receive ten per cent discount on Blindcraft products including beds and bedroom furniture like chairs, stools and headboards.
For more information, call Blindcraft on .
Welcome to Westwood
The Education Department's Advisory Service has moved its main premises after nearly 20 years in the Dean Education Centre at Belford House.
Its new home is Westwood House at , next door to Chesser House.
Last year the decision was taken to leave the Dean Centre as part of an ongoing rationalisation of Regional premises, aimed at making savings and offering an improved service to clients.
The move was co-ordinated by Graham Munn, principal officer (support services), and Sandy Black, assistant director of the Advisory Service.
Graham said: ‘The Dean Centre, while a beautiful building, had limitations from the point of view of our service to teachers and schools.
‘Everyone had to work in separate rooms, and given the physical layout of the place, sometimes an advisory team was in one part of the Centre and its support staff in another part entirely.
‘The open-plan design at Westwood means that advisory teams and their support staff can work alongside each other which is a big advantage.
Here, we also have a fully networked computer system which would have been impossible to install at Dean.
‘This computer allows us to send electronic mail, E-mail, which reduces the need to use paper and is far quicker.
I can write something on the computer, then send it to everyone else in the building at the press of a button.
‘Eventually, we hope to be able to send E-mail outside the building to our various clients and colleagues throughout the Education Department.’
Before the move, there was a consultation procedure with staff which looked at issues like layouts, team placing and furnishings.
The first Advisory Service employees moved in to Westwood in April with the last few taking up residence in June.
Graham said: ‘People are generally happy with the new premises and the move has taken place with the minimum of disruption for the service we provide to schools.
We look forward confidently to providing a service of the highest quality from our new main base.’
As some staff had been in the Dean Centre for much of their working lives, it was only to be expected that they would leave Belford Road behind with some regret.
Secretary Joan Smiles said that she preferred the Dean Centre to Westwood House while clerical officer Norma Clark said: ‘Westwood House hasn't got the character of Dean, but the facilities are much better.’
Receptionist Susan Dick said: ‘It's totally different at the moment because it's brand new.
At the moment, we are all really settling in.’
What's cooking?
LOTHIAN CATERING Services had two reasons to celebrate recently.
One involved the successful launch of its cookery book, Cooking to Please, and the other was because it won the contract to provide in-house catering to the main council sites for second time.
General manager David Melvin said: ‘We provide catering to 350 outlets within the region, including schools, but we have to tender for that business.
The recent contract was for police and staff.
It means we will continue to provide catering services at George IV Bridge, the Regional Chambers, Torpichen Street and other major centres including the police headquarters.’
This secures work for 55 employees for the next four years and David is delighted that the council recognised its own catering organisation as providing best value for money.
He said: ‘There were more than a dozen enquiries about the tender and this was whittled down to a list of six.
Finally, three submitted tenders, and we won it on cost and technical ability.’
This technical ability is demonstrated by the recipes in Cooking to Please.
Lothian Catering Services decided to launch its own cookbook to raise its profile both inside and outside the Region.
David said: ‘We have been trying to promote a professional image and get away from everyone's idea of school dinners or canteen catering.
Cooking to Please takes us into the 1990s.’
Recipes like broccoli and stilton soup or dhai bhindi (okra curry) are certainly light years away from most people's memory of what school meals were all about.
The book has been presented to kitchen supervisors and managers but is available for sale, price £4.50.
David said: ‘Demand has been exceptional.’
WATCH THIS SPACE.
Lothian Catering Services is also launching a quality awards scheme for its staff with ‘major’ prizes on offer.
Details are available from area managers, regional managers or commercial operations manager Carol McGhie.
Winners will be announced later in the year.
Your Health!
MORE THAN 10,000 women who work for the Regional Council have received a cervical smear test since 1988, and the Women's Unit has played a major part in that achievement.
This year, the tests start in September and the Unit's office in Johnston Terrace will once again turn into a medical surgery for the duration of the programme.
Carol Forfar, head of the Women's Unit, said: ‘Cervical cancer can be cured if it is caught in its early stages.
We deal with the arrangements for the smear test, the appointment and make the whole process easier and more pleasant.
And women get time off work to come here.’
The Unit has a leaflet on cervical cancer which was produced by Mary O'Sullivan.
It is free to members of the public and had proved popular with other  organisations wanting to provide this information to women.
Carol said: ‘Women's health is a major part of our work.
We are also developing workplace meetings on breast cancer and we want to raise the profile of women's health issues in general.
Women tend to be the carers in a family and don't take time to look after themselves properly, but who will look after them?’
For more information on the Region's cervical screening programme, contact the Women's Unit on tel;.
100% pure adrenalin
FOUR STAFF from Whitdale House Day Care Centre in Whitburn took their courage in their hands recently and jumped out of an aeroplane.
Fortunately, all four were wearing parachutes.
Care assistants  and kitchen assistant  took the plunge to raise money for summer outings for the Centre's clients.
Trips have  already taken place to Edinburgh Castle, Luss on Loch Lomond and up the Clyde Valley.
Kay had seen an advert in the Daily Record about parachuting at Strathallan Airfield near Auchterarder and thought it would definitely bring in sponsor money.
She said: ‘We wanted to give the clients a summer to remember.’
The organiser was Kathy Kirk, depute day care manager.
Kathy said: ‘We only opened the Centre in January and we are trying to bring clients in slowly so they have time to adjust.
We provide meals and activities for the over-65s.
‘We have around 45 to 50 clients a week, but this will rise to 125.
The existing clients helped us to raise the money and went round their relatives.
There was also a good response from the local community.’
Michelle, Valerie and June were jumping for the first time, but Kay had two charity parachute jumps under her belt already.
With her experience, she was allowed a static jump at just over 2,000 feet.
This means that she jumped out of the aircraft by herself and her parachute opened automatically seconds later.
For the other three, there was the thrill of a jump from 10,000 feet, with each attached to an instructor.
They went into free-fall for half the distance and then floated gently down the rest of the way.
Michelle said: ‘I didn't like the free fall, but apart from that I think I would do it all again.’
June said it was her first and last time while Valerie described the jump as the thrill of her life.
Her colleagues said she came down the last few hundred feet singing Flower of Scotland with her instructor.
Kathy said: ‘The final total isn't in, but we hope to have raised over £1,000.
We would like to thank the clients for all the help and Harry Ferguson who has the transport contract here at the Centre.’
Local Government Reform
The outcome of the White Paper on local government reform is now known.
Newsround felt it was worthwhile to give readers information about the efforts that are being made by the Council to ensure its views on reform are known and presented as effectively as possible.
The Council's response is co-ordinated by a working group chaired by depute director of corporate services David Hume who was also the author of the three publications described in this feature: the Council's main response on reform, the report on the future of water and sewerage services and ‘Restoring the Balance’, a proposal for a system of decentralised local government.
The members of the working group came from a variety of departments 
The best way to deliver local services
THE ABILITY of Lothian's employees to provide cost effective services at local level was highlighted in the Regional Council's response to the Government's reform document.
The intention was to show that a large strategic authority could also deliver services to local communities effectively.
The example was quoted of the Social Work Department being extensively restructured to meet the requirements of the Community Care legislation and to bring the service closer to the consumer.
Irrespective of the outcome of reform, the Council's response document ‘Making the Right Choice’ put forward Lothian's case in a way that has been widely commended.
It argued that the existing two tier local government in Lothian was the best for delivering local services but if changes had to be made, the only effective alternative would be an all-purpose local authority for Edinburgh and the Lothians.
The Council commended the existing structure to the Secretary of State and asked him to re-consider this as an option for Lothian.
‘If the Secretary of State is not convinced by the argument that the cost, confusion and disruption involved in the proposed re-organisation is not justified, it is proposed that a single, all-purpose local authority be created for Edinburgh and the Lothians,’ stated the report.
The assumption that large authorities are costly and bureaucratic is wrong, according to the Regional Council.
It has been proved that Lothian has low bureaucratic costs and provides an above average standard of services at low cost.
The implication is that greatest efficiency comes with fewer, larger authorities.
The Regional Council also questioned the assumptions on costs in the Government's paper.
Research undertaken by Coopers and Lybrand revealed there was no significant case in cost terms to justify changing the current local government structure to anything other than a single unitary authority for the whole of Lothian.
The Regional Council also stated that joint boards were not the best means of providing major public services.
They can lead to lack of clarity about who does what, fail the local loyalty test, are less efficient at making decisions.
remove local direct control over spending and lead to reduced public accountability.
Lothian was described in the report as being the right scale: its small size, population density and well developed roads and transport make all parts accessible, even compared to many existing district council areas in Scotland.
Lothian is also a well defined employment centre with nearly 92 per cent of its working population employed within its boundary.
The Lothian Region boundary is also used by many other organisations — the local enterprise company Lothian and Edinburgh Enterprise Ltd and Lothian Health Board are just two examples — as a planning and administrative area.
Commission to look after employees' interests
THE INTERESTS of council employees in Scotland are to be kept under review by a staff commission during the transition to the new local government system.
The commission will advice the Secretary of State and local authorities on the appointment, transfer, retirement and redundancy for staff.
It may also be asked to consider general staffing matters.
The move to set up the staff commission comes after local authorities asked that a body be set up to protect the interests of employees.
Councils and their staff representatives have been invited to consider how the commission can help in the move to the new system.
The government has described local government personnel as the most important resource available to the new councils and recognised the need to protect their interests.
It is likely that the vast majority of Council staff will be largely unaffected by the reorganisation, transferring directly to the new councils.
The commission is likely to be made up of three to four members and will be appointed for a three year period.
Final decisions on the membership and remit of the commission will be taken following consultation with local authorities and staff representatives.
It is possible that the prospective commissioners will begin advising the Secretary of State on staffing matters next spring.
Staff show their expertise
EMPLOYEES MAY have seen stories in the press recently about how much local government is going to cost but may not be aware the Council staff provided information which was quoted in the controversy.
Staff in Lothian's Finance Department played a crucial part in questioning predictions of reform costs and savings produced for the Government by consultants Touche Ross.
Assistant director Bill Wilson and technical accountant Raymond Wood did some behind-the-scenes calculations and found the consultants' conclusions wanting.
Their findings were then used in reports by the Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities.
The COSLA report estimated that official estimates of costs and savings have been miscalculated by as much as £100 million.
‘The problem with the Touche Ross report is that it makes assumptions that lead it to overestimate the savings associated with smaller, more numerous councils.
Projected savings arising from changes in central administration, financial services, libraries, planning and development, and housing appear to be unrealistically high,’ said Raymond Wood.
Touche Ross reckoned that the extra costs resulting from setting up 51 councils would be £58 million but the figure could be closer to £184 million.
Far from the break even point — where overall costs and savings would balance — being at the 43 authorities mark, it would be achieved if 24 authorities were created.
‘And the point is that the savings increase below this number as authorities become fewer and larger,’ added Raymond Wood.
Lothian goes local
A PAPER published by Lothian Regional Council has recommended a decentralised system of local government with some employees working from a network of council shops.
A council shop in each local area would provide a direct point of contact between local communities and the Council's services.
The shops would also give people the chance to use a consumer complaint system.
To make services more responsive to local needs, a devolved system of decision-making by local service managers would also come into force.
The paper, called ‘Restoring the Balance’, argued for a decentralised system of local government within the framework of the one all-purpose authority based on the existing Lothian boundary.
It was commended by the ‘Scotsman’ as a document which deserved a fair hearing.
Establishing 34 neighbourhood and town councils in Lothian and restoring local provosts to the region's towns and burghs were the two key proposals put forward in ‘Restoring the Balance’.
The paper took account of the need for a local government structure that reflects local loyalties and identity.
It showed how local government could benefit from the efficiency of a larger authority while also being responsive to local communities in delivering its services.
‘We had to show that the Regional Council could organise its affairs to ensure a more local system than currently exists through the regions and districts,’ said Convenor Eric Milligan.
Under the programme outlined in ‘Restoring the Balance’ the single tier authority would be responsible for strategic management such as setting performance and quality standards.
The network of neighbourhood and town councils would operate within this structure, based on the ward currently under review by the Boundaries Commission.
The councils would be made up of four wards within Edinburgh and three wards outwith the city.
The populations served by each council would vary from 11,400 to 23,000.
These councils would assess local needs, contribute to local service plans within the overall strategic plan and monitor local service provision.
In addition, they would allocate local grants and manage local parks and libraries.
The role of councillors would be strengthened: they would sit on the local bodies armed with the knowledge of the policies adopted at the centre of the council.
It is estimated that the cost of such a system of local government would be around £1 million, against the £18 million projected savings associated with the creation of a single council for Edinburgh and the Lothians.
The proposal to restore the provost as local civic figurehead raises the prospect of restoring a position to the region's small towns and burghs which was lost in the 1975 reforms.
‘There is a case for local communities, whether outwith the city or in the city, to enjoy the benefits of having a local community figurehead.
Positions such as Provost for Queensferry could be restored,’ said the Convenor.
The paper shows that there could be a return of these positions without prejudicing the integrity of an Edinburgh and Lothian-wide council.
Greater accountability and improved understanding about local government would result from the creation of three Council-wide service Users' Forums for users of the transportation, social work and education services.
They would draw representatives from the business community, voluntary and interest groups, providing them with the opportunity to influence plans and priorities and comment on the quality of services.
The fight for water services
THE COUNCIL'S response to the government's proposals for the future of water and sewerage services showed that Lothian's current arrangements would be the most efficient, cost-effective and democratic way to  provide these services in the future.
The 32-page response, ‘Making the Right Choice — A Quality Public Service’, concluded that no convincing case had been made to change the present arrangements.
The Council commissioned market research which revealed that 93 per cent of those questions rated water services as very good or quite good while 83 per cent rated drainage services similarly.
Lothian's water and sewerage charges are amongst the cheapest in Scotland and cheaper than English and Welsh water companies, based on the information available.
The report concluded that private investment options in the consultation paper would likely lead to increases in household charges, mirroring the experience in England and Wales.
High levels of investment will be needed, whichever option is chosen, and the cost will ultimately be paid for by the consumer.
The Council maintained that the investment problems could be overcome without major organisational change.
The report suggested making finance available from current revenue expenditure or by the government lifting restrictions on borrowing for self-financing schemes such as water investment schemes, paid for by charges levied on consumers.
The government could also help Scottish consumers by agreeing to write off existing debt on water and sewerage to create equal conditions with English and Welsh water and sewerage arrangements.
Council employees get public recognition
A SURVEY carried out for the Regional Council by System 3 Scotland shows that the public has a good level of understanding of the services that Lothian's employees provide.
The findings were based on interviews with 501 people — a representative sample of Lothian's population — and featured in the Regional Council's response to the plans for reform.
Sixty-eight per cent of those interviewed correctly identified education and 62 per cent social work as regional services.
Satisfaction with local authority services was high: 93 per cent described water services as being ‘very good’ or ‘quite good’and 80 per cent held education in the same high regard.
Fifty-five per cent knew that Lothian Regional Council provided local services in their local area.
In Edinburgh district, 61 per cent of those questioned correctly identified Lothian Regional Council as a local authority in their area which provided local services.
This compares with 36 per cent in the district who correctly identified Edinburgh District Council in the same terms.
There was a definite thumbs down to any reorganisation with only nine per cent feeling that a change was required.
When asked at what level unitary authorities should be created, the results were evenly split: around half the sample favoured them at broadly district level while the other half preferred regional level or expressed no preference.
Eighty-eight per cent of people interviewed were against the control of water services passing from regional councils and 60 per cent said they did not understand joint board arrangements for providing local services.
The research was also used to highlight the misguided emphasis placed by the Government on local loyalties, believing that the people a council represents should identify with it.
Presentations go down well
THE REGIONAL COUNCIL has carried out its own consultation on reform.
It organised three presentations to representatives from business, voluntary groups and community councils which created a lot of interest.
More than 60 key business people and 150 representatives from the voluntary sector as well as community councils attended the presentations in the Regional Chambers to hear the findings of an independent study into implications for Edinburgh and the Lothians of the proposals for reform.
You can read about the study in the ‘Lothian Looking Forward’ newsletter which was distributed to staff earlier in the year.
The publication also highlighted how the various options for reform would affect Lothian.
Some extra copies of ‘Lothian Looking Forward’ are available and can be obtained by telephoning the Corporate Services Department on .
Lessons from Wales?
THERE WERE a few raised eyebrows when the White Paper on Welsh local government reform was published earlier in the year.
It was by no means the victory the districts were expecting.
The new unitary authorities there will be known as county councils.
Like Scotland, Wales does not have an independent Local Government Commission to make representations on future structure as is happening in England.
Your questions answered
NOW THAT the White Paper is published, employees will be wondering what happens now.
‘Newsround’ decided to answer some of the key questions.
Q What happens now that the White Paper is published?
A Work will begin on drawing up the Bill.
The Queen's Speech in November will broadly reveal what the Bill is likely to contain.
Q When will the Bill be published?
A This is difficult to predict but is likely to be happening in mid to late November.
Q What happens after this?
A If the Bill is presented to the House of Commons in November, it will pass through the committee stage until February 1944 and be considered by the House of Lords by next May.
If the Bill receives the Royal Assent next summer, elections to the new shadow authorities are due to take place in May 1995 with the new councils taking over in April 1996.
Q When are we likely to hear about the Bill?
A There are several key stages when the bill could be in the news: during the second reading debate, committee stage and report stage/third reading.
These stages apply to both the House of Commons and House of Lords.
Q Is there a chance of the reform plans changing after the White Paper is published?
A Immediately after it is published is an important time for lobbying the Government but by the time the White Paper appears, the framework for the reforms will largely be set.
When local government was reorganised in the mid 1970s, significant changes were made late on in the process but the Regional Council has been advised that this was the exception rather than the rule.
Welter of criticism greets White Paper proposals
THE PROPOSALS in the White Paper on local government reform do a grave disservice to the people and economy of the Lothians.
This was the response of Lothian's Convenor, Eric Milligan, to the publication of the White Paper on July 8.
The Government reiterated that the vast majority of local government staff would transfer to one of the new councils on existing pay and conditions, but the proposals put the future prosperity of the Lothians in doubt.
They will undermine all the planning which has ensured that the integration of the city and the rest of the region was the basis of Lothian's economic success.
‘In taking the heart out of the Lothians, the Government is also severely prejudicing the ability of  Edinburgh to compete on the European and world stage’, said the Convenor of Lothian Regional Council, Eric Milligan.
‘Over recent years hugely successful efforts have been made to promote Edinburgh and the Lothians in Europe.
The proposals will seriously undermine Edinburgh's position in Europe’, he added.
The proposals remove the benefits which a large strategic authority brings to the people of Lothian and fail to take account of local loyalties.
It is difficult to see how the proposed ‘Lothians’ Council on either side of Edinburgh will command or reflect local loyalties.
The Convenor questioned the lack of community focus for this new authority and described the proposals as ‘bizarre’.
East Lothian is an integral part of Edinburgh's hinterland, yet most of the district is to join with Berwickshire in a new council.
The Regional Council argues that local government in the Lothians should benefit from the efficiency of a larger, strategic authority while also being responsive to local communities in delivering its services.
What the White Paper means for Lothian
BY NOW employees will have heard of the proposals in the White Paper on local government reform.
The White Paper proposes splitting the present Lothian Region three ways:
The City of Edinburgh becomes a unitary council based on the existing district council boundary
A council called ‘The Lothians’ would be formed, covering the existing West Lothian and Midlothian district areas plus Musselburgh and Prestonpans
East Lothian, minus Musselburgh and Prestonpans, joins with Berwickshire
At this stage these are proposals and are still subject to change.
Chief Executive responds
CHIEF EXECUTIVE, Graham Bowie, has reacted to the White Paper proposals with a personal message to employees.
In a letter to staff he said: ‘I have to express my disappointment at the proposed changes.
Over the years we have proved to be an effective and efficient council and I believe you have all contributed greatly to making Lothian such a progressive authority.
‘In today's world everyone is faced with the problem of having to confront and adjust to change and uncertainty.
I am confident that you will be able to cope with these issues in an effective way.
We have a long and honourable tradition of public service and I know that this quality will prevail in the months ahead.’
New Director for Highways
LOTHIAN REGIONAL COUNCIL has appointed Dr George McLean Hazel as its new director of highways.
Dr Hazel (44) comes to the post with over 23 years experience in transportation, nine years in local government.
This included five years with Edinburgh Corporation's City Engineer's Department and a four year stint with Lothian Regional Council as transportation engineer in the mid 1970s.
As director, he will be responsible for over 4,000 kilometres of roads and an annual budget of £50 million.
He moves to Lothian from his current post of executive director with Oscar Faber TPA.
His main role with the consultants was to open a new Scottish regional office in Edinburgh and from there he built them up into one of the largest transportation consultants in Scotland.
Dr Hazel was responsible for projects including a road message signing system for east/central Scotland, advising on the possibility of a third Forth crossing, the Royal Mile traffic and environmental study and the central belt rail electrification study.
He was an advisor to the Scottish Office Industry Department and to several regional councils on transportation issues.
While with TPA, Dr Hazel developed overseas business for the consultancy in Eastern Europe and the USA.
His local authority experience includes road design and construction on the Edinburgh city bypass scheme and involvement in a number of studies such as the Edinburgh Central Area Study, the Leith Docks Approach Study and the Edinburgh East Approach Study.
After his first spell with Lothian, Dr Hazel left to become a lecturer at Napier College of Commerce and Technology.
In 1989, he became a professor of transportation engineering — the first professor of transportation in Scotland.
He is an internationally recognised expert in the economic and traffic impact of large developments, having presented and published a number of papers around the world.
Dr Hazel has lived in Edinburgh for the past 23 years and is married with three of a family.
He is chairman of the Edinburgh and East of Scotland Association of the Institution of Civil Engineers and is a member of the Scottish Council for Development and Industry.
Jeux sans frontieres
LOTHIAN REGIONAL Council promoted a large number of events during the UK's presidency of the EC from July to December 1992.
It culminated in the Summit at Holyrood Palace, and later, Beacon Europe on 31 December which marked the completion of the European Single Market.
One of the most successful initiatives on the part of the Council was the Lothian European Lectures 1992.
These reached their hight on 9 December when a convoy of three cars with motorcycle outriders arrived at the entrance to the Royal College of Physicians in Queen Street, Edinburgh.
Stepping from the middle car, Sir Edward Heath was met by the Regional Council's convenor, Eric Milligan.
Just two days before the European Council Summit in Edinburgh, the former Prime Minister had arrived to deliver the final lecture.
The series had attracted capacity crowds and Sir Edward faced a packed hall when he gave his address, ‘At the Heart of Europe’.
Norman Ireland, principal, European affairs, said: ‘The Council had agreed to use the period of the UK's presidency to promote Lothian in Europe and Europe in Lothian.
This was done through a programme of special events, the ‘Edinburgh and Lothians European Programme’, which was jointly managed by the Council, Edinburgh District Council, Lothian and Edinburgh Enterprise Limited and the Chamber of Commerce.
‘In the overall programme, the Regional Council alone had responsibility for around 40 separate events including concerts, conferences, exhibitions, seminars, lectures and sport.
‘The Lothian European Lectures were a great success and attracted large numbers of people to hear speakers such as.
‘The wide range of events, coupled with the Council's responsibilities for the Summit, which included policing, meant that a large number of employees were directly involved from various departments.
Special mention has to be made of staff serving the Regional Chambers and headquarters who had to cope with more than the usual pressure!’
The six months from July to December last year had a definite European theme in Lothian.
Newsround picks out the highlights.
The number of European events supported by the Council in 1992 is too extensive to list, but the following give a flavour of what happened:
During the International Jazz Festival, the Council sponsored Stephane Grappelli's only performance
In October, the Council hosted METROPIA XVI, a Euro-wide event for senior school pupils held for the first time in the UK
Also in October, around 200 delegates representing regional governments in Europe attended the ‘Regional Summit’ which was sponsored by the Council in its capacity as a member of the East of Scotland European Consortium
In December, the Council, with Edinburgh District Council, sponsored a conference on employment rights in Europe
Over the festive period and during the Summit, the ‘Window on Europe’ project decorated the Regional Chambers and headquarters.
It was made by special needs children in Lothian and children  from Kiev and Munich
A sell-out ‘Fanfare for Europe’ was presented at the Usher Hall in December by the Lothian Region Schools Orchestra.
It heralded the Summit and was a tremendous success
At Hogmanay, the Council, supported by British Gas, presented ‘Sing a Song for Europe’ as part of the Euro-wide Beacon Europe celebrations.
Several thousand people gathered in Princes Street gardens to enjoy community singing and the lighting of the region's own Beacon Europe on Edinburgh Castle's Half Moon Battery
Travelling man
David Semple, director of education, is retiring this month.
He spoke to Keith Davidson about his 19 years with Lothian Regional Council
DAVID SEMPLE began his lifetime in education through what he describes as ‘the normal route’.
This involved university then a teacher training course at Jordanhill in Glasgow.
After Jordanhill, his career trajectory took a different path to most when he decided to join the Colonial Education Service in what was then Northern Rhodesia, now Zambia.
He went there in 1958 and his first posting was to a remote rural station in the north of the country.
He said: ‘I went to Africa to teach but I was re-routed into education administration and I have stayed in that profession ever since.
‘I have never had any hesitation that Africa was the right move.
It was marvellous and provided considerable amounts of experience.
I was given, in my first job, responsibility for the administration of the education service in an area one-and-a-half times the size of Scotland.
‘There were few people to whom problems could be referred but you had to make things work.
This provided a confidence that came from getting on with the job.’
Given the sheer size of his patch, David spent a fair amount of time travelling.
He said: ‘Every second week I would spend on tour in the country travelling by landrover, bicycle or canoe.
I even canoed and walked along the route taken by David Livingstone.’
David rose through the ranks from education officer to acting director of technical education during his years in Northern Rhodesia, but some years after the country gained independence he made the decision to leave.
David came back to Scotland in 1968 to take up a post as an assistant to the director of education with the City of Edinburgh Corporation.
He was later promoted to depute director and within six years of his return, he found himself director of the newly-created Lothian Regional Council's Education Department.
He has been a member of the Chief Executive's Management Group since those early days and is the only remaining director from the team which put the Council together in 1974.
David said: ‘A great deal has changed since then.
At that time, school rolls were still rising and the challenge was to ensure enough accommodation.
Through the 1980s, there was an extended period when school rolls fell back and there are now 30 per cent fewer pupils now than there were.
One of the current challenges is the management of contraction.’
Changes in the law over the last 19 years have brought extra work to education departments across the country and changes in the way the service is administered.
David said: ‘The great raft of, for example, health and safety and employment legislation has led to a review of our approaches and policies.
And the education legislation, of which there has been a considerable amount, is now much more specific.’
David cites as an example the 1981 Education Act which brought freedom of choice for parents.
He said: ‘Many requests by parents for their children to go to particular schools are met, but sometimes there are not enough places which leads to appeals.
All this means much more work for staff.’
Despite these changes, David stresses that his post is as enjoyable as it ever was.
He said: ‘Never a week goes by but you get something you have never faced before, or something comes in a fashion you have not seen before, so there are plenty of challenges.’
As one of Scotland's senior education professionals, he has brought his experience to bear on a number of organisations outwith the Council including the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, as education adviser, and the University Grants Committee.
He was a member of the Howie Committee on the future provision for S5 and S6 in secondary schools and David also played a part in the development of educational programmes on television in Scotland and Zambia.
In the 1950s, Northern Rhodesia, Southern Rhodesia and Nyasaland had a federal government which ran an education television service.
The federation broke up in 1964 and David said: ‘Zambia decided to continue a service of its own and the finger of fate pointed at me.
I ran the infant educational television service in the country, producing and appearing in programmes.’
Back in Scotland, David chaired Scottish Television's Education Advisory Committee from 1979 to 1985.
One of David's most enjoyable and important appointments was as general secretary of the Association of Directors of Education in Scotland, a position he held from 1986 until this year.
ADES represents the interests of senior education administrators and is influential in developing education policy in Scotland.
As the Association's general secretary, David played a major role in the many developments which took place during the period.
In recognition of his work with the Council and other bodies, David was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in 1991, and this month he receives the honorary degree of Doctor of Education from Napier University.
Looking back over the last 19 years he said: ‘Having had the opportunity to set up and develop the education service in Lothian has been enormously challenging and satisfying and I believe it is an education service of good quality with many forward-looking policies now established.
‘There are big challenges to be faced in curricular development and devolving management.
But there must be concerns at the prospect of the need to break up such a service and whether the work it is undertaking can be maintained and appropriately financially supported in smaller units.’
These will be concerns for his successor as David will take his leave of the Education Department at the end of July and his immediate plans are more leisurely now than they have been for many years.
He said: ‘I have recently taken a course to learn how to fish.
So far, this is fly fishing but it may develop into other things.
I have a modest interest in pictures and antiques and I will now have more time for the sale rooms.
Also, I hope to do more travelling and my garden is in need of attention!’
Northern LIGHT
THE COUNCIL'S new director of education takes up her post in August.
She is Elizabeth Reid, 46, who comes to Lothian from the London Guildhall University where she was deputy provost responsible for all aspects of planning and development including financial planning and employee relations.
From 1985 to 1989, she was employed by the Inner London Education Authority (ILEA), initially as the administrative head of the further and higher education branch and then in 1988 as deputy director of education.
Elizabeth also worked as a schoolteacher with ILEA from 1970 to 1979.
Elizabeth brings with her the experience of working through periods of change both with ILEA and London Guildhall which recently made the transition from polytechnic to university status.
At the time of her appointment, Elizabeth acknowledged that she was coming to Lothian also at a time of great change with developments in the areas of delegated budgets for schools, curriculum guidelines for five to 14 year olds, nursery education and special education.
Elizabeth has worked for the Association of Metropolitan Authorities and between 1980 and 1983 for the London Borough of Haringey where she was responsible for the special education service and secondary school amalgamations.
Before this, she was a professional assistant for the London Borough of Ealing, responsible for major building projects including the Ealing College of Higher Education, now Thames Valley University, a new primary school and a special school.
Her teaching duties have included head of sixth form and advisory teacher for 16 to 19 education.
Although her career has developed while working in England, the move to Lothian is a return to Scotland for Elizabeth.
She was born in Aberdeen and was a student at the city's university where she gained her MA in 1969.
The Education Department is by far the largest within Lothian Regional Council.
Its current revenue budget is £317 million gross and it has 15,000 staff of which 8,000 are teachers.
There are 340 schools and colleges and nearly 100 community education centres and outdoor education resource centres in Lothian.
The director of education post is one of the most senior in Scottish local government.
From Marine Esplanade to Muthuramalingam
Have you heard of WaterAid?
Perhaps not, but Sheena Fraser is trying hard to ensure that you will soon.
SHEENA works in the Scientific Services Division of Water and Drainage at Marine Esplanade in Edinburgh.
One of her responsibilities is to represent her department on the Scottish WaterAid committee.
WaterAid is the charity supported by water and drainage departments from regional councils across Scotland.
It was set up in 1981 by the British water industry in response to the United Nations' Water Decade of 1981 to 1990.
Sheena said: ‘This charity is about community-based appropriate technology, not just about money.
‘It is not an emergency aid organisation, responding to drought.
In Third World countries you can have problems with water supply when women have to carry it long distances, and even in the rainy season, wells can become contaminated.’
Public health in the UK improved with clean water supplies and WaterAid aims to do a similar job abroad.
The WaterAid committee tends to support projects in traditionally-English speaking areas as it is likely to have more effect where it can be better understood.
WaterAid workers will move into an area, set up a water supply and committees of local people to run it, then leave.
The Water and Drainage Department's WaterAid committee has raised more than £2,000 for the charity in the last nine months.
A ceilidh in Leith Town Hall late last year brought in £1,100 while a more recent quiz night and an assault course event raised just over £1,000.
The charity is backed by staff from the grass roots to directorate level.
The committee hopes that WaterAid will be able to up its profile in Lothian through developing links with schools and establishing a ‘give as you earn’ scheme.
Extra money will come in handy as there will soon be a particular project to support.
WaterAid is to work with an Indian organisation to improve the water supply to three villages in the Muthuramalingam district of Tamil Nadu in the south east of that country.
The Council's Water and Drainage Department intends to adopt this project to provide a focus for its fundraising efforts.
WaterAid is already supported by Regional Analyst staff and Sheena said: ‘If anyone in any other department in the Council wants to contribute, I would be delighted to hear from them.’
Contact Sheena at  .
TWO FOR THE ROAD
Two Regional Council staff will soon have the opportunity to see Water and Drainage's adopted WaterAid project at first hand as they are leaving their jobs to go travelling in Asia.
Des Ferguson of Water and Drainage and Cathryn Thompson, who works with the East Lothian Social Work Resource Team in Haddington, have decided to go ‘on the road’ for a year.
Des said: ‘This trip will give me the opportunity to see how the adopted project is doing and feed back some information to Edinburgh.’
Cathryn used to work with the Social Work Department in Craigmillar, but took up a fixed term post at Haddington once the decision was taken to go on tour.
She said: ‘We actually did this before, around four to five years ago.
We are prepared to take the risk in giving up our jobs and taking a bit of time out.’
Last time round they went to south east Asia, trekked in Nepal as far as the Everest base camp, saw Thailand and China then came back on the Trans-Siberian Railway.
This time, a few more countries are on the itinerary.
Cathryn said: ‘We're starting off in India, then going to Thailand, and possibly Burma and Vietnam.
We plan to go to Indonesia and China for sure and should be away for ten to 12 months.
On the Fringe…
Bonnington Resource Centre is all set to make a dramatic impact at this year's Edinburgh Festival Fringe with two shows by the Pisces Theatre Company between 16 and 28 August.
THE FIRST WEEK has Fairy Hill the story of the Reverend Robert Kirk of Aberfoyle who believed in fairies.
It features a ten-strong group of ballet dancers from Rouen in France.
During the second week, Pisces will put on Dr Elsie which is a tribute to the life and work of Edinburgh medical pioneer, Dr Elsie Inglis.
Community worker Pauline Crombie said: ‘There will also be a special show in the afternoons for our members.
Anyone who was born at the Elsie Inglis Hospital can take part and the story will depend on the participants but it will include half an hour of songs from the other two shows.
‘We want to involve the members of the Centre as much as possible.
Everything we do here, we hope to be integrated.
The members will be helping with the coffee bar at the Fringe shows.
As the dramas will take place in the dining room, they will also be helping to prepare that area.’
Manager Mile McCabe said: ‘Bonnington Resource Centre is for adults with learning difficulties.
Part of our operational policy is that we offer facilities to outside groups and individuals on an understanding that our members have access to an active involvement in what's going on.
‘The Fringe Show, our evening classes and our monthly fleamarket are part of our aim to inform the public about the Centre and get them coming in as a starting point for integration.
Our members are actively involved in organising and setting this up.
‘It's all activity oriented contact which is a beginning to help to alter the preconceived ideas that might exist in the minds of the local community.
If the community can come in for such events, it makes them more comfortable in the building and avoids stigmatisation.’
For more information on the Fringe shows, contact the Pisces Theatre Company on .
Dates for the fleamarket are Sunday 8 August and Sunday 5 September.
It usually runs from 10am to 2.30pm.
Bonnington Resource Centre is at .
Bringing it all back home
A major new training initiative set up by the Women's Unit and the Personnel Services Division could have a profound effect on women's employment across Europe.
The Teleworking Project is designed to test the feasibility of being employed at home but with a high-tech link to a central office base.
Lindsey Gallanders, a senior employee relations officer with the Personnel Services Division, said: ‘We have a grant from the European Commission to test teleworking and we are targeting women returners to the labour market.
‘There are two trainees at the moment attached to the Computer Services and Personnel Services Divisions of the Department of Management and Information Services.
Another two trainees are being recruited and we hope to extend the scheme to ten later in the year.
‘Teleworking is the use of modern computer technology to allow people to work at home or at a local telecentre.
This means that there is no need for staff to work in city-centre offices or to congest the city with traffic and spend time travelling to and from work.’
Carol Forfar, head of the Women's Unit, was keen to stress that teleworking was not the same as homeworking.
She said: ‘Teleworking is innovative as it allows qualified women to come back to work in senior positions.
‘Home-based work is often associated with women and with low pay.
When the idea of teleworking first came up, there was a fear of poor pay and long hours, but with this scheme we are looking at proper terms and conditions.
‘A major part of the scheme is training for managers as teleworking involves managing staff at a distance which is a departure from normal practice.’
The project has partners in Barcelona and Dublin and there is potential interest from Greece.
Carol said: ‘As it is being funded by European money, projects have to be developed in a suitable way for a transnational application.
They have to work across Europe despite different employment law and training practices, hence the need for liaison with Spain, Ireland and elsewhere.’
Future issues of Newsround will carry updates on the progress of the Project.
Distinct from the current Teleworking project, Lothian Regional Council has a framework document which allows male and female employees to telework is appropriate.
Certain staff could not telework and teachers and social workers are obvious examples.
Other posts could be ‘teleworked’ and anyone interested in the possibility of working from home by computer link should contact their departmental personnel officer to discuss the matter.
To remember them by
IN MEMORY of three colleagues who died last year, Education Department staff at Torpichen Street have been holding a number of events to raise money for charity.
The particular organisations which will benefit have been nominated by members of the families of the tree who were 
Frank Hepburn, assistant to the director, said: ‘Because of the sense of bereavement at this unprecedented loss, it was decided to have a special programme of memorial events which would act as a focus for remembering them and help raise funds for charities with which they were associated.
All were relatively young men.
They were well-loved colleagues and are very sadly missed.’
Events so far have included a 1960s night, five-a-side football, sponsored basketball and hillwalks through Glensax and the Lairig Ghru in the Cairngorms.
Frank said: ‘So far we have collected a considerable sum for St Columbia's Hospice, Save the Children and the Imperial Cancer Research Fund.’
A tale of twenty-six pizzas
The Lothian and Borders Fire Brigade was the subject of a BBC television programme recently.
The Brigade's Derek Brannan explains.
‘IN APRIL 1992, a researcher from the BBC's dramatised documentary programme ‘999’ contacted our Community Education Department asking if we had been involved in any unusual incident where rescues had been carried out.
Our answer needed little thought as the Guthrie Street disaster was the most dramatic we have been involved in for several years.
That was the occasion when a gas leak caused an explosion which wrecked an entire tenement.
Meetings took place to establish if the incident, or part of it, could be reconstructed.
Because of the scale of the disaster, it was agreed that it was impossible to recreate so the decision was taken to concentrate on the rescue of a particular individual, Martin Baptie.
Selecting the personnel to take part in the filming was complicated as some of the firefighters were unavailable.
The only fair way was to read the transcripts of those who had been there and try to piece together a sequence of events.
The BBC said there should only be five firefighters in the film and they were .
Martin Baptie was played by a local actor.
The next problem was the site.
Where in Edinburgh do you find a collapsed tenement?
The old Corn Exchange in Newmarket Road met the requirements and the set designer took no time in creating a mini-collapse.
It's amazing what you can do with a skip full of building rubble!
The long-awaited day came in March 1993 and the cameras rolled.
The filming, which resulted in an eight-minute segment took three days from 8am to 7pm each day and standing in fire gear in the freezing, draughty shell of a building is not Hollywood.
But the inner man was well catered for, although the staff at Pizza Connection took some convincing when we ordered 25 assorted pizzas.
The programme presenter, Michael Buerk, visited the Brigade a week later to shoot linking footage and that was a ‘wrap’.
The results were subsequently beamed to the nation.
Was it all worth it?
Well, the man from Pizza Connection thought so!’
Strengthening the Auld Alliance
TEACHERS IN East Lothian had the chance to meet their French counterparts recently when four members of staff from schools in Musselburgh's twin town, Champigny-sur-Marne, visited the area.
The trip was arranged by the Musselburgh Twinning Association and followed a similar exchange last year when seven teachers from Musselburgh and Wallyford went to France.
The East Lothian town has been twinned with Champigny-sur-Marne for more than 30 years.
Betty Irving, deputy head of Musselburgh Burgh Primary School, said: ‘When we were there, it was a wonderful week and we were determined to do the same for them.
Every night, they were wined and dined.’
The visitors were .
Betty said: ‘They arrived on the Sunday, then on Monday we went to Haddington and a local distillery where Jean Pierre discovered that he liked malt whisky!
Tuesday was spent sightseeing and on the Wednesday, we went to Dounans.’
Dounans Camp near Aberfoyle is hired by the Education Department from April to October each year and hosts visits from schools in Lothian Region.
Jean-Pierre, Denise and the two Danielles were taken round East Lothian schools on Thursday and Friday then were left with a free day on Saturday.
Betty said: ‘On the Sunday, they went home exhausted!’
The general twinning link between Musselburgh and Champigny-sur-Marne has been developed on a primary and secondary school level and Betty's own Musselburgh Burgh is twinned with Marcel Cachin Primary School.
She said: ‘The children get a lot out of the twinning.
We send our projects over there and the children have pen-pals.’
Betty also recognises the personal benefits of twinning links.
As a former pupil of Musselburgh Grammar School, she reckons that an exchange visit to France helped her get through her own French Higher exam.
With the French links well established in East Lothian, eyes are now turning to Rosignano, Musselburgh's other twin town in north Italy.
It is hoped that an exchange trip can be arranged with Rosignano teachers for next year.
Thanks to Sandra Kinnock of the Musselburgh Twinning Association for her help in preparing this article.
All around the world
POLICE HEADQUARTERS at Fettes Avenue in Edinburgh had an unusual visitor recently in the shape of Ram Chandra Biswas.
Ram, who comes from Calcutta, took a vow 11 years ago to dedicate his life to God and global peace.
On 21 April 1982 he set off from Calcutta with a ticket, one dollar and a bicycle.
His intention was to contact people and spread his message to the world.
So far he has visited 98 countries and covered over 280,000 km from pole to pole, through Africa and the Americas.
Constable Alan Jeffreys, who works in the Community Involvement Department, said: ‘He has met as many people in as many cities as possible who have some involvement in public safety.
‘He has police badges from 837 forces worldwide and has also met many heads of state as well as Mother Theresa, the Pope and the Dalai Lama.
He has shared his views with the Masai people at Kilimanjaro, bushmen in the Kalahari Desert and Eskimos.
He said that he won't return home for another six years and still has 65 countries to visit.’
Ram has published a message to the world which gives details of his trip so far and carries information on the reason for his extraordinary journey.
In part, it says: ‘I have not met bad people, I have never been robbed and whenever I left a village, people waved me with tearful eyes.
I carried their love and blessings all along…
I believe in my heart and soul that everyone has an equal responsibility to work together the peace and harmony of this world.
ON THE ROAD
LOTHIAN AND BORDERS Police has made a big step forward in crime prevention work with its new information caravan.
Constable Alan Jeffreys of the Community Involvement Department said: ‘This will bring the crime prevention message to the public in a more attractive package.
‘It has already been used at the International Children's Festival in Inverleith, the Meadows Festival and the Royal Highland Show.
The caravan has a canopy, disabled access and has been painted to look like a police car from the back!’
The caravan is usually staffed by two officers who can provide all kinds of information on crime prevention in the home and on the street such as the new booklet ‘Talking Sense, A Guide To Women's Safety’.
The caravan already has a busy diary for the summer but anyone interested in having it along to a community event, or simply to visit a neighbourhood, should contact their local divisional police headquarters and ask for the crime prevention officer.
The News Sheet of Lothian Highways
Issue 1 — May 1993
HIGHWAYS NETWORK
Network Launched
In this period of change and uncertainty I asked the Directorate how best to keep staff informed of the actions being initiated and decisions taken affecting staff in all Divisions.
The result is the first edition of NETWORK.
I am aware that three Divisions have their own news sheets but in the interest and the UNITY of the Department, I believe that ‘NETWORK’ has an important role to play with regard to communication and the sharing of information.
NETWORK replaces the divisional publications.
NETWORK will appear bi-monthly except when events warrant a special issue.
Major Issues
a) Reorganisation of Local Government
Responses to the Government's consultation document are now being considered by the Scottish Office.
A ‘White Paper’ is expected in May/June ‘93 on the Government proposed way forward.
The overall time scale is:
1
Bill presented to Parliament in Session 1993/94;
2
Elections to new authorities in May 1995;
3
New authorities take over in 1996.
The Regional Council will continue to issue information from time to time to keep staff advised.
b) Compulsory Competitive Tendering (CCT)
You will recall the threat that CCT would be extended to Engineering Services in 1994/95.
There is little further to report on this issue, the Scottish Office have gone quiet.
It is worth noting that in England, Councils must have competition for 33% of their Engineering service in the first year 1995 and 90% by October ‘96.
The timescale in Scotland may be affected by the proposed restructuring of authorities and the extension of CCT may be deferred until after 1996.
I would stress that there is no definitive statement on the timescale.
Given the delay in the appointment of a new Director (see later) the Directorate feel that preparation for CCT must continue and that options for the restructuring of the Department should be available when an appointment is made.
In this respect the Development of Total Quality Systems within the Department is seen as essential, not only in pointing the way ahead but also ensuring that all aspects of our work are based on the best possible delivery of service.
c) Total Quality Teamwork (TQT)
The idea of Quality is not new to the Department.
Many areas of our work are Quality Assured.
Some Departments have pursued Total Quality Management (TQM).
All employees are part of THE TEAM and this extends throughout the organisation.
The Directorate have therefore decided to look at the whole of our service provision on a TEAM basis.
A mission statement has been developed:
‘The DEPARTMENT is committed to the delivery of a quality service for the planning, design, management, maintenance and construction of all roads, structures and street lighting in Lothian Region.
The DEPARTMENT will provide services of the highest quality with due emphasis on improving safety, protecting the environment and providing value for money.
The successful execution of the DEPARTMENT's activities involves the use of staff skills and the best available equipment to provide the greatest benefit for the DEPARTMENT's customers.
The DEPARTMENT values and seeks to develop the skill levels of all staff and aims to provide effective service delivery through a highly motivated, trained and committed staff.’
The following groups have been set up to examine all aspects of the service on a corporate basis:
Departmental Restructuring
Future editions of NETWORK will keep you advised about the above and any other events which may affect staff.
It also exists for you to express your views.
Please use it — write to the NETWORK Editorial Team at .
Editorial
Welcome to the first issue of NETWORK.
Issue 1 addresses many issues which are of interest to Lothian Highways Staff.
The editorial team have tried to achieve a balance between matters which are of major concern to staff and some lighthearted topics.
Your Directorate intend to use NETWORK as a means of advising staff about events which will affect the future of the Department.
It is likely that many changes will take place in the near future.
Lothian Highways can only survive if it operates as a TEAM.
The identities of the individual sections may well survive but each member of staff is first and foremost a part of Lothian Highways.
Each of us has to be committed to serving our customers whether the customers are members of the public, councillors or other members of staff.
Another equally important function of NETWORK is to represent your views.
As Stewart Young says above please feel free to write to the Editorial Team.
Finally many thanks are due to everyone who contributed to this edition.
In order to bring you up to date the items were prepared at very short notice.
NETWORK will continue to bring you the news as it happens.
INROADS PLANT HINT
Never give the full site address.
Giving it would deprive the delivery driver of the opportunity to discover for himself some of the delightful scenery on his patch.
INROADS PASS PUBLIC QUALITY TEST
The scene is Haddington in East Lothian and INROADS has just overlaid part of the Main Street.
A NETWORK hack and photographer happened to be passing by when they spotted a well-known accountant checking the INROADS mat.
This roller skated juggler went up and down the overlay several times whilst juggling.
He was later heard to say that seldom had he juggled on such a fine surface.
Are we seeing an emerging alternative to the Rolling Straight Edge Test?
Is this the shape of training for Inspectors in the future?
Will this become a part of the Quality Assurance System?
Latest — Management Support Review Approved By Council
The Transportation Committee, at its meeting on Tuesday 4 May 1993, agreed the Management Support Review.
The report is now referred to the Personnel Committee on 11 May 1993 and on agreement will be implemented as soon as practically possible thereafter.
As well as agreeing the proposed restructure and gradings the Committee agreed the recommendation that ‘a meeting between NALGO, DOMIS and HIGHWAYS DEPARTMENT's management be initiated as soon as possible to investigate the possibility of consolidating the New Technology payment for existing staff within the Division.’
WATCH THIS SPACE!!!
Clarence's Future
What does the future hold for the Department's favourite pet — our Clarence?
Discussions are ongoing with a famous commercial radio station (named after a nearby river) whose identify I am not at liberty to reveal at present.
If these discussions prove fruitful then Clarence will reach a new high in terms of Customer Care.
I cannot divulge the ideas being discussed as they are wide ranging and could be of value to our rivals but hopefully more will be revealed in the next issue of Network.
AU REVOIR TOM McCORMACK DEPUTE DIRECTOR REFLECTS FOR NETWORK ON HIS 18 YEAR CAREER WITH LOTHIAN REGION
Jack ‘I'll be retiring soon’ Duncan has finally gone and in a few weeks I shall also have a clear desk and be on my way to Viewforth, Stirling to take up my appointment as Director of Technical Services in Central Region.
Leaving will not be easy.
I have worked for Lothian since it was born on 15 May 1975 and for its predecessor since 1969.
However, a great deal has been achieved in recent years and I shall always be proud of the Department and more importantly its employees.
The Highways Department is not a building — it is a collection of people who as a team (or some would say various teams) have exhibited innovation and ingenuity.
The staff of Lothian Highways have many achievements of which they can feel proud.
Where else will you find these FIRSTS —
1
BS5750 IN 5 DIFFERENT AREAS
2
CLARENCE CUSTOMER SERVICE
3
TALKING PELICAN CROSSINGS
4
SEE THE LIGHT INITIATIVE
5
SCOOT
6
HOT BOXES
I have spent most of my career in two specific areas and therefore I am sure I can be forgiven for saying a special thank you and farewell to Inroads and an extra special thank you and goodbye to Roadcare.
Many hurdles lie ahead eg Local Government Reform, CCT but I am positive the Department has the calibre of staff to face all the problems head on and come out on top.
I hope to see most of you personally over the next few weeks but if I don't then can I say ‘Thanks’ and ‘All the Best for a healthy and prosperous future.’
APPOINTMENT OF DIRECTOR OF HIGHWAYS
The Chief Executive has advised staff that the post of Director of Highways will be filled as quickly as possible.
The closing date for applications has just passed and an appointment is likely to be made on June 23.
He has also praised Highways staff for doing a good job under the present circumstances.
‘The calibre of Highways’ staff is high and the Department has quite rightly become known for its imaginative initiatives including CLARENCE and the many road and traffic improvement schemes throughout the Region’said Graham Bowie.
TRANSPORTATION DIVISION — LEADING THE WAY
Have you ever wondered what the heck Transportation Division get up to?
Bet you thought it was likely to be pretty exciting stuff, eh?
Well, you were right.
And just to give you a flavour of the sort of thing the Fourth and Fifth Floors of No 19, here are two of the many very hot issues currently under development.
GREENWAYS
Everyone knows that serious problems occur on main roads in Edinburgh and that things are getting worse.
Congestion gives rise to heavy costs for Edinburgh's economy and makes it difficult to run a reliable ‘bus service.
Accidents cause injury and suffering to hundreds of people every year, and those moving about on foot or bicycle, elderly and infirm people, and children are most at risk.
Urgent action is required.
GREENWAYS will help.
GREENWAYS are being developed to improve the environment while making the most effective use of existing road space, particularly for pedestrians, cyclists, ‘bus passengers and essential commercial traffic.
Greenways will introduce revolutionary new traffic regulations, setting out what can be done, as opposed to what is prohibited.
New ‘bus measures include 30 km of new ‘bus lanes and traffic calming and other measures will be introduced in certain areas next to the main roads to reduce rat-running.
A truly innovative approach to traffic management.
SCOOT
And here is another — CCTV — brought to you by courtesy of the team who brought you SCOOT.
Closed Circuit Television cameras are appearing at a location near you — or, at least at the east end of Princes Street, Tollcross, Haymarket, St. John's Road, Leith Walk and Quality Street.
Road traffic conditions at these locations will be monitored, in glorious technicolour, back in the SCOOT room.
This explains the recent resurgence of re-wiring as BT and others discreetly and tastefully rearranged the decor of upstairs Market Street.
As you all know, SCOOT is state-of-the-art Urban Traffic Control which crunches data on traffic flows from traffic loops and automatically alters the timings of over 140 sets of traffic signals to minimise delays.
CCTV, in which the Police and LRT are also interested, will assist the team in the fine-tuning of SCOOT.
It will also take traffic counts — from the comfort of the superbly appointed control room.
If you feel, having read this, that you could handle the demands of a job that entails sinking your toes into plus, deep-pile carpet, lounging back in a comfy armchair sipping coffee whilst viewing Edinburgh's citizens going about their lawful occasions and being paid for the privilege, forget it — we got here first.
SPORTING CHALLENGES
Over the past year Roadcare and Inroads have competed against each other for various trophies in different sporting events.
The results so far are as follows:
The next challenge will be football with an eleven-a-side game taking place on Dalkeith Junior Park on Wednesday 19 May.
Why don't you form a team and challenge Roadcare or Inroads for any of the trophies they hold or establish new trophies in other sports?
SO GET ON WITH IT!
L-CEL OPENS FOR BUSINESS
NEW LABORATORY DEDICATED TO TOTAL QUALITY
ROSS NICOLSON — LABORATORY MANAGER SPEAKS TO ONE OF OUR REPORTERS
Cultins Road Lab — now renamed ‘Lothian Civil Engineering Laboratory’ or L-CEL for short is no longer at Cultins Road but can be found on Bankhead Drive in new premises.
Cultins Road is due for demolition and New Edinburgh Ltd would like to hear from anyone with a three pound hammer and a strong arm who may be interested in the job.
For those who missed it, the official opening happened on Friday 30 April 1993 and the hand on the curtain draw string was Councillor Ron Muir's.
The Laboratory staff would like to thank all those who attended the opening ceremony (the Editor was not invited —Ed. — All the more leftover chicken legs for us — RN).
The new laboratory is fully operational, open for business as usual and the sign outside reflects the approach to its work —‘DEDICATED TO TOTAL QUALITY’.
‘To this end we are pursuing NAMAS accreditation with all due speed and determination and expect to have the certificate hanging on the way by August 1993.’
If you want any further information on the available services please call  .
We would like to thank all our customers for their support in the past and hope that we will enjoy your continued support in the future and that of new customers.
ROSEBURN BRIDGE REFURBISHMENT
Roseburn Bridge originally dates from 1899, when it carried the Caledonian Railway from Slateford to West Granton.
The railway tracks were lifted in the 1960s, and the bridge fell into disuse.
Lothian Regional Council saved the bridge from demolition in 1982 when it was adopted to form part of the Granton to Slateford, Caledonian Cycletrack.
The opportunity was taken during programmed maintenance and repair works to restore the appearance of the bridge, thereby enhancing its environs and creating a noticeable landmark to motorists and pedestrians passing under the bridge on route to the Capital's city centre area.
Its supporting structure is typical for its age; a concrete deck on flat metal deck panels, with cross girders and main supporting beams of  riveted plate girders spanning onto stone abutment walls.
The bridge is 8.05 metres wide and spans 17.8 metres over the A8 at Roseburn Terrace, Edinburgh.
In its original form decorative cast iron panels screened the outer plate girder.
These panels were removed by British Rail in 1951 to facilitate maintenance.
From Lothian BRIDGECARE archives, photographs of the original highly decorative cast iron panels were retrieved and used as a basis for the detailed drawings and subsequent manufacture of cast iron replacement panels from the Ballantine Bo'ness Iron Company foundry.
Architects, Patience and Highmore were commissioned to produce a colour scheme, to highlight the detailed nature of the cast iron and to accentuate the bridge's prominent position.
The original connections for the panels had been removed from the edge girders in 1951, and a system of support was introduced for the new panels.
The recessed arch panels can now be easily removed to give access to the main girders for future inspection and maintenance.
The decorative stone finials, corbels, abutments and insignia of the Caledonian Railway Company, were cleaned and repaired to highlight the historic nature of the bridge.
On site, blast cleaning of the existing steelwork and stonework, installation of the cast iron panels and painting of the steelwork, required detailed traffic and pedestrian management over the major traffic route.
The newly renovated bridge was recognised as a structure of special interest and in August, 1993 included in the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1982, list of Buildings and Special Architectural or Historic Interest, Category B listed.
This project has recently been entered for a Saltire Award, the outcome of which is awaited with interest.
NALGO AND NUPE WRITE FOR NETWORK
First of all, thanks to the Editor for asking for a short article from the unions (soon to be united as Unison) for the inaugural Highways Department News Sheet.
We would take this opportunity to express our wish for continued cooperation and communication between management and staff and welcome this news sheet as a vehicle for this.
We would hope that the Highways Department as a whole can unite to face the future and that both conditions for Highways staff and the service we give to the public can be maintained.
COMMERCIAL AWARENESS
WHERE ARE WE NOW?
ROADCARE currently carried out a number of functions with respect to the highway maintenance and management of the road network within Lothian region.
A number of changes are currently in the process of being implemented including internal restructuring and the introduction of compulsory competitive tendering.
Preparation for Local Government reform is also on the horizon.
Clearly, ROADCARE will have to address and manage these changes in a manner in which will ensure its future success.
What is the best way of going forward?— Ideas from within I hear you say!
IDEAS FROM WITHIN
Four areas had been previously  identified by the Management Team as being of particular importance with respect to commercial awareness and it was proposed that further investigation into these areas was required from all of ROADCARE's staff to ensure that the ‘correct’ solutions are applied.
The four areas identified as being of critical importance were:
1
Belief in customer care
2
Excellence in project quality
3
Success in the market
4
Trading competitively
What is the best method of achieving meaningful staff involvement?
METHOD OF INVOLVING STAFF
Each member of staff (approximately 160 people) was given their own personal A5 folder complete with ‘ROADCARE SIMPLY THE BEST LOGO’ and an eight page booklet entitled ‘Commercial Awareness’.
The booklet was divided into the four main themes identified above.
Each theme was to be addressed by every single member of ROADCARE's staff by considering the following three questions:
1
Where are we now?
2
Where do we want to be?
3
What is the best method of achieving the objective ‘where do we want to be?’
By carrying out this simple, but extremely important exercise each member of staff was directly involved in ‘shaping’ ROADCARE's future.
This may be a model for other sections.
It is only by preparing for the future that Lothian Highways staff can ensure that there will be a successful future.
All staff have to be committed and involved.
DID ICU AT ISU?
Armed with a screwdriver in one hand and a bag of chips in the other, the staff of the Computer Co-ordination Section can be seen floating in and out of offices ensuring that Lothian Highways' computers and peripherals operate efficiently.
What is wrong with the last sentence?
Yes it's the phrase ‘Computer Co-ordination Section’.
The name is too long.
The Computer Co-ordination Section has been in existence for over five years and too much time is wasted just saying the name.
Many people have taken to abbreviating it to ‘Compco’.
In the leaner, meaner, nanosecond nineties, PCs get faster and SPARCS replace Sun 3/60s.
On the shores of uncharted CCT requirements the Computer Co-ordination Section has realised that it had to come up with a leaner, meaner, faster name for the Section.
A name which trips off the tongue.
A protracted period of head-scratching and exercising of grey cells followed.
Information is what it's about and the systems that use it.
And so it was born Information Systems Unit or ISU.
So no longer do we have to struggle with Computer Co-ordination Section when the phone rings and we rush to answer it grabbing pen and paper.
Besides we were never very sure whether there was a hyphen in the word co-ordination.
So we need not worry.
The News Sheet of Lothian Highways
Issue 2 — July 1993
HIGHWAYS NETWORK
NEW DIRECTOR APPOINTED
On Wednesday 23 June the Regional Council appointed Dr George McL.
Hazel as Director of Highways.
Dr Hazel will take up his appointment on 6 August but may be see in and around the Department before then as he gets to grips with his job.
Dr Hazel will be known to some staff: he worked for the Edinburgh City Engineer's Department and in 1975 transferred to the Regional Council, working in the Transportation and Highway Planning Division.
He took up an appointment lecturing at Napier Technical College in 1979: there he became Chair of the Civil Engineering Department.
Since 1990 Dr Hazel has been Managing Director of Oscar Faber TPA, Edinburgh Office.
CRIMEWATCH LRC
How many of us encounter the activities of the criminal fraternity in the normal course of our duties?
Not many, I suspect, because we handle paper rather than cash, or anything readily convertible thereto.
So it comes as a surprise to discover that there is one section of the department which does have regular problems of robbery and criminal damage — our Parking Section.
And for once, as I will explain, they have had a chance to fight back.
The problem of destruction of, and theft from, parking meters is City wide and costs this authority a great deal.
Recently, the Parking Section identified a particular problem in Thistle Street and asked the Police to give the area as much attention as possible.
Despite that, the cost of the meter destruction between January and March this year amounted to £10,000 and the Parking Control Assistant, Tom McHugh, felt that special measures were required.
He volunteered to remove the cash boxes from the meters in Thistle Street overnight every night, tripping the mechanism to show no cash.
And one his suggestion was approved and tried, it wiped out all incidents of damage and robbery.
Until Wednesday 26th May, that is.
On that night, Tom arrived in Thistle Street a bit earlier than usual, to find a partially-damaged meter.
He observed three youths loitering nearby, who disappeared from view as he arrived.
A security officer from a nearby building appeared with a piece of metal which possibly had been used to attack the meter.
Tom put two and two together and set off in search of the youths, asking the Security Guard to summon the Police.
The tracking and following of the youths, through rush-hour traffic, took Tom through most of Edinburgh New Town, and culminated, almost an hour later, with his flagging down a Police motor cyclist who stopped and questioned them at Mackenzie Place/India Place.
The officer radioed his control.
Almost immediately after, 8 Police traffic patrol cars and 4 motorcyclists arrived on the scene.
This was a most impressive end to the pursuit, with all the flashing blue lights illuminating the scene.
Unfortunately, these vast resources had not all been turned out to apprehend three potential robbers.
The radio message, from the patrol car which had gone to Thistle Street in response to the earlier call, had been to the effect of…nothing found…no assistance required…
But, due to the interference to radio messages caused by the tall buildings around Thistle Street, the message had been heard as…
Officer down…assistance required…hence the massive response.
The three were lifted and transported ‘in convoy’ to Gayfield Square Police Station for questioning by CID.
They readily admitted responsibility  for that evening's aborted robbery (by destruction of meters) at Thistle Street during the preceding months.
Significantly, since that evening's arrests the problem has neither recurred at the location nor developed elsewhere within the controlled Parking Scheme.
Irrespective of the over-dramatic ending to this tale, it serves to illustrate the all-too-often unrecognised efforts of our staff in their particular responsibilities.
In particular, we should applaud the efforts of Tom McHugh and the Parking Section in their very important revenue gathering work.
Well done!
THE PETER MASON SHIELD
Recently retired Director, Peter Mason, has donated a Shield which will be awarded annually to the ‘Trainee of the Year’.
The award will be made each year by the Directorate to the person whom they consider to be the best trainee from within the Department.
The trophy was presented by Mr Mason to mark his retiral on 5 April this year and his period as Director from July 1981.
The idea is that those being considered for the award can be attached to any of the Divisions within the Department and will include trainee Roadworkers, Technicians, Graduate Engineers and Accountants and all training schemes currently operating within the Department.
Editorial
Welcome to the second edition of NETWORK.
One or two events which will be of more than a passing interest to Lothian Highways' staff have occurred since the first edition of NETWORK was published.
A new Director has been appointed, Tom McCormack has left and the Government's proposals for Lothian Region have become known.
Obviously, staff will be delighted that the appointment of a new Director has been made and sad that Tom has gone but it is the proposed reorganisation which will occupy the minds of most staff.
The Directorate has already acted to meet the challenge posed by Compulsory Competitive Tendering.
Whilst the demise of the Region is not certain, Network can reveal that the Directorate with the active support of the Council is already acting to ensure that the interests of staff are maximised during any transition to a new Local Government establishment.
Lothian Region has successfully net the challenges of the past by anticipating the effects of proposed changes and, through cooperation between staff and the Directorate, implemented the changes necessary to ensure the survival and prosperity.
It is a formula worth repeating.
Finally very many thanks are again due to everyone who contributed to this edition.
Clarence's Future — Part 2
The last edition of Network promised to reveal some of the plans for Clarence.
Radio Forth is running a series of commercials for Clarence commencing 26 July (see this page).
Clarence will then feature in radio Forth's Road Reports from 9 August.
There will be three reports in the 6 am to 9 am slot and two reports in the 4 pm to 6 pm show.
A copy of the Clarence leaflet will be delivered to each home in Lothian Region in late August or early September.
Grampian and Tayside Regional Councils have agreed to purchase the Clarence franchise and Central (Never — Ed.) and Fife Regions may well follow.
Shown at the top of this page is the Clarence Junior icon which was first revealed at Tom's farewell party.
This may well be used in other initiatives.
Finally, Clarence now appears in the ‘Herald and Post’ as well as the ‘Evening News’.
More Clarence news as it happens in Network.
The Clarence Ad
‘Call Clarence ’
‘Hi, I'm Clarence the Lion and that's my number  Why am I telling you?
Because I love your complaints.
You see, it's all in my name — Customer Lighting And Roads ENquiry CEntre — CLARENCE, catchy heh!
You may have spotted me already on Lothian Region road sides trying to attract your attention to that very same important message.’
‘Call Clarence ’
‘Important, because if you notice any problems with street lights, roads, pavements or gulleys in Lothian Region, that's the number to call.
The more problems you bring to my attention, the more problems I can solve, more quickly and the safer your Region becomes for cars, cyclists, pedestrians and you.
So next time you see something wrong on the road, or in your street or if you have any traffic, roads or lighting enquiries, you know what to do.
‘Call Clarence ’
Right First Time
Total Quality Teamwork (TQT) is the name given to INROADS' latest initiative to embrace modern management practices.
The concept, which will promote Quality and Teamwork whilst recognising that our Customer's needs and our business goals are one and the same, was introduced in June 1992 when the Management Team met and evaluated the fundamentals and benefits of such a system.
This continuous evaluation, which is in itself one of the cornerstones of any Total Quality System, is continuing by means for further routine seminars.
In the meantime, the TQT system is set up and is functioning within the Division, and will be presented to all levels of INROADS and support staff at informal meetings shortly.
In general terms the whole strategy is guided by a Steering Group which in turn devolves responsibility for Costs and Systems Improvements and for Education to Working Groups.
The EDUCATION GROUP comprising members from all staff groups has advocated and have co-ordinated the production, by a professional media organisation, PS Communications, of a training video called ‘Right First Time’.
This has been shown as part of the Education Programme to all INROADS' and Support Staff.
The video stresses the importance of Teamwork and features GAVIN HASTINGS, Scotland and British Lions Captain 1993.
In addition STEVE HAMILTON of ‘Wheel of Fortune’ fame is also featured.
However, the real stars are INROADS own staff who, during the video, explain the effect that small errors can have on overall contracts.
The COSTS & SYSTEMS GROUP have identified and prioritised areas for scrutiny and potential improvement.
Smaller groups called Quality Improvement Teams are undertaking this work and some of their initial finds are thought provoking indeed.
Yes, the TQT system is well under way in INROADS and the benefits should become self evident as improvements are implemented.
SOLILO — QA
When I asked the DRM,
‘What is up with TQM?’
He answered ‘Don't ask me,
That's not my PIG!’
I replied ‘But I don't see,
What is a TQT?’
And QA in LRCHD
has really baffled me!’
‘How about this CCT?
When's that hassle going to be?’
Will we soon be working for EDC
or just a smaller LRC?’
Then he bent down to my ear,
and said, ‘Now, now, young man, look here!
‘You really are a tiresome chap
Can't you see it's a load of…initialisms, or is it acronyms?’
Racing Ahead With ROADCARE
Congratulations to Andy Matheson on winning the Cairnshield Classic cycling race last weekend in blustery Aberdeen.
Success in this 85 mile road race is only one of Andy's many cycling achievements.
Andy, who works in ROADCARE's North Division preparing maintenance contracts, has been interested in cycling since leaving school ten years ago and is a member of the Musselburgh Roads Club.
He has been a member of the Scottish International Cycling Squad for 8 years.
He has raced in several countries primarily on the European mainland — Belgium, France, Germany and Spain among others.
He was a member of the 1990 Scottish Commonwealth Games Squad which competed in Auckland, New Zealand and finished a very creditable tenth in the 110 mile road race.
He was in the team which finished fourth in the 100 km team time trial.
Andy's burning ambition is to win a medal at the 1994 Commonwealth Games in Vancouver, Canada.
Network wishes Andy every success in this endeavour and will, of course, keep you advised of his progress.
New Grade-Separated Gogar Roundabout Opens
Gogar Roundabout — Grade Separation was officially opened on Friday July 16 1993 by Chair of the Transportation Committee Councillor RHS Muir.
This design/build contract is only the second of its kind to be let in Scotland and will be the first to be completed.
One of the more remarkable features of this project is the speed with which it has progressed from conception to completion of construction.
A period of two and a half years of which fifteen months have been for construction.
Funding of the scheme has been largely by the developers of the Gyle Centre and the Scottish Office.
The developer's interest is due to the fact that, without the grade separation of the roundabout, the Gyle Centre could not otherwise begin trading until completion of the M8 extension in 1996.
Implementation of the design and construction has been the Highways Department.
A design brief was prepared for a flyover followed by advertising to recruit interested consortia.
A process of selection was gone through resulting in a short leet of three being chosen to tender for the design/build contract.
Balfour Beatty Construction (Scotland) Ltd were the successful tenderers with their alternative design for an underpass.
Balfour Beatty sub-contracted Scott Wilson Kirkpatrick & Partners (Scotland) Ltd to carry out the design.
Amongst the important features which had to be considered in the design was the major traffic management measures which were required.
The design brief stipulated that there was to be no disruption to the flow of traffic while the construction work was in progress.
Another important feature was the extensive service diversions which were necessary.
A cost saving was achieved by opting for a bored pile retaining wall on the north side, thus avoiding the need to divert the 20-way British Telecom ducts running parallel to the underpass.
One of the interesting aspects of the construction has been the installation of a cumulative length of 6600 metres of bored piles.
They have been cast in-situ forming contiguous reinforced retaining walls.
No excavation took place until the bored piles were in position.
Following excavation for the underpass the piles were faced over their exposed height with a nominal 100 mm thick skin of in-situ facing concrete and tied together at the top by in-situ reinforced capping beams.
Another interesting aspect has been the two bridges which span approximately 24 metres.
Each has been designed with the deck acting as a strut to the top of the abutments.
The reactions and thrust of each deck is taken on elastomeric bearings and by ballast walls.
There has been input to this scheme from all divisions of the Department resulting in a very successful project of which we can be justifiably proud.
WHAT A PARTY!!
J BALDIES' NIGHT CLUB IS A SUCCESS AGAIN!
The Department certainly gave Tom McCormack a send off he won't forget — and neither will his bank manager!!
The event, held on 25 June, began with ‘This Is Your Life — Tom McCormack’— a brilliant production by Russell Hunter — but where was Michael Aspel??
ISU photographs certainly disproved the myth once and for all— yes, Tom did have hair!!
By 5 pm the drink was consumed and the body of the kirk was getting high on the spirits!
The crowd began to disperse but the dancing continued — do you call that dancing Neil?
(Neil who?— Ed.)
The food and drink were finished, the disco was dying out and so the cabaret began and was well received but the mouth was dry and in need of watering so everyone took off to the pub.
All in all, it was a great night — good fun and a chance to meet others in the department that you'll be lucky to see even once a year!
Who is leaving next?
MYSTERY SOLVED
For years people outwith the ivory tower have always asked what do the payroll staff actually look like and are they human!
Well after extensive tests it can be revealed that they are human and they do have a heart.
Below is their team photo for your approval — are they not nicer looking than you thought?
Introducing (from left to right) the dedicated staff of 
If you would like a date with any of the above please phone .
Payroll Staff have always tried to provide a friendly and efficient service.
Recently both monthly and weekly paid staff have switched to Videpay (the new payroll system) and like all new systems there have been a few teething problems.
Your patience is appreciated and we apologise if we have been overpaying you.
If this is the case please let them know by phoning tel; for monthly paid staff and  for weekly paid staff.
INROADS DRIVES AHEAD WITH SAFETY
INROADS first Safe Driving Challenge which they believe is the first competition of its kind in Local Authority has been hailed as a great success.
The finals were held at the Forth Road Bridge Car Park on Sunday 27 June 1993.
Entrants for both the Ordinary and LGV Class Licence holders were required to compete in a  rigorous three section contest including:
1
an assessment drive
b
a  manoeuvring test
c
a safety and Highway Code question session
The driving standards were extremely high and the event was enjoyed by all who attended.
The very hot and sunny weather on the final day was a welcome bonus.
An excellent hot buffet lunch was provided in the adjoining Forth Bridges Moat House Hotel.
The event was sponsored primarily by Lothian Leyland Daf, Leyland Daf and Econ which combined have been supplying vehicles to the Regional Council over many years.
John Mundell, Commercial Manager stated ‘We are delighted with the response from the contestants and the spirit in which they took part.
We also greatly appreciated the support of our sponsors without which the event could not have taken place.
The event was organised to increase driver involvement, improve safe driving standards and promote fleet care.
I hope that we will have an even greater response next year.’
ROADCARE Pair Win Award
NETWORK is pleased to record and applaud the achievement of two members of ROADCARE's staff in jointly winning the 1993 Civil/Structural Engineering prize awarded by Telford College of Further Education.
Billy Donnelly and Annette McFeat who work for ROADCARE in Bonnyrigg and Market Street respectively collected the award on Tuesday 22 June.
Bill Crighton, Head of Civil/Structural Engineering at Telford College stated that ‘We were unable to separate the two — make of that what you will!’
Network offers no comment other than its good wishes to both members of staff as they continue their academic careers at Napier University.
TEAMWORK IN TRANSPORTATION
Many of the Department's Capital works schemes start life in Transportation.
Transportation recommend schemes to Committee; Designcare or Roadcare get tender documents ready and Inroads build the final product — all part of the Department's service to the public.
Transportation also monitors the Department's Capital expenditure and recommend adjustments in priority to Committee.
Andrew Holmes is helping our Divisional teamwork.
He has set up a Capital Works Co-ordination Team, led by Murdo Gray who will report through David McGuigan.
Its objective is to make the best match between the money available and the staff resources.
Andrew's new team is three-person strong.
He got them all from Barry Cross but gave his three-person Cycle Project Team to David Campbell.
Seems rough on Barry?
Barry's generous to a fault: he's given his Accident Investigation and Prevention Team to David Campbell!!
So David's given his Central Area people to Barry but retained Traffic Signals and Parking.
Sounds complicated so here's what it all looks like:
John Toole says he can't get enough work done because of a lack of resources and no-one disagrees!
So he's got two extra people.
Finally, Hazel McLeod's mail recording reports to Andrew and Emily Brash's Property Enquiries to Barry.
DOMIS recognised Transportation's flexibility to move staff sideways where help is needed and NALGO have lent support.
That's TEAMWORK: part of the service to the Department and to our public.
Cricket News
A hastily arranged challenge from Borders Roads Department led to a team from Lothian Highways heading for Kelso for a twenty overs a side match at the end of June.
The team looked strong on paper but were unfortunately asked to play on grass and the result was a narrow victory for Borders.
Following a late start, due to Euan Kennedy and the passengers in his car seriously misjudging the number of pubs between Edinburgh and Kelso, Lothian were invited to bat first and with contributions of 25 from Dave Thorburn, after a steady opening partnership with Peter Stewart and 15, including two massive sixes, from Mark McKenzie they managed only 69 from their 20 overs.
The team felt that, despite the scoreline, they were in a good position at this point but they had reckoned without the depth and strength of the Borders batting.
There were notable contributions in the field from Colin ‘The Corvette’ Pryde who  regularly escorted the ball to the boundary and Mark ‘Gus Logie’McKenzie who chased the ball everywhere and thoroughly deserved his post-match pint.
The game ended with Borders reaching their target of 70 with two overs to spare despite some good bowling from Euan ‘Curtly’ Kennedy and the ageless Gavin Irving.
Gavin however recovered after receiving oxygen and was able to drive home.
Colin ‘Ducks’ Baird set what must be a new record.
As the terms of the game allowed anyone out without scoring to return to bat after the team were all out, Colin did so and still failed to score second time around!
The game was enjoyed by all who took part as was the post-match hospitality supplied by the Borders team.
A return match will be played during the first week in August, probably at Myreside in Edinburgh and any member of staff who is interested in playing can contact  
After a Children's Hearing
Your Child in our Care
THE BEST FOR YOUR CHILD
Many children come into care only for a short time while their parents try to sort out their difficulties.
Others do stay in care for a long time.
Whichever happens to your child, you are very important to them and the Department of Social Work needs to keep in close touch with you at all times to try to work out what is best for your child.
WHERE YOUR CHILD IS
As you know your child was placed in care on 
YOUR SOCIAL WORKER
If your Social Worker is not available, please ask for
Your child has just appeared at a Children's Hearing and the members of the Panel have decided that your child should be placed on supervision to a social worker and that he/she should live away from home for a time.
WORKING TOGETHER
Your social worker is there to help you and it is in the best interests of your child for us to work together.
Your social worker is available to discuss any worries you have, even if they are not directly connected with your child.
CONTACT WITH YOUR CHILD
The Children's Hearing may make conditions about when you can visit your child — you have to keep to the arrangements agreed.
It is very important that you visit and write to or phone your child as regularly as agreed.
The younger your child is the less able they are to remember what happened even a few days ago, so they need you to keep in touch with them.
When children are in care they are usually happier if they are in touch with their parents.
If it is difficult for you to visit because of travel costs please discuss this with your social worker as we can usually help with your fares.
LEGAL REQUIREMENTS
There are a number of laws which the Department of Social Work has to obey when children are in our care.
Important aspects include:
Your Child Comes First
Your child is the most important person.
Any decision by a Children's Hearing must put your child's needs first.
Moving House
If you move house you must tell us your new address.
It is important to your child and to us that we can get in touch with you whenever we need to.
Reviews
It is the members of a Children's Hearing who will decide whether your child can return to live with you.
Until that time your child must remain at the place named on the supervision requirement.
Keeping in Touch
If we don't know where you are for twelve months or more we have to assume you have abandoned your child.
This means we could take away a lot of your rights and make many decisions about your child without you being involved.
It is important to your child and to you that you do let us know where you are.
More than 3 Years in Care
If your child is in care for more than 3 years, there may be situations where we would seek to take away many of your rights and powers.
If this happened you have the right to contest this in court and a court may decide to give you back parental rights.
Custody
If someone like a foster carer, relative or a step-parent has looked after your child for 3 years or more they can apply to a court for custody of your child even if you disagree.
Until the court decides who is to be given custody you are not allowed to move your child.
In other cases a relative or foster carer may apply for custody after a shorter period and you will be informed of this action and be able to contest it in court if you wish.
It is important that you seek advice from a lawyer if either of these situations arises.
Adoption
If you are not able to start caring for your child again and it is unlikely you will ever be able to meet your child's needs for care, then the Department of Social Work may make an application to court to have your child freed for adoption.
This will be discussed with you if we know where you are.
Again advice from a lawyer is important for you.
If someone has looked after your child for 5 years or more they could apply to the court for permission to adopt your child.
You are not allowed to move the child from his/her home until the court has decided what is best for him/her child.
Adoption means that the person can bring up the child as their own.
Again you need to ask a lawyer for advice if this happens.
ASSESSMENTS FOR COMMUNITY CARE
Community Care is about helping people to live as independently as possible in their own homes or in other accommodation in the community.
Assessments are about finding out what kinds of needs people have and what services would best meet those needs.
You can ask for a community care assessment from the local authority Social Work Department.
COMMUNITY CARE SERVICES
Services to help people live as independently as possible in their own home are a priority — especially for those who live alone and whose physical safety or health may be at risk.
Help may include:
personal care during the day and evening;
provision of meals;
help with housework;
shopping;
nightsitting;
‘good neighbours’ contact and befriending;
alarm systems to summon help;
attendance at a Day Centre;
equipment to assist mobility or other difficulties.
SUPPORT FOR CARERS
Support for carers (people who are looking after someone) is very important.
Help for them may include:
someone coming into the house to allow them an afternoon or evening off;
respite care (a short stay away from home);
links with other carers for mutual support and advice;
equipment or practical help as detailed above/
HOW YOU GET HELP
The first step involves someone talking with you, and perhaps your carer, to identify and understand your needs so that we can provide services best suited to you.
You can ask any of the following to assess your Community Care needs:
any of Lothian Social Work Community Care Practice Teams, including those teams based in hospitals;
agencies contracted to do community care assessments, such as Edinburgh and East of Scotland Society for the Deaf and the Society for the Welfare and Teaching of the Blind;
some Primary Health Care Teams;
other specialist community care teams who have an agreement with Lothian Social Work to do community care assessments for people with mental health problems, physical or learning disabilities or dementia.
Your local Social Work Centre can advice.
THE FIRST STEP
Speak to any of the following: at your nearest Social Work Centre.
If you are a hospital patient, or are going into hospital, you should speak to a member of the nursing staff, about the arrangements for you going home.
Your needs and the possible ways of helping you will then be discussed with you and your carer.
If your needs are straightforward, services will be arranged as soon as possible.
If they are more complex then a plan for your care will be made and someone will be appointed to co-ordinate your care needs, and to discuss the plan with you.
They will take account of your views and those of your carer, and the services available in your area.
They will give you a copy of the plan, which will then be updated regularly.
Most people who need community care prefer to live in their own homes.
We will always look at ways of helping you to do this.
Residential places will be kept for those who need them most.
(See our leaflet ‘Residential or Nursing Home Care for Elderly People’.)
There have to be priorities to meet all your needs — either because a service is not available, or because it is outside the money available — then you will be told this.
If the right service is not available in your area this information will be noted so that better services can be planned.
A proper understanding of someone's way of life and their special needs may take time.
Please ask how long it is likely to take.
If things change then we will look at your needs again.
COSTS
Some people will have to pay for some services.
You will be given information about the charges.
Your ability to pay will not influence the decisions about which services you need.
IF YOU DISAGREE
We hope that by talking to the person who assessed your needs, you will reach an agreement about the way ahead.
If not you can take the matter up with their manager.
If for any reason you are not satisfied with the service you receive you may write to   or contact the Client Services and Complaints Officer, at the same address,.
Ask for the leaflet ‘What to do if you have a suggestion or complaint to make about our services’.
OTHER SERVICES
We have a range of other services, information and advice, and can put you in touch with other organisations including housing, leisure and education.
Please ask for more information about services which you think might be helpful to you.
District Nurses and Health Visitors are able to provide services which are more to do with health and nursing care.
YOUR VIEWS
Please tell us your views at all times during the assessment.
As with all services provided by the Regional Council you may also contact your local Regional Councillor.
Local consumer groups may also be helpful.
Guidelines for employees in handling VIOLENCE and AGGRESSIVE BEHAVIOUR by clients or members of the public
INTRODUCTION: LOTHIAN REGIONAL COUNCIL — POLICY ON VIOLENCE TO EMPLOYEES AT WORK
Lothian Regional Council has recognised that, in recent years, there has been growing concern about the problem of violence to employees who work in direct contact with the public.
The Council has further recognised that the nature of the services it provides places particular groups of employees at potential risk from clients and/or their families etc.
Whilst accepting the need to continue and improve service provision to all sections of the community, the Regional Council and the trades unions have agreed that all reasonably practicable steps should be taken to identify and minimise the risk of violence to employees.
For this purpose the Regional Council has agreed a policy on violence to employees at work in order to identify and promote practices which seek to minimise the potential risks of violence to employees.
In this respect it has been recognised that Departments will have specific concerns relevant to the activities of particular groups of workers who provide services.
In terms of policy, Heads of Departments have been instructed to produce detailed guidance based on the principles contained in the Regional Council's policy document to be issued to all groups of employees within the Department concerned.
These Guidelines have been produced specifically for employees in the Department of Social Work.
This edition builds upon the First Edition issued in early 1988 and takes account of reports on the operational experience of violence in the Department since that date.
FOREWORD BY JOHN CHANT CBE, DIRECTOR OF SOCIAL WORK
Sadly, it is within the experience of most social workers that there is a high correlation between poverty, violence and abusive behaviour.
We have all experienced situations in which clients under stress through poverty, mental illness, limited ability or personality disorders have reacted to their difficulties or to social workers' responses to their problems with displaced anger and aggression.
On occasions in area offices, residential homes, day centres, as well as in family homes, staff may find themselves faced with aggressive and violent responses to their offers of help or to their attempts to fulfil their statutory or professional responsibilities to intervene.
These Guidelines are intended to help staff to deal pro-actively with issues of aggression and violence.
The emphasis is placed upon the use of personal and professional skills, and taking all possible steps to protect staff in situations where physical or verbally expressed aggression is likely to arise.
Recognising that aggression can occur through no fault of social work staff, the Guidelines and the training associated with them are designed to give people confidence in the management of that problem.
Throughout, the importance of avoiding one-to-one confrontation and challenges is emphasised.
The issues are not about inappropriate use of authority nor are they about the display of heroics.
They are about recognising the reality of the problem and taking all reasonable steps to ensure that the well-being of both staff and clients is not unnecessarily put at risk in having to deal with such situations.
The Department pledges its support to staff who work within the spirit of the Guidelines set out in this document, and will make it clear that as a Department we are not prepared to accept threats of intimidation and violence from that small number of clients who use such methods to manipulate their social environment or evade responsibility for their behaviour.
1.
STATEMENTS OF PRINCIPLE
1.1 The personal safety of each member of staff is of primary importance.
2.2 Actual or threatened assaults on social work staff are unacceptable to Lothian Regional Council and the Department is committed to support employees who, during the course of their duties, are:
i
Assaulted
ii
Subjected to sexual or racial harassment
iii
Subjected to extreme and/or systematic verbal abuse.
1.3 All violence must be treated seriously.
No member of the Department's staff should feel automatically guilty, inadequate or unprofessional because they are subjected to either violence or harassment.
1.4 When an employee has been physically assaulted in the course of duty the police must be called in, unless the employee and the line manager make a case for this not to be done on professional grounds.
1.5 The timeous reporting of incidents of violence or harassment is important and employees who are subjected to such incidents must complete the Department's report form.
1.6 It is the Department's policy that unless the member of staff and manager concerned make a case to the contrary, it will press for charges to be brought against an assailant while recognising that such a decision is wholly the province of the Procurator Fiscal following report by the police (there being no scope for private criminal prosecution in Scotland).
1.7 The Department acknowledges that certain duties may carry additional risks to employees and all possible steps will be taken to minimise these.
Particularly:
i
Work with clients who have a known record of violence or aggressive behaviour
ii
Initial contacts with members of the public where no background information exists
iii
Employees visiting clients away from the workplace, particularly outside normal hours of duty
iv
Certain duties connected with mental health and children's legislation
v
Members of staff who carry cash or valuables.
1.8 Staff who experience a violent incident will have the opportunity to talk about the incident with colleagues and managers.
Counselling will be provided where necessary.
HEALTH AND SAFETY AT WORK
2.1 In its policy on violence to employees at work Lothian Regional Council has reaffirmed its continuing responsibility as an employer for ensuring, so far as is reasonably practicable, the health, safety and welfare of all of its employees.
In this regard the Council accepts that these responsibilities include the provision of:
i
systems of work; and
ii
information, instruction, training and supervision.
In turn the Council and the trades unions recognise that it is the duty of all employees to take reasonable care for the health and safety of themselves and other people who may be affected by their acts or omissions at work.
2.2 The Regional Council's policy statement on the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974 requires Departments to issue supplementary policy statements incorporating sufficient details in respect of the particular nature of the work performed and services provided in each Department.
In this regard it provides that Heads of Department shall review such supplementary policy statements in the light of the Regional Council's policy with particular regard to arrangements for:
i
providing a safe place of work;
ii
achieving safe systems and methods of work;
iii
achieving a safe working environment; and
iv
the provision, maintenance and revision of training to ensure the competency of employees to carry out their duties safely and without risk to health.
3.
DEFINITION OF VIOLENCE
3.1 For the purposes of the Regional Council's policy and these Guidelines, violence at work is defined as the application of force, severe threat or serious abuse by members of the public, clients or any other persons towards employees of the Regional Council arising out of the course of their employment whether or not they are or duty.
Such violence will include:
i
physical assault;
ii
threatening behaviour, with or without a weapon;
iii
serious or persistent harassment (including racial or sexual harassment); and
iv
severe verbal abuse
3.2 In seeking to apply this definition, it is recognised that, while some forms of violence such as physical assault or explicit threats are easily identified, others such as verbal abuse are more difficult to assess.
It is further recognised that words or gestures which may be tolerable to some people may be deeply offensive or threatening to others.
It is important, however, that employees retain a sense of perspective in identifying words and conduct which may reasonably be perceived as causing harassment, alarm or distress as opposed to mere annoyance.
4.
PREVENTATIVE MEASURES/SPECIFIC GUIDELINES
Buildings: Receptions and Interview Facilities
4.1 The way in which clients are received throughout the Department will have a bearing on how they subsequently act.
The Department acknowledges the basic need to provide workplaces with easy access, good lighting and an inviting atmosphere.
However, the need for physical protection for employees in certain situations must also be addressed.
4.2 Reception areas/waiting rooms should therefore be as pleasant as possible.
Every effort should be made to provide toys and a play space for children.
There should be easy access to toilets.
Notice boards should be interesting, informative and kept up to date.
If there are glazed screens in public areas, these should be fitted with material which conforms to current British Standards (B.S. 5544 and B.S. 5357).
4.3 In all offices to which the public have access, alarm systems should be installed.
The selection and location of these systems should be discussed with safety representatives.
Doors to restricted areas, usually within offices, should be kept secure from unauthorised entry.
Units that are open to the public should develop their own procedures for dealing with potentially violent incidents.
This might necessitate access to other members of staff at short notice.
4.4 Waiting time should be kept to a minimum.
Where there is delay, the reason must be explained to the person waiting.
If the receptionist thinks a situation is developing where violence could occur, a senior member of staff should be asked to assist in resolving the cause.
4.5 It is the responsibility of each workplace manager to ensure a local system for summoning support is devised and to ensure that all staff are given information relating to any future arrangements as well as these Guidelines.
It is the responsibility of each employee to acquaint themselves with the full details of these and any local arrangements.
4.6 Safety representatives may inspect the workplace or part of it once every three months or more frequently under certain circumstances.
Workplace managers should accompany the safety representatives on these inspections and take the opportunity to assess and review security arrangements.
4.7 The security arrangements for each building must be kept under regular review by the workplace manager in order to highlight any alteration or change in working practice which may be needed to provide a more secure working environment.
The workplace manager should report to senior management on any measures considered appropriate to improve security.
Such measures must be practical in the context of maintaining the image of the Department of Social Work as a caring organisation.
4.8 Ideally, no worker should work alone in an isolated office or building and arrangements should be made to ensure that, as far as possible, this does not happen.
However, it is acknowledged that caretakers and cleaning staff, among others, need to function in these circumstances and managers must keep such situations under review.
Handling of Money/Valuables
4.9 Employees who collect or carry money as part of their normal work are at risk of violence or assault.
This applies to a number of employee groups in the Department of Social Work including home helps, drivers and certain administrative staff.
Departmental employees must adhere to the following guidelines to reduce the risk of violence.
4.10 Cash should not be delivered by staff to clients in their own home unless the client is unable to come to the office to collect the money or go to the post office to collect it.
Money for clients therefore should normally be handed over at a pre-arranged appointment in the office setting (it is recognised that home helps may collect pensions for housebound elderly clients).
4.11 If it is essential that money be delivered to clients in their own homes, this must be sanctioned by the line manager and, where possible, should not be done at the same time each week.
Management must continuously examine alternative arrangements for getting money to the client's home.
4.12 Employees who search empty property in order to safeguard any valuables or money must always go with a colleague.
If there is any suspicion that the building may be inhabited entry must not take place without police assistance.
4.13 Management should continuously review the procedures for the delivery and/or collection of money to see if it is absolutely necessary and whether there are alternative methods available.
4.14 Some employees in the Department have particular responsibilities for handling cash.
For example, employees controlling imprest accounts; collecting income or collecting and banking money.
The Department has a responsibility to ensure that there are guidelines and procedures to assist those employees who handle money.
Equally, it is the responsibility of the employees concerned to adhere to these guidelines and procedures.
No member of staff is required to place themselves at risk in handling money or valuables in the course of duty or more particularly when confronting a potentially aggressive or violent situation.
If any employee is threatened with violence in order that the assailant(s) may obtain money they are carrying in the course of duty, they must not act in any way likely to place themselves or others in danger.
However, employees should if possible try to note their assailant's appearance in order to assist the police subsequent enquiries.
4.15 All money collected must be banked in accordance with the Department's financial procedures.
It is the responsibility of managers to make sure that their employees know and understand these procedures.
4.16 If you are handling cash, however small the amount, and you are not sure if there is an need for you to do so or you can think of an alternative method which will dispense with the need for you to carry cash in the course of your work, you should let your line supervisor know.
Departmental Units/Establishments
4.17 Many of the people who use the Department's resources are at a very low point in their life.
They are therefore particularly prone to react to extra stress either at home or while using the Department's services.
It must also be remembered that they have certain rights while in the Department's care not only in physical terms but also in relation to information which is held by the Department about them as individuals.
4.18 All admission policies in the Department's residential and day care units should be reviewed to ensure that they explicitly include an assessment of the potential risk of violence from the client/and or their family.
This review should be undertaken by the relevant managers — the steps necessary to ensure employee safety being of crucial importance.
4.19 Full information relating to a placement should be made available to the officer in charge or delegated person.
They have the right to insist on all relevant information being made available to them regarding the background of potential clients in order that employees can be briefed about possible risks.
Where an employee believes there is a risk of violence, this should be discussed with the officer in charge with a view to sharing the information with all staff.
In cases of violent or potentially violent clients, all staff includes clerical and manual employees.
4.20 Where clients are thought to be or are known to be a risk or danger to themselves, other clients or other people and are admitted to a residential or day care facility, their progress must be explicitly monitored by the officer in charge who should keep the line manager informed.
4.21 It is essential that staff meetings and supervision sessions continue to cover discussions of the behaviour of individual residents, clients and groups of residents.
Records in the establishment should include an assessment for the potential for or history of violence from that client.
4.22 Management should be aware of the vulnerability felt by residential staff because of the 24 hour, 7 day week operation of units.
It should institute a review in any establishment in which there is clear evidence from the monitoring arrangements referred to later in this document that there is a high incidence of violence in that unit.
The purpose of this review will be to ensure that the staffing levels and working arrangements are those needed to enable employees to deliver the service in a safe manner.
4.23 It is recognised that certain events and periods during the daily routine may raise the anxieties of residents and clients.
These include meal times, evening, going to and getting up from bed.
Admission and discharge dates and visits by relatives together with court appearances will also at time increase the anxieties of residents.
Such facts should be shared with all employees who will then be aware of residents' anxieties and be more prepared for unpredictable behaviour.
4.24 Good communication, both oral and written, is essential within staff groups.
All unusual incidents of behaviour should be noted.
Failure to share information is potentially dangerous.
Supervisors must be aware of an sensitive to negative behavioural and attitudinal indicators in order to anticipate/prevent aggressive or violent outbursts.
The degree of risk and confrontation will be reduced by sharing information amongst employees as fully and regularly as possible.
4.25 Regular internal review of residents' progress should take place when an escalation of aggression occurs or at any time an officer in charge considers appropriate.
Case conferences, chaired by a member of staff not directly involved in the case, should take place with all involved departmental employees and relevant non-departmental professional staff.
It is important that fieldwork staff give high priority to this.
A case conference should consider what will happen in the future if violence occurs.
This could include the imposition of sanctions or in extreme circumstances suspension of the client from that establishment.
The use of sanctions must accord with the Department's policy covering these measures.
Where has been an escalation of aggression or at any time, having regard to these Guidelines, a member of staff considers it appropriate, there should be an internal review of a resident's progress.
The resident should be advised of the reasons for the case conference and the result.
It may be appropriate to involve the resident or their representative in the case conference.
4.26 Residential workers must exercise discretion before investigating disturbances late at night and are encouraged to involve a colleague.
In large buildings, communication with other staff if often not easy but discretion is preferred to valour!
Staff should always feel able to call upon a colleague if needed and there should be no sense of inadequacy or incompetence felt in doing so.
Any staffing review must take this into account and have regard to the design/layout of the building.
4.27 All employees in day or residential establishments should know and have easy access to telephone numbers which can be used to summon help or support in the event of difficulty.
This should include emergency services such as the police as well as line management or other individuals who might be useful in that situation.
Managers must keep under review the ways in which employees have access to emergency services.
4.28 Incidents of violence in establishments must be recorded both within the establishment's routine method of recording so that all staff can see what has taken place and also be filling in the necessary report forms.
Field work staff should also be informed of such incidents in order to record them in the client index by actioning the appropriate ‘flag’.
Visiting clients away from the workplace
4.29 Employees must inform and discuss with their supervisor any arrangement to meet or visit a client about whom there exists a known history of violence.
Staff must not go unaccompanied in such situations.
It is acknowledged that other circumstances might exist in which, although aggressive behaviour might be anticipated, joint judgement may be exercises to allow the worker to go supported rather than accompanied.
In other words the worker in these situations might leave a colleague within hearing distance while conducting an interview on a one to one basis as opposed to being accompanied throughout the interview.
In making this joint judgement, it is nevertheless the manager's responsibility to have due regard to the experience of the employees concerned and the anticipated nature of the interaction.
4.30 It is particularly important to consult supervisors when carrying out statutory duties under mental health or children's legislation.
4.31 Members of staff must inform their supervisor and/or receptionist of their whereabouts and expected time of return when working away from the workplace or visiting clients.
If they are worried about the possibility of aggression in the visit they must tell their supervisor of their expected time of return or alternatively make arrangements for telephoning the office by a specific time.
In such cases, the supervisor has responsibility for monitoring whether the member of staff has returned or not.
If they do not return to the office or call in as arranged the supervisor should ensure that contact is made with that address to determine if the visit has been made and concluded.
4.32 Employees must no go unaccompanied into a situation where they are likely to be at personal risk.
It is the responsibility of the line manager to ensure that back-up is available.
Availability of back-up should not be wholly influenced by available resources and the onus of finding it must not be left to the worker.
There will be occasions when a worker from another agency will be visiting, for example, a doctor or a policeman.
If these occasions are known, the worker and supervisor may make a joint decision that only one member of staff from the Department may go.
If it is known that there will be no other worker present, staff must go accompanied to mental health assessments; the removal of children, child abuse investigations or any situation where there is a likelihood of violence.
4.33 While work is taking place with a known aggressive client or family, relevant information must always be shared with other colleagues who may be involved.
For example, drivers, home helps, foster parents and residential staff.
4.34 All appropriate checks must be made with allied agencies to seek information about new clients with particular reference to potential risks of violence or aggression.
It is recognised that such information may not always be disclosed.
But this must not deter staff from attempting to make such checks.
4.35 Case files must contain detailed information of any threatened or actual aggressive behaviour.
It is the personal responsibility of the member of staff involved and their supervisor to ensure that such records are maintained in other that, in their absence, information is available to other workers.
The member of staff must also notify the emergency duty team.
The client index should be ‘flagged’ appropriately.
4.36 In exceptional circumstances home visits may be suspended.
Any such decision may be taken on an emergency basis by the unit manager.
A decision for long term suspension of service should be taken by the appropriate district manager, the appropriate Directorate member and the emergency duty team having been informed.
5.
ADVICE ON HANDLING ASPECTS OF VIOLENCE
5.1 The causes of violence, which may usefully be defined as ‘behaviour which produces damaging or hurtful effects, physically or emotionally on other people’(ADSS Report), can be broadly thought of arising from:
i
Aspects of the individual's personality and personal history.
ii
Elements in the physical and social surroundings of individuals.
iii
How the worker is viewed by the individual.
iv
Certain kinds of circumstances which are produced within or between groups of people.
The professional literature on violence is extensive and usually refers to a complex interaction of factors which have to be taken into account to explain its occurrence.
In each of these settings, there will be things to look out for as  signs or signals that a violent episode might take place.
Workers can anticipate these by considering a number of questions.
5.2
Individual Aspects
The best predictor of future behaviour is past behaviour and this is worth keeping in mind as part of the assessment of risk.
Does the person have a history of violence, antagonism to ‘authority’, or of mental disturbance associated with irrational feelings of persecution?
Does the person currently have to take anti-depressants or tranquillising medication?
Is the person likely to feel coerced, even although you may consider it to be the best course of action for the individual?
Do you feel the person is especially silent, agitated or tense?
What else is going on in this person's life at the moment that might make your intervention ‘the last straw’; for example, family illness, death, anniversaries of death, separation or divorce, loss of job, being accused of abuse of some sort?
Is the person likely to understand the purpose of your intervention or feel unable to control the outcome? 5.3
The Physical and Social Surroundings of Individuals
Do they enhance or diminish a sense of self-esteem and a feeling of personal security or are they intimidating?
Will you be able to call for help if you need it?
Have you discussed joint visiting or joint working? 5.4
How the Worker is viewed by the Individual
What kind of ‘authority’ will you be representing and have you given enough thought to conveying it in a non-threatening way?
If you feel especially anxious or upset about what you are faced with doing to/with a client have you been able to use this as a guide to how fearful or angry the client may also be feeling?
Sometimes your own feelings will ‘mirror’ those of the client.
Scapegoating tends to be a reciprocal matter and, especially in time of resource scarcity, anger and blame for the failure of ‘the system’ needs to find a target.
5.5
Group Violence
This is more likely to occur in residential units.
Even the best trained staff can feel deskilled and devalued by increasingly disturbed numbers of residents to look after, and, over time, staff can also come to feel alienated by stress.
For residents and for staff, the risk of violence taking group form will be less likely where the following needs are being met:
i
Being valued and recognised; a dependable security; a sense of continuity and belonging.
ii
Having an appropriate staff development programme with ongoing learning opportunities to enhance insight into self and circumstances.
iii
Having variety and challenge in the job.
iv
Having access to the exercise of discretion and reasonable autonomy; participation in decision-making.
v
Having the feeling that one is making a useful contribution.
5.6 Reactions to violence will always involve stress and might include feelings of anger, resentment, disgust and rejection, as well as depression, sadness, failure, self-blame and guilt.
These reactions are not unlike those (and also the sequence of those) feelings that attend being raped or involved in death and dying.
A sense of serious personal loss of self-worth and integrity (invasion of personal space) is certainly involved, and might be expressed by illness, depression, absenteeism, being touchy and impatient or withdrawn with clients or colleagues or by some other change in the worker's usual pattern of behaviour.
With appropriate care and support from colleagues (and time to ‘heal’), there is every chance that victims of violent assaults will be able to get back to work quite quickly, complete the cycle of adjustment to the incident, and be able to incorporate their disturbing feelings about it as an accepted aspect of their work experience to learn from.
Whether personal counselling takes the form of individual contact or family contact of self-help discussion in groups, it will be important to keep in touch with the notion that there will be stages of recovery, just as in the mourning process.
Victims should continue to be regarded as useful and valued working colleagues, not as invalids.
Colleagues need to convey a sense of wanting to learn from the worker's experience (as against simple curiosity), and to be secure enough to explore the full range of factors which may have contributed to the outcome.
‘Denial’ and ‘distancing’may be features of the victim's attitude in the early stages, which may make it difficult to maintain a sympathetic response.
Patience and judgement will be required to know how to pace the learning and personal adjustment needs.
It is common for workers to have difficulty in accepting being in the ‘client’ role, and some individuals may misguidedly adopt a facade of untrammelled competence rather than admit needing help from colleagues.
Creating a climate of trust and reliability within staff groups and between staff and senior staff, where management can be experienced as a kind of co-operative bank to draw on rather than a persecutor to defend against, will be a central task.
6.
TRAINING
6.1 Violent behaviour by clients or members of the public cannot always be predicted.
In most instances knowledge and understanding of the subject will help employees who need to have the confidence to manage the situation and minimise the impact on those involved.
Training provides a vital means by which employees can be equipped to deal with particular problems which confront them.
6.2 Dealing with aggressive behaviour and violence is not an uncommon experience for social work employees.
One of the first principles is that training must be based on experiences and identified needs.
For this reason the monitoring arrangements referred to elsewhere in these Guidelines will provide an essential source of information from which training requirements may accurately be identified over time.
6.3 In general terms, training should seek to remove the notion of fault from the victim of violence.
It should enable the employees to develop their interpersonal skills as it is on these the employees must primarily depend in preventing violence.
This should be the main focus of the training provided.
The concept of a shared responsibility between organisation and individual is a crucially important one.
Organisational responsibility will be discharged through the managers.
6.4 There are times when physical restraint will be necessary for clients whose behaviour is a danger to themselves or to others.
In those circumstances, training programmes must take account of the training needs and welfare of employees whose duties require them to use physical restraint alongside interpersonal skills.
All such training must be based on the following principles:
i
physical restraint is used as a last resort after other responses have failed.
ii
 the application of minimum force to contain the situation.
iii
that there may be circumstances when the need to ensure the safety of employees will result in the abandonment of any attempts to use physical restraint.
iv
that employees are entitled to use reasonable force as a means of self defence when they are threatened with physical harm and unable to reasonably consider escape.
Training programmes will offer opportunities, to identified groups of staff, to learn the skills and principles of self-defence; their principle aim will be the welfare and safety of staff and clients and the reduction of risk in the avoidance and management of violence.
6.5 The avoidance and management of violence is seen as an integral part of good practice.
The Department retains its commitment to the development of a broad based training programme which emphasises behavioural aspects but also recognises the need for physical restraint, as a last resort measure, within the context of direct care.
7.
REPORTING ARRANGEMENTS
7.1 Once it is acknowledged that it has to respond to the problem of its employees experiencing violence and aggressive behaviour in the course of their work, it is of vital importance to initiate a formal reporting process.
Without information about specific incidents it is not possible to develop a methodical analysis, nor is it likely that effective strategies for prevention will be found.
7.2 Records of accidents are already kept within the Department (Form 2508).
However, for obvious reasons, the emphasis is on injury or absence from work.
When considering the whole problem of violence much broader criteria need to be adopted to include threats and other forms of abuse.
7.3 What is required is a purpose designed method of reporting incidents of violence and the Department has developed its own report form.
A copy may be found at Appendix A.
7.4 Employees and their managers must complete this form and send it to the Employees Relations Officer at Department Headquarters,, not only in circumstances in which the employee has been physically hurt but also where they may have been abused or threatened in any way or subjected to racial or sexual harassment.
7.5 Each incident reported will require to be dealt with in an individual way as determined by the nature of the report.
Once the form is received the Employee Relations Officer in consultation with the Assistant Director — Human Resources will make a judgement about whether the circumstances outlined in the report require to be investigated in an appropriately confidential manager.
The purpose of such investigation will be to determine the precise nature of the incident, to examine the factors contributing to its occurrence and to identify any measures which might be taken to minimise the likelihood of a repetition of this or a similar incident.
7.6 Research on violence to staff in Social Work Departments shows that those who have been attacked can mistakenly feel that they have failed professionally and so may not report an incident in which they have been involved.
Under-reporting can cause a serious deficiency in the gathering of necessary information and makes it less likely that anything will be done to improve the situation.
It also leaves the victim to cope with the aftermath alone.
For these reasons the Department considers it to be of the utmost importance that the form is used in all of the appropriate circumstances and clearly it will help if it can be completed right after the incident has taken place.
It is emphasised that the form will be used by the Department for reporting purposes only and will not, at any stage, form part of the record of service of any employee who has been hurt, abused, threatened or harassed in the course of their employment with the Department.
8.
VICTIM SUPPORT
General Support
8.1 The Department is committed to support any member of staff who is assaulted either whilst carrying out their official duties or as a consequence of official duties.
In the latter regard, assault on an employee away from the normal ‘work’ premises is also the concern of the authority.
8.2 A member of staff who has been assaulted or has received a threat of violence in the course of employment must report the incident to their line manager as soon as is practicable.
The line manager should offer as much support as possible although it is acknowledged that in certain circumstances the individual might wish to seek support from another colleague rather than their line manager.
8.3 Following an episode of violence, positive support should be available for the individual directly involved.
The primary purpose is to express concern for the individual involved and to give them a listening ear.
Circumstances permitting, it may subsequently be possible to widen the objective to facilitate learning from the experience and to enhance the development of good practice in dealing with violence.
This should take place at a time when the individual is able to engage in detailed discussion.
Thereafter, when the situation has returned to normal, there should, if possible and if appropriate, be a meeting of the wider staff group to discuss the implications of the incident as a practice/learning issue.
Violence should in such circumstances be viewed positively as a practice matter, not as a negative.
Counselling
8.4 The Department recognises that employees who are the victims of violence at work may suffer emotional and psychological reactions to the incident in addition to or apart from any physical injury.
Inevitably, the member of staff will have questions and emotions which must not be ignored.
8.5 After any reported incident of violence to an employee, some degree of counselling should be provided.
Whilst recognising the central role of managers in providing counselling in these circumstances, consideration should be given, in exceptional cases, to whether this form of support would be delivered more effectively if it were separated from the normal manager/employee relationship.
8.6 The Department of Social Work has identified certain external agencies with counselling skills, in an effort to provide a structured response to the minority of staff who may seek counselling support, separate from their normal manager/employee relationship.
8.7 It is anticipated on the basis of past experience that employees will in some respect ‘self-select’ for external counselling as a reaction to extreme personal stress sustained as a result of being subjected to severe violence or aggressive behaviour.
If appropriate, reasonable time off work with pay will be approved in such cases.
8.8 To ensure that appropriate use is made of the available line management support arrangements, all requests for external counselling must be discussed with the employee and approved by the relevant District Manager.
Legal Assistance
8.9 It is the Regional Council's policy, where an employee is assaulted, to report the matter to the police and to request the police to press charges.
The line manager and the employee may make a case to the District manager for this not to be done.
It is emphasised, however, that in all cases the final decision on whether or not to prosecute an assailant rests with the Procurator Fiscal.
8.10 Where charges or counter-charges are brought against an employee, the Council will, in approved cases, pay the costs of a solicitor engaged by the employee to provide advice and assist with any defence against criminal charges.
In such cases the Director of Social Work in conjunction with the Regional Solicitor will submit a report to the Social Work Committee.
The committee will determine in the light of all the circumstances whether or not to approve the funding of external legal support.
8.11 Where either:
i
charges are brought against an assailant, or
ii
charges or counter-charges are brought against an employee and the Council approves the funding of external legal support,
any employee attending court as a witness on behalf of the employee involved will be granted time off work with pay for this purpose.
8.12 On the subject of direct legal support for employees the Regional Solicitor will only be able to provide very general legal advice because of his prime responsibility to the Regional Council.
However, in exceptional circumstances, where there is evidence of seriously threatening and violent behaviour on the part of an individual client towards a worker, an interdict can be sought in the courts specifically prohibiting that individual from molesting a particular employee, or visiting, for example a work location where previous visits have indicated a likelihood of danger to staff.
It is not anticipated that in many cases it would be necessary to seek an interdict.
Much more common could be the situation in which the regional Solicitor would be asked to send a formal letter to a client or other individual warning that if certain behaviour continued, proceedings would be initiated.
It is expected that this simple procedure could, in itself, have a salutary effect in resolving some unpleasant situations facing employees.
9.
RELEVANT CONDITIONS OF SERVICE
Extensions to Sickness Allowance
9.1 In terms of the Regional Council's policy, an employee who is absent from work as a result of a reported incident of violence is entitled to receive sickness allowances in accordance with the provisions of the relevant scheme of conditions of service.
When an employee exhausts their entitlement to sickness allowance, the Director of Management and Information Services, in conjunction with the Director of Social Work, will submit a report to the Personnel Committee concerning the possible extension of sickness allowance.
This report will also contain the medical adviser's opinion of the employee's medical condition and future fitness to return to work.
9.2 The Personnel Committee will then determine, in the light of all the circumstances, whether or not to approve an extension of sickness allowance and whether any such extension shall be on the basis of full or half pay.
Accident in the course of employment
9.3 When an employee is absent due sickness or disablement as a result of an accident arising out of and in the course of employment, the employee will be entitled to a separate allowance calculated on the same basis as the sickness allowance.
It must be noted, however, that the allowances in respect of(i) normal sickness and (ii) absence due to an accident, are entirely separate.
Periods of absence in respect of(i) do not count against the period of entitlement for (ii).
Employees temporarily undertaking higher duties
9.4 The various schemes of conditions of service recognise that an employee who is temporarily undertaking all or some of the duties of a post with a higher rate of pay than their normal post will, in prescribed circumstances, be paid at the appropriate higher rate.
In this regard an employee who is the victim of a violent incident whilst undertaking such temporary duties and, as a result, is absent from work will be paid the appropriate allowance at the higher rate for as long as the circumstances which gave rise to this temporary arrangement continues.
Personal Accident Indemnification
9.5 The various schemes of conditions of service require local authorities to make payments to an employee who suffers permanent disablement arising from a violent or criminal assault in the course, or as a consequence, of employment or, in the event of death, jointly to the dependents of the employee.
In this respect the Regional Council's personal accident insurance policy provides for compensation to be paid in accordance with the scale of compensation set out in the schemes of conditions of service.
Compensation for Loss or Damage to Personal Effects
9.6 An employee who suffers damage or loss to personal effects, excluding motor vehicles, in the course of their employment will be eligible to claim compensation under the Regional Council's approved scheme.
Subject to the conditions of the scheme, an employee may be paid up to an approved maximum for loss or damage to personal effects.
9.7 An employee whose motor vehicle is maliciously damaged through its authorised use in the course of employment may be eligible for compensation in accordance with the Regional Council's scheme.
All such claims shall be assessed on their merits in relation to the particular circumstances of the case.
9.8 An employee who suffers personal injury for which compensation is not payable under the Regional Council's approved schemes may be awarded an ex-gratia payment to compensate for any financial expenditure incurred.
In these circumstances the Director of Social Work will submit a report to the Social Work Committee who will determine whether an ex-gratia payment is to be made.
Criminal Injuries Compensation Board
9.9 An employee who suffers personal injury as a result of an act of violence may be eligible to receive an award from the Criminal Injuries Compensation Board.
9.10 Where an award is made by the Board, any period of absence resulting from the injury suffered will not be treated as sickness allowance and will not count against the employee's entitlement to sickness allowance; instead, any absence will be treated as special leave with pay.
In addition, payments made by the Regional Council to an employee during their absence will be made without any requirement to refund any proportion from the sum awarded by the Board.
9.11 The Council will provide reasonable assistance to an employee in relation to the submission of a claim to the Criminal Injuries Compensation Board.
It should be noted that the Board may withhold or reduce compensation of they consider that the applicant has not taken all reasonable steps to inform the police without delay.
10.
RETURN TO DUTY
Return to previous duties
10.1 Where an employee has been absent from work as a result of an act of violence the Director of Social Work will give due consideration to referring the employee to the medical adviser either prior to or immediately following their return to work.
10.2 Prior to an employee returning to work in these circumstances, the Director of Social Work will also consider:
i
Whether it would be appropriate for the employee to return initially on a part time basis;
ii
Whether the employee should be temporarily transferred to other duties;
iii
Whether the employee should undertake some ‘refresher’ training as part of their return to work;
iv
Whether there should be a temporary restriction in the range of duties required of the employee; and
v
Whether there should be temporary additional supervision and monitoring of the employee's work.
Any such measures will be fully discussed and, if possible, agreed with the employee.
In all such circumstances the employee will incur no loss of contractual earnings during the relevant period.
10.3 The appropriate line manager will ensure that adequate support and assistance are provided to the employee on returning to work for a specified ‘settling in’ period.
10.4 If, after returning to work, an employee who has been the victim of an incident of violence at work requests a transfer to other duties, such a request will be treated sympathetically.
When a transfer is arranged this should be on a trial basis normally not exceeding one month.
at the end of the trial period and subject to agreement by both parties, the Director of Social Work will confirm the transfer as permanent.
In these circumstances the normal terms and conditions of employment for the post in question will be applied, although every effort will be made to transfer staff to posts of a comparable level.
Employees permanently unfit to return to previous duties
10.5 Where the medical adviser considers that an employee is permanently unfit to carry out the duties of their post as a result of a violent incident at work, the Director of Social Work or nominated officer will discuss the matter with the employee concerned who may be accompanied by a trade union representative or some other person of the employee's choice.
The possibility of redeploying the employee to another post within the Department will be fully discussed at this meeting with due consideration being given to the employee's preferences in terms of alternative work.
10.6 Where, exceptionally, the Director of Social Work considers that it is not possible to redeploy the employee within the Department, the full circumstances of the case will be forwarded to the Personnel Manager who will circulate details to other Heads of Department, in an appropriately confidential manner, with a view to identifying suitable vacancies for the employee in question.
10.7 Where it proves necessary to redeploy an employee as a result of an act of violence at work, the normal terms and conditions of employment for the new post in question will be applied to the redeployed employee.
10.8 If an employee who has been declared permanently unfit refuses reasonable offers of suitable alternative employment, they will be dismissed on grounds of permanent disablement.
In these circumstances the Local Government Superannuation Regulations or the Teachers' Superannuation (Scotland) Regulations will be applied as appropriate in terms of the payment or otherwise of pension benefits.
Where the Local Government Superannuation Regulations apply and the employee is not eligible to be a member of that superannuation scheme, a payment will be made to the employee under the terms of the Regional Council's Gratuity Scheme subject to the conditions of the scheme being met.
10.9 Where an employee, following an incident of violence at work, is:
i
redeployed and as a result suffers a reduction in his/her remuneration; or
ii
dismissed on the grounds of permanent incapacity,
the injury allowance provisions of the Local Government Superannuation Regulations will apply to eligible employees.
In this regard the Director of Social Work, in conjunction with the Director of Finance, will, in exercising the discretion provided by the regulations concerning the amount of an injury allowance, give sympathetic consideration to each individual case having regard to all the circumstances.
It should be noted that the amount of injury allowance payable will be affected by, amongst other things, any pension benefits payable and any payment made to an employee under the terms of the Council's personal accident insurance policy.
The injury allowance is not affected however by any award made by the Criminal Injuries Compensation Board.
10.10 The Regional Council recognises that the Teachers' Superannuation (Scotland) Regulations do not contain provisions relating to an injury allowance or its equivalent.
In order to ensure consistency of treatment for all employees the Director of Social Work, in conjunction with the Director of Finance, will make a payment to a teacher in circumstances where an injury allowance would be payable to an employee covered by the terms of the Local Government Superannuation Regulations.
This payment will be equivalent to an injury allowance and will be calculated by reference to the same criteria as referred to in paragraph 10.9 above.
The payment will be available to teaching staff until such time as the Teachers' Superannuation (Scotland) Regulations are amended to provide for an injury allowance.
11 THE ROLE OF THE POLICE
11.1 There is no doubt that many agencies serving the public experience incidents of violence towards their employees.
Their experience can be used as part of the learning progress for Social Work and joint examination of the subject can be fruitful.
11.2 At the same time, the Department recognises that it has long been practice to seek assistance from the police in certain situations, particularly in order to avoid a breach of the peace when carrying out statutory duties which involve the restriction of liberty and removal of persons.
Police forces regularly request that they should be regarded as a resource with advice to offer and practical assistance to make available when required in situations covered in this document.
They should not be regarded as simply a last resort, but involved in the consultation process surrounding possible action to prevent risk to employees.
11.3 The following extract from one local authority policy document is helpful in this manner
‘Staff in charge of establishments where violence is a problem, to the extent that the police are likely to be called upon to assist from time to time, should establish a relationship with the police which will lead to a better understanding of each other 's problems and responsibilities.
The most likely area that will involve staff with the police in the context of violence is where a breach of the peace occurs.
This involves an intentional use or threat of violence by one person against another.
Actual violence may not be involved, all that is necessary is for there either to be a breach of the peace or reasonable grounds for suspicion that someone may commit a breach of the peace.
In dealing with the breach, or threatened breach of the peace, it is the duty of the police to investigate and to take such steps to stop or prevent as they think necessary.
To this end the police may arrest without a warrant for a breach of the peace and, as a general rule, they may enter private premises without a warrant in order to stop or prevent a breach of the peace if they have reason to suspect that this may occur.
However, without a warrant, or unless other arrestable offences are involved (e.g. fire arms), they have no right to search premises or remain on private premises without invitation once the breach of the peace has been dealt with.
It must be remembered that the role of the police outlined above is purely in the context of a situation where violence occurs or is threatened.
The police are obviously involved also in other activities which bring them into contact with employees and a good relationship with them in these other areas will often be beneficial to reaching a quick and satisfactory solution to all sides when violence does occur’.
11.4 In cases of severe disturbance or potential violence, consideration must be given at an early stage to involving the police.
In all situations the decision to call the police should as far as possible be taken after consultation with the appropriate manager.
11.5 If immediate help is urgently needed dial ‘999’ without delay.
Do not use local links.
Bear in mind that it may take some time for the police to arrive.
11.6 The police do not have a responsibility to intervene in all situations; for example, if there is an argument about to whom possessions belong.
Their specific duty is to prevent a breach of the peace or to enforce a court order; for example, access.
If the police response is not what the unit is looking for, the local manager should contact the local duty inspector to attempt to find a solution.
When it is known that the police may be needed, give them plenty of warning and bear in mind that their shifts change.
11.7 When an employee has been assaulted in the course of duty, the police must be called unless the manager and employee make a case for this not to be done.
The Department retains the right to call the police even if the employee does not wish it.
It is important to note the implications of not calling the police; for example, insofar as it might affect future insurance claims.
11.8 Each social work unit and office must develop a direct link at senior level with the police locally.
The purpose of this is to enable regular discussions to take place thus developing a good working relationship within which problems can be talked through.
It should be borne in mind that any organisation such as the police or Department of Social Work will tend to react defensively to a formal complaint whereas good personal relations can often enable better results to be achieved.
12.
MONITORING ARRANGEMENTS
12.1 It is of fundamental importance that the compilation and introduction of guidelines on violence at work is not seen as an end in itself.
The subject of violence must receive ongoing consideration within the Department.
To enable this to happen in a structured way a formal monitoring apparatus must be set up and continued.
12.2 The need for sound information has been well accepted in order that trends can be observed and judgements made in the light of these.
Similarly, a means has to be established by which lessons can be learnt and the need for change to procedure and practice identified where necessary.
Moreover, the requirement that guidelines need ongoing revision in the light of changed circumstances must not be forgotten.
12.3 It is acknowledged that several areas of activity/involvement in monitoring violence need to take place concurrently within the Department.
For obvious reasons these will not necessarily be mutually exclusive:
i
Within the Joint Consultative Committee and Health and Safety Committee structures.
ii
Within branch management groups to facilitate discussion between senior branch staff.
iii
Through the Departmental Advisory Group on Violence to Staff.
iv
The Departmental Management Group.
v
Directorate.
12.4 The Director has agreed to the continuation of the Advisory Group on Violence to Staff within the Department.
This will operate outside all other apparatus and will have ongoing responsibility for co-ordinating the approach to violence and aggressive behaviour as well as updating policy.
In terms of its advisory nature, the remit of the group enables it to be pro-active.
13.
REVIEW OF POLICY
13.1 The Regional Council has agreed that is policy on violence to employees at work will be reviewed by the Council, or at the request of the trades unions, in the light of reported incidents and advice from reputable and qualified sources.
Similarly, the Department of Social Work's guidelines for employees in handling violence and aggressive behaviour by clients or members of the public will be revised periodically having regard to service development and other relevant sources of information.
APPENDIX 1
VIOLENT INCIDENT REPORT FORM
The Department needs to know about the incidents that staff experience as they do their work, in order to plan to make working conditions safer, and to train staff in the best ways of dealing with violence if they meet it.
The Department also wants to know what help staff receive, and want, from colleagues when they experience a violent incident at work.
Use this form after any incident in which you were hurt, abused or threatened, or where your property was damaged.
You can also use it to report incidents of sexual or racial harassment.
Fill it in yourself; your manager, or your union health and safety representative will help you if the layout does not fit in with the incident you want to report.
The completion of this form soon after the incident will help the process.
It should be sent to Jan Mullen, in Personnel at Shrubhill House.
APPENDIX B
POLICY ON PHYSICAL RESPONSES
INTRODUCTION
1.1 Loss, whether of status, security, freedom or in its many other aspects is often an implicit part of the life situations of departmental clients.
Working with the ensuing feelings of anger and distress can make considerable demands on staff skill and patience.
However, an important distinction must be made between the legitimate expression and engagement with such client feelings and the more unacceptable and personalised expression of aggression or threat towards workers.
Staff must therefore balance professional service obligations to clients with a realistic concern for their own safety.
1.2 The successful prediction and management of violent or aggressive behaviour follows from a partnership in which the resources and responsibilities of organisation, management and workers combine to maximise available information on client situations before contact and enable workers to feel confident, equipped and supported in their work with potentially difficult situations.
1.3 The factors contributing to the development of violent or aggressive behaviour are complex, often with antecedents extending beyond the immediate situation.
Many commentators suggest that violent incidents are best understood as unique events.
Consequently, the difficulties involved in offering advice to staff on how to respond must therefore be recognised.
1.4 In the majority of situations it should be possible to diffuse potentially violent confrontations by non physical means.
Ultimately however, in situations where there is a risk of physical injury to the client, staff member or to another person, there is a clear responsibility on the worker to attempt to avert it.
It is therefore important that staff are clear about the circumstances in which physical responses in the form of physical restraint or self-defence are legitimate.
2.
POLICY ON PHYSICAL RESTRAINT
2.1 It has to be acknowledged that physical restraint implies the use of force, albeit in a non aggressive way.
Equally, it is accepted by the Department that the use of physical restraint towards clients raises difficulties for staff.
2.2 The Department's policy in this area is as follows:
i
Physical restraint should only be used as a last resort.
ii
It should involve the minimum force necessary to effect the restraint and avoid injury to the client.
For example, persons should be held in such a way as to avoid any interference with breathing or blood circulation, or contact with sexual areas; if possible they should be held down on soft surfaces such as a bed, chair etc.
Continued calm reassurance should be given.
If it proves necessary to restrain a client's arms or legs, they should be held above and below the main joint.
This should increase control and reduce the likelihood of injury.
Where the restraint necessitates holding a client down, the first recourse should be to attempt this face up, a degree of weight being applied to the shoulders.
However, in extreme cases it may be necessary to hold the client face down, a degree of weight being applied to the upper back.
iii
Physical restraint may be used as a defence against potential or escalating violence but it should only be employed if there is a reasonable chance of success.
Clear judgement needs to be exercised by the workers present and all unnecessary risks avoided.
iv
Managers should ensure that staff are supported to use physical restraint appropriately and effectively.
In residential units shift teams should be appropriately balanced and specific members of staff should not have the sole responsibility for employing physical restraint.
Clients must not be requested to assist in the physical restraint of a fellow client.
v
In extreme circumstances when a situation escalates to a position where the client(s) cannot be controlled by physical restraint, staff members should be prepared to vacate the room, even if there is a possibility that extensive damage may result.
Personal safety is of primary importance.
It is clear that in these circumstances external or police assistance should be called.
vi
Staff members trained in Control and Restraint techniques may employ these measures where the situation accords with the conditions specified for their use.
3.
POLICY ON SELF-DEFENCE
3.1 In handling a violent situation one of the basic rules is to ensure that a means of withdrawal is available should the member of staff decide simply to vacate the room.
However it is clear that some advice is necessary about those situations in which this might not be possible.
In the event of an attempted assault in such a situation a member of staff will need to take appropriate measures to defend themselves.
In such circumstance staff may strike out but — it must be stressed — only in self-defence; the law only sanctions the use of reasonable force for self-defence.
It is difficult to exactly define the meaning of ‘reasonable force’.
The law operates retrospectively on the basis of precedent, examining each individual case on its merits.
However, in general terms, ‘reasonable force’ involves the notions of degree and duration.
Hence, even where force is used in self-defence in response to the first use of violence the employment of a greater degree of force than that used by the attacker, or the continued use of force beyond the point where the attacker is willing or unable to continue the attack would not be seen as legitimate in law.
3.2 Physical violence is a traumatic experience.
Research has demonstrated that the strong emotions  experienced by participants can lead to inappropriate or ineffective responses.
These can include either a loss of control or a tendency to freeze in the face of attack.
Such responses can also be reinforced by a lack of clarity around the options and the permitted physical responses open to the victim.
3.3 Whilst the assessment of risk and the permitted limits of response in a given situation remain a matter for individual judgement some simple advice consistent with the relevant legal and policy guidelines and training principles may be useful.
i
Always tray to remain calm.
Breathe deeply and slowly from the stomach.
Avoid shallow or chest breathing, which may promote panic and loss of emotional control.
ii
Try to control your personal space.
Only strike out if the attacker enters your personal safety zone.
Try to limit the target area by presenting a small profile to the attacker (stand sideways).
iii
Bend the knees slightly and keep a low centre of gravity.
This will make it easier to remain upright and avoid being pushed over.
iv
Consider using an object such as a bag or briefcase or a chair to fend off the attacker (bear in mind the potential difference between fending off and striking with a weapon).
v
Be prepared to yell, shout or scream.
This can be useful in unnerving the attacker and in avoiding the common tendency to freeze or become immobile in the face of attack.
vi
If you are held or restrained by the attacker try not to panic.
Remember that the attacker cannot use the hands or limbs thus employed to strike you.
Whilst there are many ways of breaking free from restraint the more complex the movement the more can go wrong.
Generally, if attempting to break a hold avoid big movements.
Concentrate your force on the restraining grip at its weakest point (usually the thumb).
A nip or a pinch directed towards specific parts of the body such as the inner surface of the upper arm, the inner thigh or the upper chest, can generate an intense but non damaging pain which may assist in breaking free from restraint.
vii
Bear in mind that if the situation merits physical self-defence much may depend upon the attitude with which it is attempted.
Half-hearted attempts run the risk of being ineffective and antagonistic to assailants.
3.4 It is recognised that the skills involved in physical restraint and self-defence are alien to many workers.
It is also recognised that the development of elementary abilities in such physical skills can help staff to develop increased confidence in their ability to diffuse situations using non physical means.
3.5 Within the context of a broad based training programme the Department will offer appropriate staff an optional training programme on physical restraint and ‘breakaway’ techniques involving ‘minimum force’techniques taught by an accredited instructor.
RESIDENTIAL OR NURSING HOME CARE FOR ELDERLY PEOPLE
The main aim of Community Care is to help people who need assistance because of age, disability or infirmity to stay at home for as long as possible, by providing services to support them, their relatives and carers.
Information about the new arrangements for Community Care is contained in a leaflet called ‘Assessments for Community Care’.
However, it is clear that some people will want to consider seeking an assessment to enable them to move into a residential or nursing home.
The information below will suggest how and where to get further advice about making this difficult decision including whether financial help would be available.
LEAVING HOME — A DIFFICULT CHOICE
Most people are able to stay at home, perhaps with some extra support.
The local Social Work Centre or Hospital Social Worker will be able to help you assess your needs and give advice on what support may be arranged (see back page for addresses and telephone numbers).
However, if staying at home is not possible, there are still many decisions to be made.
Moving to a residential home or nursing home can have many advantages — such as more company and a feeling of security — but it also means a major change in someone's way of life.
Where this is being considered your need for care would also be assessed.
It is a good idea to talk it through with someone and, if possible, to visit homes before making a decision.
Again, your local Social Work Centre or Hospital Social Worker can offer advice and support.
RESIDENTIAL &: NURSING HOMES IN LOTHIAN
There are a number of residential and nursing homes in Lothian.
Some residential homes are run by Lothian Regional Council.
Others are run by voluntary bodies, for example churches or charities; or privately by individual owners or commercial companies.
The majority of nursing homes are run privately.
All residential homes must be registered with Lothian Regional Council, and all nursing homes with Lothian Health Board.
Both bodies regularly inspect the homes and have powers to make sure that care and other conditions reach specified standards.
RESIDENTIAL HOMES can cater for people who need a lot of practical help, for example with bathing and dressing and other aspects of personal care.
NURSING HOMES always have a qualified nurse or nurses on duty.
They cater for people who need both nursing supervision and a lot of practical help.
FINDING OUT ABOUT INDIVIDUAL HOMES
Individual residential and nursing homes vary in size, layout and location, and in the sort of care they offer.
With such an important decision, it is essential to find out as much as possible about individual homes.
You can find out more by:
contacting any home direct — most homes have an information leaflet, and you can also ask to visit;
contacting your local Social Work Centre for information and advice;
talking to Hospital Social Work staff;
talking about your future plans with other professionals who know you well — for example, your District Nurse or Doctor.
There are also plans to set up a Lothian-wide Information Service for people thinking about residential or nursing home care.
A separate leaflet will be available about this after April 1993.
PAYMENT OF FEES
All residential and nursing homes charge fees.
For private and voluntary homes, these can vary from home to home and different charges may be made for single and shared rooms.
Different rates may also be charged in relation to the amount of personal or nursing care required.
Find out what the charges will be and exactly what they cover, for example‘Is there an extra charge for chiropody?’.
You can ask for information about charges to be put in writing.
N.B. Charges are liable to be reviewed annually.
You may be able to pay the full cost.
If so, you can make a direct arrangement with the home without involving anyone else.
However, if you think you may need help to meet the charges, please contact your local Social Work Centre or Hospital Social Worker who will be able to arrange an assessment of your needs.
Your choice or preference is important; if the charges of the home you choose can be met by the fees payable by the Social Work Department and the care provided meets your assessed needs, the Department will support your placement.
If the costs at the home you prefer are greater than the fees payable by the Social Work Department, your placement will be dependent on a third party being willing to make up the difference, ie a relative, a charity or a trust.
A separate information leaflet called ‘Moving into Residential or Nursing Home Care — Money Matters’ gives more details.
MAKING THE CHOICE
Choosing a home is a very personal matter.
Some questions to ask are:
Does the size of the home suit me?
Does it have a nice atmosphere?
Can I stay overnight for a trial period?
Is it easy for visitors to get to?
Do the bedrooms suit me?
Can I have a single room?
What is the food like and is there a choice?
Where can I eat meals and when?
What are the other residents like?
What standard of care is offered?
What are the staff like — how many are there?
Can the home satisfy my needs?
Can I bring my pet with me?
Can I take some of my furniture or belongings?
Can I get everywhere in my wheelchair?
It is best to consider a number of homes and to keep your own house before deciding on a permanent move.
It may be necessary to wait for a place or take a place somewhere else (either permanently or temporarily).
However, planning ahead may not always be possible — for example if your circumstances change quickly or vacancies are in short supply.
A trial period in a home may be the best way of finding out what day-to-day life is like, and make a difficult decision easier.
In some homes it is possible to stay for a few days or a week at a time either occasionally or on a regular basis.
This may suit your needs better than a permanent move.
You may want to discuss this with the home(s) of your choice.
This leaflet has been designed to provide some basic information.
Clearly, many questions will remain unanswered.
More information is available from the other leaflets already mentioned, and your Hospital Social Worker or local Social Work Centre will be happy to advise you further.
A ROAD SAFETY PLAN FOR LOTHIAN REGION
LOTHIAN REGIONAL COUNCIL AND LOTHIAN AND BORDERS POLICE 1992
WHEN WILL YOU EVER LEARN…
Foreword
Last February I was pleased to launch Lothian's first Road Safety Plan which declared a bold set of initiatives designed to reduce the number of road accident casualties in Lothian by a target of one-third by the year 2000.
In 1991 there were fewer people killed on the roads in Lothian than at any time since 1975 when the Region was formed and at the same time the Region experienced the second lowest casualty total.
This good news has to be built upon by the direct and firm action set out in, this, the second Road Safety Plan for Lothian.
In particular, I am pleased to note a number of important developments stemming from action points in the first Plan.
These include:
the issue of Road Safety Guidelines to all Head Teachers in Lothian to promote road safety education in the school curriculum
the start of Safe Travel to School projects in four areas identified as having high numbers of casualties associated with travel to or from school
the start of a project to reduce excessive vehicle speeds and help cut the number of casualties
initiatives to secure improve safety features on buses
It was disappointing that the Scottish Office refused an application for an Urban Aid grant to support a package of initiatives for Greater Pilton.
This area was specifically targeted because of the high level of involvement of people living there in road accidents.
I am, however, pleased that the Plan continues with a vigorous approach to the problem.
Death and injury on our roads touch all our lives and the Council continues in its determination to achieve the target and to make Lothian the safest region in Europe for all categories of transport and road user.
major issues
The Road Safety Plan
This is the second in the annual series of Road Safety Plans for Lothian Region.
It was prepared by a Steering Group comprising representatives of:
The Steering Group has monitored and reviewed progress on actions detailed in the first Plan.
In total, the actions included in the Plan cover all road users but specific attention has been given to initiatives targeted at those road users most at risk, especially children and elderly people.
The first Plan identified twenty action points and progress has been made on them all.
These are summarised in the table opposite.
For many of the points, action has either been completed or is ongoing.
For others, however, circumstances have unfortunately prevented more progress and this particularly so with the  Children's Traffic Club and the application for Urban Aid.
The Plan does not seek to reiterate the considerable road safety input to the bulk of the day-to-day work associated with the statutory and other responsibilities of the Council and Chief Constable.
The Plan concentrates in the main on the development of specific new initiatives which it is believed will have significant effects in achieving the Council's casualty reduction target.
The Council, however, has adopted the Local Authority Associations Road Safety Code of Good Practice which covers the road safety issues in many elements of the day-to-day management of the Chief Constable's and Council's responsibilities.
Future Plans will review progress made on these initiatives and develop new ones to ensure that every effort is made to secure the highest possible reduction in casualties.
Indeed, there are new sections in this plan relating to Safe Travel to School, Pedestrian Safety and Drinking and Driving.
Over the next few years there will be changes in the structures of Lothian and Borders Police and Regional Council Departments which will affect various elements of the delivery of the road safety function.
In addition, local government reform is planned by the Secretary of State.
This provides an opportunity to consider a wide ranging review of road safety activities and how they may be best managed to maximise casualty reduction.
If members of the public or organisations wish to comment on this Plan they should write to 
Road Accident Casualties in Lothian Region
In 1991 there were 3,099 accidents in Lothian which involved:
59 deaths
598 serious casualties
3,276 slight casualties
It has to be emphasised that the numbers of casualties often vary quite considerably from year to year as a result of weather and a number of external factors which affect the amount of travel.
Accordingly, simple year-on-year comparisons can lead to unreliable conclusions being drawn from the data.
Nevertheless, the total number of casualties is the second lowest annual total since the Region was formed in 1975.
The number of people killed has never been lower.
These casualty totals have to be set against the continuing growth in traffic which was reported in the first Plan.
The data for 1991 show that car ownership in Lothian is now 40% greater than 1981–85 average whereas accident casualties have fallen by around 8%.
The new legislation regarding seat belt wearing in the rear seats of cars which came into effect on 1 July 1991 has had a downward effect on the number of rear seat car passenger casualties.
There was also a reduction in the number of elderly bus passenger casualties which may have resulted in a fall in the number of trips being made following the introduction of fares for concessionary travel.
There are, however, a number of areas in which casualties appear to be moving against the downward trend.
In particular, there was an increase in the number of children being injured as rear seat car passengers.
These areas of concern are examined in the appropriate sections of the Plan.
The year-on-year variation in the number of accidents can be exemplified by the daily variation in accident totals.
In 1991 the highest number of casualties on any single day was 29 and the lowest was 1 (one).
High numbers tend to be recorded on days when the demand for travel is high and the weather conditions offer no deterrent but may be unseasonal.
The days with 29 casualties were Sunday 2 June and Monday 6 July; the former being an unseasonally cold day following a particularly hot day in the area.
The days with one casualty were Sunday 6 January and Sunday 10 February; on both these days there was snow and traffic volumes were observed to be lower than would have been expected had the weather been fine.
Casualty Reduction Target
The first Plan outlined the government's target of a reduction in road accident casualties of one-third by the year 2000.
The baseline for this target is the average casualty total for years 1981–85.
Table 2 shows for Lothian how the target breaks down by age group and what progress has been made to date.
On the basis of the 1981–85 baseline there is a target reduction of around 1,435 casualties from a figure of 4,302 to one of 2,867 for the year 2000.
The table also shows ‘interim’ target casualty totals for 1991 by age group which are based on straight line reductions of one third between 1986 and 2000.
Table 3 shows the equivalent data for Scotland.
The first Plan indicated that about 60% (800 casualties) of the target reduction may be expected from local authority initiatives and 40% from changes in legislation, improved vehicle design and heightened public awareness.
This led to a target reduction of around 800 casualties from local initiatives.
This Plan has updated the local contribution and suggests a new target reduction of 880 casualties.
For both Lothian and Scotland the 1991 totals are lower than the 1981–85 base but higher than the 1991 ‘interim’ target.
Although in terms of total casualties Lothian appears to be performing marginally better than the Scottish average, this masks worrying trends for the very young and elderly age groups.
For children under 5 in Lothian the number of casualties in 1991 was nearly one third greater than the 1981–85 baseline total, whereas for Scotland as a whole casualties in this age group rose by less than 5%.
In fact the Lothian increase of 28 casualties almost matches the entire Scottish increase of 33 casualties.
The large reduction in casualties for 16–18 year olds in Lothian can be accounted for by a significant reduction in motorcycle use by this age group.
This is also reflected in the national data.
It was not until the late 1980's that this one-third reduction target was adopted by the Scottish Office.
By this time there had been significant changes from the 1981–85 baseline in casualty distribution by age and road user type both locally and nationally.
Because of these changes it is not practical to adopt the government's one-third reduction target across all age groups.
The first Plan for Lothian based its casualty reduction targets on the latest available data which was for 1990.
This Plan continues to use 1990 as its baseline for its targets.
Table 4 shows the differences between the government's one-third reduction and those targeted by initiatives in this Plan.
It is evident that the government's targets for children of school age and young adults may be exceeded in Lothian but that those for pre-school children and adults may not.
Children of Pre-School Age
TARGET GROUP
Children under 5 years of age.
ACCIDENT DATA
Total casualties in this age group are 28 or 32% above the 1981–85 baseline figure of 88 casualties.
In this age group, the long-term rising trend in casualties to infants both as pedestrians and passengers shows no significant downturn.
Although there was a small reduction in the total number of casualties in 1991, it masked an increase in the number of children injured in cars who were not wearing seat belts.
It is unacceptable that adults allow children to travel without proper restraint in cars.
BACKGROUND
The first Plan identified the benefits associated with road safety education for pre-school children and in particular to  Children's Traffic Club sponsored by General Accident which is currently undergoing trials.
General Accident have indicated that subject to satisfactory trials the Traffic Club may be launched nationally to all interested local authorities during 1993.
A response is awaited from Lothian Health Board regarding their possible involvement in distributing the packs.
As part of an intensive campaign aimed at seat belt offences in June 1992, infants have been specifically targeted and the responsibility of adults forcefully presented.
Enforcement in this area has been intensive.
Display material and literature relevant to restraint of infants have been posted in hospitals and maternity units in the Region.
ACTION
To implement the  Children's Traffic Club as soon as it is made available for use by General Accident.
Road safety education will also be actively encouraged in Regional establishments and those for which Regional authority must be obtained.
Action will be taken to reinforce existing regulations regarding restraining infants in cars.
POTENTIAL BENEFITS
It is believed that the initiatives could generate a 10% reduction in casualties by the year 2000 within this age group.
MONITORING STRATEGY
In the longer term, casualty totals will be monitored by extending the data in Tables 5 and 6 on an annual basis.
Children and Young People of School Age
TARGET GROUP
Children and young people between 5 and 18 years.
ACCIDENT DATA
Total casualties in this age group are 87 or 15% below the 1985–91 baseline figure of 567 casualties.
This however, masks a longer term rising trend in car passenger casualties particularly for children of primary school age.
As in previous years, the majority of children in this age group are killed or injured when using the road as pedestrians and particularly so when crossing the road at locations where no pedestrian crossing facility exists.
In spite of legislation which makes seat belt wearing compulsory, it is a matter of concern that 45% of the car passenger casualties in this age group were not wearing a seat belt at the time of the accident.
BACKGROUND
Guidelines have been established for Head Teachers to incorporate road safety education in the school curriculum.
Each school has been asked to identify a co-ordinator who will liaise with the appropriate Road Safety Training Officer and other agencies to ensure an appropriate and progressive programme of road safety education for all pupils.
A student-centred learning pack, ‘Police Accident and Investigation’, has been produced for use in Standard Grade mathematics and made available to Secondary and Special Schools.
ACTION
In the context of the 5–14 development programme, a working group is currently publishing its report on Health Education in which the importance of road safety education is recognised.
Appropriate educational material will continue to be co-ordinated, evaluated and distributed to schools as it becomes available.
Provide support for school co-ordinators in the form of briefing meetings, curricular materials and staff development to implement a road safety education programme in schools.
In-service courses on Road Safety have been included in the Department of Education's ‘Directory of In-Service Opportunities’ for teachers.
Support for these courses is being provided by BITER (British Institute for Traffic Education and Research).
The Police will co-operate with the Department of Education in making a video to demonstrate investigative techniques at the scene of an accident.
This video will support the curricular package ‘Police Accident and Investigation’.
The Department of Highways is discussing with Road Safety Training Officers and selected Head Teachers a ‘Safe Travel to School’ initiative.
Opportunities will be taken to reinforce the relevance of the changes in seat belt legislation which came into effect on 1 July 1991.
Road accidents data will continue to be monitored and made available to schools.
POTENTIAL BENEFITS
It is believed that the initiatives could generate a 10% reduction in casualties by the year 2000 within this age group.
MONITORING STRATEGY
The road safety guidelines and in-service provision will be evaluated periodically and their success monitored.
In addition, the data in Tables 7–11 will be extended on an annual basis.
Young Adults
TARGET GROUP
Young people from 16 to 24 years.
ACCIDENT DATA
Total casualties in this age group are 407 or 28% below the 1981–85 baseline figure of 1,441 casualties.
The majority of this reduction is associated with 303 fewer motorcyclist casualties over the same period.
The increase in car driver casualties may indicate that significant numbers of young people are forsaking motorcycles in favour of cars.
There was a noteworthy reduction of 45 or 34% in the number of rear seat car passenger casualties from 133 in 1990 to 88 in 1991.
This coincided with the introduction of new seat belt legislation regarding rear seat passengers.
Nonetheless, the majority (70%) of rear seat car passenger casualties in this age group were not wearing seat belts at the time of the accident.
BACKGROUND
The Joint Working Group on Youth Work in Lothian has had initial discussions with the aim of developing appropriate strategies for including road safety issues in programmes for young people.
The Guidelines issued to schools make reference to the SCOTVEC Module (‘The Road User’ which is targeted at the 16–18 year old age group.
The Police have also developed a ‘Young Driver Awareness’ pack which covers the key outcomes of this course.
In addition many of the initiatives relating to adults will have relevance to this age group.
ACTION
The Joint Working Group on Youth Work in Lothian has been asked to report on the scope for including road safety in the range of issues addressed by youth organisations in their work with young people.
Subsequent strategies will be promoted in collaboration with the Police and Department of Highways.
Where possible, steps will be taken to ensure that publicity campaigns include specific messages targeted at this age group.
The Scottish Road Safety Campaign have recently published literature and a video presentation aimed at young drivers to promote general driver awareness.
A publicity package has been developed and is in circulation in Lothian through pre-driver training classes for the 16–18 age group in schools, driving schools and Department of Transport Test Centres.
Action will be taken to ensure the widest possible publicity is given to the changes in seat belt legislation which came into effect last year.
POTENTIAL BENEFITS
It is believed that the initiatives could generate a 5% reduction in casualties by the year 2000 within this age group.
MONITORING STRATEGY
In the short term the effect of the new seat belt legislation will be closely monitored.
In the long term casualty totals will be monitored by extending the data in Tables 12–16 on an annual basis.
Adults
TARGET GROUP
People from 25 to 59 years of age.
ACCIDENT DATA
Total casualties in this age group are 81 or 5% above the 1981–85 baseline figure of 1,637 casualties.
Whilst casualties to passengers and pedestrians show little long-term movement, there has been an increase in the number of car driver casualties.
Clearly, this will be related in some degree to the increase in the number of people owning and driving cars which was reported in the first Plan.
BACKGROUND
The Police are fully supporting all campaigns instigated by the Scottish Road Safety Campaign and the Department of Transport.
Drivers in this age group are being targeted and are being made aware of their responsibilities as drivers.
Private companies are receiving driver awareness inputs for their staff in an effort to reduce the number of accidents.
Novice drivers may be targeted through the Adult Education Service — night schools (still to be confirmed).
A particular emphasis has been placed on drivers by way of the national ‘Speedwatch’ campaign and further campaigns will deal with the wearing of seat belts and drinking and driving.
Where possible the Police Road Safety Display Caravan will highlight these initiatives in Lothian and be on site at various organised events.
Libraries are also being targeted and static displays are being used to highlight road safety.
Where needed the Police are supplying road safety literature, advice and instruction.
In a month-long seat belt campaign during 1992, this group received special mention and considerable media attention.
The Steering Group believes that the development of Departmental Road Safety Plans would enhance the contribution to casualty reduction which can be made by Regional Council and Police personnel.
These plans could deal with general issues and advise on practice of specific relevance to particular Departments.
ACTION
The Director of Highways and the Police will continue to provide the fullest support for the relevant actions of the Scottish Road Safety Campaign Committee and the Department of Transport and will integrate local activities into relevant national campaigns.
Action will be taken to ensure that the widest possible publicity is given to seat belt legislation.
An appropriate insert is to be prepared for inclusion in pay slips for all Regional employees bearing suitable information on road safety and in particular seat belt wearing.
Prepare a proposal for the introduction of Departmental Road Safety Plans.
POTENTIAL BENEFITS
It is believed that the above initiatives could generate a 2.5% reduction in casualties by the year 2000 within this age group.
MONITORING STRATEGY
Any effect on the number of road accident casualties is likely to be detectable only in the longer term.
In the short term the effect of the new seat belt legislation will be closely monitored.
In the longer term casualty totals will be monitored by extending the data in Tables 17–20 on an annual basis.
Elderly People
TARGET GROUP
People of 60 years of age or over.
ACCIDENT DATA
Total casualties in this age group are 16 or 3% above the 1981–85 baseline figure of 569.
The 1991 figure of 585 casualties shows a marked reduction of 65 or 10% compared with the 1990 total of 650 casualties.
Reductions in bus passenger and car rear seat passenger casualties have contributed in large degree to this decrease.
During September 1991 free concessionary travel was replaced by new concessionary fare structures introduced by individual bus companies and this may have reduced the number of elderly people using buses.
The introduction of compulsory seat belt wearing for rear seat passengers may also have contributed to this reduction.
This recent reduction should not mask the fact that casualties in this age group still exceed the 1981–85 baseline.
BACKGROUND
Clubs and organisations attracting this group are targeted where use is made of the Scottish Road Safety Campaign leaflet ‘The Older Road User’ to best effect.
Both formal and informal learning sessions take place currently throughout the Region organised by the police Road Safety Officers.
Six thousand campaign leaflets have already been circulated.
A seminar held by Lothian and Borders Police in connection with road safety issues involving the older road user revealed that a key element to ensure enhancement of the safety of this group requires guidance to impress upon them the importance of individual responsibility.
A principal role should be undertaken by staff directly involved with and who are experienced in dealing with, elderly groups.
Direct contact is a necessary element in the guidance process.
As a direct result of the various recommendations of the seminar, a particular course of action is being pursued employing the recommendations.
ACTION
The Police have compiled a list of clubs, organisations and interested bodies and are about to launch a major initiative where such bodies will be visited and the over 60's seen.
Use is being made of community rooms in libraries and community centres.
Where no facilities are available the Police Road Safety Display Caravan will be sited and interested road users targeted.
These sessions will be used as ‘surgeries’ where this age group can be informed of road safety issues and be given the opportunity to voice local problems.
Local police officers will be encouraged to attend to improve local relations.
It is hoped that a bond will develop in the future with the ‘Safer Edinburgh’ initiative as they are targeting the age group in relation to crime prevention.
The safety of elderly people in buses is dealt with in separate section.
POTENTIAL BENEFITS
It is believed that they could generate a 2.5% reduction in casualties by the year 2000 within this age group.
MONITORING STRATEGY
In the longer term casualty totals will be monitored by extending the data in Tables 21–23 on an annual basis.
specific initiatives
Improved Safety for Bus Passengers
TARGET GROUP
All bus passengers, but particularly those who are elderly or experience mobility difficulties.
ACCIDENT DATA
Total casualties in this age group are 26 or 7% above the 1981–85 baseline figure of 338 casualties.
The largest reduction was in the number of elderly casualties.
As described in the previous section, this may have resulted from a decrease in the number of elderly people using buses following the introduction in September 1991 of fares for concessionary travel.
Nonetheless, just over half the casualties among bus passengers are suffered by elderly people and there is a separate section which relates to this specific problem.
BACKGROUND
Since the publication of the 1991 Plan, the Council has introduced revised Standard Conditions of Contract for Supported Bus Services which now form the basis of all contracts for bus services let by the Council.
These Conditions incorporate additional features on vehicles as recommended by DPTAC and represent a further step towards the eventual adoption of full DPTAC specification for supported bus service contracts.
The Council has also actively contributed towards the production of the ATCO (Scotland) draft Model Specification for Buses which builds on the existing DPTAC recommendations.
This has now been submitted to the Department of Transport in the hope that it might be adopted to act as a national guide to all bus operators and local authorities.
The Council has introduced a Grant Scheme to encourage operators of commercial bus services in Lothian to improve the standard of accessibility of their vehicles.
£50,000 has been made available for such upgrading work in the 1992/93 Capital Budget.
Together, the Grant Scheme and the more stringent contract conditions should result in a marked improvement to buses in Lothian in terms of standards of passenger accessibility and safety.
In the past year the first phase of the analysis of bus passenger casualties highlighted in the 1991 Plan has been undertaken.
Full analysis of the 1990 accident statistics shows that most (91%) of the injuries sustained were slight.
Most casualties (46%) recorded involved people who were at the time of the incident standing in buses, but it is not always clear from the recorded data whether the passengers were standing due to the vehicle's seating capacity being fully utilised or were on their feet moving towards a seat or the bus exit.
By far the highest proportion (85%) of casualties occurred in Edinburgh.
Most casualties (66%) occurred in circumstances when the bus was the only vehicle involved.
ACTION
1
The Council will use as a basis for all future supported bus service contracts in Lothian Standard Conditions which require the provision of a greater range of passenger safety and accessibility features on buses than previous sets of conditions.
These conditions will continue to be developed and strengthened.
2
The Council will encourage bus operators to take full advantage of the new grants scheme.
It is anticipated that over one hundred vehicles will be improved using the 1992/93 capital allocation.
3
The results gained from the continuing analysis of bus passenger accidents will be used to develop the Campaign to promote improved Safety for Elderly People (see separate section).
POTENTIAL BENEFITS
Buses will continue to become increasingly safer for all passengers to use, but especially for those who are elderly or frail.
Accidents involving injury to bus passengers should, therefore, be reduced both in number and severity.
It is anticipated that these initiatives could contribute a 2.5% reduction in casualties by the year 2000.
MONITORING STRATEGY
1
The Council will continue to monitor buses deployed on its own contracted services to ensure that they conform to the standards laid down in its Conditions of Contract.
2
Bus passenger accidents will continue to be analysed and any change in trends identified.
The data in Table 24 will be extended on an annual basis.
Campaign to Promote Improved Safety for Elderly People in Buses
TARGET GROUP
People of retirement age who travel on buses.
ACCIDENT DATA
Total casualties in this age group are 16 or 9% above the 1981–85 baseline figure of 167 casualties.
Table 26 shows that in 1991 injuries to elderly people accounted for 50.3% of all bus passenger injuries whereas for the rest of Scotland the figure was 43.4%.
For 1989 the equivalent percentages were 52.5% and 44.8% respectively.
BACKGROUND
The 1991 Plan highlighted casualties among elderly bus passengers in Lothian as an area of special concern.
The figures recorded for 1991 show a decrease of 42 in casualties in this group.
The 1991 figure is some 9% higher than the average for years 1981–85.
This is compared with the 1990 figure which was some 35% higher.
This reduction is in part explained by the ending of free travel in Lothian for elderly and disabled people in September 1991 and the introduction of a subsidised flat-rate scheme instead.
Trips made under the Region's Concessionary Travel Scheme decreased by 13% to 38 million between 1990/91 and 1991/92.
The latter part of 1992 will see the development of a ‘Steady as You Go’ campaign aimed at elderly bus users.
It is intended that this be jointly developed by the Council, the Police and the Region's bus operators.
The campaign will aim at increasing elderly passengers' assertiveness and heightening their own and others' awareness of their vulnerabilities.
This message will be communicated through a range of distinctively designed leaflets and posters.
As part of this initiative, it is planned — with the co-operation of bus operators — to issue guidance notes to all bus drivers of local services.
These highlight the special needs of elderly and frail passengers.
This effort has been strengthened by Police input into driver training schools operated by both major Lothian based bus companies.
ACTION
The campaign will be publicly launched, its effectiveness will be monitored and the continuing need for future publicity initiatives assessed.
Sponsorship will be sought for future initiatives.
POTENTIAL BENEFITS
Elderly people are likely to exercise better judgement whilst using buses and to become more assertive in conveying their intentions to drivers.
Bus drivers should become more aware of vulnerable persons' needs.
Together, it is believed, that by the year 2000 these initiatives could generate a 5% reduction in casualties in this category.
MONITORING STRATEGY
Any effect on the number of casualties in this category is likely to be detectable only in the longer term.
Such effect will be monitored by extending Table 25 on an annual basis.
The number of trips made under the Concessionary Travel Scheme will continue to be monitored and the relationship with the number of recorded casualties to elderly people studied.
Analysis of accidents involving bus passengers in future years will be undertaken.
This will allow before and after studies of accidents to be made, this enabling the success rate of remedial actions developing out of the accident analysis to be measured.
Speed Enforcement
DRIVER ATTITUDES TO SPEED AND SPEEDING
The main findings of the Scottish Office report ‘Driver Attitudes to Speed’ include a number of conclusions which are of relevance to local authorities:
there was general consensus among Scottish drivers that current speed limits are set at about the right level.
speeding violations were the most frequently reported violations committed by drivers.
For example, over 80% admit to having driven at 40mph in a 30mph zone with about 30% admitting that they do so at least ‘quite often’.
⅓ of drivers questioned believed that most accidents happen on Motorways.
This reinforced findings reported elsewhere that Motorways are wrongly but widely thought to be the most dangerous type of road.
fewer than half the drivers questioned gave the correct answers of 70mph and 60mph when asked what the UK speed limits are for dual and single carriageway roads.
of drivers who reported never speeding, 8% had been stopped by the police; this rose to 62% for those drivers who admitted to speeding regularly.
These conclusions are generalisations based on all responses but there are, however, a number of marked variations which depend principally on age, sex, years of driving experience, type of licence held and miles driven per year.
There were also some significant regional variations.
A picture develops:
drivers respect speed limits in theory but not in practice.
drivers don't seem to be fully aware of what the legal speed limits are and which roads are the most dangerous.
police enforcement does seem to be successful in targeting drivers who speed regularly.
TARGET GROUP
Drivers of all ages.
ACCIDENT DATA
It is not possible to determine from raw data just how many accidents were directly attributable to excessive speed.
Research, however, does indicate that driver error is a factor in about 60% of all injury accidents.
It is further estimated that in the majority of such accidents speed is a contributory factor.
The severity of injury incurred by pedestrians is related to the speed of vehicles whether or not driver error was involved.
BACKGROUND
The first Plan identified the need to achieve a long term strategy for speed enforcement and to commission a study to determine such a strategy involving enforcement activities, new technology and publicity.
Towards the end of 1991 the Scottish Office commissioned a major national study of driver attitudes to speed.
Following an agreement by the Council to meet the marginal cost of additional interviews, the Scottish Office enhanced the sample size for Lothian and agreed that the data would be made available for local use.
A brief has been prepared and proposals have been invited from consultants with acknowledged expertise in the road safety field.
ACTION
Review the recommendations of the consultant's report.
POTENTIAL BENEFITS
The potential benefits of achieving a long term reduction in excessive vehicle speeds are considerable.
A 1% target reduction in casualties has been set initially but this will be reviewed as part of the project.
MONITORING STRATEGY
A monitoring strategy will be developed as part of the project.
Alcohol and Road Accidents
In-depth research indicates that  alcohol is a contributory factor in 10% of all accidents in Britain, deaths arising from excess alcohol accidents are more frequent that deaths arising from other acts of violence, such as homicide or acts of terrorism.
Government statistics indicate that during 1988, there were around 850 fatalities and 20,000 casualties in accidents where a driver was over the legal blood alcohol limit (80mg/100ml).
Other estimates suggest that casualties in accidents where the driver is over the limit could be in excess of 35,000 annually.
IT IS ESTIMATED THAT EVERY YEAR:
1 in 4 driver/rider fatalities have blood alcohol levels exceeding the legal limits.
High alcohol levels are present in one third of adult pedestrian deaths.
1 in 3 riders and drivers killed between the ages of 20 and 39 are over the legal limit.
During peak period ‘drink/drive’ hours, nearly 1 in 3 of all drivers and riders breathalysed after an accident exceed the legal limit
95% of drivers/riders over the legal limit are male.
78% are skilled/semi-skilled manual workers or unemployed.
70% of accidents to drink/drivers occur within three miles of the start of their journey.
Among excess alcohol offenders, 10% are learner drivers or riders and 11% drive whilst disqualified or have no driving licence.
For most people accident risk becomes significantly worse at BACs of 60mg/100ml (relative to zero alcohol).
At 80mg/100ml this accident risk doubles and by 150mg/100ml the risk is tenfold.
For inexperienced drivers and for infrequent drinkers the sharp increase occurs at a much lower level.
TARGET GROUP
Drivers of all ages.
ACCIDENT DATA
Drink driving continues to appear as a factor in road accidents in Lothian and featured in 366 accidents in 1990, 17% of these resulting in injury.
In 1991, 363 accidents involved drivers affected by alcohol with 23% of these resulting in injury.
Pedestrians under the influence of alcohol also feature but the true extent of this is not know.
BACKGROUND
Driving under the influence of alcohol, although the subject of campaigning for over 20 years, continues to be of concern particularly in regard to young drivers and a hard-core of drinkers.
A number of changes to the law affecting drink driving came into force in July 1992 when penalties increased substantially involving prison sentences, unlimited fines, extensions to disqualifications and more severe penalties for hit and run drivers.
Disqualified drivers can now be required to resit tests of longer duration.
These moves are clear indications of a ‘hard-hitting’ approach to the problem.
ACTION
Police in Lothian will continue their policy to test all drivers involved in accidents and moving traffic offences in a determined effort to discourage drink driving.
Support will be given to all Department of Transport and Scottish Road Safety Campaign initiatives in this connection.
The Police, Department of Highways and Lothian Health Board will study in detail and report on the true incidence of drink related road accidents by assessing police and hospital records.
This report will recommend on any new local initiatives which could add to existing efforts in reducing drink related road accidents.
POTENTIAL BENEFITS
It is believed that intensive enforcement of drink driving legislation acts as a highly effective preventive measure and that the scope for further casualty reductions in drink related accidents is 10%.
MONITORING STRATEGY
Data will continue to be collated and analysed by the police on a monthly basis.
Accident Investigation and Prevention (AIP)
TARGET GROUP
All road users will benefit from local safety schemes (LSS) and other action plans through the identification of accident clusters which are susceptible to AIP procedures.
ACCIDENT DATA
There are locations on the road network where engineering works can bring about reductions in road accidents.
To obtain the best value for money, accident data are analysed to identify sites where the number of accidents appear to be high.
These sites for concern are investigated and where cost-effective remedial measures are identified they are included in the works programme.
The Secretary of State for Scotland is responsible for trunk roads and the Regional Council undertakes work on trunk road LSS's as agent.
The distribution of accidents in constantly changing and the list of sites for concern is updated on a regular basis.
The process of identifying these sites has been enhanced by the introduction of the new GIS for road accidents by the Director of Highways.
Last year 17 schemes were completed on the local network with a further 5 on trunk roads (Table 27).
At present there are 28 schemes in the course of construction or design, 3 of which are trunk road schemes (Table 28).
BACKGROUND
The first Plan identified a target of a 6.5% reduction in casualties by the year 2000.
This means a sustained ‘compound’ reduction of 35 casualties per year from this work.
For statistical reasons and because of the ever changing pattern of pedestrian and vehicular movement at treated sites and elsewhere the first Plan argued for an annual ‘gross’ target reduction of 60 casualties.
Because there is often more than one casualty involved in an accident, it is estimated that this casualty target can be achieved by reducing the number of accidents by about 50.
Table 29 summarises before and after information for completed schemes and it can be seen that this target is being achieved with a total estimated reduction of 52 accidents for local road schemes with a further reduction of 16 on trunk roads.
ACTION
Maintain the programme of expenditure on local safety schemes and other action plans and ensure their implementation by according the highest priority to this work.
POTENTIAL BENEFITS
Research indicates that low cost accident remedial measures are one of the most effective ways of achieving sustained casualty reductions.
Because of this the government sees this work as providing the largest single contribution to its casualty reduction target for the year 2000.
The Council recognises this and seeks a 6.5% reduction target for that year.
MONITORING STRATEGY
Continue to undertake before and after studies at treated sites.
Pedestrian Safety
MOBILITY AND ACCIDENT RISK
The more people travel the more they expose themselves to the risk of an accident.
Making travel safer will not necessarily reduce the number of casualties if there is a disproportionate increase in the amount of travel.
Reducing the amount of travel, however, without a change in accident risk will reduce the number of casualties.
Much of the work undertaken by local authorities seeks to improve personal mobility particularly in the provision of pedestrian facilities but also in encouraging cycle use and through the concessionary fares scheme for elderly and disabled people on public transport services.
There are clearly road safety implications associated with these issues.
For example, until recently Lothian was the only Region in Scotland with a concessionary fare scheme for elderly and disabled people which provided unlimited free travel on public transport.
The scheme generated a significant number of additional bus trips which gave rise to the highest proportion of elderly bus passenger casualties of all Scottish local authorities.
There is no suggestion that passengers are or were more at risk on buses in Lothian than elsewhere: the level of casualties was simply the result of more bus trips being made.
The evidence is that when free concessionary travel was withdrawn fewer trips were made and there were fewer elderly bus passenger casualties.
Road safety policies should not seek to limit mobility.
They should be seen as complementary contributions to the wider management of our transport, environmental and social objectives.
TARGET GROUP
All pedestrian casualties.
ACCIDENT DATA
It is evident from Table 27 that over the most recent two years — 1990 and 1991 — there were 2,147 pedestrian casualties of which more than one in four (26%) were killed or seriously injured.
For all other road users this ratio falls to about one in seven (15%).
Two in five elderly people involved in accidents are killed or sustain serious injury.
The majority of children and elderly people who are killed or seriously injured on Lothian's roads are pedestrians.
Clearly people, particularly children and the elderly, are vulnerable when on foot.
BACKGROUND
It is Council policy to introduce measures to enhance the safety of pedestrians.
In recent years this has been brought into sharp focus with growing public concern for a healthier and safer environment.
Recent changes in legislation have made it easier for local authorities to promote traffic calming schemes and a significant programme for their provision has been approved by the Regional Council.
A recent major study of traffic problems in the Edinburgh area recognised road safety as a major factor for consideration.
Its recommendations include strategies which if implemented would reduce the level of accidents generally throughout the city and, in particular, in the city centre where there is a concentration of accidents involving pedestrian injury.
The Council has an aggressive approach to the promotion of pedestrian safety through many of its works programmes particularly in the areas of Pelican Crossing, refuse island and dropped kerb provision.
In addition, new initiatives associated with action points arising from the first Road Safety Plan will have a significant bearing on pedestrian safety.
These include low cost remedial measures (AIP), Safe Travel to School and speed enforcement which are dealt with in separate sections of this Plan.
In recent years Lothian has been the lead authority in introducing a number of novel facilities specially designed for people with mobility problems.
These include the ‘Talking Pelican’ and ‘Key Crossing’facilities which have proved themselves to be successful.
In recognising the safety and accessibility needs of pedestrians the Council has nominated a Pedestrian Liaison Officer who has a specific responsibility to provide an interface with groups representing pedestrian interests to allow their views to be highlighted.
It has, however, to be recognised that improved safety and greater mobility and accessibility can be conflicting goals (see opposite).
ACTION
1
Maintain existing levels of expenditure on existing road safety programmes which include:
a
Pelican crossings, refuges and guardrails, pedestrianisation schemes and urban studies implementation.
b
special facilities for vulnerable groups including ‘Talking Pelican’ and ‘Key Crossing’and dropped kerb facilities.
2
Promote a programme of traffic calming and other schemes in areas where pedestrian casualties are prevalent.
POTENTIAL BENEFITS
It is anticipated that the benefits obtained from these actions will reduce the number of pedestrian casualties by 5%.
MONITORING STRATEGY
Continue to monitor the performance of engineering solutions to determine their effectiveness and to promote continuing improvements to the pedestrian facilities provided.
Safe Travel to School
TARGET GROUP
Children on journeys to and from school.
ACCIDENT DATA
Over recent years there have been on average over 100 children per year injured in accidents whilst on journeys to or from school (see Table 28).
One in four of these children is killed or seriously injured.
Of particular interest is the age distribution of the children and it is evident that 12 and 13 year olds are most at risk and this coincides with their transfer from primary to secondary school.
BACKGROUND
The Regional Council approved a new item in the Capital Budget for 1992/93 and successive years specifically to promote a programme of works targeted at reducing the incidence of injuries to children whilst on journeys to and from school.
Accident and school roll data have been analysed to identify those schools which have high casualty rates per head of school roll.
The accident records at these schools have been examined in considerable detail by the Departments of Highways and Education and the Police and four areas have been highlighted for further action and detailed investigation.
These action areas are:
The relevant schools have been approached and it is intended to co-ordinate engineering, education and enforcement activities.
When these activities have been agreed it is hoped to prepare information notes for the school, pupils and parents.
A first note would outline the agreed improvements and a second note would be issued upon completion of the works.
In this way it is believed the benefits of the measures will be maximised.
This is a new project and it is hoped new ideas may emerge to heighten road safety awareness.
ACTION
1
Continue the detailed investigation of the four action areas identified and implement the agreed improvements.
2
Update the analysis of accident and school roll data to generate new action areas for future year programmes.
POTENTIAL BENEFITS
It is believed that the benefits will go beyond what might be expected from a ‘low profile’ introduction of engineering measures.
Involving the Department of Education and the schools in the process will introduce a wider awareness of road safety in the school.
In addition, other road users may benefit from the measures as may children on ‘non-school’ days.
It is believed that the initiatives could generate a 15% reduction in journey to/from school casualties by the year 2000 and that an equivalent reduction of other casualties will be achieved.
This would result in an overall reduction of 30 casualties.
MONITORING STRATEGY
The benefits associated with the action areas will be evaluated and reported individually and in aggregate.
In this way, the effectiveness of the initiative can be reviewed.
In addition, the data in Table 28 will be extended on an annual basis.
Urban Road Safety Project
TARGET GROUP
People who live in the Greater Pilton Area and in other areas of Lothian designated as being eligible for Urban Aid.
ACCIDENT DATA
Detailed research on road accident data for Edinburgh has shown that casualties per head of population in designated areas occur at rates considerably above the average for Lothian.
Furthermore, it is clear from the accident records that the casualty rate is higher in each age group.
These refer to victims of road accidents occurring throughout Lothian and not necessarily in the eligible areas themselves.
The Greater Pilton area has particular problems relating to children and the elderly where the casualty rates per head of population are over twice those for Lothian Region as a whole (Table 29 refers).
These disparities are matters of concern.
Although it is anticipated that the initiatives contained in this Plan will have an overall effect in reducing accident casualties across the whole community, it is unlikely that there will be any significant shifts in the disparities between the casualty rates for people living in eligible areas and elsewhere.
BACKGROUND
Although the link between social deprivation and road accident casualty rates has been known for some time, the scale of the problem has not been assessed either nationally or locally.
The Scottish Officer in its Urban Programme (Urban Aid) makes grants available for projects which address aspects of disadvantage in areas which are designated as multiply deprived.
As part of the work associated with the preparation of the first Road Safety Plan, an analysis of road accident data was carried out on a number of areas eligible for Urban Aid grant.
This analysis identified particular problems of disadvantage in the Pilton area.
In November 1991 the Regional Council submitted the Urban Aid application in respect of an Urban Safety Road Project to be based in the Greater Pilton Area.
The objective stated in the application was to reduce the accident rate per head of population for Pilton half way towards the average rate for Edinburgh.
The Scottish Office refused the application ‘as low priority in the national competition for grant funds’.
The Council considers this to be an important issue which should be pursued with vigour.
ACTION
1
Submit a further application for grant.
2
Assess the scale of the problem in other eligible areas.
3
Review strategies to tackle this problem.
POTENTIAL BENEFITS
Reduce the incidence of casualties to people living in Pilton by 30 per year with a further reduction in other designated areas of 15 casualties.
MONITORING STRATEGY
Undertake detailed analysis of accident data on a regular basis of accidents involving residents of Greater Pilton area and in other designated areas.
Change in Emphasis in Works Programming to Benefit Road Safety
TARGET GROUP
All road users.
ACCIDENT DATA
The initiatives identified in this section relate to all road users.
BACKGROUND
The first Plan identified the need to re-examine programmes for all categories of schemes to ensure that those which produce casualty reductions are given appropriate priority.
The Roads and Transport Capital Budget for 1992/93 has included a new heading for Road Lighting: Road Safety.
Pedestrian Safety is now a separate section.
ACTION
Continue to re-examine programmes for all categories of schemes to ensure that those which produce casualty reductions are given appropriate priority.
Particular attention will be given to ensuring that schemes promoted under the Roads and Transport Capital Budget block allocations for Road Safety will be given priorities associated with their contribution to road safety.
Develop improved accident analysis techniques to maximise benefits from the new Capital Budget heading for Road Lighting: Road Safety.
POTENTIAL BENEFITS
It is anticipated that the benefits obtained from this action will reduce the number of casualties by 1.5% by the year 2000.
MONITORING STRATEGY
Review and report on the proportion of schemes included in works programmes which have casualty reduction as the primary objective.
major issues
Transportation Planning
TARGET GROUP
All road users.
ACCIDENT DATA
The initiatives identified in this section relate to all road users.
BACKGROUND
The first Plan identified a number of initiatives and the following progress has been made:
1
Safety Audit: the safety audit procedures are under continuous review and improvements have been implemented.
2
Quality Assurance: a number of activities in the Department of Highways have been quality assured in the past year.
Quality assurance for further activities is planned.
3
Sign Maintenance: emergency procedures for sign replacement are fully operational through Inroads (the Council's Direct Labour Organisation for roads).
The potential for formal contracts in this area is currently being examined.
4
Development Control: development control procedures have been reinforced to ensure that developer contributions to the provision of road safety improvements required as a result of development are actively pursued.
5
Safe Travel to School: the 1992/93 Roads and Transport Capital Budget includes a new item for a programme of works to improve safety for children on journeys to/from school and this is now dealt with in a separate section of the Plan.
In recent years development pressures in Edinburgh have led to traffic and transport problems.
In recognition of this, in 1990, Lothian Regional Council, The Scottish Office and Edinburgh District Council commissioned The MVA Consultancy to undertake a Joint Authorities Transportation and Environmental Study (JATES).
The main objectives were to develop a balanced transport policy framework within which future decisions on transport policy and investment could be made.
The study focused on strategic issues which included safety and personal security in the use of the transport system.
JATES recommended some short term measures including bus priority and associated environmental traffic management in residential areas to protect the environment and improve safety.
A phased package of integrated measures —‘GREENWAYS’— has been approved by the Council and the Capital Plan includes financial provision for their implementation over the next 5 years and beyond.
The ‘GREENWAYS’ proposals will address road safety issues dealing, in particular, with the needs of pedestrians on the main roads and with the introduction of traffic calming and other measures in residential streets next to main roads to reduce the amount of ‘rat-running’traffic and reduce vehicle speeds.
ACTION
1
Ensure that road safety issues form a major input to the quality assurance process
2
Safety audit procedures will continue to be reviewed
3
Implement the ‘GREENWAYS’ initiative.
POTENTIAL BENEFITS
It is believed an overall reduction of 2% can be achieved by the year 2000 as a result of these actions.
MONITORING STRATEGY
Review the progress on the actions detailed.
Data Collection and Analysis
TARGET GROUP
All age groups.
ACCIDENT DATA
This initiative relates to the raw accident, road network and traffic information itself.
BACKGROUND
The first Plan identified the need to up-grade the Lothian Road Accident Statistics System (LORASS).
It also reported that the Regional Council was looking into the possible benefits of introducing a Geographical Information System (GIS) as a corporate resource and that road accident statistics was one of the pilot study areas.
This was seen as a sensible up-grade path for LORASS.
The GIS pilot is now fully operational and is providing improved retrieval and analysis facilities.
The specification for the wider up-grade of LORASS is currently in hand.
The data requirements for all relevant Regional Council departments have been sought and are being incorporated into the specification where feasible.
As part of this process computer hardware requirements at Police Headquarters to assist with enforcement policy and personnel will be reviewed.
The effectiveness of a GIS in assisting policy and investment decision-making is related to the accuracy of the accident data it is analysing and this is especially true for particular initiatives including Safe Travel to School and AIP work.
To maintain the high level of accuracy required, a video of the uses of accident data may prove to be valuable in reassuring police officers that their efforts in collecting so many details about each accident really do help to prevent accidents.
ACTION
The specification for the up-grade of LORASS to be finalised for implementation subject to budgetary considerations.
Report on review of computer hardware requirements at Police Headquarters.
Report on the potential of a short video to demonstrate the importance of accuracy in collecting road accident information.
POTENTIAL BENEFITS
A fully comprehensive, flexible and accurate database will improve the quality of analysis, lead to more informed decision making and assist in the identification of new target groups to influence the development of new Plans.
It is anticipated that significant improvements to LORASS could improve road safety planning to the extent of achieving a 1% reduction in casualties by the year 2000.
MONITORING STRATEGY
Review the development of the LORASS up-grade.
Promotion and Sponsorship
TARGET GROUP
The general public, Lothian's business community, public sector bodies, the media and press.
BACKGROUND
The Lothian Road Safety Campaign was launched in February 1992.
The theme is the slogan ‘When you will ever learn…’(based on a line from the folk lament ‘Where have all the flowers gone?’) together with a potent image.
This theme runs through every form of advertising, press and publicity material and forms a powerful message intended to lodge into the community's sub-consciousness.
Sponsors are offered a number of benefits including promotion of brand names at events and on publicity material, access to key sectors of Lothian's population, and exposure on TV and radio campaigns.
Promotional packs have been sent to over 100 organisations and a number of discussions have taken place with interested parties.
ACTION
To maintain and raise the profile of the Lothian Road Safety Campaign through the media, information leaflets, billboard advertising, bus advertising, articles in specialist publications etc.
To follow up initial discussions with interested parties and to arrange a number of presentations.
To set up a Publicity Sub Group to support the Steering Group.
POTENTIAL BENEFITS
Increase and maintain awareness of the road safety issues throughout the Region and across all sectors of the populations.
Generate additional funding and resources for the road safety initiatives contained in the Road Safety Plan.
Summary of the Plan
The Plan presents a set of initiatives which it hoped will contribute to the achievement of a one third reduction in casualties in Lothian by the year 2000.
Tables 30 and 31 summarise the reduction targets.
In particular:
the ‘Safe Travel to School’ initiative is now in progress
an increasing number of buses now include additional passenger safety features
proposals have been invited from consultants for the Speed Enforcement Planning Project
the programme of AIP works is delivering the target casualty reductions
the new GIS based data analysis system is operational
there will be a review of the drink driving problem as it relates to Lothian
A summary of the actions are listed in the Action Plan on page 45.
RESIDENTIAL OR NURSING HOME CARE — INFORMATION FOR PROVIDERS
The Social Work Department has a long tradition of working in collaboration with other service providers.
We aim to continue and develop this approach as we take on new responsibilities for arranging residential and nursing home care.
We seek to establish effective partnerships based on a shared commitment to good standards and quality services, and an effective use of resources.
Understandably there are considerable anxieties about the changes heralded by the National Health Service and Community Care Act.
As far as the Department's new responsibilities for the purchase of residential and nursing home care are concerned, we are mindful of the need to proceed cautiously.
The Care Gap, ie the difference between costs and charges where it exists, has the potential to be a black hole into which the Local Authority's limited resources disappear.
The Department needs to understand and analyse the scale and extent of the problem before effecting action to address it.
CHOICE
The Department will make residential placements only in residential or nursing homes registered with Lothian Regional Council Social Work Department, with Lothian Health Board, or with any other Local Authority or Health Board in Scotland, or a Local Authority or Health Authority in England and Wales; within the parameters on assessment, cost and availability of places set out in the Government's Statutory Direction on Choice of Residential Accommodation, the Department is in principle prepared to purchase a residential service in any such home.
‘SPOT’ PURCHASE
At least for the first year (1st April 1993–31st March 1994), the vast majority of residential care places in voluntary and private sector residential and nursing homes, and registered supported accommodation, will be purchased on an individual place-by-place basis for each user.
The Department has previously contributed towards the cost of some such places in the voluntary sector by paying supplementation on a per capita basis to top up the amount available from the higher rate of Income Support; or by payment of a block grant for the service.
We have negotiated, or in the process of negotiating, service agreements with some organisations which provide high-cost domestic scale units for people with profound/multiple handicaps; in addition special arrangements have been made to secure emergency accommodation for people who are vulnerable and homeless.
A further sum is added to these supplements for placement in a nursing home; and, where appropriate, a single room premium.
THE CONTRACT
A Service Agreement for the purchase of an individual place in residential or nursing home care has been drawn up in discussion with a ‘reference group’ of voluntary and private sector providers.
It consists of 2 parts: the service specification, and contract conditions, plus appendices.
The service specification describes the service to be provided in general terms, and is based on the standards/registration requirements for residential/nursing home care.
It will be supplemented by the Care Plan for the individual service user, to be discussed and agreed with the provider and attached as an appendix.
The contract conditions set out standard obligations and requirements which apply to the purchaser, the provider, or both; and details of the method for invoicing and payment which will be used.
A financial schedule showing the detail of the gross price and the net contribution to be paid by each party forms an appendix.
A notable feature of Lothian's Service Agreement is the deposit to be paid at the start of a placement, providing an agreement has been reached to enable net payment by the Department of the ‘care element’.
The deposit system has been devised in response to strong representations made by both voluntary and private sector providers on the importance of maintaining a pattern of cash flow as similar as possible to current arrangements.
A copy of the Service Agreement is available from the Department on request.
You will appreciate that it may be subject to redrafting in the light of experience.
Meetings with the Reference Group of local providers will continue periodically to allow Lothian's purchasing arrangements to be reviewed; in addition we are pleased to receive feedback at any time.
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION ON LOTHIAN SOCIAL WORK'S PURCHASING ARRANGEMENTS, PLEASE CONTACT:
Where a block grant has been paid in the past, the Department will continue to do so unless or until an alternative arrangement is reached with the provider, and undertakes to pay for new individual placements from 1st April 1993 at not less than the DSS rate.
In all cases other than those described above, individual placements will be arranged within the pricing framework outlined below.
PRICING FRAMEWORK
In determining the prices which it will pay for residential care, Lothian Regional Council Social Work Committee has been guided by the following broad tenets:
That any pricing system adopted recognises the budgetary context as indicated both by the size of DSS transfer and placement rates for 1993/94 but also the inflationary pressures inherent in the adoption of explicit ceilings to which prices may converge.
The concept of differentiated costs as one which must necessarily emerge from services driven by the assessment of individual need.
The dynamic of any pricing systems or ceilings in adjusting or creating the range of care services needed to meet assessed need, together with the importance of client need and social work values being reflected in purchasing strategy.
The need to maintain simplicity in any pricing system, that does not distort but helps articulate the assessment process.
That the criteria and financial parameters can be related to those of in-house provision, acknowledging that a ‘mixed’ economy of service provision is an increasing reality — particularly in relation to the provision of residential care services.
That the financial parameters adopted can be related to or inform the levels of payments for services that will support alternative arrangements for some individuals assessed as requiring residential care services.
The pricing arrangements link the assessed needs of individuals to defined levels of care by applying a pricing framework which anchors the costs of care for those with minimal levels of dependency to the rates which are paid by the DSS.
The model then allows the addition of supplements to the base figures reflecting the assessed needs of individuals as defined in three key areas:
mobility
mental impairment
personal care.
MOVING INTO RESIDENTIAL OR NURSING HOME CARE — MONEY MATTERS
Community Care is about helping people to live as independently as possible in their own homes or in other accommodation in the community, which might mean moving into a residential or nursing home.
An assessment will be carried out by someone who will try to find out what kind of needs you have and what services would best meet those needs.
If you are assessed as needing residential or nursing home care, your means will also be assessed and you will be advised of the contribution you must make towards the cost of your care.
Social Work staff will tell you about the homes that are available and, if you wish, will help you choose which home is best for you.
Your choice will be very important.
Normally, care will be arranged where costs can be met from the fees which the Department will pay.
You may choose to go into a more expensive home, providing it meets your assessed needs and you and your family or friends (or a charity or trust) can meet the difference between the fee provided by the Department and the cost of the home.
Here is some information about the financial questions which many people ask when they are thinking about a move into a residential or nursing home.
It applies to homes for elderly people and homes for people with disabilities, mental health or addiction problems.
It is not possible to deal with every detail in the space of this leaflet, but we hope it provides a basic outline.
Each individual will want to discuss their own particular circumstances.
WHAT WILL IT COST?
The cost of staying in a residential or nursing home varies.
You will be asked to contribute to the cost whether your stay is temporary or permanent.
The exact cost you will pay depends on your income, your savings and your capital (including the value of your house).
If you cannot meet the full cost you will still be able to move into a residential or nursing home because we can help.
If you are eligible for financial help, we will tell you how much we will pay and make sure you know how much you will pay, before you move.
You should ask for advice about costs and payments.
Your solicitor will be able to advice you on financial matters, and the local Social Work Centre or Hospital Social Worker can also help.
(Addresses on the back of this leaflet.)
HOW MUCH WILL I HAVE TO PAY?
If you have a pension and state benefits but no savings or capital worth more than £3000, then you will pay part of your pension and probably all of your benefits towards the cost.
Everyone retains a personal allowance of at least £12.65 per week.
If you have savings or capital over £3000 but less than £8000 we will ask you to pay, in addition to your pension and state benefits, £1 per week for every £250 above £3000.
If you have savings or capital, including the value of your house, of more than £8000 you will have to pay the full costs of the nursing or residential home.
Example:
If you have savings of £5,000, we would ignore the first £3000 and work out the additional payment on the remaining £2000 at £1 for every £250 which would give an additional weekly payment of £8.
WHAT HAPPENS TO MY HOME?
If you are moving permanently into a residential or nursing home the sale proceeds or market value of any property you own will be included in the calculation of the amount you need to pay.
However, if your stay in residential care is temporary and you firmly intend to return to live in your home, the value of your property will not be taken into account.
The Department may make allowances for other expenses which you may have for the upkeep of the property.
If your spouse continues to live in the house, its value is not included.
If someone else is living in your home, for example someone who has been caring for you, this may also mean the value is not taken into account.
WILL I HAVE TO SELL MY HOME?
You will not be asked to sell your house if you do not wish to do so.
However, if you do not sell it and you do not have enough income to pay the weekly charge, we would have to come to an agreement with you on how to overcome the difficulty.
If the house is rented or occupied by relatives other than your spouse or carer the rent they pay you could contribute towards any share of the costs you are required to pay.
Your solicitor could help with any necessary arrangements for dealing with any residual costs.
The Department is required by law to calculate your charge taking the value of your house into account.
Any unpaid accounts may be dealt with by levying a charge on your property to be claimed when the house is sold or changes hands.
HOW WILL I PAY THE BILL FOR THE RESIDENTIAL/NURSING HOME?
Before moving you will be asked to agree how you will pay your share to the home.
Each home has its own procedure for this and will discuss it with you fully.
Once you have agreed, this will be written into a contract which you will be required to sign.
Never sign anything until you are completely satisfied with every detail.
If in doubt, always ask for help from a solicitor, social worker or some other professional you know and trust.
You may wish to retain your pension or allowance book and continue to draw your own money.
If you wish, you may authorise someone to be your agent to draw your pension or allowance and pay your charge for you.
WHAT MONEY WILL I HAVE LEFT TO SPEND?
A certain amount of your pension or allowance is yours to buy personal items like clothes, shoes and toiletries.
The exact amount is decided by Parliament and usually revised each year to take account of the rise in prices.
WHAT IF MY FINANCIAL CIRCUMSTANCES CHANGE?
If your capital or income goes up you may be required to contribute a greater share of the costs of your care.
If your capital or income reduces you will be required to pay less.
If you have chosen to live in a home that is more expensive that the Department would normally pay and your circumstances change, or the people or the organisation helping to fund your care can no longer help, we will need to reassess your needs.
If you need a long term home we will help you to find somewhere where the costs can be met by the Department.
There will be an annual review of your financial circumstances which will give you a chance to look ahead and anticipate any changes which might be necessary to your care arrangements.
MAKING GIFTS
The law does not allow you to give away substantial sums of money, for example to a relative or a charity, prior to coming into care in order to pay a lower charge for your accommodation.
Once we have worked out with you how much you will pay towards your care, the Department has the right to continue to base this on the amount of money you had at the time of your assessment.
Should you wish to give away substantial sums of money which will reduce your savings you should notify the Department.
You will, of course, be free to give small gifts (eg family presents, gifts to charities etc) from your capital or income, bearing in mind the costs of your care.
INSURANCE
Before going into a residential or nursing home it is sensible to consider giving any valuables not in everyday use to a close relative or friend for safekeeping.
You may want to bring some of your personal possessions with you and you will need to make your own arrangements for insuring them.
This is because it is not possible for the home to consider claims for loss, theft or damage to personal belongings.
More details about this should be obtained from your social worker or manager of your care home.
It is safer not to keep large amounts of cash in your possession because of the risk of loss.
If you do not already have a bank account you are advised to open one.
MAKING A WILL
A Will is a commonsense and legal way to ensure that any possessions you have are given to the people you wish to pass them on to.
Without a Will, this may not happen.
If you wish, again your social worker or manager of your care home will advise you about finding a solicitor to help you with this.
Your Will should be lodged with your bank or solicitor for safekeeping.
FUNERAL ARRANGEMENTS
This is something everybody has to think about at some time and, if you have any special wishes, it is better to let others know.
You could write them down and give them to your next of kin or a close friend.
For , you may have reserved ground for burial, or you may wish to be cremated, or to have a very simple funeral.The Department may make basic funeral arrangements for anyone who is a client at the time of death if there is no other responsible person to make the arrangements or insufficient personal funds to provide for a funeral.
These are all important issues which need to be clearly understood and decided upon.
Your relatives, friends, social worker and/or solicitor will do all they can to help you understand and complete the formalities.
Having made the necessary arrangements you will be able to relax, feel settled and secure, receiving any necessary care in a manner that respects your right to choice, privacy and dignity.
We hope you will enjoy the warmth and fellowship you will find with other residents of your own age and interests.
NB These new arrangements apply only to those people coming into residential or nursing homes after April 1 1993.
Lothian Community Care Plan 1992–1995
Summary
About this booklet
This booklet is going to every household in Lothian.
It is a summary of Lothian's newly published Community Care Plan and tells you how we hope to develop our services for people in Lothian Region over the next three years.
What is community care?
Community care is support for people who need help to cope with life as independently as possible, either in their own homes or in other accommodation in the community.
Our 300 page Community Care Plan has been prepared by Lothian Regional Council's Department of Social Work in conjunction with Lothian Health Board, and the eight other Joint Planning Partners.
It sets out the ways we intend to support various groups of people in the community and their carers.
The groups are:
Elderly People and Dementia;
People with Physical Disabilities;
People with Learning Disabilities;
People with Mental Health Problems;
People with Alcohol Related Problems;
People with Drug Problems;
People with HIV or AIDS.
How it came about
An Act of Parliament in 1990 changed the way community care is to be organised in Britain, placing the responsibility on local authorities to take the lead in planning and developing community care services in their area, in partnership with other organisations and consumers.
A Community Care Plan will be produced every year.
From 1993, the Regional Council and everyone else involved must also make sure that people who want to use community care services are dealt with promptly and their needs skilfully assessed.
For some people, personal care plans will be drawn up.
Planning for change
Good planning will mean better community care in Lothian.
Out services can be improved and extended so that care at home becomes a real option for more people.
We cannot do this overnight, but it can be achieved with gradual development over a number of years.
Some of the changes can be achieved by improving existing services and arrangements but a major expansion in community services will be needed to make community car a reality for everyone who needs it.
To help fund the changes there will be extra money from Central Government but the exact amount is not yet known.
There may be difficult decisions to take about which new services should be funded first and how best to run them.
In Lothian, community care continues to be a partnership with the people who need help, their carers and ourselves.
So we will be working to provide better services geared to people's needs.
We want to open up lines of communication and provide more information so that people know what is available, tell us when they are pleased with the services and, equally, let us know when they are not.
The Plan stresses that point and also underlines the need to make sure that minority ethnic groups are catered for.
Living in the community
Most people who need community care prefer to live in their own homes with practical help for themselves and their carers when it is needed.
This approach to care can only be successful with the help of a wide range of support services.
If life at home becomes impossible, well-run alternative accommodation where individual privacy and dignity are respected is preferred.
A basic principal of the Community Care Plan is that care at home should support an acceptable quality of life for each person and for their carers.
This means, for example, that we will not discharge anyone from hospital before community services are ready to help.
Developments in community care services will run alongside any reductions in the level of long-stay care in residential and nursing homes and hospitals for all groups of people.
What will change?
The Plan proposes many changes.
Some of the main ones are:
Publicising clear standards for all community care services.
Good information on services.
Practical help available when needed, including at weekends, evenings and public holidays if necessary.
Additional ‘adaptations’ to houses and public buildings.
Additional home alarm services.
Improved arrangements for assessing individual needs.
An emphasis on partnership with users and carers.
Someone to speak up for the person or their carer as an ‘advocate’.
Improved co-ordination of all caring services.
Better access to educational, leisure and recreational facilities for all people with special needs.
Better developed services for people from minority ethnic groups.
Considerable expansion in respite services which offer breaks.
Additional physiotherapy, occupational and speech therapy services.
Improved specialist transport services for people with disabilities or special needs.
Improved access to public transport for the majority of people with community care needs.
A continuing emphasis on good quality residential, nursing home and hospital care.
A better deal for carers
Most support for people who cannot manage daily living without help comes from families, friends and neighbours rather than from the various formal services.
The Plan recognises that carers are the heart of community care and proposes:
Full acknowledgement of their contribution to community care.
Practical help, opportunities for a break and other support services tailored to their individual circumstances.
Recognition of carers' own personal needs.
Better information on benefits and services available as well as on how to cope with the particular condition of the person cared for.
Making an assessment
From April 1993 the Department of Social Work must ensure that people who wish to use community care services, get a prompt and skilled assessment of their needs.
Users' and carers' views must be taken into account and, where appropriate, the views of other professionals involved must also be considered.
For people who need a lot of support from different sources, a personal care plan will be developed.
This will state clearly what services are to be provided, who is doing what and when, and who is to co-ordinate the plan.
The emphasis will be on meeting people's needs flexibly.
Before April 1993 detailed information on how this will work, including how and when services will be charged for, will be produced for the public.
Residential and nursing home places
In April 1993 the Department of Social Work will also take on new duties for funding some private and voluntary residential and nursing home places.
Until then, people eligible for help with these fees can get this from the DSS.
After April 1993, for new applicants, these funds transfer to the Department of Social Work.
The minority ethnic groups
During 1992–95, with representatives of the different minority ethnic groups in Lothian, we will develop:
Better information for people from minority ethnic groups.
Better links for planning purposes.
Training programmes for staff in the main services.
Services which reflect particular cultural and language needs.
Information is vital
Good information is essential if people are to make informed choices about services.
During 1992–95 we will:
Develop and publish free, easy-to-read information about community care services.
Make this widely available in Lothian, using libraries, health centres, GP surgeries, social work offices, advice centres, housing offices and community centres.
If things go wrong
Complaints procedures are needed to deal with situations where people are unhappy with the service they receive.
Their views will be heard, decisions can be questioned and mistakes, if any, put right.
Lothian's Department of Social Work and Lothian Health Board have complaints procedures.
All voluntary agencies funded by the Department of Social Work must also now operate a complaints procedure.
Plans for different groups
The Plan sets out the action proposed for each of the main groups it covers.
The examples below are a selection to illustrate the types of changes envisaged over the three year period up to 1995.
Services for elderly people and people with dementia
Extend short term crisis support at home to East and West Lothian and set up an alarm scheme for frail elderly people in Midlothian.
Review day centre availability across Lothian.
Develop special care facilities for people with dementia in residential and nursing homes and day centres.
Ensure that all long-stay care is run well and increase single room accommodation.
Services for people with physical disabilities
Help people stay in their own homes through better availability of equipment and services.
Develop co-ordinated day-time care.
Improve the opportunities for people with physical disabilities to control their own lives.
Support relatives and friends who care for people with physical disabilities.
Services for people with learning disabilities
Develop more supported accommodation in ordinary houses and in hostels and reduce the number of places in long-stay hospitals.
Expand day-time services and offer a wider, more flexible, range of daycare, further education, training and supported employment opportunities.
Ensure that children and young people with learning disabilities have a smoother transition into adulthood and adult service networks.
Develop more day and accommodation services for the extra needs of people with severe learning disabilities and multiple handicaps.
Services for people with mental health problems
Ensure that there is adequate community care available for everyone who comes out of a psychiatric hospital after a stay of six months or more.
Fully involve users and where appropriate carers in this planning.
Name a contact person who can help and advise after discharge.
Introduce out-of-hours crisis support services for people with mental health problems.
Develop a wider range of daytime community support services.
Services for people with alcohol related problems
Provide opportunities for detoxification in the community and a range of residential rehabilitation and recovery services.
Provide early help to reduce long term social and family problems.
Provide good information and local help paying special attention to the needs of women and children.
Develop prevention and education strategies to reduce drinking above the recommended limits.
Services for people with drug problems
Improve information on assessment and counselling for people using prescribed or illegal drugs or solvents.
Extend needle and syringe exchange facilities and local health care services and set up a specialist drug clinic.
Develop more residential places where people can be treated for their addiction, or can receive crisis or longer term help.
Reduce the incidence of drug misuse through strategies aimed particularly at young people.
Services for people with HIV or AIDS
Improve information, advice services and facilities for people who wish to be tested for HIV.
Provide help for families to stay together and to continue to care for their children at home.
Provide respite and terminal care for people with AIDS and more ‘supported’ accommodation.
Continue to develop health education campaigns and programmes to reduce the spread of HIV infection.
Examples of how community care works
Here are just a few fictional examples of how people's quality of life could be improved by community care services:
Mrs A, 84, lives alone.
After a recent stroke she now needs help with shopping and heavy housework.
Physiotherapy at the local day hospital has helped her towards recovery.
She is keen to recover her interests and needs regular community care services to achieve a good quality of life at home.
Ms B, 32, has two young children and is lonely living on a large housing estate.
She became depressed and saw her GP.
She now attends a drop-in centre which has a crèche and where she is learning to cope with stress.
She is much better and plans to help to run a mother and toddler group at the centre.
Mr C, 57, who has multiple sclerosis now uses a wheelchair.
With special equipment and a home help he is independent at home.
He cannot work but wants interesting things to do in the day time.
Accessible transport and accessible public buildings are essential.
Mr D, 31, has a severe learning disability and other handicaps.
He needs extra care at the day centre and special transport; his family need a home help to help care for him and planned respite breaks throughout the year.
Mrs E, 47, dependent on tranquillisers, wants to come off medication but fears her original problems may occur.
A drug specialist service works out a withdrawal programme with her GP who introduces her to a support group and individual counselling.
Mr F, 35 has an alcohol problem and his wife, 32, has supported him through many difficult periods.
He gets treatment from the specialist alcohol treatment centre and they both attend family counselling meetings.
An alcohol problems voluntary agency helps Mrs F who has become involved in a family self-help group.
Mr and Mrs G, 29 and 27, are ill with HIV and go into hospital regularly for short periods.
They need help to care for their three children, and medical support for themselves.
Their support services include a home help, voluntary agencies, a district nurse, social worker and their GP.
Mr H, 66, has dementia.
His wife cares for him at home but this is very demanding and she finds that she needs regular breaks.
The community care and health services work together to give her husband day hospital care, planned breaks in a residential home and sitter services at home.
Your views
Many people have been involved in preparing the Community Care Plan.
Now we want you to add your views to future Plans, whether or not you are directly affected by the proposals.
We will be updating the Plan in the autumn and would appreciate your comments by 7 September 1992.
However, comments received after this will also be welcome and will be used for later reviews.
Please write to us with your views and comments on the Plan at:.
Finally
The Plan has the approval and backing of all the Joint Planning Partners, who are:.
If you want to study the Community Care Plan in detail, then you will find a full version in public libraries, Department of Social Work Offices, main District Council offices, Lothian Health Board premises, Citizens Advice Bureaux and Councils of Social Service.
We have also produced separate leaflets for each of the groups of people.
These give more detailed information and are available at Public Libraries, Department of Social Work offices, your local Health Centre or GP Surgery or from the Department of Social Work Headquarters, telephone — during office hours —.
The information in the leaflets and in this booklet is also available in Braille, on tape and in minority ethnic languages.
Community care planning in this new form presents better opportunities for better services and for more people in need to be looked after in their own homes.
We hope that the Community Care plan will ensure that services develop in line with the wishes and the needs of the people in Lothian.
Thank you for reading this booklet.
We hope you have found it useful and informative