

19/3/93 
Hi Lynn!
Thanks a lot for sending the tickets for the launch…
I'll definitely be through, all being well and hopefully James is going to manage too…
Probably arrive about 7-ish, if that's OK.
Hope all's going well!
Looking forward to seeing you.
love Angela
22/3/93 
Mon 22nd March '93.
Dear Amanda,
Hope this lot is of some use to you — the  essay was probably the best part of this dissertation (well I think so!) so I hope it's a help.
Also enclosed essay by  and a page of notes/reading list etc.
Hope to see you soon — I'll be coming through for Janet's and Nick's leaving ceilidh on the Renfrew Ferry on the 2nd, so will maybe see you there?
I hope so!
If not, give me a phone sometime, and let me know if you're coming through at all.
Good Luck with the work, and take care!
lots of love,
Angela
4-5-93 
Ray, Elaine, Laura
You owe me £19.50 each for the electricity bill.
Thanks
Michelle
day unknown April 93 
John — £10 both sides
29/3/93 
Buy CDs — Automatic for the People — R.E.M.
Great Expectations — Tasmin Archer
Various 
Date
10-2-93
11-2-93
13/2–93
16-2-93
18-2-93
23-2-93
24-2-93
25-2-93
1-3-93
2-3-93
3-3-93
5-3-93
6-3-93
8-3-93
9-3-93
11-3-93
12-3-93
20-3-93
4-4-93
7-4-93
12-4-93
13-4-93
Description
Ashley — coffee 7.30ish
Debbie — Tea.
phone
Sail dance — College of Art
Denise — Team 6.00 pm
 Lynn's — engagement
Debbie — Tea
Avril — Tea
Pictures to see Ballroom Dancing
Horseriding
Hairdressers — 5.15 pm
Angela/Georgia — dinner
Meet Avril after work —
Elaine's birthday — surprise party.
Out with Ashley — Sheraton.
Alasdair's leaving day.
Out with Debbie at Jill's.
Preservation Hall — banda.
Book Squash — Linda Sat/Sun afternoon.
Mum +  Dad's anniversary.
 Mum's birthday
Angela/Tracy's birthday
 Avril's birthday
20/5/93 
Toothpaste/Brush
Hair Brush
Headbands
Passport/tickets
Underwear
Jumper/Cardigan
Shoes
Make-up
Spot cream
Coffee
Tapes/tape recorder
Crisps
Hankies
Travellers Cheques
Jewellery
Swim Suits
Handbag
18/5/93 
Tues 18 May ‘93
Dear Douglas
A quick note with your mail — sorry about the delay in getting this lot off to you!
I've also enclosed the receipt for the advert in the paper — I hope you'll be able to get reimbursed OK.
Well, I had a good weekend.
We had yesterday off, so James and I went to the Modern Art Gallery, then to the Cameo to see Indochine , which was really brilliant.
He's away back to Biggar now, but he'll be back up on Friday as we've been invited round to Ingalo's for tea — Hazel's going as well, so it should be a good laugh.
It was lovely to speak to Mark last week, I hope he comes through to see me soon.
James saw G P when he was up in Glasgow last week — he seems to have had a brilliant trip, and spent most of his time in Chile.
It'd be good to see him too!
Ron will be back tonight, so we'll probably go out for a couple of pints.
Hopefully he'll have calmed down a bit!
I'm sure he's going to be fine, but I think I'll have to make it clear that I did actually have a life before he came along, and I don't particularly want to do everything with him!
But I think he's genuinely a nice guy underneath it all, so I'm not really worried about it.
It's just such a relief to have found someone!
I really miss you about the place though, Doug.
I hope you'll be up soon — we must arrange to get you down to the cottage, it would be a hoot.
James and I frequently say things like ‘IT'S ABSURD!!’, or ‘IT CERTAINLY IS!’, so you're still with us in spirit!
I hope you're getting on OK down there, and aren't too lonely.
Phone me up any time!
Do keep in touch, Doug, you're one of my favourite people, you know, despite the fact that you're completely MAD!
Anyway, better do some work.
I think you should phone  this week — he should get Rob's deposit this week, so you should certainly arrange with him to get your's back.
He'll be in the office this week, so you should give him a call.
Right!
See you!
Lots of love
Angie
13/5/93 
13 May 1993
Dear Sir/Madam,
I enclose a cheque for £34 as payment for the outstanding balance on my last instalment of the Community Charge.
I also enclose a bill you sent to the previous tenant of this flat, for whom I have no forwarding address.
Yours faithfully,
May 93 
Dear Math
Here's a nice letter at last about the second this year I think which isn't bad going!
Ta very mooch again for the book & tape (which I'm listening to just now & it's fab.)
Have got today (Monday 17th) off ( yippee !) but haven't done much — slightly hungover from last night, I went to see Tex Mex with Ruth & Euan & some of their friends, the food was great, & so today had a long lie in then went to a few shops…which weren't open because it's an Edinburgh holiday…
Hummm.
I think I told you all my news on the phone on Saturday.
Hope your wee flat, bicycle, mouse etc, are fine.
I've forgotten when you said you're going to Ottawa but if that's really soon & I don't hear from you before then, have a great time, I hope the meetings are short & the pints are big!
Must go & eat…
Take lots of care, & I'll phone sometime soon
Lots of love
Hazel
22/4/93 
22/4/93
Dear Sir/Madam
I would be most grateful if you could arrange the standing order as attached on my account, to take effect from 1 May 1993 until further notice.
Also, would it be possible to have my cheque books, which at present are in the counterfoil format, in the smaller format from now on?
Thank you very much.
Yours faithfully
13/4/93 
Tues 13 April
Hello Douglas.
This certainly is a beautiful place.
Climbed a very high hill today called An Teallach and am just starting to recover now.
It was wonderful !
Don't want to ever come back; can you phone Chambers and tell them I've perished on a mountain, and then I can change my identity, and disguise myself as one of the locals and no-one will be any the wiser.
love Ange
It certainly was a good day today what with climbing the mountain and having my tea cooked or me.
We are fit as two fiddles in a ceilidh bank with all this exercise and will no doubt have to pick fights with Big  to keep in trim on our return.
See ya.
James
12/5/92 
Tues 12th May
So, two days on the road and here I am sitting in the sun in a café opposite the , having just eaten and drunk the compulsory croque-monsieur and hot chocolate.
Lasting impressions so far: the sun (miraculously) shining on the slopes of Dalwhinnie, far in the north, on the first leg of the journey; stumbling across Drew from the World Cup holiday in a motorway café somewhere in England in the middle of the night; breakfast and mineral water with Claire (oh, it was good to see her) in an Italian cafe near London Victoria; people throwing up all over the joint on the Seacat crossing to Boulogne (and me staggering about, legs way out of control, on the deck, getting soaked by the spray, saltwater taste in the mouth, and a rainbow arcing on top of the water behind the catamaran); complaining English and American tourist (‘It's ridiculous that we have to go through customs —why do we have to go through customs anyway ?…); terrible fatigue on the train to Paris, and temperamental French men shouting and swearing at each other in the aisle; relief at finding Angela's flat in Paris; difficult negotiation of the very narrow stairwell, finally finding her way at the top on the 6th floor; food, and wine, and a shower, and a bed-settee for the night; Japanese tourists at Notre Dame, and a man announcing his state of poverty and homelessness on the Métro —‘‘.
And then, when no-one even blinked an eye, nor have him any money, nor (surprisingly enough) the offer of a job…‘‘; the stifling heat in the Métro tunnels, as if it were about to explode at any moment, and this uplifting sense of drifting, passing through whole areas of life scarcely touching on any of them.
And anonymity — just another tourist with a rucksack, unimportant in the scheme of things, an observer, not a participator.
2.15 pm
First financial balls-up of the holiday.
Remained blissfully unaware till I was seated on this train to Lausanne that reservations and supplements were OBLIGATOIRE on all TGV trains, so I had to fork out about £12 as a result.
From now on, I will read by Europe by Train book and Thomas Cook timetable religiously before going anywhere!
What a diddy — and I just lit up a roll-up in a no-smoking carriage, but the woman opposite was kind enough to point this out to me, saving me further financial embarrassment and financial loss…now I know why tourists are regarded as idiots the world over, it's because they are.
Have decided to make quite an easy day of it, and stay at the Youth Hostel in Lausanne tonight.
Tomorrow will be a different matter though, trying to get down to Perugia before the hostel shuts.
Still, one day at a time seems to be about all I am capable of dealing with at the moment, so I won't make too many big plans…!
10pm
In bed in hostel in Lausanne — had a most restful evening, didn't have any tea apart from some crisps and an apple, and sat down by Lac Leman for a couple of hours or so, taking in the evening sun and reading  's book.
What wonderful stories, and what a beautiful setting to read them in: the French Alps stretching out behind me, and a gentle ripple on the lake in front, with sudden appearances by swans, and jealous mallards.
Been talking to a few folk, a nice woman from New Zealand, and some Glasgow lads, and an incredibly chatty pseudo-zealot from California.
Stops me going off my head, anyway!
Early rise tomorrow, to make the 8.09 train for Milano.
Hope I wake up!
14/4/93 
Collected the photos about an hour ago.
This batch I am sending you are for keeps, if you can find a place for them!
I already have a set.
I shall write properly very soon, but thought this would keep you amused between army reports in the meantime.
Lots of love
J.
15/3/93 
Flight details
Bruss-Jo'burg SN553 arriving Sunday 0515 (early morning) at Jo'burg
15/4/93 
15/4/93
Dear Tim, Polly, Josh & William,
Thought I'd drop you a line now that things are almost back to normal here.
We had a good flight home with excellent connection times, which made it less exhausting than the journey to Jo'burg.
In fact, there was only one hitch.
As we arrived at the departure lounge to board the flight from Brussels to Edinburgh, I dropped one of the duty free bags on my foot.
Unfortunately, it contained a bottle of Van der Hum — a present from Norman to Mike's dad!
Apart from the embarrassment of being watched by the entire lounge, I was also in agony and consequently limped out of customs to greet my mum.
To cut a long story short, it wasn't until Wednesday that I could fit my shoes for the wedding, which was Thursday!
It all worked out in the end and everything went as planned.
Mike came up on Wednesday night after virtually no sleep since leaving my house on Monday at 3.30 am.
He had had to go out on exercise one night, and was on duty another, poor thing.
Anyway, he is fully recovered now and is at his parents for a couple of days before beginning a four week course in London.
I hope you are all well and getting plenty of sleep.
I don't think so somehow!
I imaging Josh would be a little confused the day after we left, wondering when the ‘big children’ went!
I've got some super snaps of you all which I shall send on to your mum, Billy.
I also have a bag belonging to her.
Well, I shall sign off now.
Many thanks for having us, we thoroughly enjoyed staying with you.
I hope your car has recovered from its long journeys.
Keep in touch, hope to see you all sometime, if not in Africa, in Britain.
Take care,
lots of love,
Judy
16/4/93 
16 April ‘93
Dear Mike,
It's 8:15 on Friday morning, and I am writing this letter in Chambers' car park.
Unfortunately the doors aren't open 'til 9 am because the person who normally opens up is off.
The reason I'm here now is because of the train strike which is extremely annoying.
I hope they don't call another in a fortnight, but it wouldn't surprise me in the least.
I don't know your views on strikes, but I am totally against this one.
They are not going to gain anything, in fact quite the reverse, it will probably mean more of them will go sooner!
I have to say that each morning when I walk off platform 16, I invariably see five or six BR employees hanging around doing nothing in particular.
You certainly wouldn't get off with that in any normal company.
Anyway, now that I have vented my fury, I shall continue this letter.
I got two sets of photos back yesterday.
One from Christmas which included the regiment panto (I'd forgotten about them) and Gatehouse.
The other set of course were the wedding.
They've turned out very well and I have brought some in to show the girls at work.
They asked to see some.
I opened a national investment account at the P.O. yesterday with £35, so your money as promised has been used wisely!
I plan to add my halifax money to it, which is a start.
I now also have a little in, out, balance book, so as you can see, ‘I never do things’ by halves!
We'll see how long I can keep it up.
I wrote to Tim & Polly yesterday but I can't lay my hands on The Barbarton exploration Base address.
Do you have a note of it somewhere?
I intend also to drop a line to Norman too.
Anyway, not much news to report.
The house is gradually getting back to normal.
The only thing we await are the official photos, which may be ready this week-end.
Anyway, I imagine you are just about ready for your course — pencils sharpened & bag packed.
I'm looking forward to visiting you in London — two treats rolled into one!
Well I shall sign off now & see if I can get in the office.
Give my love to your Mum & Dad & Gran if you see her.
Bye for now.
lots of love
Judy
17/3/93 
memo
to Me
from Me
date
Things to remember for S.Africa
Passport (+ copy)
international Driving licence
tickets
money
travellers cheques
confirmation of Nat.
Park
Map
Letter from U. Norman
Camera
Sunglasses
18/3/93 
Accessories
brown belt
scrunches
headbands
espadrilles
red shoes
deck shoes
black shoes (?)
Monsoon earrings
Silver earrings
Clothes
Swimming costume
Monsoon dress
Black dress
Flared trousers + top
navy linen trousers
navy jacket
Spotted shorts
Linen white shirt
blue belt
Toiletries
Avon skin so soft
Things from Boots
medication (malaria tablets)
toothpaste
soap
perfume
nivea
cotton wool
lip salve
face wipes
hair dryer
adaptor
brush
bath bag
25/3/93 
25 March
Dear All,
I am writing this PC in the sizzling heat on the verandah of our thatched hut.
Today began with an early morning (05:30) game drive, not many animals to be seen — impala, kudu, giraffe, rhino etc.
The first two taste very good on the braai also!
We have another couple of nights here then it's off to Durban via Swaziland.
Judy
Mar/April 93 
1 April 1993
Dear 
First of all, let me say
Happy Birthday!
— I hope you have a wonderful day.
I'm sorry to have missed you at St Thomas' during the last training session.
I would like to have heard how your groups are developing and hopefully growing, and how you liked living in Paisley.
Christopher is going into hospital soon for a hip operation and will be spending approximately 2 months in plaster up to his chest.
On a more cheerful note however, his brother Paul has asked me to be his Sponsor for Confirmation next month — so I'm quite proud about that!
Anne and I went to an information last week held by the Archbishop.
Liz came to her first CPS on Saturday since Christmas.
She was beginning to miss SPRED even although she and Gerry have kept in touch with Mary and Clare.
However she has decided not to attended the integrated sessions until after her baby is born — sometime at the end of June.
She really is so excited!
The ceilidh dance we held — way back in February — was a huge success and we raised just over £450 in profit.
More importantly however, everyone enjoyed themselves — I do wish you could have come along.
However — bowing to public demand — we hope to host another dance in October/November so you're being given ample warning.
Hope to see you again soon.
With love
30 March 93
Dear Anne
Hope this note finds you all well.
Thank you for inviting me to the information evening last week at St Thomas'.
I came across these two booklets on confirmation and wondered if they would be of interest to either you or Paul.
Please give my love to Christopher — will speak to you soon.
Louise
25.3.93 
25th March 1993
Dear 
Further to your letter of 18.3.93, I enclose some correspondence from my previous addresses'
1.
For 32 Knight Street, Sawbridgeworth Herts
Vehicle Licence Application Form
Letter from the National Westminster Bank
Cover note from Bowring Bradford insurance brokers
2.
For 68 Sakins Croft Harlow Essex
Bank statement for National Westminster Bank
3.
For 81 The Chantry Harlow Essex
Photocopy of Credit Agreement
I hope that those pieces of correspondence supplied for the last 2 addresses are acceptable.
I'm afraid that this is all I could find.
Yours sincerely
31.3.93 
31st March 1993
Dear 
With reference to your letter of 26th March requesting a copy of my driving licence.
Unfortunately my driving licence has an old address on so I am sending you a copy of my vehicle registration form which does include my present address.
Yours sincerely
29.3.93 
Birthday card — Julia
Letter/phone — Hannah
TSB
Phone Yvonne
Battery for watch
22 March 93 
Attention of 
Company 
From 
Date 22 March.
No of Pages (Incl this page) 1
Fax No 
Dear Janet
Sorry I wasn't in yesterday when you phoned:
was meant to phone me back this morning when she'd talked to her boss, but hasn't, and I don't know her work no. to chase her, but will let you know as soon as I hear!
She sounded keen on both, though.
says yes please to both — her address is WINDSOR
I haven't heard from Tasha again, though I have left several messages.
Sorry not to have complete info!
Melanie
15 March 1993 
15 March ‘93
Dear Heather,
Now I have concrete proof against any argument you might put forward concerning not being a beautiful bride, if you see what I mean!
Hope all's going well.
Janet has the 27th well in hand — I can't wait.
Do let me know if you want us to get a taxi from King's X — or send us keys so we don't wake you up?!(12.23 yawn…)
Please excuse scrawl.
Lots of love to big bruv, and to you
Mel
P.S. Re reading.
How about Hosea Chapt 2, 16–23 (may need a sentence or two of introduction explanation though)?
20 MARCH 93 
20th March 93
P.S. some of these photos are ghastly do chuck em!
PPS I think your Mahia address is the only one I have can I have the other again?
Also need Sid's number for dancing lessons please!
Dearest Jeanette
How time flies especially when one is meant to be writing lots of letters.
Are you happy?
Satisfied?
Employed?
Sun-tanned?
Missing rainy, wintry old Edinburgh?
Having lots of fun with your family?
Getting clucky over Damian?—How's life ?
I spoke to Kevin on the phone yesterday but sadly he has chosen this weekend to go home to Dunsteld, when Mark & I are here at Drumstinchall.
It was really good to see him in London last month; I think he was a bit mystified by the church we went to, but it was good of him to come with me!
I think I've been up and down to the Big Smoke more times since Christmas than I have in the past two years — and the jaunt next weekend — at long last Mark & I have managed to use a Boots free train ticket voucher — two of us for £45.55 — Baaargain!
The occasion is another dress fitting on Saturday followed by Heather's ‘hen party’, which is organized by a very efficient journalist friend of hers in London, with a little help from me.
We're going to see a musical called ‘Crazy for You’ which has had exceptionally good reviews, then a separate room in a restaurant has been booked — a sort of glorified Pizza Express so, thankfully, not to expensive (for Central London anyway).
It's bad enough having to take out a loan to get married, I sometimes wonder if I need to do the same as a bridesmaid!
Sunday is unplanned as yet.
Recovery time, I suppose.
Roland's stag night was planned the same Saturday but after a week the best man realized that he was going to be skiing then! oops.
It's Dad's birthday today and he and Mum have gone on a ‘quiet day’ with Geoffrey (baaa) and about 13 others from the church.
In theory it's a lovely idea, a whole day just relaxing and listening to God etc, but actually Dad was rather ‘down’ this morning before they left — I think he was worried he'd have more of the Virgin Mary rammed down his throat, and, quite frankly, would rather be playing golf with Mark, or going for a gentle walk with all of us.
Mum asked me to ice his birthday cake while they were out and decorate it with chocolate leaves which I had to make first.
Most of them broke when I peeled the real leaf off the chocolate which I'd painted on — not quite up to Mum's standards of patience and perfection, but who ever saw lots of perfect leaves (not on a tree) anyway.
Mark and I have just been for a walk beyond Dalseattie, which was nice until the mist came down and began to make us rather damp.
On our way home we tried to find a Mothers Day card for Mark to send to his Mum, but I think all the Dalseattie shops must have the same supplier and sell those ghastly pink-ish cards with really crass ditties inside ugh.
He decided to phone her instead!
Sorry for all this blabbing I can't think of much of great interest to tell you.
Oh yes, my curtains have arrived — Heather just got them finished before going to Australia, and I put them up last week.
I'm so pleased with them — thank you for your advice, they are a great success, and the room now ‘just’ needs a coat of paint/wallpaper and a decent bookcase…but I doubt they'll happen very soon due to my finances £18.66 to last 7 days oh dear oh dear!
I've put the white & green curtains in your room instead of the beige ones — a great improvement.
Rosie was going to move in with me April–July as Mark has found a room in a really nice flat in St Stephens Street (nr. ) from April, but she phoned last week to say she + Jonathan have bought a wee flat already!
She gets almost immediate entry and so will live there on her own until J moves in.
Presumably wedding presents will form the basis of their ‘equipment’, but I don't think Rosie minds roughing it for a while.
It's J's birthday on April 2nd & they are having a party (at last!) so I'll catch up on the news then — they are v. seldom at Gayfield St these days, so I never see them.
I do rather enjoy having the flat to myself, despite a constant battle with my clutter!
Mum has been to stay, on an epic wedding outfit hunt last Saturday, and it was nice to give her a room.
I think Mum, Dad, Roland and Heather are coming over Easter which I hope will be fun.
I really wanted to go to ‘Ps + Gs’ at Easter for a change, plus I've been asked to help with communion in the evening.
I hope it'll be a nice break for Mum and Dad too.
Burble, burble, burble — I do miss you, Jeanette, often at the oddest times — like when ‘preparing’ the washing up or using your bubble bath.
Hope all's well with you, and your family.
Please give my bestest wishes to them, and to Shelley and Robert if you see them.
And have a very very happy birthday, birthday bear.
Lots of love
Mel
Feb/Mar 93 
Dear Laura,
I hope you are well, we're all fine.
Are you enjoying school?
(BIT OF A SILLY QUESTION — WHO DOES!)
My mum enjoyed her stay with you.
Find enclosed the member's card for the Cool cats club and two newsletters! hope you enjoy reading!
I have joined a drama group called Open stage we are performing Bugsy Malone in August it's great fun!
Did you raise money for Comic relief?
I raised £7.41.
I had a great time.
Me and my best bud Emma did a sponsored-eating-jelly-with-chopsticks-in-half-an-hour-athon!!
A new girl called Laura is in my class she has a real cockney accent and she's  hilarious !
Are you watching Coronation St?
I think it has a great story line, I hate Carmel!
Bye!
Love
Corinne
Dear Jennifer,
I hope we're still writing.
I raised £7.41 for comic relief by eating jelly with chopsticks.
Did you do anything?
I have enclosed CCC newsletter two, I hope you enjoy reading!
Recently I joined a drama group — I may have said.
Its really great — we sing dance and read off scripts!
*When is your birthday?
*Have you brothers or sister?
Love
Dear Dannii + Candi,
How are you?
I am great.
I hope you already have newsletter 1 and still want to be in the CCC.
I enclose newsletter 2.
How's the weather down under?
Its snowing here.
Can you send me a recent photo of you, pweeese!
I have recently joined a drama group called Open Stage!
We are going to perform Bugsy Malone in August — its cool!
Yesterday I won the first competition, I've ever won in my life!
I won a recipe book!
Better go it's half 11!
Love from
Corinne!
Dear Sian + Anna,
I hope you're well we're great — just getting over the horrible cold!
I did eat jelly with chopsticks — as I said!
But  unfortunately I was off school on March the  twelfth so I missed the party and everything.
I raised £7.41 what about you?
I enclosed CCC news 2 — I don't think you have it.
This was just a quick note.
CIAO — Corinne!
Dear Danny,
Gosh!
I  haven't written to you for ages have I?
I think you already have newsletter 1 and a mem. card so I've sent you newsletter 2.
I hope you still want to be in the CCC.
for comic relief I ate jelly with chopsticks and raised £7.41!
Did you do anything?
A few girls in my class did a sponsored spell and wore their pyjamas to school!
I have recently joined a drama group called Open stage.
I love it!
We're doing Bugsy Malone in August!
I won a competition the other day!
The first in my life!
I  won a cookery book!?!
Love Corinne
1981 Cockerel
Sometimes arrogant, sometimes humble.
Idealistic and  self-centred .
They tend to be loners who dream big dreams, but they are conscientious, hard working, clever and get up early — is this you?!
Dear Hayley,
Find the enclosed things for your and Jenna:–1 membership card each, 1 newsletter 1 each, 1 newsletter 2 each.
Were you born in 1981?
If so — that's the year of the Cockerel I enclosed a bit over the page about it.
It's just started to snow here and the snow is filled with ice cold rain its horrible!
I have joined a new drama club — Open Stage we're performing Bugsy Malone soon!
Love Corinne.
Mar/April 93 
Butchers
mince
stew
chops
s/pine
saus
bacon
steak
Ham
Carmal
chicken
ham??
Milk??
S/drms
S/Foam
Bathroom cleaner
Bleach
Freezer Bags
Mind  Chrissie's Birthday
Lows
Butter
Gold
Eggs
Cereals: S/Wheat C/Flakes
Tuna
Yoghurt
Cott cheese
B/Bread
Onions
Potatoes
Carrots
Apples
Oxos
Biscuits
S/Powder
W/Up
Beans
Spaghetti
Pasta
Very Low Fat Cream
Comfort
Sugar
Tea Bags
Store
Cheese
Fish
Chick Butcher Meat
Mince??
Soap??
Lentils
Ham + Chick Cubes
Fraser + Melanie
DENBY CHINA
IMPERIAL BLUE
CASSEROLE DISH
2.75 PINTS
£35
LEWIS'S
Principals — Outfit.
Thurs
Marlyn Morrison — Outfit.
Sat.
BHS
Baby gift
B/day — Chris
Tights
W LOWS
Gold
Butter
S/Powder (small)
Rolls
Eggs
Soups 3
Yoghurt
C/Cheese
Cigs
Elec Freez 830mm × 545 mm 600mm deep
Zanussi £170 Slim fridge 500 mm Freezer 550 240/410
Scotmid
Bread
Milk
Omega (dog)
Potatoes
Carrots
Deliver Saturday
Card for today
BMS/Mothercare
Baby Gift
Baby Card
Wrapping paper
Birthday card + Pressie for Chris.
Tights
Feb 93
CCC Newsletter 2 February 93
*Over the page we have some opinions from three people.
If you would like to express some views on a piece of paper, Please write it to your Scottish penpal!
*We only have two calendars left.
So, if you want a calendar get your forms in soon, please!
Sweets Recipe Sweets
You need
8 oz/227g icing sugar,
1 small egg white,
Peppermint flavouring,
Green food colouring.
1 Sieve the icing sugar into bowl
2.
Whisk the egg which and add a flew drops of flavouring & colouring.
3.
Add the egg white to the icing sugar and knead until the mixture is stiff and doughlike.
4.
Roll into small balls, flatten the tops, and leave to harden.
*You can also decorate by dipping half in chocolate.
Competitions
Let's face it!
The Cool Cats Club is a pretty childish name, eh!
So we've decided to have a competition.
Can you think of a new snappy name for our club?
If so please fill in the form at the bottom!
NAME FIND
BILLOYDANDREWALTERYSIMONEIL!
Prizes
Now that you've decided on our new club name send it off to —.
The prize is a book — Someone's Mother is Missing!
(BY HARRY MAZER).
Opinions + Hobbies
Thanks to everyone that wrote in!
I like swimming.
I take lessons twice a week, I really enjoy them.
I am good at breast stroke, butterfly and I like to practise handstands.
I go to Ainslie Park Leisure Centre which is near to where I live.
Laura, 12, Edinburgh.
I thought I would write and tell you my top 5 favourite names (girls).
5)
Jill.
4)
Claire.
3)
Amy.
2)
Sarah.
1)
Charlotte
Thank you,.
Jennifer, 9, Scotland.
I have written about a T.V series which I find appalling.
It's a home video show called * ‘You've been framed’.
The people that are in the audience laugh when they see animals that could have been made to do things — just for money.
People that send in the clips set up their jokes a lot too!
I think the series should be taken off the air.
Alice, 12, Edinburgh.
*For our Australian readers!
‘You've been Framed’ is a show where people that have filmed something funny on video sent it in and can win money if the audience thinks its very funny.