

COLLECTOR'S ISSUE OF THE ULTIMATE C64 MAG!
GET A LOAD OF THESE!
A 91% Sizzler!
A 79% smash!
A brilliant Breakout clone!
An astonishing adventure!
Plus two ripping reader games!
ACTION!
Every C64 film licence reviewed!
ALL THE LATEST FULL-PRICE AND BUDGET C64 GAMES PLAYED AND RATED!
A GOOD EGG!
First look at the brand new Dizzy caper!
WIN!
Bullseye board and computer games plus videos from Alternative Software!
STARSTUDDED PULL-OUT POSTER BY OLI FREY!
TOP TIPS FOR: THE DETECTIVE…
HUDSON HAWK…
POTSWORTH & CO…
THE COOL CROC TWINS…
AND BOBBY MOORE!
Contentz!
Wot's in!
LOADS!
Great games!
RECKLESS RUFUS
This brand newie from Alternative is a polished puzzler and no mistake!
FRANKENSTEIN
New boy James Price proves he's got his head screwed on, by reviewing this monster from Zeppelin.
BULLY'S SPORTING DARTS
The second Alternative offering this month is just super.
And smashing, lovely, marvellous, great…
PRINCE OF THE YOLKFOLK
This dastardly Dizzy adventure has only been available on compilation…until now!
Regularz!
Feature!
LEAD REVIEW
Call us feckless if you wish, but we reckon Reckless Rufus is game of the month!
CAMERA, LIGHTS, JOYSTICK AND…
ACTION!
We review every film licence ever licensed for the C64 — and there's reels of 'em!
COMPETITION
Bully for you!
Or there could be, if you're one of the lucky winners in our Bully's Sporting Darts comp!
FREE POSTER
An incredible Oli Frey original, expanded from the cover art-work especially for YOU!
tape worm
For plenty of natter from the segment shedder turn to page 6.
If Tapie was a fish he'd be stuffed to the gills this issue!
The segment-shedder sure has a whole lotta action up his metaphorical sleeves: just get a load of these great games!
SILKWORM — A Sizzler from Issue 49 blasts its way onto our Megatape!
NINJA WARRIORS — Decent beat-'em-ups are hard to find?
Not now they ain't!
HALLAX — First there was Breakout , then came Arkanoid — now play Hallax !
SHYMER — Curses!
This tricky adventure should have you burning the midnight oil…
BREAKDOWN — A pulse-pounding reader's game makes its Megatape debut!
FRENZY — Weird?
Certainly!
Easy?
No way!
Puzzle over the second of our two reader games!
Review index!
zzap! zone!
The ZZAP 64 zzone!
ZZOBITUARY
Welcome one and all to the last ever issue of ZZAP! 64 magazine.
Yes, it's true, you're holding the final chapter in a long-running saga that began way back in 1985.
Of course, it's come a long way since then — full colour on every page, two Megatapes each month.
In fact, if it weren't for the big blue logo and Oli Frey pic on the cover, there'd be little to indicate to an early reader that this was indeed the same mag!
So what are you going to do, now that your favourite C64 action mag has bitten the dust?
Well, hopefully, you'll buy COMMODORE FORCE instead!
COMMODORE WHAT ?, you ask.
Never heard of it!
That's because we haven't published it yet…
Yep, it's time to ring the changes.
Out with the old, in with the new, and all that.
The last ZZAP! readers survey has (finally) been collated, and the results speak for themselves: you really like the new improvements, but are hungry for more.
Okay, you got 'em!
But it was felt that if we were to incorporate everything you wanted, why not go the whole hog and re-launch the mag?
And that meant a name change…
So why COMMODORE FORCE ?
Well, to start with, it'll bring us in line with our three sister magazines; N-FORCE, SEGA FORCE and AMIGA FORCE.
Furthermore, we felt that the very name ZZAP! belonged to times gone by, and no longer imparted the right kind of message to potential readers.
Finally, we've wrought just so many major alterations to the basic ZZAP! structure that we felt gamesplayers who had become tired of the old formula ought to get the chance to see for themselves just what improvements have been made.
With the old logo on the cover, though, we figured that many people would only expect to find the old-style pages within.
So there you have it.
Naturally, not everyone is going to be as enthusiastic about the relaunch as we are (those who've been rubbing their hands together in anticipation of issue 100, for example).
To soften the blow, then, we're giving away a special 100-page C64 Tips Book with the first issue,as well as the two tapes (which'll feature the excellent Continental Circus AND Gemini Wing among others!), and all for the regular price of just £2.95!
You'd have to be a complete and utter grimboid to miss it…
Steve Shields (Editor)
ZZAP ZOO
We are the four horsemen, er, SIX horsemen of the Apocalypse, and we bring you…the final issue of ZZAP! 64.
We're already gearing-up to launch a brand-new(ish) C64 action magazine onto the market — COMMODORE FORCE — but in the meantime we're going to bow out gracefully by bringing you the ZZAP! er's guide to reincarnation.
What would you be…?
STEVE SHIELDS — Grim Reaper
Frankly, if I died and had to come back as anything I'd be pretty naffed off.
I'm only here for the beer in the first place and, the way I see it, if old skull-face came knocking on my door with his scythe at least  I could get my laughing gear around some of that celestial scrumpy!
Mind you, I s'pose I could always return as a newt…
PHIL KING — War
Reincarnation works!
Yes, I can now reveal that in a previous life I was the iceberg that sunk the Titanic.
Before that I was Henry VIII — it was great, apart from a bit of aggro with the wives.
I also caused quite a stir as Moby Dick, and pulled pints as the fat barman at the Dog & Duck in Stratford — well, they can't all be famous!
In my next incarnation, I'd like to be the Minister Of ‘Fun’, but with better taste in footy teams (and women!).
IAN OSBORNE — Famine
Decisions, decisions…
I could come back as Kylie Minogue's bra, but that would leave me seriously unfulfilled.
If I wanted to make it rich I'd be Private Eye's libel lawyer.
If I wanted an easy job I'd be Markie's hairdresser, or for a demanding career how about Corky's zit cream?
Nahh…what I'd really like to do is come back as the guy who shot Reagan a few years back, only I wouldn't miss!
MARK CASWELL — Pestilence
If ol' Desmond D knocked on my door I'd go out of this life the way I came in: kicking and screaming.
I don't personally believe in reincarnation, but knowing my luck I'd either come back as a pair of Ian's boxer shorts or an amoeba.
Ideally I'd like to return as the main ingredient used to make the suntan lotion Kim Basinger favours…work that one out for yourselves!
JAMES PRICE — Plague
Living is very important to me as I've been doing it for a fair few years now.
However, if death was unavoidable I would come back as Arthur Miller.
Not for the experience of being a successful playwright (he penned The Crucible among others), or for the trauma of being accused of being a communist in the ‘Reds under the beds’ witch-hunt of the 1950s.
No, my reasons are far more physical: His one-time wife was none other than Marilyn Monroe!
It's just a shame he was such an ugly old boiler, otherwise I'd be well away!
MARK KENDRICK — Himself!
I never intend to die but to carry on and live forever!
But if I ever got caught out with the big guy in the skull mask and the big axe thing then I'd probably ask to end up coming back as my son because he'd have my amazing charm, dazzling character, obscene talent (?— Ed), and  chiselled good looks!(and gift for talking utter bullshine!— Ed).
Failing that I'd settle for reincarnating as either Paul Raymond, Madonna's fingers, Phil's meat pie collection, Ian Osborne's dentist (not that he's ever been to see one, mind you!), a bar of soap in an all-girl boarding school or a big black cat named Thad!
So there!
And after designing 72 issues of Zzap! 64 I bid you all fond farewell and big hello to Commodore Force !
Tape Worm
Another pair of colon-ripping monster Megatapes this month!
And what a pair we've got — there's some excellent readers' games, a brilliant tribute  to the classic Arkanoid , a well-wild adventure, and two of the classiest arcade outings of all time!
Based on the cracking coin-op,Silkworm earned a ZZAP!
Sizzler in its day.
The equally brilliant Ninja Warriors (also a coin-op licence) scored a respectable 79%, though we're now beginning to think it was seriously underrated — it's not often you'll see a Shinobi -esque hack-'em-up with this much playability and character.
So what are you waiting for?
Load 'em up and play!
SILKWORM
Storm
Why do all coin-ops have such damned silly plots?
Silkworm 's set in a world overtaken by vast military consortia, dominated by evil generals and crackpot dictators with huge armies of equally mindless cannon fodder.
Did the whole world go mad overnight?
Not quite.
Two men retained their marbles, and as luck would have it they're both roughie-toughie types as well as military scientists — a cross between Albert Einstein and Action Man!
Armed with their newest inventions (a super-duper jeep and hi-tech helicopter) they vow to take on the forces of evil and blast their way to freedom — so get blasting!
Controls
Helicopter
Slap the joystick in port 2, and blast away!
Jeep
Trickier, this one — with your joystick in port 1, you can move forwards and backwards (left/right), but you can also execute a natty little leap by hitting ‘up’.
With the fire button depressed you can rotate your gun by moving the joystick right and left, giving 180° of blasting — make no mistake; yours is the trickier of the two craft.
Power-Ups
There are only two.
The ‘shots’ icon gives improved blasting power, and the thing that looks like a sergeant's stripe increases your military rank.
Get them by blasting the goose-neck helicopter that assembles itself before your very eyes!
HALLAX
Public Domain
Another PD extravaganza, this one's a variant of the famous Breakout game.
Controlling your craft couldn't be simpler — plug your joystick in port 2 and get going!
To release the ball, hit Fire, sending it powering towards the tiles.
Clear all the tiles to advance to the next level.
Like most Arkanoid ‘tributes’,Hallax features snappy power-ups.
Unlike most they're not hidden behind tiles, but fall at random.
They're not labelled either — it's up to you to discover which coloured circle makes the ball stick to your bat, which makes it split into three, etc.
Have fun!
NINJA WARRIORS
Storm
Many years ago, the young Bangler embarked on his political career — a good-natured and mild-mannered fellow, he soon gained the support of the electors and was voted into office.
Alas, power corrupts — Bangler quickly turned into a tyrant.
Gradually his motivations (like his methods) took a turn for the worse, and the idealistic young politician turned into a power-crazed monster.
Harnessing the support of corrupt officials in the army and police, he used local and national government as a springboard for his ultimate objective: presidency of the world!
Democracy crumbled.
A few brave citizens protested when Bangler refused to call free elections, but one by one they ‘disappeared’, leaving the evil politician with a free hand — until now!
A research scientist called Mulk got together a group of followers and created two robots, assassination machines designed to put an end to Bangler's reign of terror, once and for all…
Five zones must be penetrated on the road to Bangler's hide-out.
Armed only with flesh-rending knives and magic Shurikens, the droids have a real fight on their hands.
Controls
WHAT A TALENTED PERSON DONE ALL THIS!
THE CASE OF THE MIXED-UP SHYMER
Sandra Sharkey
What a day!
What a bloomin' awful day: and with Sherlock away too…
Oh sorry, you don't know me, do you?
I'm Shirley Coombs, personal secretary to the great Sherlock Holmes.
I was planning to finish work early today, get a haircut and maybe do some shopping.
Instead I'm marooned on a magical island with a knackered boat, a missing cat and a very sore bum!
It all started early this morning, when a rather anxious mum called in at the office.
‘I-I-Is Mr Holmes av-av-avail-av-is he at home?’ she stammered.
‘Something's happened on the Isle of Nu-Nu-Nursery, and it's ter-terrib-b-ter-not very nice!’
She stumbled on in this manner for some time before I talked her into accepting a chair and a cuppa.
‘Now take your time’, I offered, ‘and explain exactly what's happened’.
Apparently all the rhymes on Nursery Isle had become mixed, leaving the kiddies with no playground chants, no reading matter, no sing-alongs on afternoon TV, no nothing really.
The situation was desperate: Holmes was away on a case, and not expected back for some time.
Reluctantly, I hired a pea-green boat, and with my faithful Siamese cat (Doc Wat Son) I set sail for Nursery Isle.
But I reckoned without the storm…
So here I am, nursing a bruised bum, dented ego and the loss of a fair few possessions including dear old Wat Son!
I must find him before I sail home, and come to think of it I'll need to fix the boat too!
And then there's the rhymes that need fixing…
The Case Of The Mixed-Up Shymer will certainly be a tough one!
What Now?
Shymer is a GACed adventure by Adventure Probe founder Sandra Sharkey.
It accepts all the usual commands, but this time we're giving NO hints as to what they are — that's for you to discover!
An ideal adventure for beginners, this one should have you plugging away till the wee small hours of the morning.
If you're really stuck send an SAE to Shymer Solution .
This offer won't be affected by ZZAP! 's impending refit, but we're not sending them out until the end of November — every time we offer solutions, requests pour in the day after the mag hits the shelf.
That's not what adventuring is all about — if you don't intend giving it your best shot, why play it at all?
LOADING INSTRUCTIONS
Follow the loading instructions in your C64 manual.
Lost your manual?
No problem — hit Shift & Run/Stop, and press play on your datassette.
To find Ninja Warriors, turn your C64 off after Silkworm has loaded, write down the counter number for future reference, then hit Shift & Run/Stop, then Play again.
If you reach the later levels, you'll find 'em on Side Two of the cassette.
DODGY DUPLICATION?
If your Megatape won't perform, send it to:Ablex Audio Video Ltd .
Every month we get a few plonkers sending their tapes back to us.
What they don't seem to realise is that we don't keep spares in the office, so all we can do is send them on to Ablex anyway, so you'll have longer to wait.
Send it to Ablex, you know it makes sense!
BREAKDOWN
Fredrik Blom
Classified Data
Subject:
The breakdown disasters.
Date:
Sometime in the future.
Place:
Somewhere in the Terran empire.
Event:
Mass breakdown in nuclear reactors, sending guardian droids crazy.
Action:
Send for Commander Jones!
Jones knew it would be a difficult mission.
An alien terrorist organisation called Gamma 693 took the opportunity to inflict damage on the Terran empire, sending space mines and debris to prevent him reaching the afflicted planet.
Earth is highly dependent on off-planet reactors for its energy — if she's to survive, he'll have to blast his way to each of the eight planets in turn, land his craft and fight his way to the reactor.
Not easy with limited ammo!
Use joyport 2 to play.
Destroying a complete attack waves earns one of the following power-ups:
‘S’— Speed.
You can hold up to three.
‘P’— Fire power.
Again, increase to a maximum of three.
‘B’— Bonus score.
‘E’— Extra strength.
Contact with an enemy reduces your strength, so be careful.
Run out of ammo while on the ground and you'll have to resort to flying kicks.
When (or if — this game will tax the most blinding button-bashers) you reach the reactor, the screen changes to an overhead perspective.
Guide the flashing dot (you) to the control box marked ‘off’.
Be quick — this stage is played against the clock, and if the timer reaches zero you'll lose a hefty hunk of strength!
Breakdown must be one of the best reader's  games we've ever had.
If you think you could do as well, get cracking — if your game's anywhere near as bostin' as this one, you could find fame and fortune as a Commodore Force Megastar!
FRENZY
Ciarán Davies
Now here's a weird one!
The object of the game is to bring together similar shapes (triangles, squares, etc.) making them disappear — destroy all to reach the next level.
Catch a shape with your static arm by pressing Fire when near.
Hold Fire to keep the shape attached; release it to send it flying.
On early levels shapes are present in even numbers, but this is not the case later on.
To dispose of odd numbers, you'll need to…no, on second thoughts I'll leave you to work that one out yourself!
COMMODORE FORCE
Reckon you're up to it?
Think you've got what it takes to be a COMMODORE FORCE Megastar?
We're always on the lookout for really great Megatape games, so if you think your game comes up to scratch, send it in!
Don't expect any favours if  your game's crap — ZZAP! 64's was no-one's free lunch, and COMMODORE FORCE will demand even higher standards.
If your offering's a blinder, though, you'll be handsomely rewarded!
HANDS UP!
IT'S A FAIR COP GUV!
THAT'S BETTER!
STUFF!
WHEEL MEET AGAIN…
More unusual ‘joystick’ controllers, this time from Spectra Video .
That natty little circular thing is a stand-on control pad designed for use with skateboard games, doubling as a Frisbee if you get frustrated…
Oh all right then, it's a steering wheel.
Unlike previous circular offerings,Nigel Mansell's Freewheel doesn't attach to your desk in any way!
Instead, it's entirely freestanding, allowing you to swing it as hard as you like without risking it flying off the table, a major fault with many wheels.
The down side to this is the sacrifice of the solid, ‘in the car’ feel provided by desk-attached wheels.
As well as the obvious left-right-fire functions, the Freewheel also allows for up-down movements, making it a whizz for aircraft action.
Even so, at £29.99 it doesn't come cheap — try before you buy, and think very carefully before spending that much on a tool that's only any use of driving and flight sims.
SWAP SHOP
Tired of your old budget games?
Never played Blast-'Em-To-Bits II since completing it?
Desperate for more titles, but haven't got the dosh?
Well worry no more, ‘coz Budswap is here!
Dealing exclusively with C64 budget titles, Budswap offers the chance to exchange unwanted games for different titles, and it only costs a pound!
The list of games on offer is constantly updated, and none are ever refused.
According to proprietor Jeffery Keen there'll be a fair turnover of titles, and all money raised will be ploughed back into the business.
It's highly unlikely, he argued, that people will unload their rubbish and leave him with games no-one wants.
‘There are some great titles out there,’ he said, exclusively to ZZAP!, ‘…and many will swap them because they've completed them, so we'll always have loads of great games.’
Sounds great, doesn't it?
For further details, write to BUDSWAP .
AND A BIG HAND FOR…
At last!
A BRITISH handheld games console to rival the best the Japanese have to offer!
(Er, it's made in China — Ed).
Looking (at first glance) like a cross between a Nintendo Gameboy and a bend-i-bus, the Quickshot Supervision features a comfortable, ergonomic design, 61mm square screen, stereo sound and cute little screen tilter that lets you play it flat without developing a permanent rick in your neck!
Retailing at a VFM £39.99, the games themselves cost a mere £10–15 — a bargain or what? 18 games are currently available, with another nine due soon.
Before Christmas, though, Quickshot claim owners will be able to choose from over 50!
British handhelds haven't been too successful in the past (remember the Gamate?
Nor do we, mate!), but Supervision could crack the market wide open!
Look out for a full review in COMMODORE FORCE!
DON'T JUMP!
If you've been contemplating the unthinkable just because Lemmings didn't look like it was going to make it to the C64, think again!
This little joined-up screenshot map has been assembled from a pre-production level of Lemmings on a Commodore 64, and we reckon it already looks good enough to release.
But why take just our word for it?
Negotiations are underway which, if all goes well, will result in one full, playable level of C64 Lemmings appearing on next month's Megatapes.
Of course, we'll be called COMMODORE FORCE by then, so make sure you don't miss out, won't you?
Oh, by the way, the game should go on sale just in time for Chrimble…
BACK TO REALITY
W Industries, creators of those spawny Virtual Reality machines, have bought the rights to produce a Star Trek — The Next Generation game.
Based on the United Federation Of  Planets' battles with the Romulan empire, the player takes the role of Captain Jean-Luc Picard.
The VR engine has been much improved, now allowing ‘scalable’ parallel architecture, a hundred-fold increase in graphics capability, and a less bulky headset.
WHO THE HECK'S THAT LONG-HAIRED GEEZER?
No doubt you're wondering who our new reviewer is.
Well, we can now officially welcome to the team the one and (hopefully) only, James Price!
A sort of cross between Kurt Cobain and a Fraggle, James has already made a name for himself in the office for dancing around and waving his arms wildly while he talks, not forgetting the regular swishing back of that blond mop.
We asked James what he thought about his new job: ‘Erm…like…you know…this gorgeous girlie was buying me drinks all night…like…you know how it gets…right!…yeah…well…
’ Welcome to the team, James!
GETTING TO GRIPS…
WITH DODGY JOYSTICKS!
Well whadayaknow?
Cheetah have just released their latest blockbusting joystick range, based on popular film and TV characters.
After scooping the rights to The Simpsons ,Batman Returns ,Alien 3 and Terminator 2 , a Cheetah spokesperson described the concept as ‘possibly the biggest ever tie-up in film licensing and video game hardware history…a truly new product concept.’
But are they any good?
Alas, they're not — in fact they're blimmin' awful!
The ‘characters’(the only real selling point) make them extremely awkward to use, and the licences have taken a hefty toll on the price — a wallet-busting £12.99!
Cheetah have produced some great joysticks in their day, but these are just overpriced, irritating junk that anyone with an ounce of common sense would avoid like a loading error.
Bart Simpson on a joystick?
I'd rather eat my shorts!
OCEAN'S CHRISTMAS CRACKERS!
Three brand-new full-price releases before Christmas isn't bad for a company who claimed that The Addams Family was definitely their last ever C64 release!
Ocean have just announced the imminent arrival of Cool World (a platform caper),Lethal Weapon (a tri-film-tie-in beat-'em-up-cum-shoot-'em-up extravaganza!) and WWF: European Rampage (er, a wrestling game).
Further details will reach you just as soon as they reach us…we're STILL waiting for a finished version of Hook , ‘coz we refuse to write full reviews from pre-production, half-finished disks!
FAIR'S FAIR
Roll up, roll up, for all the fun of the fair — the All Formats Computer Fair , that is!
See the amazing range of software at bargain prices!
Gasp as you find there's one near you — no other computer event can match it for geographical diversity.
Thrill as you realise it's coming soon!
Entry to an All Formats Computer Fair costs a mere £4.
See ya there?
All fairs run from 10am to 4pm, except West Midlands, Friday 6 November, which doesn't finish until eight.
For further information phone 0608 663820.
ELSPA CHARTS
No room for waffle, here are the Top-100-selling C64 programs as compiled by GALLUP…
Reviewz!
Reckless Rufus
Never mind the title, you can't afford to be reckless in this brain-bending game.
Each numbered block counts down nearer to destruction when you walk over it.
Alternative, £3.99 cassette 
Never one for taking risks, IAN ‘SAFETY FIRST’ OSBORNE was terrified at the thought of reviewing this one, but he soon got the hang of it.
One day he'll have the courage to shed his anorak!
RECKLESS Rufus?
They should've called him ‘extremely thick’ Rufus!
Stowing away on a space-faring mining vessel is all very well, but getting caught scrounging Liquorice Allsorts from a deactivated android…‘just say no’ kids, it'll save more than your teeth!
Rufus soon regretted his indiscretion — Admiral Greave, not a man to be trifled with, cast him adrift on the planet Killey to collect rare and valuable crystals found on the surface.
Only then would he decide whether or not to take him back to our glorious green Earth.
Easy, eh?
Well it would be if it wasn't for the tricky traps, perplexing puzzles, tantalising time limit and crafty creatures with an appetite for raw Rufus!
To add insult to injury his faithful laser blazer has limited power, so to keep the aliens at bay he has to make every shot count.
What can you say about the game that wasn't said in the last caption?
Not a lot, so I'll insult Steve instead — he's an ugly Welsh git with an in-growing chin!
Perplexing puzzles
If by now you're expecting a Manic Miner ish run-round-platforms-collecting-things game, you're absolutely…
WRONG!
Reckless Rufus is an arcade puzzler par excellence .
Viewed from an overhead perspective, Rufus can stomp from block to block with impunity but falls to his death if he makes a wrong move.
Most crystals are initially unreachable, but luckily there are several numbered blocks on each level which allow you to build a bridge across the void — if you stand on a block marked ‘4’ and move off the platform you create a block marked ‘3’, the original turning into a standard unmarked jobbie.
Walk off that, and you create one marked  ‘2’…
I'm sure you get the idea.
You can double back on yourself or move from a numbered block to a normal one without penalty — the numbered one remains if you need to return to it (and you will).
Naturally the game gets more complicated on later levels.
You're soon drive round the bend by slippery blocks that won't let you stand still on them, electrical blocks that can only be crossed when the current's off, blocks that crumble when you stand on ‘em, others with gaping holes which you must fix by flicking a switch before you can cross…
Make no mistake, you're in for a really hard time, and it's not made any easier by the baddies who wander across the screen.
They each travel in their own set pattern, but don't assume they're easy to avoid!
Don't burn your britches!
Reckless Rufus is a brilliantly designed game.
At every turn there's a tempting bridge to be made, but build thoughtlessly and you'll render one of the level's five crystals unreachable.
If this happens you can make a suicidal leap and start the level again — you're never permanently trapped on a screen that can't be completed.
Although each screen is deceptively complicated and takes a fair few attempts to solve, the solution is found through brain-power and not trial and error — once you've solved a screen you'll never forget how to do it.
The execution's great too.
The sprites are amazing, especially ol' Rufus himself, who looks like a cross between Berk from Trapdoor and Phil after a large meal.
The controls are well laid out and become instinctive after a few plays, though you have to let go of the joystick pretty smartish or you'll move one block further than you intended.
One or two minor niggles.
The pass-codes are a boon, but a game this tricky needs them after EVERY level, not every ten.
The difficulty curve could be gentler too — a lot gentler!
Even the first screen's a real killer to get through.
Slowing the aliens would help; the game's evil enough as a puzzler.
Moaning aside,Reckless Rufus is a cracker of a game that no self-respecting C64 owner should be without.
With 130 fiendishly addictive levels to complete you certainly won't be finishing it in a hurry!
Worth £3.99 of anyone's dosh.
How To Do Level 1
Rufus (that's you-fus) needs all five crystals to get to the next level.
So how do you get 'em?
Like this:
1.
Go straight down, collect the gem, then go to the builder block marked 2.
2.
Build two blocks to the right, and move up one space.
3.
Resist the temptation to head for the gem — build left, hit the switch then return to the block marked 3.
4.
Go up two spaces, left one, and collect the gem.
5.
Go left to the block marked 5, and carry on the gem on the right-hand side of the screen.
6.
Left one, down one onto the block marked 1, then down one more to collect the gem.
7.
Make your way to the block marked 4, then build left and collect the gem.
ALL DONE!
Steve!
Now here's a weird one.
Like all the best puzzlers it's simple enough to get into without a struggle, so addictive you'll always want ‘just one more go’ and, you guessed it, frustrating in the extreme!
For such a straightforward concept, the game manages to turn up surprises galore by ensuring that different approaches are adopted for each particular screen.
Some are slow, sedate affairs where the player must hesitate and ponder after every move, while others see you hurtling along with little time to catch your breath — let alone scratch your head!
Drawbacks are few, but typically niggling all the same.
Pausing the game, for example, is only half useful when you want to work out which direction is best to take…as the word ‘PAUSED’ obliterates half the screen!
Similarly annoying is the fact that nasties are able to appear seemingly on top of you, prematurely terminating your turn.
Bah!
These gripes aside,Reckless Rufus remains one of the most innovative game designs we've seen since, ooh, last issue's Cool Croc Twins ? 83%
WOTZ WOT
Numbered Blocks — Allow you to build a bridge across the void.
Fast Timer Countdown — Speeds up the timer.
Fader — Looks like a normal block, but crumbles away when you step on it!
Electric Block — Switches on and off.
Deadly while it's on.
Dude Power — Makes Rufus invulnerable to aliens.
Warp — Teleports you two spaces in the direction of the arrow.
Slippy Block — Standing on this one sends you sliding in the direction of the pointers.
Trekky Doors — Don't step on 'em while they're open, or you'll fall.
Gems — Grab ‘em, it's what you're here for.
Switch — Toggles holes on and off.
Ammo — The obvious.
Reverser — Reverses joystick directions.
Bonus Blocks — Points (quelle surprise)
Heart — Collect three for an extra life.
Freezer — Freezes all aliens for 30–40 seconds (they're still dangerous though!).
Chomper — Looks like a normal block, but it eats poor ol' Rufus alive!
The only way to avoid it is remember where it is.
Hyperspace — Appear in pairs.
Jump on one and you'll warp to the other.
Invisi-block — Hit this one invisible (and invulnerable) for 20–30 seconds.
Sticky Block — Holds you for a few seconds.
Switch holes — Dangerous when open.
Countdown Mine — Explodes a few seconds after treading on it.
Again, it looks like a standard block.
TEST YOUR STRENGTH!
PRESENTATION
Good password system, but it could be better.
GRAPHICS
Rufus looks great, could've done more with the aliens
SOUND
As much as you need, but nothing spectacular.
HOOKABILITY
Grabs you by the throat and refuses to let go.
LASTABILITY
You'll be playing this one for ages and ages.
OVERALL STRIKE 84% 
Feature!
CAMERA, LIGHTS, JOYSTICK AND…
ACTION!
The role of film licences has become an increasingly prominent one in the last few years.
But how do you separate the Oscars from the Turkeys?
JAMES ‘BARRY NORMAN’ PRICE gives his expert verdict…and why not?
ACTION!
BATMAN: THE MOVIE
Ocean, The Hit Squad
Gotham City's caped crusader hit the Commodore scene back in Issue 55, receiving a hefty 96% — perhaps a little too high.
You see,Batman sounds good, looks good and even plays well, but the levels tend to last a little too long; a password system would have been welcome.
Nevertheless, the variety provided by the five levels makes this a good investment if you can stand the frustration of repeating earlier levels, time after time.
OVERALL STRIKE 83% 
BEVERLY HILLS COP
Tynesoft
Yet another multilevel game that, while enjoyable in most ways, lacks that certain something to make it stand out from the crowd.
Being given the ability to practise each level is a bonus in some respects, but ultimately kills any trace of lastability.
Close, but no cigar.
COBRA
Ocean, The Hit Squad
Ocean should be thoroughly ashamed of themselves for releasing this third-rate rubbish.
I mean, arcade platform games are rarely (if ever) this bad, and to think that this was released at full price…
BIG TROUBLE IN LITTLE CHINA
Activision
Hello and welcome to Turkey Corner.
This month we take a look at Big Trouble In Little China and boy, is it dire!
It almost makes the shambles of a movie look impressive.
Remember the ancient Kung Fu Master ?
This game shamelessly rips it off in a way that would have most copyright lawyers drooling.
Trust me when I say you should have nothing to do with such drivel — make like a tree and leave it.
DAYS OF THUNDER
Mindscape
As the original film revolved around Tom Cruise's driving exploits (as well as the usual ‘heartbreaking’ love story) it seems only logical that a racing game would be the end product of a computer conversion.
However, if that racing game were to be as poor as the film (it is) with graphics that look positively antiquated (they do), you'd expect the rating to be about 34%, wouldn't you?
THE BLUES BROTHERS
Titus
A surprisingly good platform game, this oozes the character that most film conversions seem to lack, even if the link with the subject matter is a bit tenuous.
Add a simultaneous two-player option and you have one of the best film tie-ins I've played; a game you'd be foolish to be without.
DAMBUSTERS
US Gold
Do you have what it takes to fly a bomber over dangerous enemy territory, the Grim Reaper waiting patiently with you all the way?
If so, you probably work for the RAF!
But if you happen to be a sad coward like me, you can get your kicks  from Dambusters instead.
After all these years I still enjoyed playing this game.
Although it can hardly be described as state-of-the-art software, it's still worth a look.
DIE HARD
Activision
Bruce Willis wouldn't be very happy with this game.
He might enjoy exploring the many rooms that, while not too wonderful graphically, serve their purpose well enough.
He'd probably be impressed with the pre-game presentation and would find he could really ‘get stuck in’ during the flight sequences.
He could, even, enjoy examining the enemy corpses to obtain essential objects.
While doing this, though, he'd be looking at an amazingly porky sprite and thinking, ‘That's supposed to be me!?’
DIE HARDER
Grandslam
This Op Wolf -style shoot'-em-up has very little going for it.
Shooting-gallery games are pretty thick on the ground where the C64's concerned but Operation Wolf and Predator II are the only two of any real value.
Stick with either of those;Die Harder pales in comparison…
THE FOURTH PROTOCOL
Hutchinson Computer Publishing
If we're totally honest, this shouldn't even be in this feature as it's actually a game based on the Frederick Forsyth novel, as opposed to the consequent film.
It's an icon-driven multipart adventure and quite possibly one of the most involving and well-presented strategy programs available and is still an essential purchase even now.
GOONIES
US Gold
Platform games are a popular genre, but the essentially uncomplicated nature of the puzzles included in most tends to shorten their life span.
With Goonies , US Gold departed from the usual one-player scenario in favour of a more thoughtful multiplayer game — where one joystick wielder helps another by competing tasks to open exits, distract enemies and gain bonus points.
Surprisingly, it follows the original plot admirably (or at least as well as it could) but unfortunately there are only eight screens to negotiate, leaving very little in the lastability stakes.
HIGHLANDER
Ocean
From the days when the quality of Ocean's general releases was a tad suspect came Highlander , a dire sword-fight game with tenuous links to the original script.
Seeing blocky and uninteresting sprites slowly hacking each other into oblivion doesn't thrill me in any big way and I doubt it would excite anyone else.
HUDSON HAWK
Ocean
Out of all the titles mentioned in this feature, 23 are platform games or have strong platform elements/sublevels.
However, the amount of these that are actually enjoyable to play represents a radically different figure.
Hudson Hawk is included in this minority.
It's among the best arcade adventures available for the C64, and one of Ocean's better conversions.
THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER
Grand Slam The Hunt For Red October casts the player in the role of a Russian submarine commander attempting to defect to the West.
After wading through the comprehensive 40 page manual you may have some idea of what to do as, yet again, it's simulation time!
Luckily, it happens to one of the highest calibre.
 Receiving 81% on its initial release, I don't feel that it has aged enough to warrant a change in mark.
A  definite buy for any budding simulation buff.
INDIANA JONES AND THE LAST CRUSADE: THE ACTION GAME
US Gold, Kixx
Another arcade adventure based on a film but at least this time it bears a little relevance to the subject matter.
Last Crusade is much better than its predecessor, cramming colourful and moderately varied graphics into an interesting scenario.
During the time since it was reviewed (three years to the very month) it hasn't aged at all.
INDIANA JONES AND THE TEMPLE OF DOOM
US Gold, Kixx
This isn't actually a direct film conversion as the game's based on an arcade machine.
However, the links are there so it was only right that it should be included in this feature.
How I wish it hadn't been!
The collision detection's awful, the graphics are hardly awe-inspiring and the gameplay?
Pass the sick bucket.
LIVE AND LET DIE
Domark, Encore
Originally this game was due to be released by Elite as Aquablaster , a speedboat shoot-'em-up resembling Buggy Boy (a previous release of theirs) in more ways than one.
At the same time Domark, owners of a plethora of Bond licences, found themselves with the rights to Live and Let Die; a film with a particularly violent speedboat sequence.
After much presentation tweaking,Aquablaster became Live And Let Die , with James Bond at the wheel.
The game itself is enjoyable, if a little hard to hand at times.
THE LIVING DAYLIGHTS
Domark
While Timothy Dalton's first appearance as Mr Bond was a box-office success, his  computer replica is a poor Missile Command variant bearing little resemblance to the film — wasting yet another potentially good licence.
Originally awarded 57% in Issue 29, it's aged badly.
LICENCE TO KILL
Domark
Hailed in issue 53 as being the first game to utilise the massive potential of the Bond licences.
LTK is a vertically scrolling shoot em up following 007's attempt to capture the drug dealer known as Sanchez.
Surprisingly, the programmers managed to cram all the action into a single load; this has become quite a rarity these days, particularly where tie-ins are concerned.
All in all, LTK is still the most playable of the Bond games and could prove to be a good addition to  anybody's software collection.
NAVY S.E.A.L.S
Ocean
Stephen Thompson and John Meegan's conversion of the flop film has to be one of the most superlative tie-ins available.
Breathtaking graphics complement the excellent game design with Matthew Cannon providing yet another atmospheric soundtrack.
As a cartridge-only game it costs a hefty £14.95 but when you consider the quality you're receiving, could you do without this purchase?
RAMBO 3
Ocean, The Hit Squad
John Rambo's second (and last) Commodore appearance is a three-level affair, incorporating two game types.
Levels One and Two have you wandering around large mazes, killing guards and collecting items to solve the odd puzzle or two.
To a dedicated mapper this could be quite interesting; to anyone else it's tedious and unfulfilling.
Level Three, on the other hand, is an entirely different kettle of fish as Rambo, strapped into the seat of a stolen tank, single-handedly takes on the entire Soviet Army.
Soldiers, battle-wagons, helicopters and rockets rush towards you with alarming speed, only to be shot down by John in true Op Wolf/Thunderbolt fashion.
However, the speed and excitement of the third level simply can't make up for the boredom of the first two, thus banishing this product into the depths of mediocrity.
RAMBO — FIRST BLOOD PART II
Ocean, The Hit Squad
When I was younger, I had a friend with a C64.
Most of the games he owned were very old and substandard but the one saving grace in his collection was a game called Rambo .
It's an eight-way-scrolling arcade extravaganza with graphics and sound I could have cheerfully shot my grandmother for.
Playing the game and succeeding involves very little style or finesse: if it moves, you shoot it; if it doesn't, shoot it anyway.
Loading it after all those years was a strange experience; if anything it seems better than I'd remembered it.
Although the graphics are looking a little dated, you'd be a banana not to find a copy.
PLATOON
Ocean, The Hit Squad
Oliver Stone's Oscar-winning film was based on the horror of war, the inhumanity of situations that arise during conflict and the feelings of those under fire.
Innocence may be the first casualty of war, as the posters for the film boldly quoted, but it seems good taste is the first casualty in computer-game marketing.
However, as a stand-alone game it's simply stunning, with several varied sub-level presenting different challenges.
One to look out for.
RED HEAT
Ocean, The Hit Squad
Whereas Predator was flawed by poor programming,Red Heat was abysmal all the way from the design board.
The idea behind it is that Arnie has to move along an ever-scrolling backdrop, punching and headbutting all and sundry while ducking underneath projectiles hurled by his assailants.
However, to save memory the programmers have cut off everyone's legs, leaving sprites that only Basil Brush could identify with.
For me this was the final nail in the coffin of a terminally dull product.
SHORT CIRCUIT
Ocean
I can remember feeling puzzled at the release of Short Circuit .
Of all the films Ocean might've obtained the licence to, they chose one that could only be described as mediocre.
The conversion from the big screen went well: the programmers were able to capture the boredom perfectly in the form of  an insipid flickscreen arcade adventure.
TEENAGE MUTANT HERO TURTLES
Konami/Imageworks
As this isn't actually a direct film licence I won't dwell on it for too long; just long enough to warn you that it's a particularly poor platform product, with the only good feature being that the Amiga version was a lot worse.
Not to be confused with the superior coin-op conversion,Turtles 2 .
THE SPY WHO LOVED ME
Domark, The Hit Squad
Continuing with their long run of Bond licences, Domark released this uninspiring conversion.
It's a very basic vertical scroller that would fail to enthral most people, simply because (a) it looks bad,(b) it sounds worse, and (c) it plays terribly.
One to buy if you profess to being a masochist as well as a Bond fan.
TOP GUN
Ocean
One of my all-time favourite two-player games,Top Gun is a wireframe 3-D dogfight.
The screen is divided into two halves, to give both players their own cockpit view.
Blowing mates out of the sky is great fun — even if the graphics aren't exactly stunning — but the solo game lacks the competitive element and soon becomes tedious.
One to buy if you have friends (so it's no use to a Spectrum user).
A VIEW TO A KILL
Domark
Ian Fleming's superhero first appeared in Issue 4 of ZZAP!, much to the dismay of the reviewing team.
Not that they had anything against the original character or film; far from it.
No, the problem was a licence with such potential being turned into such a diabolical arcade adventure.
THE UNTOUCHABLES
Ocean, The Hit Squad
The Untouchables has to be one of the all-time classic film tie-ins, with every aspect oozing playability.
From Op Wolf -style shootouts (only much, much better) to bouncy platform blasting, this game surprises, shocks and stuns the player into submission, time after time.
A favourite of many and an all-time classic you can't afford to be without.
ALIENS
Electric Dreams
Very few games, regardless of quality, can convey the general atmosphere of a film, no matter how hard the programmer has tried.
But Aliens manages to capture at least some of the tension from the original script.
Viewing the game through the eyes of the six marines, your mission follows the film's plot in a roundabout type of way: your task is to destroy anything resembling an alien on your way to a confrontation with the alien queen.
Mappers will find this game a particular challenge as there are over 300 rooms to explore.
ALIENS (U.S. VERSION)
Activision
The American version of the popular film attempted to stay close to the original script but sadly failed to be playable due to slightly dodgy design.
The English version was by far the better of the two.
Aliens US tends to rely on its excellent presentation to cover up the low standard of the six sublevels.
Take my advice and stay with the immensely superior original.
DARKMAN
Ocean
Multiloads have been the bane of cassette users for many years, with large, well-programmed games being rendered unplayable simply because of the time wasted during loading.
Darkman is another example of this great tragedy.
The game itself is an interesting mix of platform hopping and hand-to-hand combat, with a few subgames thrown in for good measure.
Too bad the horrendous loading system leaves a nasty taste in the mouth — had it not been for this I'd have cheerfully awarded around 85% (disk owners take note).
FRIDAY THE 13TH
Domark
The comments box for Issue 10's review: presentation 40%; ‘Attractive packaging disguises lack of options and a horrid game.’
Graphics 16%: ‘Amazing programming puts the machine into Vic 20 emulation mode with fatty sprites wobbling unconvincingly on cardboard-cutout backgrounds.’
Sound 28%: ‘Incongruous music, thin screams and the odd hacking ‘bop’ as another victim hits the ground.’
Hookability 19%: ‘The graphical disaster area tells the tale.’
Lastability 16%: ‘Really there isn't much’.
Value for Money 17%: ‘Blood capsules are fun [the original game came with two free blood capsules].’
Overall 13%: ‘Surely Fridays were never this dire?’
So, has the game improved with age?
Nah!
NIGHTBREED
Ocean, The Hit Squad
Flickscreen arcade adventures seem to be two a penny on the C64, and really have to be something special to stand out.
Nightbreed almost does, but fails for some reason I can't quite put my finger on.
Wandering through the caverns of Hades, you come into contact with the Sons Of The Free, a neo-Nazi movement hellbent on the destruction of your character, Boone.
The map is large with many attractive baddies attacking you.
To sum it all up, it's good but not that good.
The title tune is probably my favourite part: in fact, it's the best C64 music I've ever heard!
BACK TO THE FUTURE
Electric Dreams
In this arcade adventure the aim is to collect the correct objects and drop them in the right place at the right time.
Such games are usually very playable but BTTF is so poorly executed, I'd rather have Corky stand on my head than play this drivel again.
BACK TO THE FUTURE II
Imageworks
The second BTTF arrived in October 1990 and, like its predecessor, failed to create a stir.
Loosely following the film across five multiloaded levels, it's an insipid affair with shoddy graphics and flawed gameplay.
Our only solace is that it was just as dire on all the other formats.
BACK TO THE FUTURE III
Imageworks
The third, and best, of the series is a mixture of shooting galleries, horse chases and plate throwing (?), among others, with the option to practise later levels.
The downside to this variety is a big multiload, but for once this a price is worth paying.
Devotees of the films will love playing out all the scenes, but they're great games in their own right with neat graphics and well-designed, compulsive action.
BLADE RUNNER
CRL
Ahhh, now this is an interesting one.
CRL attempted to buy the rights to the film and were refused point-blank.
So, rather than give it all up and find another movie, they bought the licence to the film's soundtrack (a rather haunting piece by Vangelis) which, surprise surprise, was called ‘Blade Runner’!
One quick piece of programming later and a game that was remarkably similar to the original film, and sharing the same name, hit the shelves.
After all that trouble, it really was a shame the end product was such utter rubbish.
CONAN
Americana/US Gold
Now this is an old game.
Before writing this I'd never actually seen it before, but after playing it I realise I didn't miss anything.
As this is a disk-only game, you'd expect quite an accomplished product with many detailed screens.
Unfortunately you'd be expecting too much: the game was poor back in Issue 3 when it received a very sad 32%.
Even accounting for the generally lower standard of software then, I reckon the reviewers were feeling generous.
THE EMPIRE STRIKES BACK
Domark, The Hit Squad
The second game in the Star Wars trilogy is by far the best.
Programmers Vektor Grafix managed to get a fair amount of graphical speed from the C64 to provide an accurate conversion of the popular arcade machine.
However, in both the arcade and 64 version there are only four levels: these are repeated in order, getting increasingly more difficult as the game progresses.
So, once the initial excitement has worn off, it could become boring and predictable.
But nevertheless, May the Force be with you.
FLASH GORDON
M.A.D.
Created by Alex Raymond in the 1930's Flash eventually made his way onto the Commodore with a little help from Mastertronic Added Dimension, a budget house set up by Mastertronic.
The MAD games retailed at £2.99 rather than the traditional £1.99, meaning that more time and resources could be poured into the production, resulting in higher standards and improved gameplay.
Flash Gordon was an excellent example of how this concept could work.
Essentially being three games for the price of one (a beat-'em-up, an arcade adventure and a shoot-'em-up)Flash is a product that would be well  received even in these advanced Commodore days.
GHOSTBUSTERS
One of the all-time top-selling computer games,Ghostbusters shocked everyone on its arrival.
Not for graphics or depth of gameplay, as the crude design didn't include either of these.
Nope, the thing that drove everyone wild was the music.
Ray Parker's theme tune was transferred onto the SID chip as perfectly as you could imagine, so when you add the lyrics to the bottom of the screen with a bouncing dot highlighting the words in time with the music…
GREMLINS
Gremlins is essentially a text adventure, following the original plot as closely as you could hope for.
But, unlike most games of this genre,Gremlins also incorporates interesting graphical sequences to accompany some of the more important puzzles.
For example, in the film our hero kills a Gremlin in a food blender; the same can be done in the game, with an animated ‘blending sequence’ to satisfy all your daily gore-lust needs.
GREMLINS 2
After playing this for  a while, I reckon the original mark (38%, Issue 73) was a mite generous for a game that doesn't rely on skill in the slightest — you just need to memorise the entry and exit points of the Gremlins and use the same movements, screen after screen with no variation.
Yet another victim of poor design.
MASTERS OF THE UNIVERSE — THE MOVIE
A curious mix of tried-and-tested subgames that look pretty damn poor on their own, but make up a reasonably playable package.
From shoddy Op-Wolf -style shootouts to a frustrating overhead-view maze variant, the game keeps the player interested via a perfect difficulty level, compelling you to have ‘just one more go’ to get that little  bit further.
It's by no means excellent, but still a whole lot better than US Gold's Masters of the Universe cartoon licence.
GHOSTBUSTERS II
Activision's second ghostly computer product didn't quite follow the enormous success of its predecessor, although in game design it's just as mediocre.
Add to this a particularly dodgy multiload for a mere three levels and you have a product to haunt any gamesplayer.
MOONWALKER
The fact that the subject matter was so dire must have posed a problem for the programmers.
Understandably, they'd be under pressure to produce an accurate conversion; you can almost hear them…
‘Yes, we'll have an overhead-scrolling runaway bit, perhaps he can change into a car later, kill lots of people,(cough) and perhaps along the way the game could convey a general lack of atmosphere, just like the film.’
THE NEVER ENDING STORY
The White Wizard (one of Bash's predecessors) originally entered the text-adventure world of Fantasia way back in 1985 and found the well-presented environment a mite too dull for his liking.
After seeing it myself I'm inclined to agree with him.
The vocabulary is limited, to say the least: I mean, how many adventure games do you see without an ‘EXAMINE’ command?
Not many I'd wager.
Nevertheless, the three separate loads offer much in the way of graphical excellence and make this a worthwhile purchase if found at a discount price.
THE NEVER ENDING STORY II
Not so long ago (Issue 81, to be exact) Corky reviewed NES II , concluding it was ‘a hotch-potch of crudely implemented game styles’ and awarded it 48%.
Nine issues later, it doesn't look any better.
Avoid.
PREDATOR
In Issues 35 and 59,Predator scored 90% and 85% respectively.
After playing it I came to the conclusion that it was one of the biggest pile of dog's droppings I have had to look at while researching this feature.
The graphics are good with the main sprite actually resembling Arnie, in a vague sort of way.
Sound and presentation are  also acceptable for a film licence and the basic design behind the game is perfectly plausible.
The point where it all falls down is when you actually try and play it!
PREDATOR II
Op Wolf -style games are pretty thick on the ground, so when I discovered Predator II was yet another one, I didn't exactly jump for joy.
However, after extensive playtesting it turned out that P2 is as enjoyable as you could hope for…and beats the living daylights out of 90% of all other games in this  category .
My only gripe is that it could prove to be a little on the easy side for more experienced gamesplayers.
ROBOCOP
Alex Murphy, a determined Detroit cop, is shot down in cold blood during a risky low-profile operation.
However, the OCP corporation, who ‘own’ the police, decide to rebuild him as half man, half machine; the ultimate force in law enforcement.
During the many twists and turns in the film's hectic plot RoboCop (Murphy) comes under fire from all sides, sustaining all manner of injuries.
In that respect the game is certainly true to the movie, but it's beginning to age a little now, since the release of its successors.
ROBOCOP 2
Out of the three RoboCop games available,2 has to be my favourite.
It's a frustrating affair though — don't think for a second that you can breeze through this game; think yourself lucky if you get past the first few levels!
The graphics and sound are out of this world; as is the presentation, making this a very worthwhile purchase and one I heartily recommend you to make — especially the cartridge version (avoiding the inevitable multiload).
ROBOCOP 3
Ian Osborne is my guest in this piece, guiding me through RoboCop 3 …
IAN: ‘Squeak, squeak, squeak, tee hee hee hee.’
JAMES: Ian says R3 isn't actually a film licence.
Rather than wait for the release of the third cinema outing, Ocean have written an excellent multilevel extravaganza, incorporating and improving on existing styles from the other two RoboCop games.
IAN: ‘Tee hee, squeak squeak squeak.’
JAMES: Ian says that when Dorky Caswell and Sexy Phil (?) reviewed R3 they awarded it an overall mark of 92%.
Personally I don't think we should change that at all, do you?
IAN: ‘Squeak!’
RETURN OF THE JEDI
The last game in the Star Wars trilogy signalled a departure from the previous wireframe-orientated style to a more traditional coloured-sprite affair.
Concentrating on three of the main action sequences from the film Return fails to shock the player in any way, and could even be described as dull.
For avid fans of the movies my advice is to stick with The Empire Strikes Back .
THE ROCKY HORROR PICTURE SHOW
Converting Richard O'Brien's eccentric movie onto the C64 was downright impossible.
How on earth could any programmer keep the general plot and utter weirdness of it all while providing a playable, interesting game?
You'd probably think that the end product would be a disappointing arcade adventure with very little to keep any gamesplayer enthralled for a moment.
And you know what?
You'd be dead right.
TERMINATOR 2
A large percentage of film tie-ins these days incorporate several game-types.
T2 follows this trend but somehow fails to hit the mark due to poorly designed sequences that, while attractive, are tedious and unexciting.
Its original rating was 89%, which I feel is far too high when you consider the quality of games such as Rambo , a film licence from several years ago.
THE RUNNING MAN
Yet another multipart game, only this time it manages to be just a little more feeble than the others.
Running Man?
It's more like the Steady Stroll Bloke!
The controls are slow and unresponsive — let's face it, with the amount of platform beat-'em-ups around you'd have thought the programmers would've given a bit more care and attention to this aspect, not to mention the graphics, presentation…the game in general really.
STAR WARS
Domark's conversion of the aeons-old-coin-op was a big disappointment.
Slow, badly coordinated vector graphics are awful at the best of times, but when they're trying to convey the scintillating action of such a classic film their inadequacy is more poignant.
WHO FRAMED ROGER RABBIT
Roger was a huge hit in the cinema, but his appearance on the C64 leaves a lot to be desired.
I find it an insult to my bottom that I was forced to sit on it while playing this badly designed excuse for a game.
If someone you know happens to own a copy, wait until you recover from the inevitable hysterics and check out the presentation: that is good.
TOTAL RECALL
Total Recall is by far the best appearance Arnie has made on the Commodore, with large, well-defined sprites bouncing around colourful subgames.
The difficulty level is pitched on the right side of frustration, adding a great deal of playability, but the cassette multiload is a pain in the bum.
As with Darkman , it's a case of ‘nice game, shame about the loader’.
PD FILE
While the Maastricht Treaty lies in tatters, and the ERM's crumbling to pieces, the European Public Domain scene is stronger than ever.
Our Dutch correspondent Remi Ebus pulls his finger out (of the dyke) to reveal the latest PD developments…
If you believe certain software houses, the C64 won't carry on much longer.
Mind you, they've been saying that for years, and the C64 is still the second biggest leisure-software market in Europe (and the biggest market for budget software!).
The reason I'm telling you all this is that not so long ago the PD scene seemed to be in decline.
Groups were at ‘war’ with each other, not many demos were produced, and the ones released weren't too good.
There were almost no (cool) parties, and generally everybody was feeling down.
That was until about a year ago when the last Silicon party was held in Utrecht.
Several very good demos were released, and the party was a big success.
Since then, things have got better and better — the amount of demos has risen and the quality increased enormously.
Groups like Black Mail, Beyond Force, Origo (more about them later) and Horizon have made a comeback with some awesome demos, while new groups like Extend, Starion and Visual Reality had dazzling debuts.
And with several parties coming up this autumn-winter the prospects for the coming months are looking good.
At the moment everybody is eagerly awaiting Crest's Late Night Show from Crest (of course!), a group which has pushed C64 to its ultimate limits, only to go even further in their next demo!
Another very interesting part of the scene is the disk magazines.
Produced by enthusiasts, they contain the latest gossip and news of upcoming parties, as well as interviews, reports, contact addresses and probably the most interesting thing, the charts.
These are the best way to see if your efforts have been appreciated by the rest of the scene.
Here are the charts, as voted for by the readers of the disk-magazine Remark:
DREAMS
Eternity
This demo caught me off guard.
I'd never heard of Eternity before, nor had anyone I knew.
Not so surprising, as this is their first official demo, though the group members (all two of them!) have been around on the scene since 1988.
The dynamic duo are responsible for almost every bit used in the demo except for some loading routines and music players): Equal doing coding and graphics; Snap doing music and graphics.
From start to finish this is a bodacious demo.
It all starts with some balls bouncing onto the screen, and after some text the group members are introduced.
Then the first part is loaded, and begins with some bricks floating in midair — in time with the music they form ‘ETE’(short for Eternity), an excellent animation indeed.
By far the biggest part of this demo is the graphics and music collection.
You get to see the Turtles, a ninja, a robot and loads of other pictures, each with its own tune.
After all that, the final part is an anticlimax, just a simple up-scroller.
Nevertheless,Dreams is a stunning debut.
It's got it all: great graphics, marvellous music, creative coding and brilliant design.
This is a collectors' item!
JUST IN TIME
Grafitty
There's something special about Grafitty (even for the scene!): they're a Hungarian group, and quite a good one too.
They haven't released much, and certainly took their time making this one, but it was definitely worth it.
Just In Time is a great demo, not so much because of original ideas (there are hardly any), but the excellent execution of the routines make it well worth a gander.
The intro is only okay but has a little twist: the longer you look at the scroller at the bottom of your screen, the weirder it gets.
It starts normally, but ends up as a DYPP (also known as a sinus(oid) scroller).
The second part excels in coding and graphics.
Below some Roman pillars holding a fantastic Grafitty logo, a ‘Globe-scroller’ appears (after some calculations).
It's a bit hard to describe: like a normal scroller rolled up into a ball-shape.
A similar effect is used in another part with a ball swinging over the screen.
Every time it rolls over the scroller, the text is projected onto the ball.
Following some other reasonable sections you arrive at the final part, a big up-scroller containing the credits, thank and usual stuff.
Just In Time is a very fine demo.
Although it doesn't feature any original routines, it uses the best existing ones in great style.
As these demos were the only good productions released last month, here are some classic demos you should take a look at.
JUSTICE
Triad
This is a protest against the injustice that took place in Los Angeles, when four policemen brutally assaulted Rodney King.
Before you get to see the demo, you have to flick through some text pages containing interesting pieces about the ‘incident’, making you think about what happened.
The demo comprises only one part, in the style of Triad's Red October and Bonzai's Bonzieeed .
Images and text flash onto your screen in synch with the music (kinda like those Acid-House video-clips, only a bit simpler).
It might not be a big demo, or a very good one, but it has a meaning, a message, something I would like to see more of.
It just shows that there's more to demo-making than a bunch of programmers having fun.
There are people in the scene who are at least trying to create a little awareness amongst others.
That's why I won't rate this demo, as it's the message that counts, not the production.
ELYSION
Origo
Looking at the position of this demo in the charts, you can see it's very popular.
Again, I must add, this is more than just a demo, as it's subtitled ‘A Requiem’ to honour a friend of Origo who is no longer amongst us.
No doubt the members were very proud when it won the demo-competition at the party where it was released.
Besides that, this demo is very special indeed, as it's more like a Trackmo.
There's no waiting for disk accessing — the next section's loaded into the memory while the previous part's still running.
It starts with a multicoloured starfield and some text fading in and out.
Via some nice colour animations and a plotted ball, you get to see some very fast filled vectors, stunning plasma and realtime-calculated fractals, all accompanied by great music.
It's a well-designed demo, which almost leaves the screen empty, filling it with some of the best routines around.
This is what a demo's meant to be: not too big, not too short, well designed, accompanied by music which suits the parts to create a certain atmosphere.
One of the best demos I've ever seen.
SCENE SLANG
Here's a list of words you should know if you want to be involved in the PD scene.
DYCP: Different Y-Char Positioning.
Scrollers influenced by a sinusoid, making them swing up and down your screen.
Variations are possible like DXCP and DXYCP (also different X-positioning), DYPP (pixel positioning) and DYSP (using sprites instead of chars).
FLI: Flexible Line Interpretation.
A graphic mode enabling the use of all 16 colours (instead of the usual three) within one character in low-resolution.
HI-FLI and AFLI are almost the same, the only difference is that they use high-resolution, and can therefore only use up to three different colours (rather than one) within a char.
Bobs: Taken from the Amiga, where they are Blitter Objects.
The C64 doesn't have a Blitter, but C64 bobs enable characters to move over each other.
Tech-Tech: A graphic influenced by a vertical sinusoid.
It's much like a DYPP, and should really have been called DXPP, but someone came up with the name Tech-Tech first (on the other hand, just try to pronounce DXPP!).
Swappers: Someone who exchanges (swaps) software with another person, mostly accompanied by letters.
Trades his latest software for your latest.
Sometimes called a Mail-Trader.
Coder: Programmer.
Spreader: Much like a swapper, but his main interest is to spread his group's latest software.
Don't expect to get too much back, and usually no letters.
That's about it for this month.
If you have any questions, requests, or want to send in your own PD product, contact me via the usual address (put ‘PD File’ at the top).
Next month, some famous demo-dudes express their personal views on the scene.
And, of course, I'll review all the very latest PD stuff.
Tot ziens!
Playing tipz!
it's Corky
As you'll have noticed by now, two new characters have been added to the Corky repertoire by our (F) Art Ed.
The Ox has been around for a couple of months, but the new host of the Tips Clinic is Dr Butcher.
The darker side of my character is finally emerging (nya, ha, ha), so watch out if you annoy me.
This month I have the final part of the Creatures 2 solution, the second half of the Blues Brothers solution I printed last month, and lots more.
So read on, my most excellent amigos…
COOL CROC TWINS
Gavin Dixon has sent in these handy Cool Croc Twins codes.
Now you can help the reptilian brothers leap around and win the hand of the fair Daisy (hmmm…
I wonder if something like that would help me win back the hand of my loved one?…probably not).
POTSWORTH & CO
Hi-Tec
Yep he's back again, there's no holding this lad down.
Richard Beckett's here again with his umpteenth contribution to the tips section.
This time it's Hi-Tec's nonheinous game Potsworth & Co (good call, my friend).
LEVEL 1 — THE CAVE ZONE
Go right and push the crate onto the button, go up on the lift and to the left, push the crate off the edge of the platform, go up on the lift and right, climb up six platforms and push the crate left, fall left and duck down to go along the conveyor belt, jump onto the ledges on the wall and go up, go right, up, left, up, push the crate right, fall down, push the crate right into the button, go right and duck down to go along the conveyor belt, drop down to the stationary lift, go left then up, push the crate down, right, right, left, right and right onto the button.
Go left, down, right, then fall down, push the crate onto the button and go up on the lift, then left along the lower platform, push the crate left onto the switch, fall down, then go up on the lift, collect the speaker, fall down, go right and up on the lift, go left along the top platform, go up and left, go up on the lift, and continue going up on the platforms.
At the top of the shaft, push the crate right onto the switch, go right and duck down to go along the conveyor belt, push the next crate right onto the button, then go along the next conveyor belt.
Go right and fall down, go left and push the crate right onto the button, go left to a wall, duck down and crawl under it, go left and fall down, go right, fall down and collect the main tape deck, go right, then up on the platforms, right, down, and collect the battery, push the crate left and go up on the lift, go left to a button, then jump two platforms to your right, and then onto the platform to your left, push the crate down onto the button and fall down, go up on the lift, then right to the next lift, go up the passage on the lift and ledge, and then go left along the top.
Push the crate left onto the button, stand on the conveyor belt, duck and go left, jump up two platforms and crawl right, through the wall, collect the speaker, go back out of the cave and jump up, go right at the top and fall down the hole, go right and jump over the crate and push it left onto the button, go up on the lift, then right, jump onto the crate on the top platform and push it right, then left onto the button.
Fall down and crawl left under the wall, push the crate left onto the button and jump up through the roof, go up, left, up on the lift, right, and then fall down, go under the lift and go left to collect the object, go right, up on the lift, left under the wall, up through the roof, up, left, up on the lift, left, push the crate left onto the button, go left along the conveyor belt, go left and collect the battery, now go down as far as possible and enter the door to complete the level.
LEVEL 2 — THE SUPER ZONE
Firstly, jump up and collect the shield, then go left, jump on the platform to your left and then the platform on your right, grab the weight, climb the right wall and throw the weight on the switch, jump/fly up onto the block on the wall, go left and cross the gap on the swing, fly up two platforms and run right, go under the guillotine, jump up the pipe and collect a weight, walk left and fall off the last platform, throw the weight on the switch, go left and use the fly to climb up the platform, take the weight and throw it on the switch above you.
Go down, catch the swing and go up on the lift, go left and collect the shield, go right and up when you reach the right-hand wall, go left and fly up the pipe, go right and fall down the gap, then go left and collect the weight and throw it onto the button to your right, go up on the lift, right, up and left on the lift, fly up past the spikes and collect a weight, fall down and go right under the spikes, throw the weight on the button, go up on the lift, up, go left when you can and fall down to collect the weight.
Go back to the lift and go up, carry the weight to the button and drop it on the button to start the swing, stand on the swing and fly up-right, collect the weight above you and throw it onto the button next to the swing, go back to where you grabbed the weight, go left, collect the weight, go right to the wall and fall down, throw the weight on the button, go up, left, up the pipe, collect the flower and go down the pipe.
Go right across two platforms and catch the lift, go up on the lift and go left, take the weight and continue left, throw the weight onto the person, go left, up, up the pipe, take the weight, go right and throw it on the button, go up on the lift and go left, go up, take the weight, throw it on the person and fly up the pipe, go left, take the weight, go right and fall down the wall, go left, throw the weight on the button.
Fall down, then fly up the pipe, use flying power to get the weight above you, go right, fall down, fall down again, go left to the main wall, jump up and throw the weight onto the button, go up the pipe, right, up on the lift and collect the weight, go left, fall down and throw the weight on the button, go down, right, up on the lift, left and up the pipe, go right (dodge the guillotine) and leg it to the door.
LEVEL 3 — THE CANDY ZONE
Go right and collect the bone, fall down, fly up on the fountain and collect the cocoa bean, fall down and jump along the pipes, go up on the platforms, go left at the top, get the cocoa bean and fall down, wait on the platform next to the pipes, go right on the ice cream, go up on the next ice cream, up on the platforms, bounce on the fountain, jump up three platforms and go right, collect the cocoa bean, climb down four platforms, climb up, go right to the top of the map, go right on the lifts and platforms and collect the blue object.
Throw the blue object onto the button, go left, fall down and cross the river on the cakes, go up on the ice cream, go right, fall down, cross the river on the cake, climb up via the platforms and lifts to the top of the map, jump onto the wall to the left, fall down one platform, stand on the lift moving left to right, collect the cocoa bean and fall down, go right, cross the first river on the cake, and the second on the platforms, when you're on top of the wall next to the second river.
Jump down and go right, cross the river on the cake and go up on the platforms, collect the cocoa bean at the top of the platforms, go back down the platforms, go left across the river, jump up on the sherbet fountain and collect the blue object above you, go straight left along the platforms and throw the blue object at the button to start the lift, go up on the lifts and collect the cocoa bean, go down, left, down, left across the rivers and into the cup to complete the level.
LEVEL 4 — THE RAINBOW ZONE
Go right, bounce on the trampoline, go up, right, down and paint the button, paint some platforms to bounce out of the cave you're in, go left, down to the trampoline, go right and fall down, go left and paint the switch, go right and climb the stairs poking out of the cauldron, paint the button on your right, fall down and go left, fall down and go left, fall down and collect the picture from the bottom of the hole, paint some of the ledges to get out of the hole and go right, fall down the right-hand side of the map and go left, paint the switch, go left and paint the next switch.
Fall down, go right and collect the painting, use the painted ledges and stars from the cauldron to get back to the start, go left and climb up the stairs from the cauldron, go right and bounce up to the platform to your right, go to the right of the cloud and paint some ledges to get into the castle, stand on the wall to your right and paint some ledges to go right to the edge of the castle, go up and collect the piece of painting, go down, then up the left side of the window using the painted ledges.
Go upwards and stand on top of the wall (above the window), go to the left of the wall and paint some ledges, then go onto the wall on the left, go left and shoot the switch, go up on the painted ledges and head right along the wall above you, go up on the trampoline and paint the button, go left along the passage, jump onto the trampoline, and from there onto the ledge on the left wall, jump to collect the painting, fall down and go up on the right of the window (paint some ledges).
Go right and collect the painting, go left, down, and right along the passage, go down and left along the passage, go down and right along the passage, fall down the gap, and then down again into the clouds, go back to the start, go right and down, go left to the switch, go up on the painted walls, go left and collect the painting, fall down, go right and up on the stairs from the cauldron, go right and into the painting board to complete the level.
LEVEL 5 — THE CARNIVAL ZONE
Fall down and right, go up and collect the star, fly up two platforms and right, push the crate onto the switch, go left and fall down, fall through the left side of the cave floor you land in, go right on the ride and collect the arrow, go left on the ride and up on the platforms, go right on the platforms in the cave above, push the crate right onto the switch, go right, down and left on the dodgems, jump up onto the platforms, then onto the wall above, go right through the wall and collect the star so you can fly, fly left, up, go right and collect the arrow.
Fall down and go right on the dodgems, go up and right through the wall, go down and collect the scroll, go up and push the crate right off the platform, fall down and push the crate left off the platform, fall down and push the crate right off the platform, push it left off the next platform, then right and left twice, jump on the big wheel on your right, jump off and at the bottom of the screen go right, collect the arrow, go left and up, go right and climb up on the platforms, go left and collect the star, fly right, up and right, push the crate right off the platform, push it left onto the button, go left, down and collect the star.
Fly right to the platform under the last button you hit, go up and collect the arrow, go down and right, go left and right through the platforms to get to the bottom, at the bottom go up the other side of the wall, collect the star and fly left over the spikes, collect the arrow and recharge your flying abilities on the star, fly right and go down, go right to the star in the grass, collect it and fly up, push the crate down, fall down.
Push the crate left to hit the switch, go down, collect the star and fly up, left and then down, go left, collect the star, fly straight right, then fly up, land on one of the platforms on the side of the wall, jump up and go right on the chair-lifts, go down, right through the wall, climb up the blocks, push the crate down two platforms and go back through the wall, go left, down, right and jump onto the boat, go right, up and left into the tent to complete the game.
BOO!
HA!
FOOLED YOU!
YOU THOUGHT I WAS FATTY FIL!
CREATURES 2
Here's the third and final part of the excellent Creatures 2 solution, courtesy of my old hoppo Matthew Allen.
TORTURE 5 — CREEPY CHAOS
This torture screen is a tough son of a gun, but if you follow these instructions you'll be fine.
Switch to wavy bullets and go left, get over the blocker and jump up to shoot the fat creature.
When you've hit it enough times it'll die and leave an extra weapon potion and some bird seed.
Shoot the bird seed so that it moves to the right and stops at the point where Clyde started.
Shoot the bird to wake it up and switch to the straight-up bullets.
The bird will go to eat the seed — when it does, jump on it.
Waggle the joystick like mad to move the bird upwards, get off and work your way up to the ghost.
Stay on the left and let it come up close, jumping over its lightning bolts in the process.
Then fall down to the left and shift right; the  ghost should follow you down and scare the blue guard away.
Move left and shoot the blue ground under the axeman.
As it breaks, the axeman falls and chops the conveyor creature in half.
INTERMISSION 5
Things start to get very tricky now.
There are 16 Fuzzies to rescue in four minutes.
The Demon's a bad mutha, although the time limit's not as tight as on Intermission 3.
Get out of sync as quickly as possible and forget the coins completely.
TORTURE 6 — BALLONACY
Switch to wavy bullets and go down, now shoot the creature guarding the balloon machine.
Switch to up-bullets, jump the fire and turn on the machine (at the switch).
Very quickly jump back over the fire and go to the top of the screen.
Wait by the edge of the flames and the bird should pick you up.
Waggle the joystick to move over the flames and stop to be dropped.
The bouncing creature can't be killed, but is stunned for a while if shot.
The idea is to shoot the balloons across so they burst on the stalactites and drop their water into the bowl below.
Every so often you'll have to shoot the creature to stun it again.
If you run out of balloons, just go back and switch the machine on again (simple eh?).
The machine automatically switches off when enough water has been collected.
Go back to the top and shoot the bird, now switch to wavy fire.
The feathered friend will move across and peck at the TNT guard.
Shoot the TNT so it moves across, flame it and then shoot it into the flames.
A convenient hole appears and the TNT falls into the bowl, goes BOOM and the water douses the flames.
INTERMISSION 6
20 Fuzzies in five minutes is tough, but it's possible.
With this Demon you'll lose loadsa Fuzzies, so you must get out of sync as soon as possible (it's tough, so keep trying).
Vary the number of bounces before sending the current Fuzzy left, or alternatively stop the Fuzzy in mid-transfer, then continue when the Demon moves past.
DEMONS 3 — THE HEINOUS FAMILY
Wicked by name and wicked by nature, number one requires seven hits and follows a repeating pattern of swoops and stepped climbs.
He lobs loadsa bombs, so keep to the sides and move in to kick when you see the chance.
Number two requires 12 hits and follows a simple oval pattern around the screen.
Keep the exhaust port low and attack when it swoops down to bomb you.
Number three's the main Demon with 28 hits needed to kill him.
And all of you who hide in the corners, this swine can reach you even there.
It follows this pattern…swoops down/left (stays in corner), ground-bombs right, moves up/left then back, then ground-bombs left, moves up/right then repeats.
You can catch it after it ground-bombs right, but the best time (set the port in the middle) is when it ground-bombs left.
You can get two or three bugs in at one time if you're lucky.
You must move left pretty fast, though, to avoid the bombs.
When the last Demon's dead, take a breather before the celebrations start.
THE ENDING
I won't give too much away.
It's sufficient to say that Clyde thanks you for saving his family, but then finds out there's one Demon left.
Phrrrt!!!
OI!
MOVE UP!!— JUST BEHAVE AND SMILE WILL YA!?
MURRAY & DIZZY POKES
Thanks go to Ms K Brummitt from Birmingham for sending in these pokes for Murray Mouse and the Dizzy's Excellent Adventures compilation.
THE BLUES BROTHERS
As promised last month, here's the last half of the Blues Brothers solution.
Thanks go to Robin Greenwood from Barnsley for his hard work.
LEVEL 4
From the start, go down the ladder, grab the crate and kill the green blob, jump down the hole into the water, swim over to the ladder and get out, avoiding the workman in the process, continue right, kill the blob and move into the ladder, climb up and collect the records (avoiding the broken ones), dive down the hole, swim right to the open/close door then go up the ladder, pick up the crate and jump out the open gap onto the railway line and lob the crate at the workman, move left over the trains (killing the blobs with spare crates if you wish) until you reach the end.
Fall through the platform, and unless you're either amazingly brave or stupid head down the wind tunnel to the left.
The macho merchants among you could try braving the green blob, numerous wires and broken records that occupy the alternative route.
You should find yourself in a room with seven doors, the two lowest switch between each other, the next up contains a heart and a green blob, moving up again, the door on the left can't be opened, while the door to the right switches with the top door, the final door has three rooms.
The first contains a few records, so collect them and slide down the ice into the water, this is extremely easy so just use the map to reach the room containing the concert poster, records and a ‘?’(worth 50 points), grab 'em all and move up to the extra life, then to the ladder and get the heart if you need it, walk right, go up the ladder and down the other side, pick up the crate and jump into the water.
This will kill the green blob lurking in the watery depths and help you avoid the workman.
Use the map to get up to the ladder on the other side and climb out onto the platform, pick up a crate and kill the workman, now kill the green blob and complete the level by reaching the flag.
LEVEL 5
Probably the biggest level in the game but it's not too hard.
From the start, pick up a crate and kill the policeman, continue right, dodging the dog on the way, climb the ladder to where the mugger prowls, dodge him and grab the ‘?’(50 points) and the records, climb upwards, collecting records on the way, kill the workman with the crate and thus gain access to the roof of the building, avoid climbing the crane (there's nothing of interest there), climb up the ladder and kill the policeman, run right and jump off the edge to the end of the building.
Avoid the fire and also the two question marks, as they make you dance and thus a perfect target for the dog.
Jump onto the lift to your right, then on the second lift, and finally onto a platform (watch out for the bare wires), climb down the site of this second building if you wish to collect  a couple of records, but it's quicker and safer to climb up the purple wall above you and climb the four ladders, grab the crate and jump onto the platform on your left, kill the mugger, climb the ladder and grab another crate, climb another ladder, then another kill the workman in the process, run across to the right, jump before you touch the wire and you should land on the next platform.
Keep moving right and you should find the concert permit, jump up onto the purple wall and walk right to the other side, get one of the three crates and kill the mugger, then walk to the right and jump up three platforms to reach a heart, fall down to where you started then climb down the ladder with a crate, kill the workman, go down another level and kill the mugger (avoiding the dog), go down another level, climb down the ladder and go down again, you can risk hitting the wire and flame to collect the records (macho time again), climb down a final ladder and jump off to the left.
Jump the gap and make your way down the steps and platforms to another ladder, pick up another crate to your left and climb down the ladder, kill the workman and run right (out of the building), get on the lift and jump into the little room (this contains a couple of records), get the crate and climb up the ladder to kill the last workman, get on the lift to your left and go to the top, jump onto the platform, and the next, and the next, until you reach the furthest one where there's an extra life.
Scale the purple wall and step onto the third lift.
This takes you to the top of the crane and the two flags — well done, level complete.
LEVEL 6
Here you must find your way to the concert stage to perform loads excellent R 'n' B music.
From the start, go right and pick up two crates, now kill the guard and the policeman, get the third crate and travel down the lift, at the bottom go right and kill the policeman, keep going right until you fall off the edge of the platform.
Now drop left to avoid the guard, while climbing back up left and collecting a crate.
Continue left to the second lift.
Go up and left, killing both the guards and the policeman with the crates.
Ignore the ladder and go to the door just past the policeman.
You will now appear in the top, righthand corner of the playing area.
Go down the two ladders and enter the second door, walk down the steps and onto the stage, then it's under the spotlight to perform all those great songs the Blues Brothers are famous for.
ARNIE
Here's an Action Replay poke for the muscle-bound gun-toting best seller.
Thanx again go to Gavin Dixon.
CHUCK ROCK
Gavin Dixon isn't finished yet.
Here are some Action Replay pokes for Core's caveman classic.
AIN'T I GORGEOUS?
GORGEOUS?
MORE LIKE  CORKY'S BUM!
DETECTIVE
So many of you have written in and asked for help with this game, I've decided to print  a few more hints (thanks go to Richard Lupton, Mark Latham and Ewen Nicholson for this stuff).
I hope this helps Jenny,, S Windridge from Coventry, Paula Ward, her grandparents, and her mates Tom, Gaz and Debby from Leeds, and finally Neil Anderson from Co Dublin.
THE CHARACTERS
Major Sludgebucket — Similar to the character in Fawlty Towers (ie as mad as a hatter).
This is mainly 'coz he's always shouting strange stuff such as‘Grenade’ and ‘Dirty Rats’.
As you may have guessed, he's not very informative (unless you're interested in grenades or rats).
Hilda Crumble — The family cook, she's a bit thick and doesn't know much about anything.
Professor Bull — Like the Major this guy's a couple of sandwiches short of a picnic.
Gabriel Gasbag — As thick as a proverbial brick, possesses hardly any intelligence (it's doubtful if she can even spell the word).
She's a great one for idle gossip though.
Cynthia Sludgebucket — The major's daughter, and the second person to die when a piano decides to commit suicide.
She's a total airhead: ask her about other characters and she'll respond with, ‘Yes I totally agree.’
Bentley — He's a very strange character, if you find his room open he's often there waiting to lure you in.
As soon as you enter he'll lock the door, but it's in his contract to act suspiciously (in all good murder mysteries the butler did it).
Doctor Mortem — The family doctor snuffs it when he loses an argument with a knife.
He's informative beforehand though.
Reverend Wrinklebottom — The local vicar, his wife disappeared in suspicious circumstances so it's worth talking to him.
Mr Dingle — The family solicitor and the first person to die — not surprising when the will contains some nasty surprises.
HINTS
When the game starts, wait for a couple of minutes, then make your way to Dr Dingle's room — he's the first person to croak it.
If he's dead, go up to him and, when the screen fades, select option Open from the menu.
Three items should appear.
A word of advice: the silver key is for the briefcase, NOT to open doors.
Go to the picture in the drawing room and select icon Open on the menu.
Underneath there should be a safe: the combination is 210319.
Inside is a will, so read it for a few surprises.
To prevent someone getting murdered, hand around and follow them.
Search every room for clues.
People worth talking to are: Doctor Mortem, Reverend Wrinklebottom and Mr Dingle.
They'll give you useful info on the other characters.
All the guests respond differently to different objects, so experiment.
I EAT SHOES!
HEE!
HEE!
HE'S A BIT DODGY IS THAT DR.
BUTCHER!
TIPS CLINIC
Right you orrible lot, Dr Butcher is here to open the Tips Clinic doors and deny any malpractice charges (as in ‘my hand slipped, honest guv’).
Another batch of letters has reached my desk, some pleading, others offering help to my more unfortunate patients.
The address to send stuff to is DR BUTCHER (MD), COMMODORE FORCE, So, if Nurse Enema would be so kind as to wheel in the first vict…erm patient, I'll sharpen my instruments.
John Walker from Oxford asks how to get the Gunship chopper in the air.
After being smacked on the head with a baseball bat (wielded by Steve) for a couple of hours, I remembered how to do it.
On the left of the cockpit panel are three letters: F, T and R. Above these is a small red light; press number 3 on the keyboard to extinguish it.
Then press number 2 so the R bar increases with the rotor speed.
Now repeatedly press F1.
The chopper will take to the air.
Finally press number 1 to keep it there.
It only remains for you to push forward on the joystick and go kick some butt.
Chris Nicholls from Plymouth asked for a Turbo The Tortoise infinite lives poke, so thanks go to W Keenan from Tyne and Wear for his/her help.
Reset on the title screen, then enter POKE 44165,44 (infy lives), then enter POKE 40872, 44: POKE 40910,44 (infy energy), now POKE 39129,44 (infy bullets).
Then to restart the game type SYS 35895.
Darren Hare wanted non-Reset tips for Armalyte ,Exolon ,Robocop and Ikari Warriors , also Roland Jackson from Lancs wanted the Armalyte stuff.
Well I have Armalyte , Exolon and Robocop for ya.
Thanks go to W Keenan for the Armalyte and Robocop stuff, and Michael Newsham from Ipswich is the sender of the Exolon tip (cheers pal).
ROBOCOP
Also, for Reset cart owners, type POKE 44416.0 (infy energy), then SYS 32768 to restart.
EXOLON
Select the Redefine Keys option and type in Z, O, R, B, A (in that order).
Start the game as normal, and infy lives will be yours.
Especially for Luke Croll from Kent, here are the rest of the Steg codes.
Thanks go to Gavin ‘The Joker’ Dixon (watch it with that Smylex gas though).
HO!
HO!
 I'M MR.
WIBBLE ARMS!
Darn it, we haven't quite finished with The Detective yet.
Adrian Spink from Kent wants to find out how to open the secret passages (especially the one in the kitchen).
He also wonders how to open Gabriel's locket and where to find the 101 Detective stories.
Neil Anderson from Ireland wants to get into the few rooms that the bunch of keys and big iron key won't open.
He'd like to know the location of the secret passages in the kitchen and bedrooms.
He's also after cheats and maps for all the games in the Dizzy Collection …any takers?
S Windridge from Coventry's after help with Arnie and F1 Tornado .
Well, for Arnie I printed a map and infinite lives poke in issue 87 (also look at this month's tips section).
So for infinite lives, just Reset the game and enter POKE 2048,32 POKE 2–40.153; POKE 2-5-.57; POKE 1328-.44 SYS 2–49 to restart the game.
If anyone can help with F1 Tornado I'd appreciate it.
Paula Ward & co from Leeds would like help with Defenders Of The Earth ,Five On A Treasure Island and Batman The Caped Crusader .
Ms K Brummitt from Birmingham is after a cheat for Dragon Ninja and wants to know how you get out of the factory in Robocop .
Patrick Langen from Co Mayo's having problems with Treasure Island Dizzy .
He wants to know how to get up the steps to the left of the infrared detonator.
James Smith from Leeds recently purchased a copy of the legendary Elite , and is after some tips that work.
Apparently he tried typing old tips from pre-Corky days, but they didn't work properly.
So if any space pilots want to write in.
Tim Harding from Halstead is having trouble with Fantasy World Dizzy .
When he leaves the meaty bone for the Armorog, it's supposed to stay in its den, out of the way.
But it doesn't, so can anyone tell him why?
Luke Croll from Kent is stuck on Seymour Goes To Hollywood .
He can't get past Ding, arrest Saucy Sal, get to Frankenstein or cross the main road.
Also what do you do with the rubber gloves, the ball, the banana butty, the gold dollars and the dagger.
A solution/map would apparently be gratefully received by Mr Croll, so get yer sheets of A4 paper and crayons out.
Ryan Pascall from Plymouth's after help with Pitfighter ,Out Run Europa and Spellbound .
Michael Kissane (I think…attack of the ol' spidery handwriting) from Co Kerry would like infinite lives pokes for the cartridge version of Rick Dangerous , plus the tape versions of Secret Agent: Sly Spy and Altered Beast .
And finally, Matt Barton from Norwich can't get past the piranha pond in Creatures .
Can anyone help this poor, unfortunate guy?
CORKY'S ROLLCALL
Due to limited space and a lorry load of mail, not all your tips and maps could be used this month.
I've read through them all, but unfortunately can't answer 'em individually.
Although they give me a good start for next issue.
So thanks for the hard work goes to…
PARP!
PARDON ME!
IT'S ALL THOSE SHOES!
Competition!
BULLY FOR YOU!
zzap! comp
GET ON THE OCHE WITH ALTERNATIVE SOFTWARE!
Good evening ladies and gentlemen, and welcome to one of Ludlow's most renowned hostelries, The Wonky Joystick.
Tonight's entertainment takes the form of a knockout darts competition, and your host for the evening is none other than TV superstar Jim Bowen.
So give him a big hand, please…
‘Right, thanks, lovely to see you, great.
I can tell you we're in for a smashin' night tonight at the Gronky Josstick pub here in lovely Ludlow.
There are some truly super prizes on offer to the ten lucky winners of this evening's match, and 25 runners-up will each be awarded a little something, too.
So without further ado, let's get on with the show…and remember, out of the black and into the red, you get nothing in this game for two-in-a-bed!’
Thanks, Jim.
Now let's get this show on the road.
To be in with a chance of winning you'll have to answer the following three questions (the categories are popular music, fashion and words).
Then, when you think you've got all the answers right, it's time to get on the oche, and aim for bull on our special ZZAP! dartboard.
Naturally, we don't expect you to fling real arrows at the best C64 mag on the market, no no no!
Instead, pick up a pen, close your eyes and try to jab your biro down in the bull's-eye.
You've got three tries at it and, if you do get one right in the middle, you qualify and can enter the competition!
Obviously we're unable to ensure that none of  you omitted cheat by not closing your eyes properly, but we know that if you do sneak a cheeky peek as the pen descends you'll never be able to watch Bullseye again without suffering heart-rending pangs of guilt.
Be warned!
QUESTION 1 — POP MUSIC
Which '70s rock 'n' roll group had hits with Duke Of Earl ,Daddy Cool ,Blue Moon and Boys From New York City ?
QUESTION 2 — FASHION
What do tailors and seamstresses call the little tucks they sew into garments to make them fit more snugly?
QUESTION 3 — WORDS
Which word means to dash quickly from one place to another?
(Clue: Four-letter word beginning with ‘D’.)
Got the questions right?
Good!
Now close your eyes and aim for the bull!
YO!
DUDES!
ROOKFORD SMELLS OF DEAD FISH!
HEE!
Adventures!
Bash Yer Brains!
Roll up, roll up for another blood-soaked slaughterfest, brought to you by ZZAP! 's very own master of disaster…take it away, Bash  The Barbarian!
(We'll mop up the blood afterwards).
It's all go in adventuredom this month.
I've barely had time to wipe the blood off my axe after my last battle and it's already time to hack my way through the next trail!
Just for a change I teamed up with a few fellow warriors to take on the Witchlord in Gremlin's RPG-for-the-masses,Heroquest .
It was some fight, I can tell you…
For all its strengths, the game has a few flaws — you can't drop objects or give them to another character.
So if you're on full energy and have a potion of healing while your buddy's damn-near dead, it's tough — you can't let him swig it!
They could've done more with the ‘ol wizard too: unable to use most of the flashy weapons from the armoury, he accumulates huge amounts of dosh as he has nothing to spend it on.
Nevertheless Heroquest is still a damn fine game.
Obviously it's nowhere near as deep or complicated as Bard's Tale , but it's still a force to be reckoned with — especially now you get the expansion set thrown in too.
World of adventure
Oh well, back to business.
Adventure giants Atlas, alas, have closed down.
But fear not — their mighty offerings are all still available through other labels.
Tony Collins at The Guild now publishes this month's Megatape game The Case Of The Mixed Up Shymer , plus former Megatape hits Atalan and Black Knight .
He will also release Dorothy Millard's adventures in the near future.
For further details send an SAE to Tony at The Guild.
Walter Pooley, another Atlas author, is to market his own games — covered extensively in our Issue 83 feature, ‘Pooley Makes Waves’.
They cost a mere £2.50 each or five for a tenner (cassette or disk).
For further details bung him an SAE (see ‘Contact Points’ box for address).
TREASURE CHEST
Verily, the plains of adventuredom tremble as two of its mightiest denizens join forces — but only for disciples of Bash!
The Simon Avery classics Danger — Adventurer At Work and Danger — Adventurer At  Work  2 are available, exclusive to ZZAP!, on one VFM pack!
Just send the coupon with your name and address and a cheque for £3.00 to The Guild.
TANTALISING TIPS
Here are some more of Chris Boyd's adventure cheats.
If you're stuck, check 'em out — you may get lucky!
KAYLETH — A little exploring outside the Kromer will reveal an AZAP clue.
FRANKENSTEIN — The rope is in the garden.
Pray and speak in the church, and search the forge for money.
RIGEL'S REVENGE — Don't get caught in the net as it's impossible to escape.
DRACULA — Wear the crucifix to get on the second coach.
KNIGHTMARE — Give the old man food and water and ask for help.
So there we have it.
More tips next month, and if anyone wants to send in a few, go ahead — you might even get your name in print!
Send 'em to Bash Yer Brains at the usual address.
A  BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO ADVENTURES
BY DAVE HAVARD
Available from Mandy Rodrigues, £3.00
By Crom I wish there were more adventures for novices to practise their skills.
People who write adventures tend to forget they were beginners once, making the mighty plains inaccessible for all but the brave and fearless (like myself).
Thankfully there are some still willing to take would-be heroes under their wing and give the novice a chance to become a legend.
If my beginner's guide (Issue 88) left you hungry for more, check out Dave Havard's brilliant book,A Beginner's Guide to Adventures .
A 52-page paperback offering, it explores all aspects of adventuredom in detail.
There are chapters on the various types of adventures, problem solving, mazes, and an excellent walk-through analysis of Artic's ageing classic,The Golden Apple .
The appendix on useful verbs should come in handy for those not up on adventure jargon, but be careful with the address section — a lot of them are now out of date so be prepared for some lack of response in some cases.
A Beginner's Guide To Adventures costs a mere £3.00, though regular readers can get it at 50p off with last month's coupon.
Send a cheque/PO to Mandy Rodrigues.
Book Review!
DANGER — ADVENTURER AT WORK 2
The Guild, £2.00 — cassette OR disk
You knew it couldn't last.
You couldn't live in peace, playing adventures all day long, undisturbed by the real world.
The computer paradise to which you emigrated in D — AAW 1 (81%, Issue 85) was rudely shattered when your electricity was cut off, leaving you with no choice but to find the electricity-board office and pay the bill.
A conversion of the original Amstrad  game, like all Simon Avery outings it's wild, wacky and totally divorced from reality.
Look out for the splatter (a knuckle-cracking heavy who uses more force than a bouncer), pay a quick visit to heaven and hell, and as for Santa's in-store ‘grotty’…it's tacky, vulgar, and full of overpriced garbage they couldn't sell during the year!
Sound familiar?
Starting in your computer room, you can enter separate ‘zones’ at will using a Star Trekstyle transporter (I wonder why it still works with the electricity off?).
Fans of the Level 9 classic Lords Of Time will find this system immediately to their liking.
There are three worlds to explore: a tropical beach littered with lovely palm trees and lovelier nudists (don't get too excited — there aren't any graphics), a chilly Arctic zone, and of course the real world — well it's as real as you'll ever get in an Avery game!
Although not too difficult, it's certainly trickier than D — AAW 1 .
Unfortunately, unlike  its predecessor it has no score system (I always like to know how far I've got in a game), but I presume this is due to memory restrictions.
The puzzles are always fair, but you'll need to latch onto Mr Avery's offbeat humour if you're going to get anywhere.
Alas, there's a slight bug.
You can wash your clothes wherever you like, not just in the logical and intended location.
Obviously cock-ups like this we can well do without, but thankfully it doesn't detract from the game too much.
I like Simon Avery's games.
They all possess a keen sense of humour, fun and imaginative problems, and they never leave you groping in the dark wondering what to do next.
And guess what?
D — AAW 2 is no exception!
A damn fine game that improves on its superb predecessor — buy it!
ZZAP! 64 ACTION!
All the Hollywood blockbusters on your C64!
Bash's Letters!
‘Well, hi there Bashers,’ beamed Whiplash, donning her whip and boots for another hard day's letter-lashing.
‘I see you've got this month's reader-writes!
Maybe one day I'll teach you to read so you can check 'em out!’
‘By the sacred stones of Sharniad,’ cried Bash, ‘that wisecrack was your last!’
‘Schlock — thud!
Whiplash's head rolled away from her lifeless body, mouth contorted in a hideous grin.
Laying his blooded axe beside her twisted form, Bash once more turned to the letters…
SIXTEEN PLUS FOUR EQUALS CRUD!
Dear Bash
First of all I'd like to compliment you on such a brill and fabbo magazine.
I've had my Commodore 64 for only three months and haven't yet, and won't in the future, miss a copy of ZZAP! 64.
Down to my reason for writing.
I used to own a C16+4, until it blew up on me.
Now I'm left with loads of software that won't load on my 64.
Can you please tell me why?
'Coz it's a completely different computer, yer nit.
Please keep up the good work, your mag is great.
Oh, by the way, is there ever likely to be a section in ZZAP! all about programming the 64.
I have read the user manual but would like to know more.
•We've no plans to introduce a programming section, but for those who seek guidance in their struggle against technical foes, Professor Brian Strain will be here from next month on to sharpen your axe.
Send him your technical queries at the usual address.
FROM LITTLE ACORNS GROW…
Dear Bash
Firstly I'd like to thank your brilliant mag.
I used to get a ‘lesser mag’ until I heard about ZZAP 64!
Now I don't go anywhere without it!
Now, please could you answer my questions as I'm desperate to find the answers:
1
Could you put more games like Detective on future Megatapes, as it's excellent (but I could do with some help!).
So could we!
If anyone has a solution, send it in.
2
I've heard about a roleplaying game called Maniac Mansion from US Gold.
How much is it and where could I contact them?
Alas, I bring ill tidings.
Maniac Mansion, more of an animated adventure than an RPG, is no longer available — keep checking those car boot sales and market stalls.
3.
Have you (or Corky) got an Action Replay poke for infinite lives on Turrican (Kixx)?
I sent my faithful carrier-eagle across the mighty plains to ZZAP!
Towers with your request.
Check Dr Butcher MD's Tips Clinic for a reply.
4.
I know many millions of people have already asked, but when is Lemmings coming out for the 64?
A messenger from a far-off land brought fearful news — see the Stuff pages for full details.
5.
What is the best value-for-money tennis sim around?
I like International 3D Tennis, but it won't be everyone's cup of tea.
The new Zeppelin game looks good — check out this month's preview.
6.
What is the best ‘in the driver's seat’ racing car game?
Stunt Car Racer, without a doubt.
It's on the Kixx budget label.
7.
Many moons ago, I had an Acorn Electron (please don't laugh), which had an ace game called Ghouls (from Microvalue, I think).
I've heard it's out for the Commie (well, has been for years), and was wondering where I could get hold of a copy.
Verily, thou art mistaken — I contacted Microvalue, and they've never heard of it.
There's a game called Ghouls ‘N’ Ghosts on US Gold's Kixx label — is this the artifact you seek?
•Glad you like the magazine, Stuart, and I hope our counsel is of help.
IT'S IN THE CAN
Dear Sir/Madam (make your mind up — Ed)
I purchased Issue 87 of ZZAP 64 on 10/8/92.
The covermounted games were great — that is, all except LA Adventure .
The introduction screen appears (when the game has loaded), telling you to press ‘space’ to continue.
When I press the space-bar a computer appears with the following information beneath it:
‘Sitting at a desk in front of your computer.
You have just put the finishing touches to your latest creation ‘LA Adventure’.
You see a can of hydro-soda.’
It then waits for your input.
I have tried practically every word suitable (grab, get, etc) but all it prints is either ‘exqueeze-me’ or ‘you can't’.
I then checked the green box on the right-hand side of page 8 (Help For The Hopeless).
It said if you're unable to enter the adventure, type ‘GRAP PULSE’.
I tried this, but much to my disappointment that didn't work either.
•By Crom, how many intrepid heroes are stuck in this particular peat-bog?
For those still scratching their heads, the first two commands are GET CAN and OPEN CAN.
GRAB PULSE comes later.
Enjoy the rest of the game, and I hope you like this month's offering too.
DESPERATE OF DEVON
Dear ZZAP!
I know ZZAP! has done away with the classified adverts, but I'm writing to you, hoping you'll print this: ‘Wanted — ZZAP! 64 issue numbers 55 and 68.
Must be in good condition.
Please ring (0752) 251144 and ask for Scott.’
Please print this letter as I want to get hold of these two issues and the ZZAP!
Zzuperstore has sold out.
Can anyone help?
There must be thousands of copies out there, surely someone's got a couple they've finished with.
CONCERNED CRITIC
Dear Lash 'N' Bash
Well I've sent my tips to Corky, returned my ‘surveying the scene’ and even included an SAE!
So I thought I'd write to you too.
On the whole the magazine is great…however, I do have some ideas and some points to be raised.
In fact I'm going to comment on every aspect and section of the mag, and so as the trend goes:
1
ZZAP!
Zone: I think this section should be centred on the news from Commodore (new projects, for example) and developments in the software companies.
Personally, I'd like to see a column, perhaps a page, dedicated to the programmers, such as the article on Mike Singleton several issues ago.
It would be nice to see how people like Manfred Trenz design their games.
2
Tape Worm: I'm normally very polite and hardly swear, but I'd go so far as to say that Tape Worm is one ugly (Censored!— Ed).
Seriously, the games so far have been great (I have Megatapes 22–30).
I'd rather see one or two GOOD games from major companies and on the other side there should be games sent in from readers (they must also be of a high quality though!).
Good section, but get rid of that maggot!
The fish character would be better, or dare I say banana!
(I never bought earlier mags, so who is he/she, as it caused an uproar in the last issue!?)
3
Reviews: No problems, great presentation.
4
Features: As above.
5
Previews: As above the above!
6
It's Porky, er, Corky!:
Lookin' better these days, although more tips and maps for old games would be great as some of us don't have the luxury of buying every new release!
7
‘How To Be A Megastar’ Feature: Quite brilliant!
This feature was very informative.
Will it be included regularly?
I reckon that it oughta be!
8
Scorelord: POINTLESS!
People are sending in some really bad, obviously made-up scores: 9 million on Turrican — the most I can manage is 2 million and that's by visiting every section and standing at the edge of the cascade, blasting everything.
Sorry to those who send in sensible scores but people like Gaz Hutchinson should be shot as they spoil the whole thing.
9
Poster: Please, please, I'm 16 and I don't want pictures of Steg to pin up or wrestlers.
Take a look at the Ultimate posters, now they are good (I did like the poster of Elvira though!).
10
Lash ‘N’ Bash: Dare I say?
I think you really ought to let your hair down and become one horny bitch!
Nice boots and dress though!
11
Flashback: Very good section.
12
Compilations: Ditto!
13
Adventures: Hmmm!
I'm not really interested in adventures but I understand that some people are and the mag has to cover all topics to please everyone!
Leave it, I suppose!
14
Surveys: I find these quite good and happily fill 'em in.
Perhaps you should include one for each section every issue, so you can focus on what's wrong with it.
Concentrate on Corky for one issue, and review style the next.
Not just one big survey, well perhaps at the end of the year!
15
PD File: Interesting, no probs yet!
Well that's it for now.
I hope that was informative!
Oh, one last thing.
Can I win the ‘Pilchard Of The Month ’award by saying that you can reset the C64 by pressing Run/Stop and Restore simultaneously (no!— Ed).
•Glad our mighty tome strikes true!
It's certainly nice to see someone who's not into adventures but doesn't expect us to trash the column.
Check out Shymer on this month's Megatape — you never know, you might actually LIKE it!
Lots of people like the poster too, so we'll be sticking with it for now, and as for the scores…we'll be done some more reader challenges soon, so liars who can hardly play a game they claim to have mastered will have me to deal with!
MUSIC TO OUR EARS
Dear Bash
I've read ZZAP! since Issue 81 and it beats the other mags into a pulp.
Of course, Issue 81 was the last issue of the old-look ZZAP!.
I read the Blues Brothers review and the soundtrack gave me an idea: why not have a soundtrack chart in ZZAP!?
Here are my questions:
1
What do you think of Ocean's Narc (now on budget)?
Flippin' awful!
Check out the review in issue 88.
2
Have Software City stopped trading because I couldn't find their list of games in Issue 87?
No, they're still fighting the good fight.
Seek out their advert this issue for further details.
3
When are you going to review Grandslam Video's Beavers ?
When they finish coding it.
4
Please could you put better games on the Megatape?
Most of them are crud!
By the wings of Draconius, when I've sharpened my axe you'll suffer the same fate as Whiplash!
The Megatapes are getting better and better, and next month we're launching the all-new COMMODORE FORCE with a couple more great Storm games.
If you're still alive, you won't be disappointed.
5
What do you think of the Max Pack compilation?
It's great.
6
Is the Action Replay MkVI cartridge worth £35?
Depends how much you'd use it, but I wouldn't be without mine.
7
Please could somebody do some maps for Terminator 2 ?
You heard the man — get mapping!
HEY!
GOOD LOOKING…
This isn't a complaint, it's a compliment on the new look.
I think it's great and I have every sympathy for you copping all the flak from the readers who don't like it.
If I were you I'd tell them if they don't like it, lump it.
Now for some questions:
1
Would you recommend Wrestling Superstars by CodeMasters, and how much is it?
Give us a chance!
At the time of writing it's not even out yet.
2
What would you recommend as a good beat-'em-up game?
Check out Target Renegade, WWF Wrestlemania, and this month's Megatape hit, Ninja Warriors.
3
System 3 are meant to be bringing a new game called Silly Putty out.
When is it going to be in the shops?
The game's just called Putty now, and it won't be released on the C64.
4
Will you ever put MicroProse Soccer on a Megatape?
If they let us.
MEGA WALLY!
Well done for making your mag the best on earth.
Recently I bought a Python No 1 Multi-system joystick.
I reckon it's fairly good, what do you think of it?
There is (was) a friend of mine who reminds me of Fatty Phil.
He has a huge belly and is always drooling.
That same stupid person got a Master System 2 for his birthday and went out and bought two £33 games for the Mega Drive.
Of course, when he got home he found they wouldn't fit into his console!
I have got some questions for you:
1
When will Nigel Mansell's racing game be released by Gremlin?
January, Crom willing.
2
What is Zeppelin's phone number?
I'm not sure I should give out their phone number, but their address is:
3
Why are you and Lash always fighting?
We don't, we've stopped — she's so much more amiable!
4
Who do you follow in the Premier League?
I  follow Everton, the best!
One Aston Villa, there's only one Aston Villa, one Aston Viiiiiilla, there's only, etc, etc.
•I don't think your friend's much like our Phil.
Ol' Kingle might be fat, ugly, maybe even stupid, but he'd NEVER be daft enough to buy a console!
BLOWIN' OUR TRUMPET
Congratulations ZZAP!
There was a time when, reading a certain other C64 magazine, I thought ‘No way is ZZAP! better than this.’
Not until Issue 88.
I couldn't believe my eyes!
Not only did it have bundles of games and demos (the only games I have enough money to buy) but also pages of reviews!
Budget software was fully covered, with great screenshots and as much as a page per game!
But this was not all that caught my attention.
There were posters galore!
(Heh heh, need I say more?)
And the adventure section!
C64 mags have been without a good section for yonks, and yet here in ZZAP!
I was confronted with great adventure stuff, plus the adventure special.
Great Scott!
I do apologise for such a long letter, but I had always believed that ZZAP! was the inferior C64 mag.
So I hereby declare that in saying ZZAP! was inferior, I was talking out of my bottom.
Well done ZZAP!, keep it up.
By the way, you were quite right about the higher price — dedicated gamesplayers don't mind paying that little extra, especially for that whole lot more.
PS Any chance of a review of on old adventure games such as Bloodwych ?
•Verily, he has seen the light!
Look out for more great Megatapes, rip-roaring reviews and fantastic features in next month's issue of COMMODORE FORCE!
We're having a bit of a refit (see the ‘next month’ page), but make no mistake — all your old favourites will be there!
Oh yes — I'll still swing my mighty axe on the adventure pages too!
There's too much going on in Adventuredom to give much room to its older denizens, but you can't go far wrong with Bloodwych — it got a Sizzler in Issue 65!
HE'S FROM BARCELONA
I'm one of your countless subscribers who's indebted to your great magazine.
So much, that I decided to draw you a piccy of your swish logo on our school's Nimbus printer.
ZZAP! will always reign supreme.
It proved this when it first came out way back in ‘85.
Other magazines have always tried to copy ZZAP! but have never quite cut the mustard.
The following survey was taken on the streets of Bradford.
We asked 250 people who owned Commodore 64 machines which magazines they read, or if more than one, the one they liked best.
Here are the results on a percentage basis:(* Yes, we do have nutters in Bradford!).
Now for the dead-important questions and comments.
Uno.
If you're going to put adventures on one of the Megatapes, can they be good (like Nythyhel ) and not rubbish (like Black Knight and LA )?
Not everyone has the same tastes, remember — some people don't like reading long text messages like those in Nythyhel, but perhaps it's time for another game with a strong storyline.
Watch this space!
Dose
.
I like the idea of TWO Megatapes and bigger pages.
Now they're the same size as that popular teenage magazine BIG!!
Maybe the exclamation marks make the difference…
What's BIG!?
Sounds like one of those magazines Miss Whipple used to hide under her bed…
Trese
Can we have Rampage on the Megatape as I know Your Sinclair had it a while back?
Maybe.
Quattro
£2.95 is a small price to pay for the world's greatest mag!
Cinco.
Tell Lash she should be locked up and left to rot while some good people get all the letters.
She will now I've decapitated her.
Seis.
Is Mega-Sports from US Gold any good?
Depends if you're into that sort of thing.
We couldn't review it ‘coz US Gold never sent us a copy, but most of the games are featured in Phil's Issue 88 sports roundup.
Ocho.
May Crom be with you!
Now that's your lot FOR NOW, so Buenos Dias/Tardes/Noches!
PS.
If you're wondering why I'm going Spanish, it's 'coz of that wondrous soap, Eldorado.
ELDORADO?!?
I've had more fun wiping the blood of a blue-bottomed bloggert off my broadsword than watching that pile of pus!
LITTLE WONDER
The date is the 25th of August 1992AD, the time is 20:30 and 5 seconds, no 18 seconds, no 32 seconds, oh forget it.
Right, down to business.
I've been a ZZAP! fan since Issue 68, and I'd like to say it's the most amazing thing that has set foot on earth.
Quite a while ago I purchased Super Wonder Boy in Monster Land .
I loved it: when nearly every one of my friends came round, all they wanted to play was Super Wonder Boy .
But when I looked in the ZZAP!
Bible I saw that it only got 68%.
Only 68%!?
Great colourful graphics, very hard (well that's what I think, when it comes to computer games I'm pretty rubbish), fun.
Also, I'd like to tell everyone out there to stop making fun of the Spectrum.
We don't like 16-bit owners making fun of us 8-bit owners, so why should we make fun of the Spectrum?
I know it isn't perfect but neither is the C64.
So before you're about to criticise the Spectrum, ask yourself this question: if I didn't have a computer and I was trying to look for one and I only had enough money for the Spectrum, what would I do?
(Hang myself!— Ed).
Also, tell all those 16-bit owners to stop making fun of all us 8-bit owners or Miss W will give them 20,000 lashes (hope you don't mind).
At least we don't have to spend £25 on a single game.
I have a friend who owns an ST and he keeps telling me to sell my C64.
Well if he doesn't like my C64 why doesn't he buy me an Amiga 500 for my birthday?
Questions:
1.
What was the best game ever reviewed in ZZAP! and is it worth now what mark it got?
That's a matter of opinion, but the highest mark ever was 98%, scored by Alter Ego, Ballblazer, Bubble Bobble, Head Over Heels, Mercenary, Spindizzy, Tetris and World Games.
There's some great games there, but why Tetris scored so highly I'll never know.
It's slow, flickery and nowhere near as good as the PD version we had on the Megatape.
2.
How much is the pay for the ZZAP! staff?
About 30 groats each moon phase.
3.
How tall and old are the Scorelord, Miss W and Bash — and what are their hobbies?
I've never met Scorelord so I can't say, but I'm 6′4″, and Miss Whipple's about a foot shorter than she was this morning.
As for our hobbies…
I like travelling, meeting people then killing ‘em, Scorelord's into zero-gravity flyball, and Whipple — her hobbies weren't fit for publication!
4.
How's about putting an advert for ZZAP! on television?
Do it yourself — just cut out one of our ads, paste it to a stiff piece of card, and place it on your set!
PS You're definitely crazy for giving everyone TWO Megatapes.
•Point taken about the computers, Joel, but let's be realistic — the Speccy was great in its day, but it's a bit long in the tooth now.
Still, anything's better than those 16-bit monstrosities that cost so much to buy, you can't afford the overpriced games to go with them.
AND A BOTTLE OF RUM?
After reading your magazine for a few years now, I feel it's time to send you a letter.
ZZAP! has always had a very strong opinion against software piracy (eg the article ‘Pirate Walks The Plank’, Issue 87) and I think you're right in many of your arguments.
But ZZAP! has never looked at the other side of the problem or asked themselves: ‘Why is there so much software piracy?’
Well, in the beginning the price for a game was very high (more than £40 for a simple game like Frogger on the Atari console).
Later the home computers entered the market and software prices lowered but were still high.
But with the coming of the home computer, software piracy also appeared.
From that moment the software companies said they were forced to keep up prices because of the hackers.
This sounds logical, but when I look at the  Sega or Nintendo where there's no piracy, you still have to pay a fortune for one single game.
Software pirates are also blamed for the low sales figures.
The total damage done is said to be millions and millions.
This amount is usually the total worth of illegally copied software.
The real damage must be much lower for two reasons:
In most cases when a game is acquired illegally, they wouldn't even think about buying the game if copying was impossible.
I mean, when you can get Dick Tracy for free you'll take it, but when you have to pay £10 for it you'll leave it on the shelf.
The second reason is the fact that most people have a limited budget and are already spending all their cash on games.
When these people copy games they can't be damaging the software market, because they're not able to buy the software anyway.
You mustn't get me wrong, I think the world would be much better without software piracy.
I only want to make clear that the problem is far more complex than it is represented.
Keep up the good work, long live ZZAP! and God save Phil King.
Verily, your axe strikes true when you suggest that some can't spend more on software, even if they didn't pirate — but is this any excuse for stealing?
Personally I'd love a coat of mithril mail forged by the high elves of the mystic wood, but I can't afford one.
Does that mean I should go out and steal one?
Also, there are thousands of cowardly curs out there who never buy software, preferring to rip-off their friends' instead.
These evil leeches should be fed to the Stygian hell-hound.
WHAT ASAD ONE!
HIGH-DIE-HI, CAMPERS!
After reading the August issue of your magazine I was happy to finally see the feature on how to be a Megastar.
Not only because we sent in a game, but also because I'm interested in what other readers have created.
I really liked the feature — and I hope you'll start to put readers' games on your Megatape more often, maybe even monthly — except for one thing.
The article says that the game Dying High has a bug in it, which simply isn't true.
You probably figured out by now that I'm part of the team that made the game and to prove it isn't bugged I only have to quote some of Ian Osborne's words:
‘We once got a two-player-only aerial dogfighter (Dying High , where the second-joystick option didn't work, making the game unplayable!’
First of all, if it's a two-player-only game, why in the world would there be a second-joystick option?
Secondly, the game doesn't even have a second-joystick option, so how can it not work?
Therefore I suggest Mr Osborne tries inserting joysticks in both the ports and then enjoy the game which is really fun to play (and hopefully put it on the Megatape after all).
•What's this?
A mistake in our hallowed tome?
I seriously considered disembowelling Ian for this, but on reflection that would be a little harsh.
Perhaps ‘second-joystick option’ was the wrong phrase to use, but when joysticks were plugged into both ports, one of them most definitely DIDN'T work!
Maybe the fault was in our copy of the game rather than the program itself.
Anyway, I'm glad you liked the feature, and feel free to resubmit Dying High , or any other game you've written.
I THINK, THEREFORE…
Most people who write to you say they think your mag is great.
Well I don't think it's great…
I KNOW it's great.
Anyway, on to my questions:
1.
Is it possible to list a program after resetting the game with a reset switch?
2.
Does the Action Replay Cartridge Mark VI have a reset switch?
How many games does the infinite lives cheat facility work on?
Using the freezer facility, can I put all my games on blank tapes to load faster?
If it's written in BASIC, yes, but if it's in machine code you can only PEEK individual addresses.
If you've got an Action Replay cart you can disassemble and display machine code routines, but not with an ordinary reset switch.
Yes, the vast majority of ‘em, and yes (in that order).
3.
Have you got an address I can write to for cheats and tips?
Yes, ours — write to Dr Butcher MD, and he'll sort you out.
4.
Is The Simpsons any good on tape and when will it be out on budget?
It wasn't bad at all, but I doubt it'll be on budget until some time next year.
It'll be included on a compilation with WWF and Terminator 2 at the end of the month.
Look out for a full review in the new-look COMMODORE FORCE!
5.
Is there a program that'll put a simultaneous two-player mode in Turtles 2 :The Coin-Op ?
There's one there already, you twerp!
6.
Could you tell me how to hack a game?
Depends what you mean by ‘hack’.
If you mean ‘pirate’, you can get lost, but if you want to analyse programs in order to get reset pokes, for example, you'll need to learn machine code first.
Write to Brian Strain with any specific probs.
ZZAP!
UBER ALLES!
I'd like to compliment ZZAP! on a great mag which I'm sure will go on for years to come (ho ho ho!— Ed.)
Anyway, to the issue of the C65 which I have been hearing a lot about recently, but still don't know exactly what it does.
Could you please answer this for me?
The C65 was intended to be a low-cost computer with better technical specifications than, but still compatible with, the C64.
Despite much interest from the press and public, Commodore have shelved its launch.
I also have some other questions:
1.
Why is Phil always slobbering on the reviews pages?
You should see him slobber in the office!
2.
Is there any chance of a Wayne's World computer game?
I hope so…
NOT!
Rising from his sturdy wooden bench, Bash blew out his candle and made towards his bed.
‘I'll sleep well tonight,’ he thought.
‘I've earned it!’…a bright, distant light halted him in his tracks!
‘By Crom,’ he screamed, ‘The stars are falling!’
The light grew in size, taking on a vaguely spherical shape.
Shielding his eyes from the glare, Bash looked on as the craft continued its slow descent, coming to rest in a field outside the barbarian's hut.
The light gradually faded, allowing a clearer view of the craft — Bash could now make out a thin outline, a panel or…a door!
Moments later his suspicions were confirmed as it gradually slid open.
A tall humanoid creature with a large, fierce-looking helmet stepped out and headed towards Bash, who raised his axe and prepared for battle.
‘Fear not, brave barbarian,’ the creature's rich baritone echoed across the plain.
‘I come in peace.’
Suddenly Bash realised who it was!
‘Scorelord!’ he cried, ‘Is it really you?’
The figure nodded.
‘I've been watching you, Bash.
You fight well on the plains of Adventuredom, but since your quest began, huge numbers of adventure foes have risen.
Bash, your readers need you — only you can up the slaughter rate.’
‘B-but what about the letters page?’ stammered Bash.
‘I won't have time to do it now, and Whiplash is dead.’
‘Worry not, Bash.
In my hyper-ship I have the latest sub-ether radio equipment.
If I set it to the same frequency as the only Mark I Super C64 in existence, I might just be able to contact an old friend of ours.’
‘You mean…
Lloyd Mangram?’
Bash queried.
‘Indeed I do,’ answered the Scorelord.
‘Come, Bash — join me in my quest.’
Heart in mouth, Bash walked deliberately towards the ship.
‘I'm finally going to meet him,’ he thought.
‘I'm finally going to meet the legend…‘
Lloyd Mangram takes over the letters page as of next month — if Scorelord can find him!
Look out for Lloyd's column in the new, improved, COMMODORE FORCE!
And keep sending those letters to  
SCORELORD
Another Earth month, another mailbag full of pathetic ‘achievements’ sent by all you worms out there.
how you can persist in being so utterly incompetent bewilders me, and so while indulging in a little light entertainment in the ZZAP! offices (brutally torturing the staff for being human) I decided it was time I found a solution to the problem.
After booting up the initiation sequence on my 700,000,000 Mb supercomputer, I fed in the works of supposedly brilliant Earth dwellers, namely Einstein, Newton and Wayne Campbell.
The computer quickly came to the conclusion that, taking the IQ levels on my own planet into consideration, Einstein and Newton ‘couldn't find their bottoms with both hands and a flashlight.’
When I attempted to feed in the information on Wayne Campbell the computer exploded.
Feeling slightly vexed I decided that all those readers too lazy to write in will be receiving personal visits, so I can introduce them to my favourite topic: ‘Pain, and how (and where!) to inflict it’.
So send your high scores to: The Scorelord  — or be included on my visiting list!
Wayne: ‘I've drunk twenty pints me, and I dunneven need the toilet!’
Dog: ‘Can I have some beer please?’
John goes on the rampage after a heavy ‘Creatures’ session.
‘That'll teach you to nick my sherbet!’
Well, well, well, another humanoid to try my patience.
But at least this James Davies creature has completed Paperboy and looks marginally human!
Which is more than can be said for the Osborne  creature's genetic offering!
Previewz!
Peep show!
IAN OSBORNE rounds up the previews, and  lassos a brand new Dizzy game, a couple of sporting efforts courtesy of Zeppelin and an antiquated arcade adventure from Atlantis.
Yee-haw!
SCEPTRE OF BAGHDAD
The story so far…it was the first day of the year and the people had started to gather in the palace yard.
At noon today the caliph must show the sacred sceptre, to prove his right over the realm of Baghdad (alternatively he could always start another Gulf War).
But it was not to be.
Several hours earlier the caliph woke feeling very strange.
Everything around him seemed to have grown bigger (just like Alice in Wonderland, innit?).
Nervously he ran through the palace to the room, where he kept his magic lamp — rubbing furiously, he summoned the genie!
‘How can I help you master?’ echoed the awakened spirit, obviously not bright enough to notice the obvious.
‘Why am I this small?’ said the caliph, ignoring the genie's stupidity.
‘What has happened to my palace?
What does this all mean?’
After an oppressive silence the genie spoke again.
‘It seems that an evil wizard from a land across the sea has filled your palace with evil creatures and hideous traps to prevent you showing the sceptre at noon today.
He intends to divest you of all your power and become the caliph himself.’
‘What can I do?
How can you help me?’ asked the caliph.
‘I am doomed to stay in this lamp,’ replied the genie, ‘but whenever I can, I will try to give you some helpful clues.’
Needless to say, your task is to help the caliph battle his way through his dark and dangerous palace.
A flickscreen arcade adventure in the Dizzy mould,Sceptre Of Baghdad is a conversion of the yonks-old Speccy game.
Can it hold its own with today's releases?
Only time will tell, but it's looking good — watch this space for further details!
INTERNATIONAL TENNIS
‘Out!’
‘Whadayamean ‘out’?
That ball was in!’
‘It was out!’
‘You cannot be serious.
You just CANNOT be serious, man!
It was on the line, chalk flew up!’
Phil, this is computer tennis.
There's no chalk, and the ball was out, you prat!’
Tennis will never be the same now McEnroe's retired.
No computer sim could simulate all those tantrums and four-letter words, but short of a disaster,International Tennis should be the snappiest C64 tennis game ever!
A highly polished effort, the graphics are nothing short of amazing.
The silky-smooth animation has to be seen to be believed — each stroke is executed without a hint of jerkiness, and they're so realistic you'll think you're watching Wimbledon!’
International Tennis is almost ready to be served up.
Look out for the full review coming over the net, in next month's COMMODORE FORCE.
GRAEME SOUNESS
INTERNATIONAL SOCCER
(Right, Ian — one Birmingham City joke and you're fired — Ed.)
Giving more than a passing nod to the Amiga  classic Sensible Soccer ,Graeme Souness International Soccer is played on a vertically scrolling pitch viewed more or less from above, but with just enough tilt to allow for detailed player graphics instead of a bird's-eye head-and-shoulders shot.
this makes for far more interesting visuals, and if you've got a team of useless old fogeys (like Birmi…erm, like that not-very-good team from the Midlands) their Markie Kendrick bald patches won't show (Har!
But at least I have friends, Ian — Art Ed).
As you can see from the screens, the graphics are pretty good.
They animate well too.
The dodgy dance performed by a goal-scorer looks just like Steve outside the pub loos after half a shandy!
Or to put it another way, it's like a Birmingham City player when…
(You've earned yourself a booking!— Ed.)
Graeme Souness International Soccer 's got a real fight on its hands — there's some great footy games out there, and loads of the all-time classics are now budget!
It's early days yet, but we're really looking forward to seeing the finished article.
Be there, or be a Blues player.
Sneaked that one in, didn't I?
CRYSTAL KINGDOM DIZZY
Dizzy's back, in his biggest, baddest, brawniest adventure yet!
Set over four exciting levels,Crystal Kingdom Dizzy has our ovoid hero seeking the three treasures of Zeffar.
One look at the screenshots will tell you this isn't a dodgy Speccy port, updating about as fast as a reasonably athletic snail.
Crystal Kingdom uses the C64 to its full, with cracking full-colour graphics and near-instantaneous update.
The control method's been improved too — you can now change direction mid-jump and even control the height of your leaps!
With loads more baddies after you, this proves essential.
As with all Dizzy games,Crystal Kingdom is jam-packed with perplexing puzzles to solve.
How do you get the lifts to work?
What do you do with the gold coin?
Why is there a whip in Daisy's bedroom?
Crystal Kingdom Dizzy is due for release in November.
Unlike previous Dizzy outings it retails at £9.99, but from what we've seen so far it'll be worth it.
Bully's Sporting Darts
Eric settles himself on the oche.
He just needs double top now to be the Dog & Duck champion once again.
Can darts ever make a decent computer game?
IAN ‘ON THE OCHE’ OSBORNE grows an enormous gut to find out…
I hate Bullseye .
I really, really HATE it!
That irritating git with his ‘lovely, great, smashing, super’, the darts ‘celebrities’ no-one's ever heard of, the overweight taurine disaster that looks like Corky's reviewer head…let's face it, that show's the pits!
Good job this ‘licence’ has sod all to do with it, innit?
Snooker's a lot more fun when you don't have to wear a tie and waistcoat — who in their right mind would want to do that?
Darts isn't easy to simulate — how do you reproduce throwing the arrow without making it stupidly simple?
You could use the wibbly-wobbly cursor, but this reduces the game to a one-button outing with precious little to do.
The alternative is to use the effects of gravity, the dart losing height as it flies.
Trouble is, it's easily mastered and very limiting — you might throw it high or low, but never wide.
So what does Bully's do?
Well it's a combination of both.
You control a floating hand that wibbles of its own accord but still responds to joystick commands, so you don't have to wait for it to wobble onto the bit of the board you want to shoot at.
When you chuck the arrow, gravity takes effect and it arches realistically in flight.
The result?
One of the most pleasingly accurate darts sims ever seen.
Jocky goes around the clock…
Great shot!
Double ten just leaves him the bull to win the leg.
Has he got the stomach for it?
And that's no bull
Bully's just oozes variety.
As well as the standard 501 match, Alternative have crammed in six popular pub variations, each a game in its own right.
Okay, one or two of them are a little contrived, but they still make for a cracking package — all in one load too!
There's nine (computer) skill levels and a great two-player mode, so it's not a game you'll master in minutes.
And the minus points?
I'm not sure if this is a good or a bad thing, but the game's got practically nothing to do with the Bullseye TV show.
There's been no attempt to create the game-show's quiz element, no digitised piccie of Jim Bowen (hurrah!), and no Bully's prize board (out of the black and into the red, etc).
The only passing nod to the show is a little picture of Bully himself, and it's the chubby cartoon character's hand (hoof?) which delivers the dart.
At the end of the day, though,Bully's Sporting Darts is a blimmin' good game.
As polished and realistic a darts sim as you could wish for, you really can't beat a bit of Bully!
It's a strange sort of footy is this, but still a lot more exciting than watching Birmingham City.
Mind you, the players look much the same!
SUPER, SMASHING SPORTS
If you get bored of 501, there's loads of popular pub variants:
501
This is the bog-standard game played by beer-swilling arrow fans everywhere.
Each player starts with 501 points, the winner being the first to reduce it to zero.
You must finish on a double.
Round The Clock
This has you aiming for each number in turn (1–20), finishing on the bull.
Hit a double or treble and the value of that score is counted, eg double four counts as eight.
Football
Each player in turn aims for the highlighted number — hit it and the ‘ball’ moves towards the  opponent's goal, one, two or three places depending on whether a single, double or treble was hit.
Get it in the penalty area (coloured blue or red) and you can shoot for goal — hit bullseye to score!
Tennis
The ‘ball’ is represented by the highlighted bed.
To whack it over the net, land a dart in it.
The server has an advantage in that he always get doubles to aim for, where his opponent must hit trebles.
Golf
Numbers 1–18 on the dartboard represent the 18 holes.
To progress to the next hole, the player must land three darts in that particular number, doubles and trebles counting as two and three respectively.
Cricket
Owzat?
Pretty good actually!
Each side takes it in turn to bat.
To pile up the runs you must get over 40 with three darts — any excess is added to your score.
The bowlers must hit a bull to claim a wicket (centre bull counts as two), and if the batter hits the bull one of his team is run out.
If the bowler throws outside the trebles ring, that score is credited to the batting side as wides.
If he misses the board  altogether , 25 wides are scored.
Snooker
Numbers 1–15 represent the red balls, 16–20 the colours.
To ‘pot’ a ball you must hit three red numbers in one throw, or four times (doubles and trebles count as two and three) for a colour.
Normal snooker rules apply, with colours being replaced until all the reds disappear.
Darts is one of the few sports I've got the right build for.
Sadly girth doesn't come into play in Bully's , nor does pint supping.
Nevertheless, it captures the essence of the game very well.
The shaky-hand aiming is a fair simulation of real throwing, though it's much easier to get high scores here (I even hit the odd 180!).
So even two-player matches are like watching two top pros playing, albeit without the glorious sight of their beer bellies!
Add to this the variety of the ‘sporting’ events and you've got double-top value for money.
TEST YOUR STRENGTH!
PRESENTATION
 Easy-to-use menu screens, but a tad too green.
GRAPHICS
Darts will never be able to lend itself to artistic flair
SOUND
A few bleeps and bloops only (just like KLF!)
HOOKABILITY
I never thought I'd see the day, etc, etc, etc
LASTABILITY
Who said that variety was dead?
Not me matey boy!
Grandmaster Chess
Renaissance Othello
C64 board games have something of a chequered history — is this twin pack a ‘renaissance’, the ‘king’ of board sims or would you rather ‘pawn’it at the earliest opportunity?
IAN ‘CZECH MATE SOUGHT’ OSBORNE has something to get off his chess…
Legend has it that the guy who invented chess did so as a favour for his king.
When given the game, the king was so pleased that he offered it creator anything he wanted.
Being a modest man, he asked for.
‘One grain of corn placed on the first square on the board.
Put double this amount (two grains) in the second square, double that (four grains) in the third, and so on until you reach the 64th and final square.’
The king was astonished that he asked for so little, and readily agreed.
Little did he realise that doubling up 63 times produces an astronomical total (18,446,744,073,709,551,615); there wasn't that much corn in the entire world!
This tale might be apocryphal of course(just get on with it — Ed), and even if it isn't, it won't work with your pocket money.
Not that it'd need to —Grandmaster Chess might be showing its age a bit, but if you can put up with its idiosyncrasies it's a bargain at £1.99, especially with Renaissance Othello thrown in for good measure.
Grandmaster Chess offers nine levels of play and a special level for board analysis or postal chess but, like most chess sims of its day (it first was released in 1982), the higher levels take for ever to make a move — Level Nine takes up to two hours!
A full game at this level would probably take three days so it's highly unlikely anyone will bother, but the first four levels take a minute or less and even at Level Seven it only takes five — overall, this isn't a slow program.
Aha!
Boris, my old comrade, I can see what you game is.
Erm…king's pawn forward two, or maybe not…
Can't find Grandmaster Chess in the shops?
No worries — just send a cheque/PO for £1.99 to: Make cheques payable to Alternative Software.
Very T.D.Us?
Where the product really shows its age is in the user interface — it's terrible!
Instead of the now-common joystick-and-cursor approach,Grandmaster has you entering your moves using standard notation.
Each square on the chessboard has its own ‘code’ consisting of a letter and number — to move a piece, first enter the reference for the square it's on, so to move the white king's pawn forward two squares you'd enter E2E4.
Cumbersome, but it works.
There's no pointless, memory-hungry options to change the perspective or style of pieces, but you can alter the colours.
Overall Grandmaster Chess isn't a bad program.
Byu today's standards the user interface is shocking, but the number of options and level of artificial intelligence is pretty impressive.
And Renaissance Othello ?
Well that's just more of the same — a competent but unspectacular version of the board game.
Its user interface is even worse than Grandmaster 's, but it's a welcome ‘B’ -side freebie.
Not many people know this, but Othello is the only game at which a computer has beaten the world champion.
Hmm…good move, Boris, you dark horse.
But please don't keep calling me your ‘Czech’ mate.
Frankenstein
Bah, the professor always gives me the dirty jobs while he plays with his monster.
Just look at all them boulders!
Oh well, mustn't get the hump…
Baron Frankenstein stands in his laboratory quaking with anticipation; in half an hour a lightning bolt will streak from the skies bringing life to the thing that lies on the slab.
Turning on his heel he strides  purposefully towards a hatch and shouts, ‘Egor!
Go and get the shopping!’.
So JAMES ‘FRANK N. FURTER’ PRICE nips off into town to show us around the latest Zeppelin creation.
While loading Frankenstein I took some time to read the inlay.
Quite usual behaviour really, the sort of thing most people do if they haven't experienced a game before.
Something that immediately caught my attention was the astounding similarity between the picture of Frank on the cover, and our very own Mark Caswell.
Feeling slightly puzzled by this I continued my perusal of the instructions.
It turns out that the Baron is short of certain body parts (also a bit like Mark!) which are essential if the experiment's to run smoothly.
So, like people in power everywhere he delegates the task of collecting the necessary bits to a servant — the faithful but dim hunchback, Egor.
He's an obedient kind of fellow, and after being kicked out of the castle by his master he sets about his task with a determination unusual for someone with such a cowardly disposition.
The game begins with an animated sequence showing the Baron stomping around his laboratory, setting up the experiment.
Turning to Egor he requests more body parts and, to accentuate the urgency required, he physically hurls our hunchbacked hero from the top of his castle into the graveyard below where the game begins.
The first thing you notice is that Egor has no weapons — he has to rely solely on his limited athletic ability to negotiate the many platforms and dodge the terrifying ‘things’ that patrol the six game areas.
Rather than losing a life when he comes into contact with a creature, Egor merely becomes more frightened until, when the bar representing his fear level reaches its limit, he screams and pops his clogs (something I can identify with after seeing my caricature, as created by the evil hand of our Art Editor).
Egor, bring me organs
In this flickscreen platform extravaganza, Egor's first priority is to collect the bodies conveniently littered around the many screens, then find a way back up to the top of the tower where his master impatiently awaits.
On his travels he passes through the tower vaults (unpleasant), local village (worse than Ludlow), Baron Frankenstein's Castle (tasteless decor), Black Forest (well, more green than black), Graveyard (dead dudes) and The Morgue (Spectrum Fan Club offices).
Now the local populace are hardly pleasant, as (and you may notice this very quickly) they all seem to take the form of disembodies eyes, bouncing skulls and Steve in a cameo role as The Village Drunk, among others.
Not a Hammond you stupid fool!
The graphics are clear and well defined with some excellent backgrounds, while the sound is suitably atmospheric.
However, there are a few problems that could hamper your enjoyment.
‘Ere!
This corpse looks fresh — it's a good job they don't bury people properly round here, else I'd have to dig 'em up.
The most important is the ‘monkey’ thing.
On the stairs in certain parts of the game is a solitary creature that closely resembles a red monkey.
If at any point you come into contact with it you lose  a life immediately and are moved a few steps back.
Which is all fair and well — I assume the purpose of this is to block off certain routes to force the gameplayer to explore more thoroughly.
The problem arises when you fall from a screen above and land on ‘monkey features’: wham bam, every single life lost!— smacked bums all round and general loss of brownie points.
Secondly, I had negotiated the entire map within my first four attempts.
Not to say that the map is too small; quite the opposite, in fact.
I just feel a game of this genre needs a quota of well-hidden rooms to add a little interest.
Despite these flaws, I like the game.
If you're not a lover of platform  games it could be a wee bit tedious.
It's be a shame if you didn't at least try it out, though.
There's some quality body parts lying around her; should make a good monster.
I wonder if the doc can patch me up too — he's my mate, he is!
Grrrrrr!
Oy!
Watchit!
Moan, groan, a hunchback's work is never done — oh well, I suppose I should try to get ahead.
And a heart, a spleen, pair of legs, some ears…
Ian!
Frankly, I found Frankenstein about as absorbing as shiny bog-roll — this sort of flickscreen platformer went out with Jet Set Willy !
The whole thing has a very dated feel to it.
The baddies trundle back and forth like an expectant father and resurrect on returning to a screen, and you've got this pathetic energy bar thingie which encourages you to ignore them anyway!
Frankenstein repeats mistakes made by Ocean's The Addams Family , but lacks the flashy graphics.
Oh well — at least they're not charging £11.99 for it.
TEST YOUR STRENGTH!
PRESENTATION
Good introductory sequence, no multiload (shock!)
GRAPHICS
Serve their purpose well, but dated in appearance
SOUND
Excellent atmospheric spot FX; interesting tunes
HOOKABILITY
This could become very tedious indeed…
LASTABILITY
…and thus leaving very little long-term appeal 
Dizzy
Prince of the Yolkfolk
Will the sanctions placed on Iraq eventually lead to peace in the Gulf?
Can Norman Lamont lead sterling to an astonishing recovery?
And could a Dizzy review be written without any rotten-egg jokes?
JAMES ‘SCRAMBLED BRAINS’ PRICE attempts the impossible.
The half-boiled storyline could have been poached from a hundred different games: Dizzy and Daisy were in the Enchanted Forest collecting cherries when they became hopelessly lost.
Rather than wandering around aimlessly, the ovoid twosome decided to visit a nearby castle to obtain directions.
However, while searching the many rooms for signs of the species Homo Sapiens, Daisy caught herself on a mystic spinning wheel and fell into a sleep so deep it would surely last for a hundred years (zzzzzzzz!— Ed).
As Dizzy tried to wake her, Rockwart, the evil (and very large) troll, grabbed him and locked our hero in an underground chamber.
A prince among…eggs?
Originally part of the Dizzy's Excellent Adventures compilation pack,Prince of the Yolkfolk is yet another chapter in the seemingly never-ending story of all things eggy.
Taking the role of Dizzy, your aim is (as usual) to solve problems while trying not to make an omelette of yourself.
The puzzles facing you range from the blatantly obvious to the hopelessly obscure: how, for example, can you pass the troll guarding the castle gate?
Looking at the objects available is of little help, as it's only by trial and error that the problem can be solved.
This is unsatisfying, killing the logical thinking aspect and leaving the gameplayer frustrated.
However, the Dizzy games are such a simple and enjoyable, it would be a strange day indeed if one lacked playability.
POTYF is not exception.
Stomping around the 40-odd screens that make up the playing area, solving puzzles and avoiding the numerous nasties, is as absorbing as you can get for four pounds.
But there are a few faults…
Free-range fun!
The graphics look as if they've been ported directly across from a Spectrum.
They also flicker in places; not something you expect to see in games these days.
Beauty is only skin deep, as they say, but I would have hoped for a lot more from a C64.
Secondly, there isn't enough in the game for a hardened Dizzy fan.
40 screens really isn't much for an arcade adventure, and I counted roughly 16 main puzzles, with a fair helping of cherries (you have to collect 20) hidden behind the scenery.
To be honest, there are puzzles of a more arcade variety — timing jumps to get to a specific point is an integral part of the game — but we already take these for granted in cartoon adventures.
Finally, the slow screen update is a bit of a yoke, which soon becomes irritating and seems as unnecessary as the flickering sprites.
Don't get me wrong — I actually like POTYF , but feel that the problems seriously detract from the overall shine of the product.
My advice for the less affluent Dizzy fans out there is to wait for Crystal Kingdom Dizzy (see preview this issue), which looks to become the all-time bestest-ever eggstravaganza.
But if you can't wait that long,Yolkfolk isn't bad — you certainly won't end up with egg on your face if you shell out for it!
(You're fired — Ed.)
Where do eggs go when they've cracked up?
To an egg-spert!
No, to eggy heaven, of course!
The hero with the cholesterol problem sets on yet another eggs-traordinary adventure.
Match of the Day
Cor blimey, it's Showaddywaddy!
The chap on the right doesn't look much like Des, but there's no mistaking Jimmy.
I wonder what he'd say about this game?
What a glum-looking geezer your physio is.
But once he gets his hands all oiled up, he's a whizz at refreshing your players' tired muscles.
Da-da-da-DA-da-ra-da-dada-da-ra-da-ta-ta-ta TA!
PHIL ‘DOUBLE CHIN’ KING goes on telly to spout his footy views.
Yessss!
The legendary TV show's back on a Saturday night, albeit minus the inimitable Jimmy Hill.
Never mind, I'm sure he'll take it on the chin.
This latest offering from Zeppelin ensures he's still a star of the small screen, sharing his comments at half- and full-time in this football management game.
Starting your career at any Fourth Division club, you open the first page of your footy diary.
This is the game's main motivation, enabling the planning of your week by dragging various icons into each day's five time slots to organise training, buy players, pick the team etc.
It certainly makes a refreshing change from reams of text menus.
Sadly the management fails to live up to expectations.
Tactical options are limited to selecting the team and general player positions (goalie, defence, midfield, attack).
There isn't even a choice of formations, never mind the sort of position/marking tactics permitted in Tracksuit Manager .
This geezer hasn't got much in the way of skills, but he's fairly popular with the fans.
But should you really play Muggins up front?!
Instead, the emphasis is on handling your finance.
As you start with a side of no-hopers, you need to spend wisely on players.
One of the game's best aspects is sending scouts out, then reading their detailed player reports.
As well as the various skills, these also show popularity and notoriety — sign a popular player and your gate receipts go up.
Instead of buying, you can get players via the free-transfer market.
The only problem is that they usually command high wages (especially from higher divisions).
Classy players do make an immense difference, though: just two or three can turn your team overnight from the league doormat into promotion contenders!
Much more authentic are the slow improvements made by training — taking several days to raise a single skill by the tiniest amount.
Progress can be speeded up by employing a top trainer, but it's still a lot easier to acquire better players.
Controversial views
After the slick presentation, including player pics with facial expressions, the match section is disappointing.
There are always five static, overhead-view highlights per half (the maximum score is 10–0!).
It's fairly entertaining to watch but commits the cardinal sin of not identifying individual players.
So there's no way of telling how team members are performing.
Worse still, the teams always play in blue and red, and you don't even know which side's which until one scores!
Along with the severely limited tactical options this consigns Match Of The Day to the lower divisions.
Great presentation lifts it slightly, but not enough to justify the high price.
As for Jimmy, he chooses from a handful of set comments, so he hasn't a great deal to say.
Oh well, that's one thing to be thankful for!
James!
In a market saturated by second-rate footy managers comes Match Of The Day ; a game that nearly (but not quite) succeeds in being enjoyable.
The addition of icons and absence of the now-legendary ‘Please Wait’ messages are welcome surprises.
Unfortunately, the animated sequence is diabolical.
How on earth are you supposed to ascertain how players are performing if the graphics show nothing more than ten shots at goal by three forwards per match?
Match Of The Day may be slickly presented (by Des and Jimmy!), but its shallowness soon becomes apparent.
Arrange your daily itinerary by dragging icons into your diary.
It's the supporters club at 9, team selection at 11, etc.)
And a superb move there — see how he swept it in with his left foot.
Footballing icons
Dealing:
You purchase players or get them from the free-transfer market.
For either option, you must first obtain a scout's report.
You can also hire and fire physios, trainers and scouts.
Supporters Club:
Shows a list of the fans' favourite players, from best to worst.
Leave popular players out of your side and gate receipts could drop.
Team Selection:
Players can be put in any position, so you could have a striker playing in goal!
Physiotherapist:
Informs you of unfit players and those recently injured.
Allows reorganisation of physio's sessions to treat injured players.
TV Coverage:
Toggle it to turn match highlights (plus Des and Jimmy!) on/off.
Trainer:
Lists off-form players and enables reorganisation of the training schedule.
Chairman:
Tells you a free-transfer player's been taken from your squad.
Also gives you the sack!
Team Talk:
Some talk — this is where you put duffers on the free-transfer list!
Scout:
Send him out to watch your next opponents, or look for defenders, midfielders etc.
League Tables:
See any of the four divisions.
Fixture List:
You only receive gate receipts from home fixtures.
Cash Flow:
Club expenses include wages, transfer fees and ground rent.
TEST YOUR STRENGTH!
PRESENTATION
Excellent diary and icons, and even a save position
GRAPHICS
Fair match selection and good player pictures
SOUND
Not a peep — even from the ref's whistle!
HOOKABILITY
At first there seems plenty of choice to make…
LASTABILITY
…but at the end of the day, it really lacks depth 
Blue Baron
Oh look, it's Richard Branson going for another record in his big balloon — go on, bomb the bearded bigwig!
Bandits at six o'clock!
IAN ‘HIGH-FLIER’ OSBORNE isn't unduly worried.
‘We've ages yet — it's only half past two’, he squeaks.
Chocks away!
Put on those flying goggles, tweak that handlebar moustache and blow the enemy to hell!
However much he sounds like an aristocratic flasher, the Blue Baron is in fact a fictitious flying ace from the Great War and the star of Zeppelin's latest budget blaster.
Your mission is to fly over horizontally scrolling enemy territory, hitting the space bar to bomb the target (bridge, fort etc.)
Be quick — your fuel won't last for ever.
But make sure you don't miss: as most World War One biplanes had no bomb ports, the pilot had to keep the bomb in the cockpit with him and drop it by hand!
Needless to say there was only room for one.
Once you've devastated the target (or missed it completely) it's back to the airfield.
You start the game with three Sopwith Camels (the best Allied aircraft of WWI), each of which can absorb four hits before crashing to the ground.
Bearing in mind the game's WWI setting, the degree of movement enjoyed by your fighter is incredible.
Its ability to weave in and out of the enemies is unbelievable, and turning back on yourself sends it into a tight mid-air manoeuvre that would tax a Harrier jump jet!
Not that this is a problem —Blue Baron doesn't claim any degree of realism, and shouldn't be graded like a flight sim.
The question's not ‘does it play accurately’ but ‘does it play well?’
Very plane graphics
And the answer?
Well it's a definite maybe.
As a game it's ridiculously shallow and dated — we were playing games like this five years ago, and they were pretty undemanding then!
The graphics aren't particularly inspired: the scenery's pretty drab, the enemy aircraft look just like yours, and apart from the odd multiple-shots-to-kill barrage balloon that's all there is!
Even so, the game does have that spark of playability.
The missions are mercifully short so you'll often lose it only seconds from home, encouraging you to have another try to get through one more mission.
The passcode system's a welcome addition and the joystick on the control panel which mimics your movement's also a nice touch, but once you've played it for five minutes you'll have seen everything the game's got to offer!
Blue Baron 's fun while it lasts, but unfortunately it won't last too long.
There are much snazzier sideways-scrolling shoot-'em-ups around, and a fair few of them are out on budget.
Check out The Hit Squad's R-Type instead, or this month's Megatape marvel,Breakthrough .
Phil!
I remember when all this were nowt but fields, and people released simple horizontally scrolling blasters for the C64.
Those were the days, son.
Grand they were too — none o' yer fancy parallax, varied enemies and scintillating soundtracks.
Aye, the production may have been poor, but the crude gameplay shone out like a beacon of hope for us downtrodden folk.
This Blue Baron 's a real trip down nostalgia lane.
Ah, now I remember…in those best and worst of times, I kept thinking, ‘There must be more than this.
Some day the boffins'll make games with massive levels, innovative features, loads to see and do, much more than blasting a few planes and balloons.’
TEST YOUR STRENGTH!
PRESENTATION
A good password system, but cheap overall
GRAPHICS
They do their job…well, er, sort of anyway!
SOUND
Bzzzz — khrrrrr — bdang bdang bdang bdang!
HOOKABILITY
It's surprisingly playable the first time around…
LASTABILITY
…but will you really load this game up twice?
Neighbours
Ah, Jason Donovan, what a nice boy!
Now an international pop/musical star, he once played a skateboarding character in an Aussie soap opera.
PHIL ‘HALF PIPE’ KING tries to stay awake…
I still can't quite believe how successful Neighbours has become — particularly as the Beeb originally bought it on the cheap just to fill part of their new ‘Daytime’ schedule.
I had the dubious pleasure of watching the first-ever episode, in which Des (the bank manager) was about to marry Julie (Jim's daughter), but she discovered his stag-night stripper (Daphne, later killed in a car crash) still in the house on the morning of the wedding!
Of course, that was yonks ago, and hardly any of the original characters are still around.
In fact, the turnover rate is so high, that only one character from the nine-months-old computer game is still in the series — and that's Bouncer the dog!
Flying Scott
You play the part of Scott (Jase!), skateboarding around the streets of Erinsborough in a race against up to four other characters: Charlene (Kylie) in a go-kart, Henry on his tractor-lawnmower, Matt on a motorbike, and Mike on another skateboard.
Your board can be spun left/right, with fire held down to gain speed.
While steering through a series of gates, watch for hazards ranging from Bouncer and Mrs Mangel to kangaroos and emus!
Hitting these results in a time-wasting fall — and a drop in your popularity (shown by the lighting of the ‘Neighbours’ title).
This can be restored by collecting litter, but even on the fastest of three levels it shouldn't be a problem.
The time spent on your bottom is much more costly.
It's irritatingly easy to crash at first, as the pushscroll is only activated when you're more than halfway across the screen, giving you little time to see and avoid hazards.
Scott has a bonzer time, cruising the streets of Erinsborough.
In fact, he's got no spare time to make pop records and wear a loincloth — phew, what a relief!
With practice, however, the race action becomes enjoyable, particularly in close battles with your opponents as you carefully avoid collisions with them.
At times my skateboarding skills astounded me: zipping around corners, weaving through obstacles etc.
Having broken my ankle on one, I vowed  never to ride a skateboard ever again, so Neighbours is a good substitute.
The simple racing action was inadequate at full-price, but makes for a fair budget game.
So what if it's got nothing to do with the TV show?
Come to think of it, that's a bonus!
Scott weaves through the gate into second place (above), but must watch out for Bouncer the dog and Mrs Mangel (below).
Doc Croc's Outrageous Adventures
Can a name-change make all the difference?
RAMSES WIBBLITT THE SECOND (aka Ian Osborne!) tries to find something interesting down a sewer.
Choose you character and which hole to send him down.
It's trial and error to decide which is the right one.
Will the magazine ever get put together in time?
Or will Doc Croc end up as a matching handbag and shoe set!?
Squeak squeak — it's not James asking for a pay rise, but Doc Croc's mousey mate on the lookout for pages and machine bits.
PREVIOUSLY RELEASED AS ROUND THE BEND!
Right, let's get something straight — the reason Zeppelin changed the title for this budget rerelease is because the TV show from which it was licensed was changed.
Zeppelin are making no bones about the fact that Doc Croc's Outrageous Adventures was previously released as Round The Bend , and aren't trying to pull the wool over anyone's eyes.
Ahem.
Now we've got that sorted, let's have a look at the game.
A sideways-scrolling platformer, your task is to patrol the sewers (home of Doc Croc and company) looking for your magazine, which the rancid reptile has inadvertently blown to bits.
On finding a page, you're presented with a short subgame, which inevitable involves getting from one corner of the (static) screen to another, avoiding anything that moves — succeed, and the page is yours.
Starting in the editorial office, you choose one of the four characters, and which of four sewer tunnels to explore.
You can send any character into any tunnel, but each can only collect the pages for which he's responsible, and the only way to find out who gets what is through trial and error.
Croc around the clock
An interesting feature of Doc Croc is that you can't actually ‘die’ as such.
Collide with one of the sewer-stopping baddies and you're just returned to the office.
Needless to say, starting that particular sewer again is very time-consuming, and the whole thing's against the clock!
Unfortunately when it comes to originality that's about all the game has to offer.
It's brilliantly programmed, but adds nothing new to the platform genre — no interesting devices, no secret rooms, no exciting artifacts…no nothing, really.
Also, your character is under constant threat from irritating bats that zoom onto the screen at an incredible rate of knots, leaving you no time to react.
You'll soon get the hang of it — once you've been caught a few times you'll suss out the attack patterns — but until you do, frustration is high.
Doc Croc's Outrageous Adventure isn't the most blindingly original platform outing, but it's certainly no turkey.
When we gave it a tightfisted 52% in Issue 79, our main bone of contention was that it was ridiculously overpriced.
As a budget release, it's a worthy purchase.
Winners!
AND THE WINNERS ARE…
WITH KEN D. FISH!
Welcome to another (salmon) run of competition winners to be announced by my piscine self.
If only you readers realised how difficult it is attempting to open envelopes without the gift of arms you'd send postcards instead!
Anyway, a bumper crop of entries have been sent in for my perusal with a phenomenal response for the Hi-Tec and Elvira puzzlers so, waffling aside, let's see who the lucky pilchards are this time.
GO QUACKERS (Issue 87)
Go Quackers indeed!
When I saw the amount of entries I had to sift through, my gills went into overdrive and I hyperventilated.
Following a lie-down to recover I set about this mammoth task and after much intensified opening of envelopes the winner of 30, yes THIRTY Hi-Tec games became clear.
The ten runners-up will receive their own personal choice of cassette from the list provided in that issue.
And the big winner is…
Terence Honeyford, Buxton, Derbyshire.
The following ten receive the Hi-Tec game of their choice:
WAGGLE THAT STICK MADAM (Issue 86)
Originally we were planning to reward the first ten correct answers drawn out of the bag with a wonderful Sigma-Ray joystick, but unfortunately Markie (feeble minded fool that he is) mistook them for his laundry and took them home to be washed by his Mum.
However Steve decided it would be unfair for the winners to go without some kind of reward, and so he intends to pop round to show you his collection of ‘Bunty’ comics — expect him within the next 28 days.
The visiting list includes:
WHO'RE YOU CALLING A BUM-BAG, SCUM BAG?
(Issue 86)
Usually, I never feel I have to complain about competitions as they're always judged fairly by Steve ‘Fishnet Tights?’
Shields and the prizes are lush as a crystal fishbowl.
However, I think the bum-bags on offer were discriminatory against non-human creatures.
I can just see a little haddock at home, receiving a phone call saying he's won a prize.
Within days the elusive bum-bag has arrived.
Eagerly, he (or she) rips off the wrapping and tries it on…only to find it won't fit.
‘Drat!’ says the fishie.
‘No hips…
’ Luckily, the three bum-bag winners were not aquatically inclined but  I do hope software houses show a little more consideration in future.
ELVIRA OR BUST (Issue 88)
Elvira is possibly the only lady in the world who cannot be accused of enlarging her chest by putting tissue paper in her bra; firstly because she is never seen in one and secondly have you seen the points on her high heels?
I'd say they were enough to make any male invest in a cricket box, regardless of species and alignment of anatomy.
However, the prizes on offer in the codtabulous competition were a little bit special, as are the clever people who became the ten winners.
So in a flash of generosity an extra prize will be my personal assurance that Elvira will not be coming around to kick you in the groin in the immediate future.
Bearing that in mind (as opposed to trousers), the winner of the disk drive and a copy of Elvira II is:
Five runners-up will receive a copy of Elvira II on disk:
Subscription!
JOIN THE FORCE!
COMMODORE FORCE
Have you ever wanted to walk around dodgy parts of town wearing a silly hat and saying things like ‘Ello, ello, ello’ and ‘You're  nicked ’?
You have?
You must be crazy!
Instead, why not join the COMMODORE FORCE?
By doing so you'll not only find a copy of the best C64 games mag in the known universe on your doormat every month, you'll also be able to avoid all those nasty lager-swilling thugs on the way to the shops.
You can still wear a silly hat if you want to, though…
As COMMODORE FORCE will be essentially the same magazine as ZZAP! 64 (only better!), you know what you'll be getting: right-on reviews, phenomenal pheatures, cor-blimey cover cassettes, rip-roaring roundups and the rest!
Add to that a freebie joystick or light phazer, plus an incredible cash saving, and you've got an offer that's hard to refuse.
So, why not just come quietly over to this cosy coupon in the corner, Fatty-Phil in your details and mail it off to the address at the bottom.
It's a fair cop — honest, officer!
PHAB PHREEBIES!
Subscribe to COMMODORE FORCE and get an excellent Quick Shot Joystick…
ABSOLUTELY FREE!
Or, pay an extra £4.99, and receive a terrific TROJAN LIGHT PHAZER GUN with SIX great light-gun games:
Mail Order!
ZZap! 64 Zzuperstore!
24 HOUR HOTLINE 051 357 1275
ACTION REPLAY MARK VI
‘The ultimate feature packed utility cartridge ever conceived for the CBM 64/128 systems.
Press the cartridge ‘freeze button’ and unleash the powerful Graphics, Backup and monitor utilities.
Fastload a 200 block program in under 6 seconds.
How have you survived without this?’
LIGHT PEN
The Trojan C64/128 light pen can be used as a complete replacement for the mouse in many applications.
Particularly useful in drawing and design, the two button pen provides the user with a very direct method of control.
Pack also includes Pen Master art program and a basic program to allow users to write their own pen compatible software.
CORISH'S COMPUTER GAMES GUIDE
This book helps on just about any game you care to name on a wide variety of computer formats.
Covers backdoor codes left by the programmers, cheats and tips to get past your opponents, how to skip levels, pokes for  infinite lives, time etc plus many other options.
This is the ultimate hint book with * In excess of 750 pages, * In excess of 1250 games, * In excess of 200 adventures, * More than 12000 hints, Tips & Pokes.
STAR CURSOR JOYSTICK
This new joystick will give you maximum results in game play.
It is comfortable, easy to use and is of arcade quality.
The Star Cursor Joystick is the closest thing to having your own arcade game in your home, it also comes with a 1 year guarantee.
Trojan Phazer gun opens a whole new phase of computer entertainment.
This advanced light phazer presents a challenge of skill and accuracy for C64 users of all ages.
Also includes six games
TURBO DATACORDER
Got loads of great C64 tapes that, er…won't load?
Worry no more, just splash out on a Zzap! 64 TURBO DATACORDER and wave goodbye to those tape trubs!
ZZAP! 64 BINDER
Using  strengthened steel rods, this handsome binder, embossed with the ZZAP! logo, will hold 12 issues of your favourite magazine  securely in place .
Back Issue Binder £4.95  
Ordering is easy.
Please complete the form below remembering to clearly indicate which product you require along with our reference number if shown or the type of computer and cassette/disk format you require.
Then send the form to our FREEPOST address or if you prefer fax it or telephone our 24 hour hotline.
Coming Soon!
NEXT MONTH…
DON'T BUY ZZAP! 64
BUY COMMODORE FORCE INSTEAD!
A brand-new C64 action magazine will be hitting the shelves next month, in place of ZZAP! 64.
Called COMMODORE FORCE, it will feature all the things you know and love from the old ZZAP!, but none of the things you didn't like!
And to prove we mean business — as usual!— we'll be giving away a special 100-page A–Z Book Of C64 Tips …absolutely FREE!
You want more?
Okay, how about a reader-challenge featuring that classic 64 footy fest,MicroProse Soccer ?
Can your Centre Forward put one in against Fatty Phil, or will he be playing Left Back in the changing rooms?
Find out how to enter the one and only Force Challenge by scoring a copy of COMMODORE FORCE next month!
You want right-on replies to your letters?
Then Lloyd Mangram's your man!
Due to overwhelming popular demand Lloyd will be rejoining the team from Issue One of COMMODORE FORCE, providing witty, informative answers to all your bananas!
So, don't be a complete ninny, buy COMMODORE FORCE!
MEGA MEGATAPES…
AND DISKS!
C64 Lemmings on the Megatape!?
We've got to be joking, right?
Wrong!
Look out for our EXCLUSIVE PLAYABLE DEMO of the game everyone's been waiting for, next month…
What's that?
You'd like a few freebie games too?
Don't want much, do you?
Okay then, how about the classic driving game,Continental Circus ?
Still not enough?
All right, we'll bung the snazzy shoot-'em-up Gemini Wing on to boot!
And that's only a few of the things that'll be making their Megatape debuts on the front cover of COMMODORE FORCE!
And now, due to popular demand, we can announce the arrival of the Megadisk!
Yes, if you return your Megatapes with the coupon inside the mag, we'll send you all the Megatape demos and games on a disk.
Now that's Megatastic!
ISSUE ONE OF COMMODORE FORCE GOES ON SALE, 26 NOVEMBER — JUST £2.95, DON'T MISS IT