

THIS WEEK best quest GO FOR THE JACKPOT Hundreds of prizes to be won Health news •Amazing crystal therapy •Relief for migraine at last Special report ‘That's not my son — he's my husband’ Christmas is coming…•Get-ahead recipes •Mail order presents •Sensational, easy cake to make now Great home makeovers Stencilling, furnishings, painting…
Brilliant budget ideas — do them in a weekend Incredible The steel halo that saved Lisa's life
Dear Reader
Could you fall for a younger man?
I must admit, I've never been tempted.
But then I've got sons, and there's never seemed much point in going for more of the same!
But these days, lots of women are happily involved with chaps many years their junior — and in this week's Special report we examine some of the pros and cons of these kinds of relationships.
Christmas is less than seven weeks away; forgive us if it all seems too early, but wouldn't it be terrific if this year, just for a change, you really did manage to get everything done ahead of time so you could actually enjoy the break…?
Read on!
Paper smiles
Greenhouse, aluminium, fully glazed and insulted, with 5ft potting bench
One robber is described as about 128, slim, 5ft 6ins tall
Beautiful ivory weeding dress.
Size 12.
Worn once.
Seen any good howlers in print?
We'll pay £5 for every one used.
Sorry, we can't return anything you send.
DOUBLE TAKE
Photo sent in by J A Skinner, Eastbourne, Sussex
If you have an amusing or wacky photo at home send it to Double Take with an sae for its return
WE PAY £25 FOR EACH PICTURE 
‘I hate abstract paintings — you can't tell whether they're disgusting or not’
‘Have you been swapping the furniture around again?’
Quote of the week
‘I'm a little too old to be a sex symbol’ Neil Diamond (51)
FASHION
Red, black and ivory
Mix and match this season's colours for a combination that says winter 1992  
FASHION NOTE
Try your wrap out for size as a sarong skirt
Capes and wraps make a highly practical top layer.
Wear them over tailored outfits or warm knitwear when the weather's cold.
The curvy, long-line redingote is the season's new shape.
Combine it with jodhpurs for a sporty look.
FASHION NOTE
Check out car boot sales and army surplus stores for good leather buys
Add a red beret, gloves or scarf to give a fresh splash of colour to classic mixes of black and ivory.
Soften up the tough biker's look by combining a black leather jacket with a cream crêpe T-shirt and tailored red trousers.
Distinctly masculine details, such as a tie, man's cardigan and pin-striped shirt, contrast strikingly with the sexy, long split skirt.
OTHER PEOPLE'S LIVES
Crazy but it's home
What's it like to eat in a tree or live on a bus?
We take a peep through some extraordinary keyholes
Most of us agree that it would be handy to turn the loft into a bedroom, or have a conservatory tacked on to an outside wall, but can you imagine what it must be like living in a church, a factory or a windmill?
During the affluent 80s when it seemed property prices soared higher each day, there was a lot of money to be made in real estate.
Those with an eye for a lucrative deal raced to convert every spare inch of space — from barns and warehouses to derelict docksides — into fashionable homes.
The trend reached such an absurd level that, in 1987, a 5ft by 11ft converted broom cupboard, opposite the top London store Harrods, was sold for an amazing £36,500.
But true enthusiasts are not inspired by making money — their only concern is a passionate interest in the buildings themselves.
Their houses may not suit everyone's taste, they could have started life as a lighthouse or a fire station, but you can't deny they are different.
So come along with us as we enter the doors of these rooms with a view.
Dining in style at the top table
Guests of Mark and Cynthia Wilkinson are literally out on a limb when they are invited to dinner — because the couple entertain in a tree house.
Their hideaway — 45ft above the ground in the branches of a 100-year-old ash tree — can only be reached by clambering up a 28-step ladder.
But the climb is worth the effort.
The house boasts a miniature galley kitchen with a sink, hot and cold water, cooker and a fridge-freezer.
There's also a table and comfy chairs.
And the view — overlooking the couple's farm, in Bronham, Wiltshire — could easily have been taken straight from a postcard.
‘Ever since I was a little boy it was my dream to have a tree house,’ says Mark, 40, who built it out of materials from his timber yard business.
‘The first time people see it they react with goggle-eyed wonder.
No one has ever refused to go up, but there have been a few that needed coaxing down!’
Mark and Cynthia's plans for dinner are up in the air
‘When the fire brigade moved out — I moved in’
Hilda Eaton's home was once the snooker room of Vale Royal District Council's fire station, where her husband Percy used to work.
‘When Percy died, eight years ago, our house — which was right next to the fire station ‘was just too big for me, so I had to move,’ says Hilda, 71, from Frodsham in Cheshire.
‘But I couldn't have chosen a better house than this flat.’
Park Court, which houses Hilda's flat, was at one time an outhouse for a local manor, but in 1931 the owner left it to the local council who then converted it into a fire station.
In 1974, the fire brigade moved into new premises, rendering the existing building useless — so the local district council bought it for £36,000 and changed it into the block of 10 flats for elderly people.
‘This building had such happy memories for me,’ says Hilda, who rents her four-room flat from the council.
‘When I was offered a place I was so pleased I didn't have to think twice before I accepted.’
Although Hilda's husband Percy worked in the public health department, he was a part-time fireman for 25 years.
‘He loved this building,’ says Hilda, who has a 41-year-old son, Colin, and a seven-year-old grandson, Richard.
‘Percy had his retirement party in this very room.
I could never move from my flat — that would be like leaving Percy behind.’
Hilda's late husband Percy (above) would have felt right at home in her new flat
Aspiring clippies queue here
This house is bright red, 30ft high, has four wheels, comes with a double bed, a fully fitted kitchen and is on the market for £10,000.
When 26-year-old Tim Haller, from Horncastle, Lincs, bought a double-decker bus in 1988, his great ambition was to travel around the world in it.
Those plans fell through but, undaunted, he spent £6,000 converting it into a home for his wife, Louise.
Now, after two years of living in the bus outside his  parents' house, lack of work in this country has prompted him to emigrate to Auckland, New Zealand, with Louise and son Sam, so his marvellous mobile home is now up for sale.
Estate agents Woodroffe Walter, of Horncastle, say that the bus has been ‘beautifully converted’ and list central heating, a flush toilet and a cast iron bath among its many features.
The one drawback potential buyers face is that it can only be parked on a registered site, such as a caravan park, or on land of your own.
Tim's mum, Gill Haller, 56, says the 1964 Route Master bus is a good investment.
‘It's an attractive little home for a small family, and I think it's a bargain.
And best of all — you can choose your neighbours!’
‘Room on top,’ says Tim.
This bus could be just the ticket for a small family.
A light in their life
The first time Frank and Danielle Sheahan saw the West Usk Lighthouse near Cardiff, South Wales, chickens nested on the window sills, goats wandered in the living room and cows went to the bathroom in the bathroom!
‘It was a real mess,’ says Frank, 40, who used to work as a copyright manager for a London record company.
‘As soon as we spotted the advertisement for the lighthouse we were intrigued.
We were bored and felt like a change.’
The couple bought their novel residence, which was build in 1821, for £80,000 in 1987.
They spent an additional £45,000 on renovating it — although the beacon needs more work to restore it to its former glory.
Three years later, the couple opened their 10-bedroom home-with-a-difference as a guest house.
Frank and Danielle specialise in romantic breaks — but, for the adventurous, there's the chance to try sea fishing from the top of the tower.
‘It's great living here,’ says Frank.
‘The views from the top of the building, out over the Bristol Channel, are stunning.
It's like the edge of the world.’
Frank and Danielle cut no corners when they converted a 19th-century lighthouse into a guest house
Stationmasters of all they survey
Avonwick Station, near Totnes in Devon, is railway enthusiast Bob Gale's fantasy house.
But it was a derelict wreck when he first saw it.
Ex-engineer Bob, 54, paid less than £5,000 for the building, set in five acres of land, in 1971.
Six months later the conversion was complete.
The ticket office was transformed into a bedroom, what was the gents toilet today houses a shower, and the parcel room serves very nicely as a spacious sitting room.
The tracks of the old South Brent to Kingsbridge line still run past the house, and the original station canopy survives.
Bob and his second wife Beryl, 49, say they'd never sell their dream house — estimated to be worth £500,000.
‘I don't care about what it's worth,’ insists Bob.
‘What matters is we live in a building we love.’
Bob and Beryl live just off the beaten tracks
best and C&A special promotion
What can I wear?
For a supper date, an office party or a simple dinner with friends, here's the answer to the question on every woman's lips this Christmas
I won't be out long…
Christmas dinners or lunches require something a bit more comfortable and gold adds the sparkle that's right for such events
Who'll arrive first?
Being the hostess calls for something a bit more exciting and this Christmas marabou feather trim adds just the festive touch
Dance 'til dawn…
Head-to-toe gold makes a dramatic statement for really special outings
I might be late…
For sophisticated late suppers it's really hard to beat the little black dress.
This slimline classic had been given the distinctive dinner suit look with satin lapels and buttons.
What a wonderful party…
Office parties or casual occasions call for an outfit that's special but not over the top; smart, but not dull.
A mix of black and gold separates is a perfect solution.
REPORT
They tried to tell me he's too young
Lock up your lads…there's an older woman around!
Having a boyfriend or husband who is young enough to be your son can still raise a few eyebrows and set tongues wagging but, as these couples prove, love conquers all — even a 30-year age gap
Shopping in her local supermarket, Margot Clark saw two younger women eyeing up her boyfriend.
She wasn't surprised.
After all, hunky Michael Cassion, a 20-year-old stripper, is gorgeous.
‘I saw them nudge each other and stare — after all, he is divine.
So I sidled up, slipped my arm around him and gave him a kiss.
Their eyes nearly popped out when they realised we were together!’
The girls were shocked because although public relations consultant Margot is as good-looking as her toyboy lover, at 39 she is old enough to be his mum.
But the 19-year age gap is insignificant to the couple, who met at a nightclub earlier this year and who now share Margot's west London home.
Divorcee Margot says, ‘You can't beat a younger man.
Blokes my age are either cheating on their wives, divorced and bitter, or just plain boring.
‘Sex is great, too.
He's very considerate.
When we first made love, I would lie on the bed in a certain way so my tummy didn't flop, then I realised it was me he loved, flab and all.’
Giving more than Margot Clark's ego a lift is her boyfriend Michael, who's 19 years her junior.
‘She oozes sex appeal,’ he says.
Michael is also a hit with Margot's two children, eight-year-old Persephone and six-year-old Caspar.
He is confident their love can survive.
‘When we first met, I couldn't believe that Margot was 39.
She's fabulous-looking and I can trust her.
She just oozes sex appeal.
People assume our relationship is based on sex.
But they are wrong.’
Sexually, it's hardly surprising that older women fall for younger men, and vice versa.
According to experts, women hit their sexual zenith in their 30s and 40s, while men reach their peak in their late teens and early 20s.
But top psychologist Maryon Tysoe insists that sex isn't necessarily a key factor in an age-gap relationship.
Author of Love Isn't Quite Enough — a study of male-female relationships — Dr Tysoe says, ‘I haven't come across any evidence that shows older women are attracted to toyboys because they think they might be better in bed.
‘We don't really know what sexual chemistry is.
We can't explain it.
Sexual passion is nothing to do with age.
A wonderful sex  life is based on a good and loving relationship.
‘One of the attractions of younger men is that they appear to be less traditional than the older generation.
They're more prepared to do the dishes or change nappies.
It can be very nice for an older woman to have a partner who treats her as an equal,’ says Dr Tysoe.
Colin Bastafield, 29, also fell in love with a woman old enough to be his mum — his 48-year-old mother-in-law, Dawn Stafford.
And when the couple, from Gornal in the west Midlands, wed in 1990, Dawn's daughter Kim, Colin's ex-wife, was guest of honour.
Colin and Kim married at 18 and had two little boys.
But they divorced five years later.
Colin and Dawn fell in love when Dawn tried to help them patch things up.
Colin says, ‘I had to keep telling myself I was falling for my mother-in-law!’
Dawn and her first husband, Brian, divorced as a result of the affair.
Kim also felt hurt initially, but now the three are the best of friends.
Mother-of-four Dawn adds, ‘Kim and I had a cry together and I told her that just because I loved Colin, it didn't mean I'd stopped loving her.’
Marcelle Tweed, 50, is used to people mistaking her 27-year-old husband Paul for her son.
‘It doesn't bother us.
In fact, when people find out, they usually say, ‘Good for you!’
The couple, from Kings Lynn, Norfolk, married on Christmas Eve 1989.
‘It was my best ever Christmas present,’ says Marcelle.
‘We're inseparable.’
The Tweeds, both CB radio fans, met at a CB club barbecue in 1984, shortly after Marcelle's divorce from her first husband.
‘I was amazed to meet this handsome young lad,’ says Marcelle.
‘He sounded older on the radio.’
Paul became a frequent visitor at Marcelle's house and got on famously with her five grown-up children.
Gradually, over the five years that followed, friendship turned to love.
‘We're good mates, we treat each other as equals, we're very happy together.
That's all that matters,’ says Marcelle.
Paul adds, ‘I liked Marcelle from the moment we met and I married her because she's a really lovely person.
She may be twice my age, but that certainly doesn't worry me.’
Dr Tysoe believes that social attitudes are changing.
‘More people now appreciate that you can't look at a relationship and say, ‘It hasn't got a hope’.
It may work very well.’
But family opposition to an age-gap relationship can still cause permanent rifts.
Rita Claydon, a 49-old grandmother, ditched her husband of 30 years to marry 18-year-old window cleaner Roy Dubbs.
‘I wed Kim — and them I married her mum’ Colin and Kim on their wedding day (left)— before he fell for her mother
Family circle — Colin with his second wife Dawn, his former mother-in-law
The couple met at a holiday camp and when Roy's mum discovered the affair, she kicked him out.
Roy moved in to lodge with Rita and her unsuspecting husband, Steve, 50.
He hit the roof when the pair left to set up home in a bedsit.
Despite the odds, the couple are still together — and still at war with their respective families.
‘Stephen saved my sanity’
Cockney Carry-On actress Barbara Windsor, 55, found happiness with her 35-year-old husband Steve Hollings after divorcing former East End playboy Ronnie Knight.
Despite their 20-year age gap, the couple have now been together for eight years and run a pub in Amersham, Bucks.
‘Stephen probably saved my life, and certainly saved my sanity because I was one sad lady,’ says Barbara, referring to her traumatic divorce from Ronnie Knight, who was cleared of a murder charge and then deserted her for another woman.
‘When I first met Stephen it was all, ‘what's she doing with a young man like that?’
Someone said I ought to think about getting a good night's sleep.
It really hurt that it all got back to sex,’ says Barbara.
Barbara Windsor and Steve Hollings — together eight years
Crossword
Across
Not very sensible
Wooden tap fitted to a cask
You'd be wrong to make one
Namby-pamby person
Something to show
Job that has to be done
Say the word
Change for a different use
Person of authority
Betrayal of trust
Showing one's been in the sun a lot
Moved to guide a boat
It's not what's generally thought right
Down
Having a lot of bumps
What people do in church
Low woody plant or bush
Large-billed water bird
Vigorous enjoyment
Fur shoulder cape
Traditional stories about gods and heroes
Where you go when you leave the house
Put in an envelope with the letter
Enjoyer of the outdoor life
Spirit distilled from wine
Pungent and biting
Cotton or nylon thread
Solutions are on page 34
BEAUTY
beautiful backs
Revealing party clothes could mean you back will be on view after months under cover.
Here's how to get it in shape
Try these bathtime remedies
Tucked away behind us, backs suffer because they're out of sight and difficult to reach — drawbacks which easily lead to neglect.
The central panel between your shoulder blades is a major outlet area for sebum and perspiration, so don't skimp on cleansing and exfoliation.
Try using fine sea salt as a scrub — this will help dry out blemishes naturally because it's slightly antiseptic.
And ensure you have the right tools for the job — a long-handled back-brush or loofah for the bath, or a massage strap in the shower.
Soaking in a warm bath will open up pores ready for deep cleansing.
But don't add oil to baths if you have spots: try adding powdered seaweed to the water as it's good for drawing out impurities.
After bathing, get someone to apply a ‘back pack’ for you: use a facial mask (choose according to your skin type) and apply in the same way as for the face.
After cleansing, apply a light, non-greasy body lotion, paying particular attention to any dry areas.
Apply when the skin is still damp to ‘trap’ in the moisture.
For special nights out, give your back extra shine by spraying on ‘dry body oil’.
This penetrates quickly, leaving a non-greasy, silk-like sheen to skin — even more effective on top of fake tan.
Alternatively, apply bronzing gel, or dust bronzing powder, over your upper back and shoulders.
Exfoliate once a week to slough off any dry skin and unblock pores
Treat yourself to a professional cleanse
Despite the cost — from about £15 for 30 minutes — all our testers loved salon back cleansing treatments, and found them well worth the price.
They involve the same exfoliating, cleansing, toning and moisturising routines as facials.
While a back scrub or massage can be done at home, getting rid of spots or blackheads is best left to the professionals.
However, all the attention can over-stimulate the skin and more spots of blemishes may erupt for a few days afterwards, so always book a back treatment about a week before a special night out.
Ask your local beauty salon which treatments are available — look out for such well-known names such as Thalgo, Rene Guinot, Cathiodermie and Clarins.
Give grey, dingy skin a boost with a ‘back pack’ cleansing treatment
How to get rid of blemishes
Regular home care and the occasional ‘luxury touch’ of a professional treatment will keep most backs blemish-free and looking good.
But if you suffer from persistent crops of spots in this area, dermatologist Dr David Fenton has some simple tips.
‘Spotty backs are caused when grease glands become blocked as we wrap ourselves in man-made fibres that inhibit air circulation.
Wash daily, apply a non-greasy body lotion to dry patches only, and wear loose cotton next to the skin when you can.
This helps sweat to evaporate so there's less chance of irritation.’
Most acne treatments available without prescription, such as Oxy 10, contain benzoyl peroxide, a clinically tested, well proven ingredient used by doctors and dermatologists.
A newer, less conventional treatment is Ketsugo, a spray-on lotion containing Isolutrol, the naturally occurring detergent property of shark's bile.
‘Isolutrol has a direct effect on the sebaceous glands, reducing sebum production in greasy skins,’ explains Dr Fenton.
Our two testers found Ketsugo cleared their spots after a couple of months' use.
An elegant back view can't fail to get you noticed in a crowd
Essential tips for perfect poise
Posture and weight are important
Poor posture, lack of exercise and being overweight can lead to ageing lumps of flesh under the shoulder blades and sides of the back.
Keep your weight as near ideal as possible and take regular exercise that works on the upper body as well as your legs.
Always stand and sit with your spine stretched upwards, your shoulders back and down, so that the muscles move inwards towards your spine.
Bras and bumps
Badly fitting bras can affect the look of your back and shoulders.
A back strap that is too tight will encourage bulges above and below, and a bra that relies on straps rather than shaping to hold breasts in place can cut grooves in your shoulders.
The support should come from underneath so stick to bras that are underwired.
Remember, constantly wearing the wrong size and style of bra can lead to permanent back bulges.
Don't leave your back out of your beauty routine — remember, it needs light moisturising like the rest of your body to keep skin supple.
Follow up with a relaxing massage for a luxurious treat
MAKE-UP TIPS
Brilliant mascara tricks
Emphasise eyes with darkened lashes
For perfect results, always brush a mascara comb through lashes before applying your mascara.
Starting with the top lashes, look up and — taking the wand as close to the roots as possible — brush from roots to the tips in a single motion and leave to dry.
Then, looking down, brush lower lashes in the same way.
A good mascara should lengthen, curl and separate with one application — the fatter the brush, the thicker and fuller your lashes will be as more colour adheres to it.
Don't over-apply or you'll end with clumps that look hard and unnatural and may flake off — separate with a mascara comb or an old, clean wand.
Remove any smudges with a cotton bud dipped in non-oily make-up remover — dab gently, wipe off mark with a tissue, then rub a clean finger over the smear and re-powder.
If your mascara is beginning to clog up, wipe the wand gently with a tissue before applying — over-pumping adds air, drying it further.
Only use eyelash curlers if your lashes are very straight.
If you do use them, make sure that your lashes are free of all traces of make-up.
Which type to choose
Waterproof
Shouldn't smudge or run in water, but many do.
They are difficult to remove and need an oily remover which may puff-up sensitive eyes.
If you swim a lot, consider eye-lash tinting or a mascara such as Rimmel Waterproof, 10ml, £1.99, which won't end up on your cheeks.
Water-resistant
Won't smudge or run when touched and can be cleaned off with ordinary remover.
Try Colourings Mascara, 8ml, £2.40.
Conditioning
Contain ingredients like keratin, panthenol and vitamins B and E which prevent lashes becoming brittle and dry.
Try Almay Colour Performance Conditioning Mascara, 5g, £7.95.
Lash-building
Contain nylon or rayon filaments making eyelashes look thicker.
Can irritate sensitive eyes or those of contact lens wearers.
Try Max Factor 2000 Calorie Mascara, 12ml, £3.95.
No-colour
Clear conditioning gel can be used on its own or under mascara to soften and protect lashes, or on top to give glossy sheen.
Try Cover Girl Natural Lash Clear Mascara, 12ml, £3.20.
Lengthen and thicken hairs with a lash-building formula
PERSONAL STORY
‘Just a friend — but I had to make him mine
Avril Waters was devastated to learn she had breast cancer.
There was only one person she could turn to.
But would he want her…?
Avril Waters lay on the hospital trolley outside the operating theatre.
Four weeks earlier, she'd noticed a lump in her breast.
She'd been told it was malignant and now, in a few minutes, a surgeon would remove it.
Avril was worried — but not about the operation.
‘Would you tell everyone to get a move on?’ she asked a startled nurse.
‘I've got a visitor coming at six o'clock and I want to make a good impression on him — it's twenty to four already.’
Avril had planned to have her hair and make-up done by two fellow patients, in time for her special visitor, widower Peter Spencer, 54.
‘I wanted to look pale and interesting and bowl him over with my sparkling wit!’
Avril laughs.
Avril's plans, however, didn't quite work out as she'd intended.
The operation, originally planned for early afternoon, was re-scheduled and it wasn't until quarter to six that she returned to the ward, still feeling groggy from the anaesthetic.
‘I opened my eyes as Peter walked in,’ says Avril.
‘I just sobbed all over him.
The glamorous nightdress I'd bought to wear for his visit was still lying in my locker and, instead, I was wearing a shabby old hospital gown.
Avril, 49, who'd divorced her first husband in 1987 after 20 years of marriage, first met Peter through their local church in Saltburn, near Middlesbrough.
His first wife, Catherine, had died of cancer in January 1990, leaving him with their two sons, David, 15, and James, 14.
At the time, Avril felt she was at a crossroads in her life.
Her three children, Karen, 25, Nicki, 23, and Mark, 21, all lived away from home.
She decided to go back to work — but first wanted to catch up on the qualifications she'd missed out on.
After a year-long pre-entry course, she began a BA Hons degree in Humanities, both at the Teesside Polytechnic.
In November 1990, during her final year, Avril noticed that there was something wrong with her breast — it looked misshapen.
‘I went to my GP and he examined me.
He said I had to see a specialist,’ says Avril.
‘I asked him if I should finish my dissertation.
I wasn't going to struggle on if I was going to die in six months!
He told me to go ahead and finish it.’
That same night, Avril rolled over in bed and felt a lump in her breast.
‘I went a bit cold then,’ she admits.
‘I was worried, on my own and it was very late.’
Avril knew of one person she could turn to for support — Peter Spencer.
‘I'd spoken to him a few times,’ Avril recalls.
‘He'd struck me as a very kind, caring man, so I rang him and found myself pouring my heart out.’
Over the next few weeks Avril and Peter, a Royal Mail executive, gradually got to know each other, but they remained just good friends.
When Avril was told the date of her operation Peter promised to visit.
‘I told him to come the day before the operation,’ she says ‘I thought I'd still be looking fairly reasonable then.’
But he told me firmly, ‘No, I'll come on Tuesday.
That's the day that you'll need me the most.’
‘It was then that I realised what a lovely person he was,’ says Avril.
‘He didn't care what I would look like.’
It was the first of many visits and when Peter offered to take Avril home from hospital, she was delighted.
She knew she was in love with him, but didn't know if he felt the same way about her.
Avril found out the very next evening when Peter drove her to her daughter's house to stay for a few days.
‘As we left the hospital he joked with the staff, saying, ‘Don't worry, I won't ever let her come back again.’
I wondered if he felt as strongly about me as I did about him.
‘When we got into the car I said, ‘Thanks for coming to get me,’ and he said, ‘Now that I've found you I'm never going to let you go.’’
I wondered if I'd heard him right.
‘That night at my daughter's house I felt very emotional when Peter stood up to leave.
He obviously felt the same way, too, as we suddenly flung our arms around each other— we haven't stopped hugging since!’
Avril still had to undergo radiotherapy, but was also determined to go back to college after Christmas.
Unfortunately, it proved to be too taxing and Peter persuaded her to give up, telling her, ‘You're far more important than a degree.’
Luckily, Avril's course work had been so good she only had to finish her dissertation to pass — which she did.
But the best news came in February 1991 when Peter proposed.
Avril had been advised to have chemotherapy, but she wanted her wedding first.
‘To be honest if I'd been on my own I wouldn't have gone ahead with it,’ says Avril.
‘But I thought, ‘He's already lost one wife to cancer — he's not losing another one.’
I also wanted my son Mark, who's in the army, to give me away before he went on a posting to Northern Ireland.’
Avril's wish came true on April 6 last year, when the couple were married at the parish church in Saltburn where they'd first met.
And Peter was with her, too, when she finally collected her degree on December 13 at Middlesbrough Town Hall.
‘At the moment the cancer appears to have been beaten, and we're looking forward to our future together,’ says Avril.
‘Peter gets more special to me every day.’
Has something unusual happened to you?
We will pay £100 for each true story we use.
Send it to Personal Story at the address given on page 3.
So happy together: now Avril and Peter say, ‘We're looking forward to our future’
Avril, enjoying family life with husband, Peter, and his sons, David (left) and James, after their wedding last April
You and your letters
Make us laugh, make us cry…this is the page on which to share your news and views.
My pen-pal's a friend indeed
I live in Malta and have an English pen-friend called Rae.
We've been writing to each other for eight years but had never met until this year.
Rae and his wife Heather, at the front in the photo, came to Malta on holiday and while they were here they came to stay with me and my husband Brian.
We spent a wonderful week together and have agreed we won't leave it another eight years before we meet again.
When the name says it all
A nasty experience I had recently brought to mind an interesting phenomenon — how appropriate people's names often are.
I was bitten by a neighbour's dog and heard from the police that the same dog had bitten two other ladies — a Mrs Gentles and a Mrs Savage!
It reminded me of when I was a teacher and watched one of my pupils, Dan Waterman, grow up to be a fireman.
There was also a boy called Eric Early who was late for school almost every morning!
Just for laughs
I had arranged to meet my husband in a department store.
While I was waiting for him, an assistant approached and asked if she could help.
Without thinking, I said, ‘No thanks, I'm just looking for a man.’
Eyeing me suspiciously she said, ‘Aren't we all!’
The night before my friend's birthday, she bumped into her four-year-old son as she was going upstairs.
‘Mummy!’ he cried.
‘You can't go up there!
Daddy's wrapping your silky dressing-gown.’
A group of pupils studying science asked me about the new member of staff.
When I told them that he was a chemist, one boy asked, ‘Couldn't they get a proper teacher, then?’
Every birth is a ‘natural’ birth
After 22 hours of distressing, agonising labour, I was told I was going to need a Caesarean section.
My boyfriend was allowed to be by my side throughout this operation.
I was totally conscious and for the first time since my labour started I felt relaxed.
I mention all this because I know that many women are horrified at the idea of their baby being delivered in this way.
They say the mother is ‘cheated’ if she doesn't have a natural birth.
My reply is that, to me, being cheated would have meant not being able to hold my beautiful son, Sam in my arms after nine months.
I think anything that helps to deliver a healthy child is to be welcomed, not feared.
Don't get your knickers in a twist!
Just before I went to bed one night, I decided to have a shower.
I'd forgotten to fetch something to put my hair up with, and so I brushed it into a ponytail and held it in place with a pair of knickers from the airing cupboard, which I twisted round and used like a scrunchie.
The next morning, I overslept and rushed out of the house in a hurry.
It wasn't until lunchtime that my boss drew my attention to the strange ‘hairband’ I was wearing.
If she noticed, I wonder just how many other staff and customers in the busy DIY store where I work noticed, too?
I could have died from embarrassment!
Poets corner
Thank you to Jenny Cochrane of Liverpool for her poem:
My time
Nip into my local library
Get a good book — have a read.
Lose myself between the pages,
Put my feet up — sit for ages!
Time spent with a book is special
Set apart and undisturbed
In a world of fantasy
Quiet moments just for me.
Send your poems (15 lines maximum).
We'll pay £10 for any we print.
Come clean!
Old tricks are best
A cream-coloured dress of mine got covered with rust and, although I soaked it in biological liquid, it didn't get rid of the stain.
Then I remembered a leaflet that came with my old washing machine 30 years ago.
I dug it out and there was the remedy for rust stains — moisten with lemon juice, sprinkle with salt, place in the sun, then rinse off.
It worked a treat!
It seems the old-fashioned remedies are the best.
British Rail still isn't getting there
Travelling by train from Gatwick Airport to London, I felt sorry for the many foreign visitors struggling to follow the announcements made over the loudspeaker.
Even though I speak English, I had trouble following their logic.
First, we were informed that the train would be delayed for two minutes — it was another 10 minutes before we got going.
The train crawled slowly along until, eventually, our destination came in sight.
At this point the guard announced, ‘We will shortly be arriving at Gatwick Airport.’
Not only had a 30-minute journey taken one hour, but according to him, we'd been brought back to where we started!
British Rail say that it's getting there, but in which direction, I wonder?
HAPPY SNAP
We're having a whirl of a time!
Congratulations to Mrs Turrell from Aberdeen, for capturing on camera a truly magical moment.
Her photo shows son Philip, three, having a great time in Cornwall, shooting down an amazing mirrored tunnel-slide.
Have you captured a funny moment or precious memory on film?
Send us your photographs with an sae for return.
WE PAY £25 FOR YOUR HAPPY SNAP 
GOOD HEALTH
STOP PRESS
New breast cancer detection tool
A new microwave device to detect breast cancer is being developed by researchers.
A signal device the size and shape of a small jam jar is used to find tumours and create a 3-D picture of them in just minutes.
The research team, based at the Bristol Oncology Centre, hopes the method will eventually become an accepted screening method as it can be used time after time without any risk to the patient's health.
Supermodels can make you sick
At last, psychologists claim to have found proof that glossy magazine images of thin, super-sexy models can make us ill.
They say they have found a link between eating disorders such as anorexia and bulimia and pictures of slimline models.
A research team at Birmingham University asked women to look at magazine pictures of catwalk beauties and then asked them to guess how wide the models were.
The women who normally overestimated their own size by up to 15 per cent under-estimated the models' sizes by 25 per cent.
Danger!
These women could seriously damage your health
Cigarettes could cause cataracts
Smoking could give you cataracts, according to American scientists.
Studies in the Journal of the American Medical Association say men who smoke could be doubling the risk of developing cataracts in later life, while women smokers could be increasing their chances by more than 150 per cent.
Both men and women lowered their chances of developing cataracts when they stopped smoking, but still got them more often than non-smokers.
More work is to said to be needed to find out exactly how smoking damages the lens of the eye.
Ectopic pregnancy — new treatments
Around one in every 100 women run the risk of an ectopic pregnancy — where the embryo begins to develop outside the uterus, usually in the Fallopian tubes.
During an ectopic pregnancy, the foetus damages or ruptures surrounding tissue as it grows, which causes abdominal pain.
The pregnancy must be diagnosed quickly and the embryo removed, or the affected tube will eventually burst (usually between 10 and 14 weeks), triggering severe, life-threatening bleeding.
However, as some women don't realise that they are pregnant, experience no pain and simply assume that they are having period problems, the condition can be extremely difficult to detect in time.
Doctors now routinely use super-sensitive blood and urine tests to screen women suffering from any lower abdominal pain.
And vaginal ultrasound — a technique which gives clear pictures of the Fallopian tubes via a probe inserted into the vagina — also makes diagnosing an ectopic pregnancy easier.
Eventually, all expectant mums will be screened this way if they are in the high risk group.
This includes women who've been trying for a test tube baby, have a history of pelvic inflammatory disease or sexually transmitted diseases, have suffered previous ectopic pregnancy, or surgery on their tubes, and those who've had infertility problems.
‘Those at risk may eventually be screened’
Treatment had improved dramatically, too.
In the past, the surgeon would automatically snip out the affected tubes, but this could leave you with half the chance of conceiving later, or completely infertile.
Now, however, he simply makes a small incision in, or beside, the navel and inserts a  laparoscope (viewing tube) to see inside.
A tiny slit is then made in the affected tube with a laser, or a hot diathermy needle, and the embryo removed.
Looking further ahead, doctors at two of London's hospitals, King's College and St Thomas's, are researching the injection of embryos with chemicals to stop them growing.
This means they can be reabsorbed by the body.
Mr Rajat Goswamy, who is a consultant gynaecologist at St Thomas's Hospital, comments, ‘I have used it successfully on 20 women, all of who were less than eight weeks into pregnancy.
In two further cases it hasn't worked.
‘The technique still needs to be evaluated, but I think it has a positive feature because it has potentially fewer complications.’
How the damage is done
Why young feet need special attention
You can never be too early starting your kids off on the right foot — in fact, it's essential
Over 70 per cent of 12-year-olds have problems with their feet, mostly because of ill-fitting shoes.
Corns, heel  calluses and hammer toes are common complaints, but with care most can be avoided.
Baby toes need room
Pre-walking age children do not need shoes.
However, even bootees or Babygros can damage a baby's malleable feet, so check regularly that toes are not scrunched up.
Wait until your baby has been walking for a few weeks before taking her for the first shoe fitting, as toes are crucial in gripping the floor while learning to toddle.
Fit shoes properly
Children's feet often stay the same size for several months at a time, then move up a size almost overnight.
So check your child's shoes often for signs of discomfort.
When buying shoes, opt for lace-ups, or those with T-bars, as they can be secured firmly.
Avoid slip-ons, as the toes need to grip hard to keep them on and so are put under strain.
Don't hand down shoes from one child to another, and it's false economy to buy a size too big for kids ‘to grow into’.
Sort out socks
Socks that are too tight can cause as much harm as an inadequate pair of shoes during childhood.
Make sure there's plenty of room, and buy cotton or wool mix socks, as opposed to nylon ones, as they allow the foot to breathe, avoiding bad odour and fungal infections.
The seam joining the main part of the sock to the toe section shouldn't rub.
Are trainers OK?
Many teenagers today would live in their trainers, given half a chance, but try to discourage this.
They shouldn't be worn all day long because they don't provide the support young feet need.
For sportswear, though, leather or canvas trainers and gym shoes are by far the healthiest choice — they let feet breathe, unlike plastic shoes, or those lined with nylon or PVC.
Have youngsters feet measured every three months by a trained shoe fitter
It happened to me
‘At last I can control my migraines’
After years of suffering severe, debilitating headaches, Janice Walmsley tried a revolutionary new drug that changed her life
Janice Walmsley was in agony.
She simply clutched her head and closed her eyes, trying to stop the room spinning in front of her — knowing that if she moved she would be violently sick.
‘There's no mistaking the pain,’ says Janice, 44, a freelance journalist and mother of four.
‘Migraine is more than a headache.
It's a disabling illness.
When I have it badly I can't stand up without vomiting, my vision is distorted, my speech is slurred and the pain in my head is almost unbearable.’
Janice was only 13 when the doctor first diagnosed her headaches as migraine.
They usually struck once a month, around the time of her period, making it almost certain they were hormone linked.
‘The doctor prescribed Migril, but it was far from ideal.
If I could manage to absorb a tablet in between the bouts of vomiting it did stop the sickness and bring a pain-free sleep — but it left me too exhausted to do anything about enjoying life.
‘I got most relief from Solpadeine.
Sometimes I could stave off an attack by taking two every four hours.
But some weeks I would take eight every day and feel awful all the time.’
In the spring of this year, a pharmacist told her about a new drug called Imigran.
Intrigued, she went to her doctor.
‘He said he'd never prescribed it before but he was willing to let me try it.
Then he dropped his bombshell — it was only available in injectable form and I just cannot stand needles.’
The prescription that Janice collected consisted of two syringes, each filled with a measured dose of the drug, ready to load into an autoinjector, a spring-loaded plastic ‘gun’.
But Janice's fear was so great she struggled through two more migraines before screwing up enough courage to try the injection.
All she had to do was remove the safety cap from the autoinjector, hold it to her thigh, press a red button at the other end and wait 10 seconds.
‘I felt a stab of pain as the needle went into my leg but the fact that it was concealed made me feel less squeamish,’ she says.
‘It helps that you don't have to push the needle in.
The spring does it for you.’
So was it worth the trauma?
‘It was like a miracle,’ recalls  Janet .
‘Within an hour the headache had vanished, the sickness was fading and I felt bright enough to be able to go out.’
Now Imigran is available in tablet form, Janice uses that.
‘They take longer to work and they're no use if I'm being sick, so I still have to carry my autoinjector,’ she says.
‘But now I only use it as a last resort.’
She takes one tablet a month.
‘I can plan my life with confidence,’ she says.
‘By adding up the days migraine stole from me in the past, I calculate that I shall be able to enjoy living for three extra weeks in a year!’
Our expert replies
‘The drug works for up to 85 per cent of patients
Dr Tom Whitmarsh, registrar at the Princess Margaret migraine clinic at London's Charing Cross Hospital
Migraine is a very severe, often one-sided, headache which can last from several hours up to two days.
Sometimes vision is affected, for example by flashing lights or zig-zag lines, and you may not be able to stand light or noise.
Nausea and vomiting are also common symptoms.
Imigran works by neutralising inflammation in the walls of the carotid artery in the head, as it's here the symptoms of migraine seem to start.
The injection works in up to 85 per cent of cases, and the tablets in up to 70 per cent of patients.
The immediate side effects range from pain at the injection site to a constricting feeling in the throat — its long-term side effects aren't known.
If you use Imigran more than once or twice a month, you should also be using a continuous anti-migraine treatment and reserving Imigran for breakthrough migraines.
It isn't prescribed for people under 19 or over 65, and you should not take it if you have heart trouble, particularly angina.
For more  information contact the British Migraine Association
DR CAROL COOPER ANSWERS YOUR HEALTH QUERIES
Why are my nails in bad condition?
My nails have recently started to flake at the ends.
Is it something to do with my diet?
Iron deficiency — anaemia — sometimes causes nails to turn upwards and then flake, so you may not be getting enough iron (found in red meat, eggs, and green veg).
Other medical conditions, such as an overactive thyroid gland, occasionally cause similar symptoms.
A more common reason for brittle nails is repeated injury caused by heavy work or, for example, if your hands are in and out of water a lot .
Household cleaning products can damage nails, too.
Always try to protect your hands, especially when using strong chemicals.
Is it too late to give up smoking?
My husband who is 62 has recently had a mild heart attack.
He now says it's nor worth him stopping smoking as the damage has already been done.
Is he right?
Even if his heart is already damaged, your husband is wrong.
Among other things, smoking makes the blood clot more easily and puts him at risk of another heart attack, which may be less mild than the first.
Smokers are twice as likely to die from heart disease than non-smokers.
But even a heavy smoker can reduce this risk by kicking the habit, and the benefit starts within days of giving up.
For an information pack on giving up, write with an sae to .
Send your queries to the address on page 3.
Dr Cooper cannot answer letters personally.
If you are worried about your symptoms, see your GP straight away.
YOU'LL NEVER BELIEVE IT
Pigs might fly?
Some do…
Jockeying for position, these racing pigs took part in the first-ever Porky Grand National
These little pigs are making a name for themselves in Bellingham, Northumberland.
Former farmer Michael Bell organised a race for porkers at the county show after seeing hog racing while he was on holiday in Canada.
And the Bellingham pigs really let fly along the course.
‘They are let out of a greyhound-style trap and can cover more than 100 metres in a matter of seconds when they get a whiff of food,’ says Michael, 52.
‘Long legs are absolutely vital, and you wouldn't believe just how fast they can go.’
Michael trained one of his own pigs, Canada Hog, and seven other porkers belonging to local farmers.
Lester Piglett was the favourite at the first-ever Porky Grand National, but Canada Hog romped home on the day.
Michael has no intention of taking his winning boar off to market.
‘Certainly not.
I am planning to breed even faster pigs,’ he says.
‘I'm hoping to set up a special league.
People will put money on anything if they're given the opportunity.’
Trainspotters buy ‘station’
Standing at the end of a freezing platform spotting trains is one thing.
But paying £56,000 for a house from which to collect train numbers is taking a hobby too far.
Yet Melvin Thorley, 45, his uncle Eric Hobson, 79, and five friends have clubbed together to do just that.
Three hundred trains a day pass the quadruple-glazed windows of 15 Buttercup Drive in Stockport.
The main Manchester-London line runs alongside one side of the garden, and a heavy goods line along the other.
Eric, who sold his house for the venture, is the resident caretaker, and plans to turn the house into a base for fellow trainspotters are under way.
Scattered across the lawn are station signs, railway seats and a ‘Trains cross here’ notice.
‘We're planning to run a miniature railway track round the perimeter, with an ornamental lake in the middle,’ says Melvin.
Some of the neighbours, however, don't care much for the spotters' activities.
Melvin thinks they are way out of line.
‘Surely we can do what we like in our own back garden,’ he says.
‘Some folk have plastic gnomes, some have swimming pools.
We've got railway memorabilia and we're very proud of it.’
Rail buffs outside their dream house in Stockport, where they enjoy an uninterrupted view of the passing traffic
Be my birdie!
Golfer Brian Holliss missed a simple putt on the 17th green…and gained a wife!
As he lined up his shot, he boasted to his mates, ‘If I don't sink this, I'll marry my girlfriend.’
But his ball missed the hole.
‘The next thing I knew the boys were arranging my stag night,’ says the 39-year-old heating engineer, from Slough, Berkshire.
Meanwhile, his girlfriend of 17 years, Jenette, was delighted when Brian popped the question.
But she was less than pleased when the truth finally came out.
‘I gave him hell,’ says the 34-year-old supermarket supervisor.
‘No woman would ever want to walk down the aisle thinking that she was the bet in a silly game of golf.’
However, Brian insists, ‘I play against the same guys every week and we're always striking crazy bets.
I was going to ask Jenette anyway, as it was coming up to my 40th birthday.’
The pair tied the knot in July, and the last-minute wedding went off to a tee…
Sink into a real waterbed
Way ahead of current thinking is this new form of Parisian transport designed by Jacques Rougerie
No, your eyes don't deceive you — yes, they are floating down the Seine on a double bed!
Parisian designer Jacques Rougerie obviously got rather tired of his new project — designing a Seine riverbus — and thought he'd have a lie-down instead.
So he made a floating bed.
But it's not recommended for everyone — after all, things could get rather choppy during the rush-hour…
Magnificent melon sets a British record
Jimmy Walker is celebrating a juicy record — the green-fingered genius has got the biggest melon in Britain!
Grown on his allotment in Middlesbrough, Cleveland, it weighs a massive 26 lbs and is more than three feet round.
‘I was given a hero's welcome when I visited my local pub,’ says dockworker Jimmy, 38.
‘I like a pint, and I cracked a joke that it was modelled on my belly.
Mind you, the melon is just loaded with water rather than beer.’
Jimmy was given the melon seed by a friend.
‘I didn't use any tricks or special manure whatsoever,’ he says.
‘The other plants were rather disappointing this year, but the melon just kept on growing and growing.’
Jimmy smashed the previous British melon record by nearly eight pounds, but he won't be tucking into his prize exhibit — he has already raffled the mouth-watering treat to raise money for the British Heart Foundation.
He's all heart — Jimmy's prize melon was raffled to raise money for charity
BEAUTY, FORM AND FITNESS
The cheer up diet
Does the cold weather make you feel hungry and miserable?
Try some of our treats — they'll put you in a better mood without spoiling your figure
Go on, spoil yourself
•Out of your 1,200 calorie a day diet set aside 100 calories for warming drinks or hot, spicy snacks as well as sweet treats.
Make that you limit though, or you won't get enough nutrients or learn new eating habits.
•Savour the moment — relax and really enjoy every mouthful.
•If you find it hard to eat one chocolate or biscuit without devouring the whole packet, but an individually wrapped serving.
Here are some goodies you can work into your daily diet.
Keep within your 100 calories limit, but, if you choose carefully, you could have two treats!
Chocolate fixes
Sweet treats
Warming drinks
Savoury favourites
Free!
Put moisture back into dry skin
Those of you who have dry skin will be all too aware that it is sensitive to some skin care products, can easily feel taut — after cleansing or time spent in cold weather — and is prone to premature fine lines.
Dry skin's best friend is an effective moisturiser which minimises tautness and protects skin from potential irritants.
One of our favourites is Laboratoires Garnier Synergie Dry Skin Daily Nourishing Cream containing Karite, a rich vegetable butter.
NATURAL BEAUTY
Carrots
Eat them or mash them up and put them on your face — with their soothing properties, carrots really earn their ‘skin-food’ label.
They're a rich source of vitamin A and beta carotene, and research has shown these nutrients to be vital to the healthy growth of skin, eye tissue, hair and nails.
The French have known about their beauty benefits for years, using poultices of fresh carrot to clear blotchy complexions.
They contain a natural antiseptic which fights spot-causing bacteria and dries up the blemishes.
Carrot oil, a rich, orange liquid made from the dried root of the plant, is used on dry and scaly skins to make them more supple.
It also has an astringent effect which can tighten skin, making wrinkles less noticeable.
Clear a spotty complexion with this easy homemade mask.
Liquidise a large, raw carrot to a smooth paste, or boil or steam the carrot then mash it thoroughly.
Apply to the spotty areas of your face and leave for 15 minutes.
Rinse the mask with warm water and gently pat your skin dry.
Product choice:The Body Shop's Carrot Facial Oil, 30ml, £2.25.
10 MINUTE WORK-OUT
Work on your upper body
Arms lose their tone with age.
But there's no need for them to be flabby — give them a stretch and they'll soon shape up
Work your upper arms and your chest muscles in one.
Stand with feet width apart.
Fold your arms, grasping each just in front of the elbows.
Push your hands forwards and feel both arm (biceps) and chest (pectoral) muscles contract.
Repeat up to 30 times.
WARNING If you are overweight, pregnant or suffer from back pain or any medical condition, consult your doctor before attempting these exercises
Feel the strong  triceps muscle of your upper arm tighten with this stretch.
Clasp fingers behind your back and lean forwards, pushing your arms up until they're at right angles to your back.
Don't lock your elbows or knees.
Hold for five counts.
Relax and repeat exercise at least five times.
Loosen the muscles you've worked.
Stand straight with feet shoulders width apart.
Clasp hands in front of you then raise arms above your head.
Bend from the waist, first to the left until you feel the stretch along upper arms, and hold for 10 counts, then to the right.
Repeat 10 times.
BULLETIN
Just what is in your little pot of cream?
Shopping for skin care products seems simple enough — until you're faced with a barrage of scientific-sounding ingredients.
Don't panic — to make sure you come home with the right product for you, we have translated some technical terms.
Anti-oxidants
Vitamins A, C and E are anti-oxidants.
In beauty products, they fight free radicals — the molecules that attack skin cells and contribute to premature ageing.
Ceramides
These fats hold the cells of your skin's topmost layers together.
If this ‘glue’ is damaged, by overharsh cleansers, pollution or sunlight, skin begins to look flaky.
Synthetic ceramides stick down these rough bits.
Collagen and elastin
Both fibres are part of the lower layers of your skin, providing its flexibility and strength.
The older you get, the less efficient collagen and elastin fibres become.
Collagen and elastin fibres become.
Collagen and elastin in creams can bolster your skin's natural supplies.
They only strengthen a cream's film-forming abilities, trapping more moisture in your skin.
DNA
Along with every living thing, our bodies contain deoxyribonucleic acid.
DNA molecules, comprising two separate strands twisted into a spiral, monitor how cells function.
As they wear out with age, skin repairs take longer.
In beauty products, DNA holds moisture in the skin, protects it against UV rays and improves the appearance of scar tissue.
Liposomes and niosomes
These are round, hollow molecules which your skin absorbs easily.
Filled with a cream's ‘key’ ingredients, they carry then into the top layers.
NMFs
Natural moisturising factors are compounds in the middle layers of your skin that attract water from the atmosphere, giving your skin a youthful ‘dewy’ appearance.
Your natural production of NMFs tails off with age, leaving skin drier.
Two substances which mimic NMFs, attracting and holding water in the skin, are urea and lactic acid.
Plant extracts
Modern research backs claims that plant extracts, such as lotus, used for greasy skin, are better tolerated than synthetic substitutes.
It's not just synthetic ingredients that give your skin a boost — many modern products now contain plant extracts which have been used for their stimulating and soothing properties for thousands of years
OVER THE COUNTER
The latest news for glamorous-looking hair
Update your hairstyle with three of the latest products designed to shape, smooth and shade
1
Create the winter's wavy look with the help of styling mousse.
Choose a firm hold variant which will keep your style in place during winder weather and light drizzle.
Some provide a protective barrier against the rain — your hair will still get wet, but is saved from damaging effects of pollutants.
Product choice:Supersoft New 3 Weather Extra Firm Hold Mousse from Schwarzkopf
2
Thanks to new smoothing products, it's not just those born with straight hair that can follow the trend for sleek, shiny styles.
Try one of the latest lightweight liquids with Panthenol, a form of vitamin B5, the only vitamin known to penetrate the hair strand.
It fills in rough patches on the cuticle and give a light-reflecting finish.
Product choice:Boots New Smoothing Complex, 200ml, £2.19.
3
Brighten and condition your hair with a plant-based colorant.
These stain hair without interfering with its basic structure.
Used in the right concentrations, they colour hair for up to six washes and add a protective film.
Product choice:Daniel Field Plant Remoisturising Semi Permanent colours in six shades, £3.65 each
YOUR RIGHTS
‘My perm was a total disaster’
After a nightmare trip to a hairdresser, Susan Newby decided to make the salon pay for its mistakes
Last July, with her 40th birthday approaching, Susan Newby decided on a change of image.
Her long black tresses were to go and her hair restyled with a soft perm.
‘There was a picture of exactly what I wanted hanging in the salon,’ says Susan.
The stylist assured her that it would work will on her hair.
And as the salon in Susan's home town of Bristol was part of a reputable chain, she didn't for a moment expect any problems.
But four and a half hours later, when the curlers were taken out, Susan was furious.
‘My hair was a mass of dried up matted tangles,’ she says.
‘I was so angry I started to cry, but the stylist insisted it was what I'd asked for.
I was in such a state that I stupidly paid the £40 bill and stormed out.’
However, after she'd had time to calm down, Susan returned to the salon the next day to try to get her money back.
The manageress was apologetic, but said Susan would have to contact the head office if she wanted a refund.
‘I wrote immediately,’ she says, ‘and a few days later I was sent a complaints form to fill in and return.’
Susan, a part-time school cook, then had to put on a brave face for a holiday in Spain with her children Emma, 10 and Jonathon, 13.
She returned to a letter from the salon's head office inviting her to see one of their hair technicians free of charge.
The chain's director, himself an experienced hairdresser, was going to come to the salon to put things right.
‘He said my hair had been badly cut,’ says Susan.
‘He started to re-perm it, then left the manageress to finish it off.
But I was stunned when they took out the curlers — it looked even worse!’
The director offered Susan a refund for the £40 she had originally paid and free treatment until her hair was put right.
‘But I told him I was going to take legal action,’ she says.
The company's complaints department phoned Susan the next day to tell her who to contact.
A friend who worked in liability insurance agreed to handle her case.
He wrote to the company's insurers outlining Susan's complaint, and eventually received a letter explaining that he would have to provide evidence that the stylist had not done her job properly.
So, at the beginning of October, Susan saw a trichologist (hair specialist), who said the salon had used the wrong chemicals.
She then had to visit two hairdressers to get independent reports — and both said that whoever had permed her hair was incompetent.
After receiving the evidence, the insurance company offered Susan a few hundred pounds compensation.
‘I thought it was too low,’ she says.
‘So I threatened to take the case to court.’
That did the trick, and in January Susan was offered a four figure sum which she accepted.
‘The whole thing took seven months,’ she says.
‘I'm glad I did it, but I'm still trying to grow out the damage.
The money can't make up for all the misery I went through.’
Our expert replies
You may need a solicitor's help
John Byrne, registrar of the Hairdressing Council
If your are unhappy with a new hairstyle, complain to your hairdresser while you are still in the salon, and if possible get her to put it right before you settle the bill.
Or offer to pay what you think is fair — not the full amount.
If you're still not satisfied, you may be able to claim compensation, as Susan did.
However, you have to prove that the hairdresser didn't do the job with reasonable care and skill.
Have a photograph taken immediately, and arrange to see a trichologist (hair specialist) or another hairdresser for an independent written report.
If the treatment has caused any physical damage (for example to your scalp or face) visit your GP as a statement from him could help your case.
Claims of up to £1,000 can be made in the small claims court, but in larger, more unusual cases you'll probably need a solicitor whose fees will be paid by the hairdresser if you win the case.
For more information contact your local Citizens Advice Bureau or The Hairdressing Council.
FENTON BRESLER ANSWERS YOUR LEGAL QUERIES
Do I still have a criminal record?
Ten years ago, when I was 19, I was convicted of shoplifting.
Now I'm married with a daughter and feel so ashamed in case she ever finds out.
Is there any way I can get my record wiped clean?
You don't need to — it was expunged automatically long ago.
You don't say whether you were fined or, more likely at that age, given a probation or a conditional discharge.
But either way, the conviction is spent.
The 1974 Rehabilitation of Offenders Act states that anyone jailed for between six months and two and a half years has their conviction wiped out after 10 years.
If you are sent to prison for up to six months, you have to wait seven years; a fine is wiped clean after five years and probation or conditional discharge takes one year.
The times are less for youngsters under 17 years of age.
How can I see my aunt's will?
I have just heard that an aunt of mine died some years ago.
She did once promise to leave me something — can I get hold of her will?
Copies of all wills in England and Wales, of which probate has been granted, are kept at St Catherine's House (no longer at Somerset House).
They are also available at the dead person's local District Registry.
You don't have to be a relation — anyone may obtain a copy for a small fee.
It's quicker to go there yourself (you'll get a copy within about three days) but you can also apply by post, which takes about four months.
If you have any legal queries, write the address on page three.
Fenton regrets that he cannot give personal advice.
Money down the drain?
Having spent money on a new washing machine or fridge-freezer, you may be tempted to pay a bit extra to cover the cost of potential repairs.
But with a one-year guarantee, is it really worth the extra for a service contract?
Make sure you'll be getting value for money before you decide.
Typical contracts are available on domestic electrical appliances such as washing machines, dishwashers or televisions, provided they're under five years old.
(Beyond that time most manufacturers won't insure their machines.)
You pay an annual fee — from about £15 for a microwave to £50 for a washer-drier (of all household appliances, these cause the most problems).
Any repairs including labour, parts and VAT, are free for 12 months.
However, a Consumers' Association (CA) survey in 1990 found that most appliances didn't need any repairs at all over five years.
And if they didn't, the bill would probably still be lower than the price of the service charge.
If you're unlucky enough to have a machine that goes wrong regularly, a service contract may save you hundreds of pounds.
Even for small problems, an engineer's charges can be high.
‘But in most cases you are likely to save money by not taking out a contract,’ says the CA.
‘It may just be worth running the risk of needing a repair.’
Is your service contract worth paying for?
Decide for yourself with our easy-to-follow chart — but remember, prices will vary slightly from area to area, and from one company to another 
Ouch!
That 999 call can cost you
Asking the fire brigade for help when you're locked out of your house may seem like a good idea.
But did you realise that you could be landed with a huge bill afterwards?
That's because many brigades charge for call outs which are not for a fire (false alarms count as fires), or for a life-threatening situation.
Obviously if you are worried about someone's safety, you should dial 999.
But bear in mind that charges for non-emergencies can be around £150 an hour, plus VAT.
What you could pay for
Most brigades outside London would charge for dealing with emergencies such as a flooded cellar.
You may also have to pay if you'd locked yourself out and wanted help getting back indoors (this is in fact the only thing the London fire brigade ever charges for, and it would cost you about £99).
As the brigade would probably simply knock down your door, you could just as well do it yourself.
You would also be billed for help in rescuing a cat from a tree — you'd be better off going to the RSPCA who will save your moggy cost-free.
The charges made will vary with different brigades, and will depend on the number of vehicles and fire fighters attending the incident, and the number of hours spent on the job.
How to dispute charges
If you ask the fire brigade for help in a non-emergency, you will be warned that a cost may be incurred and will be asked to sign a form agreeing to this.
When the invoice arrives, you can appeal if you think it's unfair.
First contact the Chief Fire Officer at the headquarters of your local fire brigade.
If you're still not satisfied, write to your County Council asking for the matter to be referred to its Fire Services Committee.
•Only call the fire brigade if you feel you really have no choice.
While it's attending a non-emergency, a real one could be taking place elsewhere.
Some fire brigades may bill you for coming out to help rescue an animal.
You may be better off going to the RSPCA, which is free
JOB OF THE WEEK
Exhaust fitter
Getting covered in grease is all part of the fun for Lesley Smith
Lesley Smith left her Nottingham school last summer without a GCSE qualification to her name.
With the employment situation for school-leavers as it is, she reckoned her chances of landing a job were slim.
‘I thought I'd just spend my days messing around with nothing to do,’ says that 17-year-old.
‘Now it may look like I'm just messing around with cars, but my job as a Kwik-Fit fitter means I've always got plenty to do.’
Lesley, one of two female fitters at the company's centre in Daybrook, Nottingham, joined Kwik-Fit in May.
Training is on the job, learning how to test and change tyres and exhausts.
‘The teacher explains how to change a tyre, then you have a go,’ she says.
Although she can now refit a car by herself, she won't qualify fully until she has worked for two years and passed her City and Guilds ‘hand on’ course.
‘I'm determined to stick at it, because I really enjoy my work,’ says Lesley.
‘You don't need to be physically strong — if you use all the equipment properly, it's quite easy.
But you should be curious about mechanics, which I always have been.
As a child I was always taking things apart then putting them back together.’
However, it isn't a job for those who worry about their appearance.
‘My hands and face get completely covered in grease and dirt,’ laughs Lesley.
‘But I like that.
It shows I'm working hard.’
Kwik-Fit provides her with five blue boiler suits and, because the job is so messy, organises a free cleaning pick-up service from work.
‘That way I don't clog up my mum's washing machine with greasy overalls every week,’ she says.
Lesley, who works from 8.30am to 6pm Tuesday to Saturday, earns about £70 per week.
She spends much of her free time with boyfriend Andy, 23, who works as a forklift truck driver.
‘Andy thinks my job's great,’ she adds.
‘If we go for a drive in his Escort and anything goes wrong with it, he knows I'll be there to put it right!’
Factfile
What qualifications do you need?
No exam passes — just an interest in and an aptitude for mechanics.
How much will you earn?
Wages start at £70 a week and rise to around £140 after two years' experience.
For more information Contact The Personnel Dept, Kwik-Fit,.
It's actively trying to recruit more women — by 1995 the company wants to see women in 25 per cent of fitter's jobs.
This week's people
We meet
Eddie Murphy
After two years out of the limelight, the 31-year-old comic is bouncing back with his new film, Boomerang
Why did you have such a long break doing nothing?
I realised I was no longer having any fun doing my movies, and I think this was reflected in my last two films,Harlem Nights and Another 48 Hours .
I was doing them for the wrong reasons — out of curiosity or for the money, rather than because I had a passion for doing them.
So I stopped.
What exactly went wrong with these two films?
They were just movies that didn't come together — poorly executed, I guess.
Harlem Nights — which I also wrote, produced and directed — was a question of wearing too many hats.
Another 48 Hours was done out of fear because Harlem Nights was the first time I'd had a movie that flopped.
Did you find early success hard to cope with?
I used to play that brooding celebrity thing, always depressed, always upset, nothing's right, everything's a drag…
You can get so lost trying to please so many people that you stop being true to yourself.
But I feel my life started again on April 3, 1991, when I turned 30 and finally grew up.
Now I look at my life today and realise I am blessed.
How big a part did you daughter Bria, now three, play in this change?
At first I ran away from my responsibilities.
I associated the whole family thing with being older and I was holding on to my youth.
I could feel it pulling me in, but I wanted to remain a bachelor.
After about a year I gave in to the pull and discovered that fatherhood has made me a much more serious person.
I used to approach my future like a loose cannon, but now I'm really trying to do the best work I can because I think about my daughter all the time.
You have now settled down with Bria's mother, model Nicole Mitchell.
Can you explain why you fell in love with her?
Nicole is the sweetest person I've ever met, and she doesn't suffocate me.
She does her own thing and she's fine.
I feel so proud of her when we're out together.
It's very rare that you meet a woman as fine as she is who also has a sense of humour.
When you're feeling down, what spurs you on?
I'm only in this business to make people laugh.
The most important thing is making people feel good.
I'm happier today than I've ever been in my whole life.
I feel everything is perfect.
The smile that launched a career
Fans of television presenter Michaela Strachan love her famous cheeky grin.
But that megawatt smile indicates more than contentment with her soaring career and bank balance.
At 26, it seems she's anxious to hang on to her youthful good looks and reckons that a happy face helps.
‘I'm a smiley person, I like smiling,’ says Michaela.
‘It's good for your face and keeps you looking younger.’
After making her name in children's shows like Wacaday and Owl TV , Michaela has broadened her range to such adult fare as ITV's The Hitman and Her .
Now she says she'd like to do her own show, but points out, ‘I can't ever see myself doing a pompous evening programme wearing a skirt and jacket.’
In the meantime she's got other things on her mind — and they won't involve wearing a skirt either.
Michaela's all set to join the BBC programme The Really Wild Show , the popular wildlife series for kids.
‘Bridesmaid’ Jimmy gets a cue for the title
It's not been the best of years so far for Jimmy White, who was dubbed the bridesmaid of snooker after losing his fourth world championship final in May.
Supporters were even more taken aback to learn that he was calling himself James, rather that the long-familiar Jimmy.
‘My father always calls me James — and I like it,’ he said.
The 30-year-old Londoner hopes to be competing in next week's UK Open in Preston, starting on November 13.
And his wife Maureen will be cheering him all the way.
‘These young kids playing today owe it to my Jimmy,’ she says.
‘They'd be nothing without him…and the game would be nothing, either.’
Success leaves hubby behind
Hollywood's hottest couple, Harry Hamlin, once of LA Law , and blonde actress Nicollette Sheridan, seem set to split.
Since their lavish £200,000 wedding 14 months ago, they have rarely been out of the headlines — but for all the wrong reasons.
Nicollette, 28, star of the Jackie Collins mini-series Lucky Chances , quit their home in the summer and has been spotted out on the town with singer Michael Bolton.
Her jut-jawed spouse, 41, once voted the sexiest man in the world, is also rumoured to have other love interests.
Gossips say that additional strain has been put on the marriage because Nicollette's career is moving into top gear, while her husband's has foundered since he left LA Law .
A spokesman for the actor, who was married before to actress Laura Johnson and has a son by Ursula Andress, says he is considering ‘two major projects’.
But then he would, wouldn't he?
ON THE GRAPEVINE
Vintage vine
Former Coronation Street star Jean Alexander, 64, is the youngest of the regulars in the new series of The Last of the Summer Wine .
The classic has now set the record and the longest-running TV comedy of all time — Compo and company first appeared on our screens in 1973!
Quote of the week
‘So far my whole life has been a comedy.’
Kylie Minogue 
Happy Birthday
Celebrating this week are: Bryan Adams, 33…
Lester Piggott, 57…
Tatum O'Neal, 29…
Nigel Havers, 42…
Jean Shrimpton, 50…
Ken Dodd, 61…and Demi Moore, 30.
Smith and Jones inspired by a window-cleaner
After his car windscreen was cleaned five times in half an hour, Mel Smith has had enough…to write a hilarious sketch for the latest BBC series of Smith And Jones .
With partner Griff Rhys Jones, 38, he sends up the squeegee pirates from hell — the fast operators who jump out armed with a bucket and sponge and cover your screen in soap suds while you're stuck at traffic lights.
‘I don't blame them for trying to make a bit of cash, but it gets ridiculous when they insult you for refusing to pay for something you didn't want doing,’ fumes Mel, 39.
Both carry notebooks with them to jot down ideas for sketches.
‘If I couldn't see the funny side of life, I think I would have murdered someone by now!’ says Mel.
Freds wanted fire escape
Oh, the pressures of international stardom!
Right Said Fred have made it mega big in Japan — and as a result, the hit-making trio were keen to please while rehearsing for a TV show there.
However, they drew the line on being told to dance with flames during one number — it just sounded too dangerous.
But when it became clear that the disagreement was becoming a hot issue, they gave way…only to find they'd misinterpreted the producer's fractured English.
Hunky Richard Fairbrass, 31-year-old frontman for the Freds, explains: ‘We thought they wanted us to dance around the flames.
But when we got to the studio, the first thing we saw were all these picture frames suspended from the ceiling — we just looked at each other and burst out laughing.
The Japanese must have thought we were mad when we said it was dangerous!’
Star profile
Lynda La Plante — aiming for another award
Like her heroine in Prime Suspect she found success the hard way…
She's now one of the hottest names in television, but for years writer Lynda La Plante was a bit-part actress, struggling against typecasting.
Born Lynda Titchmarsh, she went to RADA at 15 to train for an acting career.
‘I hated it,’ says Lynda, now 46.
‘They can be very cruel there.
I once complained to the principal about being cast as 89-year-old women all the time, and he said, ‘My dear, that's probably all you'll ever play.
You're a very plain-looking person, small and rather squat.’
I thought, thanks very much!’
In 1975 she met and married her husband Richard La Plante, an American thriller writer, who's also a black belt in karate.
Recently he persuaded Lynda to work out with him at their Surrey home, which they share with two Irish wolfhounds.
‘Three mornings a week, he punishes me,’ she laughs.
‘I hate every second!
But I'm in better shape than I have been for a long time.’
At one time they hoped for a family.
But following fertility treatment Lynda had an early menopause, so children of their own were out.
For 20 years she tried to make her name as an actress.
‘I enjoyed it, but I never had the lucky break.
Because I was loud and had red hair, I always played hookers in TV series like Bergerac ,The Sweeney ,Fox and Minder .’
She was spurred on to write 10 years ago when she appeared in The Gentle Touch , the TV series about a top woman cop.
Lynda, again typecast as a prostitute, confessed to the star, Jill Gascoine, that she thought the script was rubbish.
When she was told this was one of the better scripts, Lynda promptly wrote four outlines for plots herself.
They weren't used, but one eventually blossomed into the TV hit series Widows , about four women who commit the robbery their late husbands had planned.
This led to a lucrative offer from Hollywood.
‘Disney executives flew me out there and gave me the kind of treatment I'd always dreamed about when I was an actress…bouquets, champagne, limousines,’ says Lynda.
But the project still hasn't seen the light of day.
Last year Prime Suspect , her nail-biting drama about a woman CID officer tracking a serial killer, had viewers hooked, and later won a British Academy award.
The follow-up,Prime Suspect 2 , will be shown in December.
Helen Mirren again plays DCI Tennison, but this time the script's by Alan Cubitt.
‘I felt I'd already done Prime Suspect ,’ says Lynda, although she did supply the plot outline.
Between scripts Lynda keeps busy writing novels.
Her fourth,Entwined , about twin sisters separated in Auschwitz concentration camp, is published this month.
But she's happiest working for TV and is a frontrunner to pick up another British Academy award next year.
Her recent output includes Civvies and Seconds Out , both BBC productions.
It's all a long way from those bit-parts and Lynda's delighted to be making her mark — even if it did mean changing career.
‘I love the small screen,’ she says.
‘I think it's magic.
Given a thriller and a classic play, I'm afraid I'll watch the thriller.’
Helen Mirren as DCI Tennison in the gripping TV thriller,Prime Suspect .
To make the character totally convincing, Lynda did extensive research with the real CID
HOME SHOP SPECIAL
Christmas presents by post
Go shopping from the comfort of your armchair.
We've got a great selection of mail order gifts, and they're all under £25!
Our choice of the best mail order buys
Cushion colour
All the fun of painting by numbers, but with a very sophisticated result.
Designer Silk Painting Kit, by Elaine Rippon.
Handy helper
For DIY fanatics — five tools in one.
Includes 12ft locking rule, solar calculator, spirit level, angle finder and write-on strip for noting down measurements.
Stylish storage
Great for storing fruit or veg, this pair of silver-coloured metal baskets would look equally good crammed with toiletries.
Keeping cosy
Someone with a draughty door would love Peter Rabbit to stop the wind whistling in.
Draught Excluder.
Food for thought
Combine lessons and lunch with wipe-clean map place maps, or an astronomical lunch bag.
Victorian-style étui
A traditional sewing box design, originally made by sailors.
This modern version of an étui comes ready-filled with useful haberdashery items.
After-dinner treat
Give a little taste of luxury.
Beautiful lustre coffee cups; flavoured coffee; chocolate-covered espresso beans.
Disney time
Squeeze his sides and Mickey opens his mouth and talks the time.
This fun timepiece features a talking alarm, a one-year guarantee and a long-life battery.
Mickey Mouse Talking Watch.
Candles for Christmas
Beeswax candles look and smell good.
12 candles in a wood box.
It's in the bag
These carriers are perfect for kids' lunches, or as wacky handbags.
‘Bag'ums’.
Books on board Kids may keep their books shipshape if you give them this pair of Noah's Ark bookends.
Soft options
Padded hangers keep clothes in shape.
Tartan coathanger.
Lights, camera, action!
For the wild at heart, an entire army of animals captured on film and adapted to become a pair of braces.
Film Reel Braces.
Man on the move
Everything a man need to keep up appearances while he's away from home.
Fishing for compliments
Under every business suit there should be a pair of lobster socks — while water babies can carry their tackle in a trout bag.
Shine a light
This tough torch focuses to a beam 70 times brighter than standard.
Mini Maglite, in black, silver, blue, red and grey.
It could be catching!
Prove that you can keep everything going at once with a crazy set of juggling balls — guaranteed fun after Christmas lunch!
Three-ball boxed set.
Writing partners
If you're looking for a good-looking, big value gift, this ball point and fountain pen set fits the bill.
In a black presentation box.
Glorious gardens
Give a green fingered-friend this artist's palette of tins of seeds arranged by height and colour to reproduce Monet's garden at Giverny.
Flowers of Monet.
You have THREE chances to win a prize
Play best quest, add up your logos, enter the lucky draw
Play the grid game and win a prize.
If you've 21 or more best logos you can win a prize.
And send your card in to take part in our great lucky draw to win any unclaimed prizes
Just look at what we're giving away…
Mini Cooper cars taxed and ready for the road (insurance not included)
Fabulous Hawaii holidays for two, worth over £3,000 each
Family holidays worth £2,000, to be chosen from any Page & Moy catalogue
Bottles of Rouge Mumm champagne
Living Card Presentations arranged and hand delivered by Interflora
Zanussi dishwashers worth over £400 each
Hot air balloon flights from Clover Extra Lite
Sanyo Camcorders worth £549.99 each
Brilliant cut diamond ear stud sets in 18ct gold, crafted by Eric N. Smith Goldsmiths
Avon Parfums Creatifs Casbah
Lentheric Fleur perfumes
Olympus trip S cameras
Game seven
Use your best quest card and play the game!
If your eighth move leaves you on a circle containing a prize, it's yours.
See left for details
How to play…
Use your personal game card to play — see Rule 1 (right), if your haven't got one.
The front of your cards contains eight unique numbers, each representing a move on the grid.
•Take the number shown against move one and move the indicated number of circles.
For example, if your first number is five, move to circle five and follow any instruction found in that circle.
If you instruction is found, simply make your second move as shown by the number on your personal game card.
Follow this procedure using all eight numbers.
You can only claim a prize if your eighth and final move leaves you on a circle containing a prize.
For details of how to claim, see far right.
•If you make a move that takes you beyond the last circle on the grid, you must count back to complete that move before continuing forward with the next move.
For example, if you are on circle 96 and your next move is five, you must move four places to circle 100 and one place back to 99.
If you have any remaining moves to make, continue in the same way.
•Add up your logos As you make your eight moves, you may land on circles containing a best logo.
Make a note of these.
After completing all your moves check how many best logos, you have collected.
Fill the number in on the remaining circle on your game card.
Add up all seven boxes.
If you have 21 or more best logos, you'll be eligible for an accumulator prize.
•For the accumulator winning claims, the first two correct claims on the telephone claim line will each win a car, the next three correct claims received will each win a holiday in Hawaii and the other correct claims all receive Olympus Trip S cameras.
•Enter the lucky draw Any unclaimed prizes will go into a final lucky draw.
Complete the coupon on the right and send it together with your personal game card to The best Quest Lucky Draw.
PRIZE WORD-FINDER
Clues
Across
Hold on — it is not the winner
Left a sheet of paper alongside the case
Detailed feline
Tattered sail's fibre
French sea girl
Fibre extracted from mistletoe
Proportion of allowance cut short
A friend in form
Full extent of the scale
Harmed old lady first
Goods for soldiers going into battle
Put in the picture
Bull, he's in the dictionary
No one takes part in offensive
A one-handed wood cutter
Can keep sort of protection in one's leg
King or emperor
Youth leader replaced trough containing curdled food
Senseless to have a fool in charge
Like young Tom, perhaps frolicsome
Word case
Order player from the field with a friendly demonstration of goodwill
About to make a sudden move at beginning again
Correct side
Be disturbed when aroused
Monster from Hardy novel
Basis of nightclub entertainment
Heeds the good wishes
Crime of one with a burning desire
It's a word of praise
Afterbirth?
Gem of a country?
Down
Athletic vegetable?
Holy place can and must be changed
Nice tan developed of times long past
Ceased being an outsider
Beginning of a violent attack
Did go round southern gatehouse, having been evicted
Father left his friend
Dance from Burma
Number said to understand and know beforehand
Creeper caught in Australian azaleas
Singular item intended, say, to be left over
Young trainee acted badly
Island race
Saucy novel
48 across to adjust thickness
Learning about one European river
Valid reason for charity
Fool one from a Belgian port
Heed a military order
Salvation Army must beat this enemy!
One way or another this is an Eskimo canoe
Shape of gentleman getting up in the afternoon
Loosen one French knot
Manage to make progress
Set him to catch another one
Resisting pain, say, with this on the bed
He had the measure of Biblical king
Speed one goes after a job?
Drowned valley to dry up
How to get out of a tight situation
Greek character from a comic Ronald revealed
The car with cracked windpipe
Declined to accept safety device Marxist was holding
Justifiable basis for having dregs
Wise men are a long time in the ship
Like trees that have been transplanted
One capped at the bottom of the class
A 50–50 combination for everybody
DO IT YOURSELF
Are your machines showing their age?
If your faithful old fridge, freezer or washing machine isn't looking quite up to scratch, why not give it a face-lift with a fresh coat of paint from an aerosol spray
Be safe when using aerosols 
To prevent the valve of an aerosol can becoming clogged, turn it upside down after use and press the nozzle for a couple of seconds, then give it a wipe with a cloth dipped in white spirit.
When spraying
ALWAYS…
•Wear a face-mask and make sure the work area is well-ventilated
NEVER…
•Smoke or use a naked flame near spray paint
You'll need a tough, high-gloss paint.
Both Finnigan's Smoothrite and Rust Not from Homestyle work on metal surfaces, and are available in aerosols
Treat rust
Wash the surface thoroughly with sugar soap, paying particular attention to edges and around door handles.
Lightly sand scratches and chips with fine wet-and-dry paper, and remove all traces of rust with small wire brush.
Touch in rust spots with a gel-like rust inhibitor (for instance, Jenolite) which won't run on a vertical surface.
Touch in
Rebuild any badly damaged edges and corners with an epoxy-based metal filler (eg Isopon Plastic Padding) and, when hard, lightly smooth with fine wet-and-dry paper.
Use a fine artist's brush to touch in sports of bare metal, scratches and chips with a metal primer.
A few coats may be needed to build up the surface over deeper blemishes.
Prepare the surface
Remove handles, nameplate and door seal and carefully mask off all areas that you do not want to paint with overlapping sheets of newspaper.
Lightly sand the door with fine wet-and-dry paper, used wet to prevent surface scratches.
When dry, remove grease by wiping with a fluff-free cloth dipped in methylated spirit.
Tackle edges
Shake the aerosol thoroughly, then hold it upright 150mm to 300mm from the surface.
Work down each door edge in a series of overlapping bands, wafting the aerosol form side to side.
To prevent patchy coverage, keep the can parallel to the surface at all times.
If the finish looks powdery, try holding the can closer to the surface.
Spray the door
Next, tackle the front of the appliance.
Work from top to bottom, and from side to side.
Press the nozzle just before you aim it at the surface, and release it at the end of each stroke.
Work in a swift, sweeping motion across the surface with even, parallel strokes.
To prevent a streaky finish, you must slightly overlap each pass.
Finish off
When touch dry, apply another thin coat.
Do not hurry the job by applying thick coats (this will create an orange-peel effect), or concentrating the spray on one spot (causing runs and drips).
As many as 10 thin coats may be needed to build up dense coverage.
When hardened, refix fittings and buff up paintwork with a silicone polish.
DIANE CARR ANSWERS YOUR DIY QUESTIONS
My son has trodden grease on to our concrete doorstep.
What's the best way of getting rid of it?
Garden Jack Oil Patch Cleaner (available from DIY stores and garden centres) will remove the grease, but it may leave a stain.
You can disguise the patch with a coloured concrete paint such as Rustin's Step and Tile Paint or International's Doorstep Paint.
We want to lay a plain carpet in our lounge, but we're not sure which way the pile should go.
Ideally, the carpet should lie with the pile running away from the main, or only, window in the room.
This will minimise uneven shading in daylight, which is more noticeable on a plain carpet.
To work out which way the pile runs, rub your hand over the carpet — it will feel smooth when running with the pile, and rough when going against the pile.
Quick tips — using and choosing adhesives
PVA glue
Polyvinyl acetate adhesive is non-flammable and water resistant, when set.
Apply it to one of the surfaces then clamp together until the glue sets.
For use on wood, paper, fabrics, carpets, leather and polyurethane foam.
Formaldehyde glue
This is the ideal glue for woodworking — it is waterproof, heat resistant and produces a strong joint.
Apply it to one surface, then clamp the parts together while the adhesive sets.
UV-activated
This is a clear, liquid adhesive for glass that sets when exposed to natural daylight.
It leaves no glue line and, once set, is detergent-proof and waterproof.
Epoxy resin
This is supplied in a pack containing two tubes — one adhesive, the other hardener — which are mixed in equal amounts.
Apply to one surface and clamp the surfaces together until the resin sets.
It can be used for mending or bonding metals, china, glass and wood.
Cyanoacrylate
Often called superglue, this clear, thin liquid bonds in seconds.
Apply it to one surface then press together quickly and accurately to make a good contact.
Use on metals, glass and china.
PVC adhesive
Polyvinyl chloride is sold ready-mixed in a tube.
It can be used to mend plastics, vinyls, leather, rubber and fabrics.
It's best to test it on a hidden area first.
Tip of the week
To same yourself having to stretch too much when cleaning the bath and surrounding tiles, says Elizabeth Hagglund of Birmingham, keep a long-handled squeezy mop for the purpose, and you will avoid backache.
Send your tips on a postcard to the Home Editor at the address on page 3.
If your tip is published you will receive a £5 prize.
WARNING
Never attempt electrical repairs without unplugging the appliance.
Never tamper with electrical fittings without first switching off mains power supply at the consumer unit.
Always check for electrical wires and eater pipes with a pipe and cable detector before drilling walls, floors and ceilings.
Get a grip
Do your skills with a hammer tend towards bashing your thumb more often than the nail?
Then this gadget could save your fingers, and your temper.
The spring-loaded holder grips any size of nail and is handy for working in awkward spaces.
Hammermate costs £1.99, including p&p, from Ercon Ltd.
Don't hammer your thumb — use a handy nail gripper
PERSONAL STORY
A steel halo saved Lisa's life
Young Lisa Hammond's survival depended on an operation that would leave her in pain and unable to move for six months.
But the results made up for her ordeal
Little Lisa Hammond looked up at her mum Janet with hopelessness in her eyes.
‘I hate my body, Mum,’ she sighed.
‘Sometimes I just want to die.’
Janet bit back the tears.
‘Don't say that,’ she whispered.
‘You'll be fine.’
But she was torn by her daughter's despair.
Lisa's body was encased in plaster while a metal frame held her head rigid.
That was two years ago, and the treatment was the London girl's only hope.
Lisa, now 14, had been born with a rare bone condition, Spondylo Epiphyseal Dysplacia.
Her joints were deformed and didn't grow properly.
By the age of 12, she was only the size of an eight-year-old and had already undergone two operations to straighten her legs.
Now she had to wear this metal cage to stop the bones in her neck crumbling.
Lisa, right, and above, sister Nicole and mum Janet — her loving carers
Lisa's nightmare escalated in the summer of 1990 when Janet, 36, took her to St Bartholomew's Hospital in London for a routine checkup.
While the specialist was examining her legs, Janet mentioned that Lisa had been suffering from aches in her neck.
Taking no chances, the doctor sent Lisa for X-rays — they showed that her neck was extremely fragile.
‘Even if she fell from her bike she could be paralysed,’ a shocked Janet was told.
Later at London's Great Ormond Street Hospital, the consultant orthopaedic surgeon explained that Lisa would need an operation.
‘We'll take two pieces of bone from your pelvis and wire them to the top two vertebrae and your skull,’ he said.d.
‘They'll fuse into one big piece of bone and that will make your neck stable.’
A metal ‘halo’— secured to her head by four bolts drilled into her skull, and to a plaster cast stretching from hips to shoulder — kept Lisa's head stationary
But, incredibly, that was only the easy part.
He told Lisa that before the operation, and for a few months after, she would have to wear a steel frame pinned to her head and connected to a rigid plaster jacket to hold her damaged neck in place.
A few days later, Lisa was fitted with her steel frame.
It was held in place with four bolts drilled through her skull — two in her forehead and two above her ears.
Three days after that, a plaster jacket was fitted from her shoulders to her hips.
Janet watched as her daughter knelt down while she was coated with plaster.
‘She was so brave.
She was even joking with the nurses as they did it,’ she recalls.
But as the plaster hardened and the doctor attached two metal struts from her ‘halo’ to the jacket, panic began to set in.
‘Once she realised she couldn't move her head, she was literally sick from terror,’ says Janet.
The following day at Great Ormond Street, she had the four-hour operation to transplant the bone.
And, a week after her gruelling ordeal, she was allowed home.
Janet gave up her secretarial job, and devoted herself to caring for Lisa for the next six months.
‘She couldn't walk, or bend, and getting upstairs to her own room was impossible because she was in too much pain,’ says Janet.
‘For the first month she had to sleep on the settee, and I lay on the floor beside her.
‘Lisa was in constant agony, but I couldn't even comfort her or give her a cuddle because of the plaster.’
After a month, the pain began to ease slightly and Lisa was able to get up to her own room with Janet's help.
Then the local centre for the handicapped lent them a wheelchair, so they were able to get out and about.
But things didn't always go smoothly.
After four months the skin around the bolts became infected.
She had to have two of the holes redrilled and new bolts fitted.
She was frightened and depressed when they took her into hospital for the operation on December 22, but she was fit enough to go home on Christmas Day.
In February last year, six months after it was fitted, the ‘halo’ was taken off.
Janet watched with relief as doctors unscrewed the bolts from her unconscious daughter's head and cut off the jacket.
Lisa was overjoyed when she came round.
‘It felt so wonderful to be free,’ she says.
‘The first thing I did was clap my hands.
I hadn't been able to do that for so long.’
Now it was just a question of waiting to make sure the surgery had worked.
Lisa still needs yearly check-ups on her neck and legs, but seems to have recovered according to plan.
She knows she will always be small for her age — even now she is still under five feet — but she insists that won't stop her achieving her ambitions.
‘I'm looking forward to starting my GCSEs.
I want to study to be a barrister,’ says Lisa.
‘But right now, all I want is to lead a normal life.’
Has something unusual happened to you?
We will pay £100 for each story we use.
Send it to Personal Story at the address on page 3.
PATTERN BY POST
Swing into style
Day or night, rain or shine, this is truly a coat for all seasons — and it's as easy to make as it is to wear
This shawl-collared, raglan-sleeved swing coat is made in a navy cotton gaberdine, and lined with bold polka dots.
Alternatively, you could use a medium-weight microfibre, wool or a wool mix, leaving it unlined, or lining it with the fabric of your choice.
Try wearing it belted over a pair of tailored trousers, for a smart look, or leaving it open over casual separates.
However you wear it, you will find a useful addition to your wardrobe.
front back
The magical healing power of crystals
The idea of curing pain with a lump of rock may sound crazy, but precious gems have been used for healing since ancient times, and many people believe that they are just as effective today
If you heard that someone had taken an amethyst to bed with them, you'd probably think that they'd forgotten to take off their jewellery.
But putting a lump of this crystal under your pillow is the treatment a crystal healer would prescribe for insomnia!
Does it work?
Well, the only evidence we have is from the people who believe it has worked for them — and this includes many celebrities.
Charles Dance is convinced of the powers of crystals, as is Jane Fonda.
Shirley MacLaine advocates their use and Tina Turner never travels without them.
In the same way that alternative therapies such as acupuncture have become accepted by the medical profession, the day might come when, to treat your flu, your doctor prescribes a piece of topaz instead of tablets.
But for the present, crystal users recommend using their treatment to complement, rather than replace, traditional medicine.
Shirley MacLaine (above) and Jane Fonda believe in the power of crystals
DOSSIER
Hidden beauty in the heart of the earth
Crystals and gems grow in cavities far beneath the earth's surface, when magma — molten rock from the earth's hot core — forces its way into cracks in solid rock, such as granite.
As it cools, over the years, the magma slowly solidifies and forms crystals.
Different minerals in the magma create different structures.
If it's rich in iron and magnesium, it's likely that sapphires, zircons or peridots will be formed.
Quartz crystals are the most common, formed from magma rich in silicon.
Most of the rarer, coloured gems come from Arkansas in the US, Mexico and Brazil, but common clear quartz is mined in this country.
Crystals are pieces of solidified molten rock
The secret lies in a spark of energy
Scientific research has shown that crystals are far more than clusters of beautiful, but inanimate, minerals.
If you have a gas oven, you may use a special lighter wand to spark it off.
This special tool has a piece of quartz built in to it which releases energy — the spark — when it's squeezed.
Another amazing fact is that crystals actually vibrate at different frequencies when they come into contact with other energy fields.
Digital watches work because a small sliver of quartz inside them pulses at a rhythmic and unchanging frequency, which is stimulated by energy from the battery.
Good vibrations make you feel better
Crystal experts believe that your body can act like the watch battery, stimulating a crystal's vibrations, which have a beneficial effect on well-being.
Soozi Holbeche, author of The Power of Gems and Crystals (Piatkus, £7.95); has worked with crystals for 25 years.
She says: ‘We all have an electric force field surrounding us — an aura — which shows up with Kirlian photography.
This aura indicates how healthy we are.’
If we are ill or emotionally disturbed, the clear outline of the aura will be broken.
Soozi explains that if you place crystals close to you, your body will tune in to their vigorous vibrational frequency and be energised and healed.
The white lines show the body's electric force which energy-giving crystals can tune into
‘Headaches?
Forget it — I hold my crystal and the pain just seeps away’
Julie Carney, a social worker from London, carries a quartz crystal with her wherever she goes.
Julie, who's 26, says, ‘I keep it in my bag when I'm at work, and often place it by my bed at night.’
Julie first came into contact with the power of crystals just over a year ago, when she happened to visit a psychic fair.
Wandering around looking at the different displays, she experienced a strange sensation of being drawn towards something.
‘The feeling was so strong that I actually felt quite emotional — almost tearful,’ says Julie.
She was compelled to stop at a particular stall, where a woman was selling crystals.
She told Julie to hold her hands over the crystals until one ‘chose’ her.
‘I felt something tugging at my hand, as though it was a magnet,’ she says.
She picked up the quartz crystal which, she believes, has had a beneficial effect on her well-being.
‘I use it to soothe headaches,’ she says.
‘If I feel the tension building up behind my temples, I hold the crystal tightly in my right hand and I can feel the pain slowly seeping away.’
Julie now owns several different types of crystals and finds they have a comforting and calming influence whenever she feels stressed.
‘I really wouldn't be without them!’ she says.
‘I felt something was tugging, like a magnet,’ says Julie, who was first drawn to a crystal when she visited a psychic fair
Massage away your ailments
Healers use their own crystals to treat other people, and may practise a form of crystal ‘massage’, which involves holding the crystal two inches above the patient and rotating it in small clockwise circles over the entire body surface.
Different ailments can be helped using this particular method, depending on the type of crystal used.
Self-help treatment
One of the simplest ways to benefit from crystal power is to wear one.
However, if your crystal is too heavy to wear, you can carry it in your handbag, place it near you during the day, and take it to bed with you at night.
Soozi Holbeche says, ‘If I have a problem — a headache or a twisted ankle — I put the crystal in my bed.
By morning it will have moved towards the part of my body that needs healing.’
Try a 10-minute pick-me-up
This is said to give you a quick energy boost.
Hold a crystal in each hand.
The one in your left hand should point towards your wrist, the one in the right hand should point away from it.
Hold this position for five to 10 minutes — you can rest your hands on a table if you need to.
Afterwards, you should feel revitalised — as though you have plugged yourself into a source of energy.
Cleanse your whole body
Advocates believe that crystals can even play a big part in your daily beauty routine.
To improve the quality and texture of your skin, put a crystal of your choice in to the bathwater about 10 minutes before you get in, then soak in the water for as long as you can.
To flush harmful toxins out of your body, drop a crystal into a glass of water before you go to bed.
Drink this pure and ‘crystallised’ water as soon as you wake up, and then refill the glass for the next time.
Healers lay crystals on ‘chakras’— the parts of the body such as the solar plexus and the thymus area (above) which can best absorb the healing energy
A gem to suit your every mood
They're all good for you, but each one is said to have unique healing properties
Agate
Apparently relieves tension and anxiety.
Use a couple of small ones as worry beads, jiggling them around in the palm of your hand.
Amethyst
Placing one under your pillow helps you to sleep.
The Romans believed the amethyst prevented drunkenness and used to drink out of goblets studded with these purple gems.
Bloodstone
Said to be a very calming stone when held in the hand, it can also help to regularise the menstrual cycle if you suffer from erratic periods.
Jade
The stone of friendship which, it's claimed, can help you overcome shyness.
Drinking water in which jade has been soaked will strengthen your body.
Quartz
If criticism gets you down and you tend to brood, keeping one of these crystals near you is believed to bring you renewed confidence and a fresh perspective.
To ease a headache, lie down and place three of these crystals on your forehead — one pointing up to the crown and two pointing towards it from the left and right sides.
Rose Quartz
Said to help depression.
Hold a piece in your right hand and think about what is making you depressed.
Then hold the crystal against your forehead.
Breathe into the crystal, and imagine that you are expelling all those miserable thoughts.
Tourmaline
One of the most versatile gems.
Its combination of green with pink inside symbolises the state of our consciousness, and it can apparently reveal new levels of spiritual awareness.
If you've been hurt by a loved one, this stone's innate joyfulness is said to help heal the pain and the suffering.
Where to find your crystal
According to Soozi Holbeche, it's more a case of the crystal finding you.
But you have to help it a bit first!
You'll find crystals for sale in New Age shops, gift shops and at psychic fairs.
When choosing one, rely on your instincts.
Go for the one that you feel compelled to pick up.
Crystals are affected by the emotions of everyone who handles them, so to make your chosen one yours, cleanse it by soaking in seawater or dissolve ½ teaspoon of sea salt in warm water and allow to go cold.
Try to leave your new crystal totally submerged for at least 36 hours, but no longer than 70.
Soozi warns against keeping your crystal wrapped up to protect it.
‘They enjoy sunlight and air, just as every living thing does,’ she says.
A PROBLEM SHARED
Anne Hooper, counsellor, sex therapist, author and mother, offers her help and advice.
If you have a problem, why not share it with her?
From my casebook
Keith felt that after a five-year relationship, Valerie should be prepared to make a commitment.
But after two failed marriages, she was worried about being hurt again
She was afraid of losing her identity if she became his wife
Keith, aged 32, is short, with a Beatles-style haircut.
He appears to have a quick temper and uses his hands continually when he speaks.
‘Valerie and I have been in a relationship for five years now.
We live around the corner from each other, and visit one other's homes.
I feel that it's time we made a commitment.
I want us to marry, but Valerie says she's not ready.
But, if she isn't ready after five years, when will she be?’
Valerie is also 32.
Dark and willowy, she has the natural grace of a ballerina.
‘I've been married twice before.
The first time I was too young to know what I was doing and we split up after only seven months.
The second time, my marriage was everything I didn't want.
I felt stifled by it.
‘Husbands and wives are expected to do everything together, but I felt this cost me my identity.
My name changed, my driving licence and cheque books too.
The bank suddenly started asking for guarantees from my husband, even though I'd held my own account for two years.
Now, I'm enjoying having my own home and own bedroom.
I like having time to myself, and being an individual.
I'm just not ready to give all that up.’
•At our first counselling session I asked Valerie to describe Keith's character; he was loving, caring and independent.
He respected her and made her feel beautiful.
Then I asked her to describe her ex-husband's character.
She told me he was aggressive and overbearing.
He regularly came home drunk and expected his wife to do everything he told her.
He was, in fact, totally different from Keith.
Living with Keith might therefore have a very different outcome.
True, she agreed, but what about the independence she valued so highly?
I explained to Valerie and Keith that a relationship could be anything they cared to make it.
I asked the couple, during the following week, to write down separately what each would expect of marriage.
Valerie said she wanted to have her own room, separate holidays occasionally and a guarantee that they would remain in London where all her family lived.
She also wanted to retain her own surname, separate bank accounts and tax returns.
Keith also wanted his own room and the freedom to go out separately.
It was important to him that neither of them would be financially dependent on the other.
On the basis of these lists, though still with some hesitation, they decided that their views of marriage matched.
Counselling ended with our third session, at which we wrote down this couple's agreed terms for marriage.
Even then, Valerie opted for living together first — but a year later I received an invitation to their wedding.
‘I fantasise about making love with my stepfather’
I am 30, and my son is four years old.
My husband left me when I became pregnant.
We're divorced now and he pays his dues, but won't have anything to do with me or our son.
Now I've fallen for my stepfather, Jim.
He's a lovely man, and he and my son go everywhere together.
He is 61, five years younger than my mum.
I fantasise about him and get the shakes when he's in the room.
I went off men after my husband left but Jim has changed that.
•What your intense desire for Jim tells me is that you are a highly sexual person: one who has managed to heal herself after a difficult marriage and who's now ready for a physical relationship.
Your body has expressed its need through this fixation on the nearest man.
But he's your mother's husband and not available.
You seem to have spared no thought for your mother.
Presumably, she and her husband have a valuable relationship, which would be devastated if you let your feelings get out of hand.
In fact, your whole family would be devastated — including you.
If you need a man, look for one who's free.
‘We smack our children — are we guilty of child abuse?’
As parent of two children aged 12 and 10, who are usually well-behaved, sometimes we do feel it's necessary to check their behaviour.
When they misbehave, we resort to various sanctions, including old-fashioned spanking at times.
Talking to a friend recently about this, I was shocked when she suggested that smacking our children might be seen as abuse.
Both my husband and I were strictly brought up and, if we were naughty, were beaten.
My friend, however, was adamant that we had both been abused in some way, though not sexually, which was my understanding of abuse.
Both my husband and I accepted it as a part of our way of life.
If the children get half a dozen whacks with a slipper a few times a year, surely it's not abuse?
•There's no cut-and-dried answer to your question, but I can tell you that a great many people would disagree with you — both about your view of your own childhood and about smacking your children with a slipper.
In Sweden it is against the law to hit a child, and there are moves to make this the case in England, too.
Physical punishment doesn't teach a child the difference between right and wrong.
Instead, it sets up shame, hatred and sometimes a complicated sexual response, which is not we want for our children.
I also get the feeling that you have, indeed, been affected by the discipline you received from your parents.
I suspect that your desire to write a letter about beating children reflects an especially high level of interest in the subject.
Most people wouldn't have even bothered to write and ask an opinion.
My advice is that you stop smacking your children.
‘My life's such a mess, it's making me ill’
I am 16 and a typical Scorpio — understanding, emotional, honest, outgoing and caring.
Last January my grandmother died and I took it very badly.
My boyfriend and I were going through a very rough patch at the time.
Recently my grandfather died — it was sudden and such a shock after my grandmother's death.
Not long after this, my boyfriend and I broke up because I liked somebody else.
I went out with a new boy for a while and we fell in love.
But then he suddenly dumped me for no apparent reason and left me broken-hearted.
Everything seems to have come at once.
I'm very depressed and have tried to commit suicide several times.
Please help me.
•What an awful series of events.
I'm not surprised you are feeling lousy.
I sounds as if your grandmother was a much more important figure in your life than perhaps anyone realised, and you needed to grieve for her.
I imagine that you didn't get the chance to do this properly, and then your sadness was complicated by two more people abruptly vanishing from your life.
Suddenly things must have seemed very uncertain.
Please respect your own sad feelings.
Most people need to talk about their grief, to express it with others and have some kind of ceremony to show what an important life change it brings about.
Don't be afraid to tell your mum and dad how you feel.
Get out the photograph album, remember old times and cry — if that is what feels right for you to do.
It takes time to get over loved ones disappearing or dying.
Expressing your feelings should help you start to recover.
If, however, you don't, ask your parents to take you to a grief counsellor.
‘His addiction has turned him into a cheat and a liar’
My husband has a problem he won't acknowledge.
He is constantly coming up with bright ideas for making money.
Every time he gets one of these, he becomes wildly enthusiastic, borrows money and works 16 hours a day.
Sometimes his ideas are good, but when they're not, he's unable to recognise the fact.
Because he has no financial ability, none of the schemes ever work in the end.
But he feels that he's completely justified in lying, cheating and evading bills in order to carry them out.
Every penny I've ever had during our nine-year marriage he's taken to get himself out of trouble, including the £18,000 divorce settlement from my ex-husband.
Recently, we had enough saved up for a nice flat after having lived in one room for a year.
But when the time came to buy it, I heard he had ‘invested’ the money and hadn't even paid the rent on our room.
I realise his problem is an addiction, rather like gambling — but for him the thrill is high-risk financial ideas.
Is there a name for this and is there any possibility of a cure?
•Your description is of someone who suffers from an ‘endogenous mania’, though your husband would need to be clinically assessed to confirm this.
You need to be very patient in trying to convince him to see a doctor.
If you do manage to get him to go, there is drug treatment that could help.
I'm sure you must need support and, if your husband refuses to get advice, then you have to consider your own needs.
See a counsellor to work out what would be best for you.
TALKING CONFIDENTIALLY
Do some women get more pleasure from sex?
Being able to experience multiple orgasm is one of those infuriating abilities which other women seem to possess.
In the 70s, when we were hearing a lot about sexual research, we were told that 14 per cent of women managed it.
Since then, the figure is supposed to have increased.
But, as a sex counsellor, I only ever get to meet the women who can't.
The issue gets even more complicated when I'm asked to define multiple orgasm.
Sex specialists Masters and Johnson say it's a series of quite separate orgasmic peaks which are linked in the same sexual experience.
Kinsey, the sex research pioneer, also included women who could have more than one orgasm in an hour.
However we choose to define multiple orgasm, there are a lot of us who'd like to be able to do it.
There's cause for encouragement in that it seems to be something we learn with age.
Many women develop the ability to have multiple orgasms in their 30s which, not so coincidentally, is when our sex drive is at its peak.
Men only seem able to do it when they are in their teens — which is when they peak sexually.
I once had a letter from a woman asking me if I could settle a dispute she was having with her partner.
In it she explained that she had experienced a second climax during lovemaking which took place some five minutes after the first.
Her partner insisted that the time gap was too great for this to be anything other than two separate orgasms.
I pointed out that it was silly to argue over such good fortune — that if she was getting so much pleasure, it didn't matter what the cause was!
I explained, however, that because her arousal had clearly remained at a high pitch during uninterrupted lovemaking, she had indeed experienced a multiple orgasm.
It's as well to remember that all women's orgasms differ and, what's more, they differ on each occasion, too — in length, strength and quality.
It's true to say that multiple orgasm can be achieved — through a combination of extreme arousal, great self-confidence, a complete lack of anxiety and a wonderful partner.
But don't worry too much if you can't manage them.
They're the exception — not the rule.
COMING NEXT WEEK
CREATE A SPLASH OF OUTDOOR COLOUR
Brighten up the winter months with our terrific gardening ideas
HEALTH & ADVICE
•Could you have an ulcer?
Look out for the tell-tale signs
•Take the pain out of cramp
•‘We've found an easy — and safe — way to borrow money
•Protect yourself when driving
FASHION & BEAUTY
•Winter coats and jackets with luxurious, fake-fur trims
•Large-print overshirts — the versatile option
•Winter woollen knit for kids
•Look great in that dress — fast-working exercises to get you into shape for the party season
IN THE KITCHEN
•Savoury winter pies
•Wickedly tempting cakes — a chocaholic's dream!
•Weight-watching stir-fries
THE HOME FRONT
Treat your kids with this surprise-a-day advent calendar PLUS Kitchen update — news of the latest gadgets
MORE TO READ
•Behind closed doors
‘I deliberately ruined his marriage’
•It happened to me
‘I had my baby on the kitchen floor’
•Special report
The eldorado lifestyle may look like a whirl of sun, sea and sangria — but what of the real-life ex-pats, struggling to make ends meet on Spain's recession-hit Costa del Sol?
4-page dossier
LOSE 10LBS BY CHRISTMAS — a diet that'll pay dividends when the time comes for a little festive cheer!
Ask your newsagent to deliver you a copy of best every week
On sale every Thursday
DOSSIER
Work wonders this weekend!
Give your home a facelift
Tired of your sofa, bored with your walls?
We show you how a flash of inspiration and a little cash can transform your house in next to no time
New beginnings
Second-hand shop discoveries or tatty old faithfuls can be turned into prized possessions with a little love and attention.
After rubbing down and applying a one-step primer and undercoat we gave this set of drawers a modernist look by painting different sections in a variety of bright, matt colours.
Brilliant border work
Add character to a plain kitchen or to old bedroom cupboards by painting a border design around each door.
First, mask off the area to be painted and sand it down, then pencil on your design.
For a soft effect, thin down an oil-based paint with spirits, and then apply your colour with a brush.
If you would find it easier to work with the doors flat on the floor, they can easily be unscrewed and replaced later.
Clever cover-up
Take an honest look at your kitchen — could it do with a revamp?
Using a self-adhesive laminate in a smart new woodgrain finish, we resurfaced these doors and drawers in a day.
The vinyl is cut to size the a craft knife, the backing peeled off and the laminate simply stuck in place.
New chrome stirrup handles add the finishing touch.
‘Zelda’ Fablon Laminate for Kitchen Doors by Forbo-CP, £9.99 a roll — sufficient for approximately four 500mm kitchen base units.
Budget tip
Keep paint oddments for quick jobs like these.
Invert tin so skin forms under, not over, the paint.
The fabric that you choose will set the theme
Floral transformation
Four ordinary chairs have been transformed into inviting seats with simple loose covers.
Made up in a bouquet of floral-design remnants, they are secured at the corners with a bow.
You could machine a set of four in a day.
A bonus is they can be easily removed for cleaning.
Draped and shaped
A piece of upholstered furniture is one of the most expensive items to replace — so freshen up a tired sofa by draping it with interesting fabric.
It's cheap and easy to do and you can change fabrics with the seasons.
Look out for sari fabrics, unusual sheeting and large shawls.
Clever paint tricks
Because there's more patience than skill involved in stencilling, it's a great technique for absolute beginners.
Fix the stencil in place with a spray adhesive, such as SprayMount, and use very little paint (the brush should be almost dry) for the best results.
Narrow border designs work well on any straight run, such as this staircase.
Stencil interest
You may not want to redecorate walls completely, but there's plenty of scope to revitalise them.
A floral stencil around the top of this room is intertwined with a ribbon and bow design for a soft, flowing look.
The bow theme is used to cover-up the nail and string holding the picture.
Rose and Ribbon Stencil by Elrose Products.
Cushion comfort
Armfuls of comfy cushions give a welcoming feel to a room, and you can add your own touches with fabric paints.
Cheap plain cotton or calico makes the ideal canvas for an ambitious, all-over stencil design, coloured to blend in with your decor.
Stencils are quick and easy to apply — you could copy this effect in under an hour.
Stencils and paints by Elrose Products Ltd.
On the surface
Bring stencils to life by making them three-dimensional.
Add a paint tinter to some Ready-mixed Artex and dab through the stencil with a piece of sponge.
Lift the stencil carefully, and rinse and dry it before moving it to the next position.
Leave the first colour to dry before you reposition the stencil to add a second shade.
You'll find a day is ample time to apply your stencil all around a medium-sized room.
New looks for old
More quick and easy ways to brighten up your home furnishings — without having to spend a fortune.
A sheer delight
A simple style and a light touch can be all you need to create a stunning window treatment.
Look out for muslin, calico or any natural, sheer fabric, which can be dyed and used to create an unusual and interesting finish.
Machine a wide casing along the top of each length and thread onto wire or a pole.
If you have more time, try swagging or knotting the fabric and then secure it in place using swag hooks.
Window ways
Transform glass on doors and windows in a matter of minutes!
These innovative window decorations allow you to recreate authentically the beauty of stained glass in your home, at a fraction of the cost of the real thing.
They're hand-printed onto quality vinyl, and simply need to be trimmed to size, peeled and stuck on.
A variety of designs available from Peels of London
Ribbons all the way
Cover up a boring view with a simple, unobtrusive treatment.
Create this easy-to-make blind by cutting an oblong of fabric to fit the window and hemming all its edges.
Cut lengths of ribbon, and stitch them to either side of the fabric at the top.
Pin or staple fabric in place and tie ribbons underneath to draw up the blind.
Finishing touch
Changing the smallest details can give a piece of furniture a completely different look.
Perk up a chest of drawers, cupboards or a wardrobe with a new set of handles.
If you have time, try painting them to match existing colours and designs.
Range of knobs available from Top Knobs.
Be prepared
For best results, do take time to prepare surfaces properly you plan to paint or paper.
Going on display
The kitchen always seems to be the first room in which you run out of space.
If your cupboards are full to bursting, put up a handy shelf.
Hide the brackets by adding an edging of deep wallpaper border — backing it with stiff card for extra durability.
For a co-ordinated effect throughout, run the same border along the back of the worktop.
A warm and welcoming floor
Everyday life is hard on the kitchen floor — so replace worn lino with some new carpet tiles which look good and feel warm underfoot.
They can be cut with a craft knife, are easy to lay and now come with patterned border tiles, so it's easy to create an individual effect.
Lifestyle carpet tiles in Pastiche, teamed with the Country border range, by Heuga.
Lining for effect
Use fabric remnants to back a shelving unit.
An interesting collection can be beautifully silhouetted against a dramatic-coloured fabric.
Simply stretch the material across the back of the unit, fixing it to the wooden frame with wide-headed nails.
Or, for solid-backed shelves, cut pieces of fabric to fit into each space and then fix in place with PVA adhesive.
New openings
Transform plain flush doors into elegant features without hanging new ones.
These mouldings are pre-assembled with self-adhesive backing and are easily fitted — you'll need just a tape measure and a pencil, and you can do the job in an hour!
Different looks, traditional or modern, can be created by painting or staining.
Self-Adhesive Door Mouldings by Richard Burbidge 
Brighten up your features, fixtures and fittings
Storage solutions
Alcoves and corners can all be put to good use by turning them into highly attractive display features.
Add a fully adjustable shelving system — there are plenty which are quick and easy to install — to show off all your goodies.
A paint-effect wall makes a beautiful backdrop, whether you try your hand at  sponging or go in for a more adventurous colour-wash finish.
Radiator revamp
There are specialist paints for every surface in your home, so if you can't hide an eyesore, flaunt it!
Radiators can be transformed into colourful features painted in bold primaries to co-ordinate with a room's scheme.
Let them dry overnight before you switch on the heat again.
Smoothrite by Finnigan's, available in a range of colours, by Hunting Specialised Products
Tile talk
Practical and easy to clean, tiles stop moisture penetrating your walls.
A few stuck behind a sink and framed with wooden beading gives the effect of an old-fashioned washstand, and is an easy project to tackle.
Choose a waterproof adhesive and finish off with grout in a contrasting colour.
Tiles from The Merchant Tiler 
BEHIND CLOSED DOORS
Every week a reader shares the burden of a dark and deep regret
‘He robbed me of my childhood’
Unwanted and unloved by her parents, Cassie felt unable to tell them about her hated uncle's secret visits
Though I enjoy seeing children playing together, it's also very painful for me.
It's lovely to watch them having fun, yet I'm envious of their happiness.
I'm 28 now and reasonably content with life but, when I look back on my childhood, I can't remember ever being happy.
I felt unloved by my parents, who are the kind of people who believe children should be seen and not heard, and was unable to confide in them.
So they'll never know about the things Uncle Joe did to me…
My parents were very young when they met, and Mum already had a son, Jack, from a previous marriage.
My parents were 21 when they wed, and I was born 10 months later.
Dad worked at the local car factory.
Mum, who was an intelligent woman, resented being stuck at home with two young kids, and used to vent her frustration on me and Jack.
She would beat me with a bamboo stick for the slightest misdemeanour, and there were never any treats for either of us.
It seems strange now, but I never complained to classmates or teachers.
I was convinced that my feelings didn't matter and, anyway, I didn't really have any friends.
I never let on that my dad's brother, Uncle Joe, made me feel anxious.
We'd go to tea with him and Auntie Lucy, and Uncle Joe would sit me on his lap and stroke my hair.
His only son had been killed in a car accident so Mum expected us to make a fuss of him.
‘What a pretty girl you are,’ he would say.
‘Give your uncle a nice, big kiss…‘
When he let our family move into his large farmhouse, Mum and Dad were thrilled.
He and Auntie Lucy moved to a small cottage nearby, but he continued to keep sheep in the fields surrounding our home.
It was my job to check up on the flock every morning and on Sundays Uncle Joe would come to the farm.
By this stage, I was nine years old, and physically very well developed for my age.
Each week he would sit me on his knee and, under the pretence of asking me about the things I'd been doing at school, he would squeeze my thighs and waist.
I can still remember how I used to squirm uneasily under his touch.
Then, one day, he announced that he was going to check on the sheep.
I reluctantly followed.
After parking his car in one of the fields he turned to me, put his hand inside my pants and tried to force my legs apart.
Then he put my hand on the flies of his trousers.
‘Make your Uncle Joe happy.
There's a good girl,’ he said, gripping my wrists so tightly it hurt.
As he gripped me and tried to make me touch him, I remember screaming inside, ‘Why don't you stop?
Please, please stop…
’ Yet I was paralysed with fear and the words wouldn't come out.
Uncle Joe subjected me to the same torture and humiliation every time we were alone together — although, thankfully, he never actually went as far as raping me.
When my mum started training to become a probation officer, I used to spend two hours alone after school.
My brother Jack, tired of the atmosphere at home, had left when he was 16 to live with friends, and Uncle Joe started coming round when he knew my parents would be out.
If I heard him approaching, I would hide in the cupboard under the kitchen sink.
‘I know you're there.
Open the door!’ he'd shout, and I'd hold my breath in terror until he went away.
The only comfort I had during this time was a farmer's daughter in my class at school called Tina.
Uncle Joe used to advise local farmers on sheep-breeding and had spent a lot of time on Tina's family farm.
One day she said to me, ‘Does Joe touch you too?’
It was such a relief to know that I wasn't the only one!
Tina and I spent hours discussing Joe.
We often fantasised about murdering him, too — as painfully as possible.
But neither of us had the nerve to confide in anyone else about his abuse.
Then when I was 14, the abuse stopped.
I dread to think who Uncle Joe had transferred his twisted ‘affections’ to, but at the time, I was just relieved to be free of his attentions.
Yet its impossible to forget what he did to me.
I met my first boyfriend when I was in the fifth year at school, and we were together for six years.
Steve was a lovely, kind boy.
I told him about my uncle after we'd been together for six months and, though he was outraged, I persuaded him not to confront Joe or tell anyone.
And although I enjoyed cuddling Steve, I couldn't bring myself to go any further — the thought of being touched by a man filled me with horror.
Then, at 18, I left home to go away to college and I met a very experienced and fairly wild young man.
I decided to sleep with this boy.
I didn't care for him — I just knew I had to find out if I could go through with it.
I managed, just, and afterwards I remember feeling tearful and numb.
But I was glad that I'd finally had sex — it was a way of proving that my parents and Uncle Joe hadn't destroyed my life.
I've had two long-term boyfriends since then, both of them considerate lovers.
But I've never had an orgasm.
It's been 10 years now since I left the farm, and I'm happy that I've ‘escaped’ to London.
I've got a good job and, although I'm not going out with anybody right now, I have a lot of close friends.
I rarely talk to my parents these days, or visit the family home.
It's so full of unhappy memories — and I don't want to face the possibility of bumping into Uncle Joe.
It's hard to stop feeling guilty; imagining that somehow, I'm to blame.
I often think about seeing a therapist, in the hope that one day I'll be able to have a fulfilling love life.
But no amount of talking could make up for the unhappiness and lost innocence of my childhood.
‘It's painful to see children playing.
I envy them.
I can't ever remember my childhood being happy’
A GREENER WORLD
by Josephine Fairley
A change is in the air
Power stations use up valuable resources and create pollution — but could an environmentally friendly alternative be blowing in the wind?
The wind is potentially a perfect source of power; it's non-polluting, sustainable — and breezy Britain is the ideal location.
In fact, wind power is already contributing energy to the national grid in places as far apart as Ilfracombe in Devon, and Ripon in North Yorkshire, with dozens more wind farms planned by the turn of the century.
It's hoped that wind power will eventually provide up to 20 per cent of the country's energy needs.
It it's to be expanded beyond that, we need to find ways of storing power produced on blowy days to use when it's calm.
Of course, wind power isn't new.
For centuries, traditional windmills harnessed the wind to drive machinery for grinding wheat into flour.
Today, modern versions of windmills, called wind turbines, are used to create electricity.
To replace a 600 megawatt oil-fired power station, a wind farm would need nearly 500 turbines, and cover about 10 square miles.
Large numbers of turbines create noise as well as electricity, so there's often resistance to wind farms from local residents.
But they provide real hope for the future: wind farms could help slow down global warming (because they don't give off any toxic emissions) and they don't use any of the planet's precious resources.
The Government's targets for wind power are still very low.
By the year 2000, it would like to see total wind power generated in the UK equivalent to the power given off by just one coal or gas-fired power station.
The pressure group Friends of the Earth thinks we should be aiming for four times that.
In America, wind is already being used by small communities with just a few well-designed windmills to supply all their power needs.
Here in the UK, wind power is a possibility for some private, domestic users, mostly in coastal districts or on high ground.
A Leicester couple have just become the first to install a wind generator in their home to provide part of their electricity supply.
They estimate they will have recouped the £500 outlay within seven years.
To find out more about windpower, contact the Centre for Alternative Technology,.
Wind turbines (above) are up to 90 metres high.
Because they can be noisy, they are usually sited in remote areas
JOSEPHINE FAIRLEY ANSWERS YOUR ECOLOGY QUESTIONS
I've just bought a second-hand car.
How can I find out whether it runs on lead-free petrol?
Your local garage should be able to do a quick spot-check and tell you.
Alternatively, get in touch with the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders, which has a list of all models that take unleaded petrol.
If yours hasn't already been converted, it's very simple to get it done.
Ask your nearest garage and, the chances are, you won't even be charged for the conversion.
But if you are charged a few pounds, you'll soon make up the difference once you're filling up with cheaper, lead-free petrol.
Wise toy buys
Wooden toys will last for years — but avoid those made from tropical hardwoods
The children's toy market is big business — worth £3 billion a year, it uses vast resources to make and package its products.
But this doesn't mean you can't dream of a green Christmas.
Here are some guidelines to help you choose more ecologically sound toys.
•Buy for durability; instead of settling for cheap plastic, spend a little more on something that will last.
Look for natural materials such as cloth, leather, natural fleece and metal, and consider buying books instead of toys.
Avoid plastic and battery-operated toys as these use the most resources, and go for long-lasting crayons, rather than felt-tips, which dry out.
•Create your own alternatives.
Instead of plumping for shop-bought toys, build up a useful box, filled with everything from buttons to old magazines, which children can glue together to make their own sculptures.
•Join a toy library and give your children a constant supply of new playthings at very little cost.
Toy libraries take many different forms and there are over 1,000 across the country.
Play Matters is the national toy library association and membership costs £17.50 a year for unlimited access to toys!
Stop heating bills going sky high
Because heat rises, if your home is not properly insulated you may be paying to warm the air above it.
Now there's a new, greener loft insulation material, Warmcel, made from recycled, fire-resistant paper.
It's easy to install, will cut down fuel bills and is manufactured using less power than is needed to make traditional insulation.
Warmcel costs from £2.50 per square metre and details are available from Energy Ways 
Plastic project 
Mrs M Watson of Wimborne in Dorset sent in this tip to us.
Trim off the base of a plastic washing-up liquid bottle to re-use as a saucer under a plant pot.
5 MINUTE FICTION
Unforeseen circumstances
Jennifer knew very well what her future held — her marriage to Steven was imminent.
So why was the fortune-teller so secretive?
By Rosemary Lord
Jennifer had finished her shopping and, pausing to look at her watch, realised that she had time for a coffee before her train left.
She remembered having seem a small café down one of the streets that surrounded the station and turned off the main road to find it.
She soon realised she was lost.
They her eye was caught by a faded and peeling board.
‘Madame Gloriana’, the sign read, and then in smaller letters underneath, ‘Discover what the future holds for you.
Crystal ball, palm readings, tarot cards.
Appointments not necessary.
Jennifer was fascinated in spite of herself.
She knew quite well what the future held for her — marriage to Steven and a busy life as the wife of a doctor.
But…
She quickly told herself not to be ridiculous, that she did not believe in any of that mumbo jumbo.
All the same, it might be interesting…
As she went up the narrow stairs, Jennifer's heart was beating.
At the top a door stood ajar.
She peeped in and a friendly voice greeted her.
‘Hello my dear, now what can I do for you?’
Jennifer smiled, feeling a little bit foolish.
Madame Gloriana was not at all what she had expected, but an ordinary, pleasant-looking woman in her mid-50s.
‘I expect you want to know what the future has in store, don't you?’
Madame Gloriana turned away murmuring to herself, ‘That's what they all want to know, although I'm not at all sure if it does them any good.’
Jennifer, unsure if this comment was directed at her, smiled again and nodded, ‘Yes please.’
‘Well, you had better come through and sit down.’
Madame Gloriana lead the way into a dimly lit back room.
It was very small, and in the centre was a round table covered completely by a purple velvet cloth.
Madame Gloriana sat down and, gesturing Jennifer to the chair opposite her, removed a silk handkerchief to reveal a gleaming crystal ball.
Jennifer held her breath with excitement as the older woman passed her hands over the misty sphere and stared into its centre.
‘I see a man,’ she said at last.
‘Tall and dark…‘
Jennifer stifled an impulse to giggle.
A tall, dark stranger — that was what fortune-tellers always saw.
But Steven was dark and over six feet tall…
Madame Gloriana had started to speak again.
‘A scientist perhaps?
I see him in a white coat.
No, no, I think he must be a doctor.’
Jennifer caught her breath.
It must be a coincidence, no more than that, surely?
‘My fiancé is a doctor.’
‘You plan to marry soon.’
Was it a statement or a question?
Jennifer wasn't sure.
‘Quite soon, Midsummer's Day.
Then we plan to go to Venice for our honeymoon.’
The fortune-teller was peering into her crystal ball again.
‘Midsummer's Day, is it?’ she echoed.
Jennifer was about to reply but stopped short at the look on the other woman's face.
Madame Gloriana had gone very pale and was staring with a look of puzzlement.
‘I'm sorry, but I can't tell you anything else…you'll have to go now.’
‘But…
’ Jennifer began.
This was unfair.
The old woman had told her nothing.
‘No.’
She spoke firmly but she still seemed pale.
‘I'm afraid I can't see beyond Midsummer Day.
I can tell you nothing more except…
’ The fortune-teller hesitated then reached out and put a hand on Jennifer's arm.
‘Beware of trains.
I can see danger from a train.
And now, please, you must go.
There is no charge.’
Jennifer found herself back out on the street, confused and bewildered.
She didn't know what to think.
She should never have gone there in the first place.
Jennifer realised that she would have to run for her train if she was to be home in time; Steven had booked a table at their favourite restaurant and was due to pick her up at 7.30.
Then a small chill ran through her as the recalled the fortune-teller's words: ‘I see danger from a train’.
She was a grown woman and she had always prided herself on her common sense, but all the same…
When Jennifer rushed in at 7.15, explaining that she had caught the bus home, Sue, her flatmate, raised her eyebrows.
It was very unlike Jennifer to be so flustered.
Later, over coffee, Steven broached the subject that he had been waiting all day to discuss with Jennifer.
‘Listen, I've had a wonderful idea.
Why don't we go to Venice on the Orient Express?
It's the most luxurious train and…what's the matter, darling?’
Jennifer had suddenly gone very pale.
Steven, concerned, paid the bill and put his arm round her protectively as they went out to the car.
As the car drew up outside her flat she turned to Steven.
‘I'm sorry darling.
I just felt a bit faint.
The Orient Express is a lovely idea but, couldn't we do it some other time?
I've really been looking forward to flying — it will be my first time on a plane.’
She looked so wistful that Steven's heart jumped.
‘Anything you like, Jenny my love.
You know I'd be happy on a bicycle as long as I was with you.’
Jennifer laughed, suddenly feeling much better.
Her earlier fears had faded and she thought how foolish she had been to let a ridiculous fancy disturb her happiness.
It was not until autumn that Jennifer found herself in the city again.
The honeymoon, like the wedding, had been perfect — Jennifer felt she couldn't be happier.
She suddenly realised how close she was to the fortune-teller's shop and an impulse drew her towards it.
She wanted to prove to Madame Gloriana that she had been wrong — to let her see how happy she was.
The faded board had gone and in its place was a sign proclaiming ‘Gentlemen's Hairdresser — pensioners 10% discount’.
A workman was busy giving the door a new coat of paint.
‘Madame Gloriana — do you know where she has gone?’ she asked the painter.
‘You mean the old fortune-teller who used to be here?
She had an accident a few weeks back.
Midsummer's Day it was.
She tripped on the platform and fell right under the express train.’
COOKERY
Get ahead for Christmas
Make all the fiddly bits now and you'll help avoid a last-minute panic in the kitchen
Each of these tempting mince pies, quiches and sausage rolls is based on one easy, basic recipe
Mince pie ideas
Rub the butter into the flour, stir in salt and 30–45ml (2–3 tbsp) cold water.
Mix to a soft dough.
Roll out the pastry and cut out 12 shapes, using a 6.5cm (2–½in) fluted round cutter.
Line a 12-hole patty tin with the pastry cases.
Stir the brandy into the mincemeat and spoon onto cases.
Add a topping, each is for 12 pies, and bake for 20 mins.
Serve hot or cold.
Spiced crumble:225 cals per pie.
Rub 50g (2oz) butter into 100g (4oz) plain flour.
Stir in 30ml (2tbsp) demerara sugar and 5ml (1 tsp) ground mixed spice.
Spoon onto pies.
Glacé fruit and nut:191 cals per pie.
Stir 25g (1oz) chopped glacé cherries, 25g (1oz) chopped walnuts and 30 ml (2 tbsp) mixed peel into the mincemeat.
Spoon onto pies and bake.
Mix 50g (2oz) of sifted icing sugar with lemon juice to make a thin icing.
Drizzle over pies.
Macaroon:183 cals per pie.
Whisk 2 egg whites until stiff.
Fold in 50g (2oz) caster sugar, 25g (1oz) ground almonds and a dash of almond essence.
Spoon or pipe onto pies.
Star shapes:153 cals per pie.
Re-roll pastry scraps.
Press out shapes with a cutter, chill.
Brush with milk and bake.
Quiche selection
Make the pastry and line a 12-hole patty tin (following the basic mince pie recipe).
Beat together the egg and cream, add salt, pepper and nutmeg to taste.
Fill the pastry cases with one of our fillings and divide the cream mixture between the quiches.
Bake for 15 mins, or until golden.
Serve warm or cold.
Salmon and dill:139 cals per quiche.
Mix 100g (4oz) chopped smoked salmon with 5ml (1 tsp) dried dill.
Pizza:160 cals per quiche.
Mix 1 finely sliced Pepperami stick with 25g (1oz) grated Cheddar, a few chopped pitted black olives and 2.5ml (1/2 tsp) dried oregano.
Herby mushroom:146 cals per quiche.
Sauté 100g (4oz) mushrooms in butter.
Drain, season and stir in 50g (2oz) Boursin cheese.
Savoury sausage rolls
Halve pastry and roll out on a lightly floured surface to a 30 x 15cm (12 x 6’) rectangle.
Prepare one of the following fillings and place half of it in a sausage shape down one edge of the pastry.
Brush the other edge with beaten egg, roll and seal.
Brush with more egg  and sprinkle over either the poppy seeds, sesame seeds or Parmesan.
Cut into 5cm (2’) pieces and bake for 20mins.
They are equally delicious served hot or cold.
Vegetarian:131 cals per roll.
Make up one 125g (4.4oz) pack vegetable burger mix, following the directions on the packet.
Stir in 25g (oz) chopped peanuts and 5ml (1tsp) dried mixed herbs.
Turkey korma:139 cals per roll.
Mix together 350g (12oz) of minced turkey, 30ml (2tbsp) mild curry paste and 30ml (2tbsp) mango chutney.
Savoury sausage:193 cals per roll.
Mix 350g (12oz) pork sausagemeat with 1 small chopped onion and 30ml (2 tbsp) wholegrain mustard.
Traditional Christmas pudding
Place all the ingredients together in a large bowl and mix thoroughly.
Spoon into two greased, base-lined 1.15 ltr (2pt) pudding basins.
Cover with a piece of pleated greaseproof paper and foil, and secure with string.
Steam each pudding for 6 hrs, topping up pan with hot water as necessary.
Cool completely then, leaving greaseproof paper in place, renew foil, wrapping tightly.
Store for up to 3 months in a cool place.
To serve, steam for 1 hr.
Loosen sides with a knife, transfer to a serving plate.
If you are using a pressure cooker, steam for 30 mins then cook for 2 hrs under 15 lb pressure.
Store and reheat as before.
This dark, rich, traditional pudding looks the epitome of professionalism
Brandy butter
Cream butter and sugar together until smooth.
Add brandy a few drops at a time until pale and fluffy.
Spoon into a jar and store in the fridge for up to 2 weeks.
Variations: omit brandy and use your choice of liqueur.
To freeze: Spoon into a rigid container and freeze for up to 3 months.
Thaw overnight in the fridge before use.
Fruity apricot stuffing
Soak the apricots in the rind and juice overnight.
Toast the oatmeal under a medium grill before use.
Mix together with remaining ingredients.
Cook separately, or use to stuff a turkey.
Cumberland jelly
Pare the rind from fruit and cut into fine strips.
Cover with water and simmer for 5 mins.
Drain well.
Mix the jelly, mustard and seasoning with the juice of the orange and lemon, and the cooked rind, then simmer for 5 mins.
Stir in the port.
Spoon the sauce into a clean jar, seal and store in the fridge for up to 1 month.
This is ideal to serve with ham.
Cranberry sauce
Cover and cook the cranberries in 300ml (1/2 pt) water for about 10 mins, or until all the berries have burst.
Stir in remaining ingredients and gently cook, stirring until sugar dissolves.
Spoon into a warm, clean, wide-necked jar, then cool, label and seal.
Store in the fridge for up to 1 month.
Try making your own sauces and stuffing — they're tastier and cheaper than those in the shops
COOK'S CLASS
Festive ring cake
Celebrate the season in the most delicious way.
Our cake looks dazzling, tastes wonderful and no one else's will hold a candle to it!
This has to be one of the easiest-to-make Christmas cake recipes ever.
It can be baked in your conventional oven or, for speed and efficiency, in the microwave.
And it's guaranteed to be moist and appetising as the fruit is soaked overnight in port and fresh lemon juice to make it extra plump and tasty.
The delicate fondant decorations look like they have been crafted by an expert, yet they are surprisingly easy to master if you follow our simple step-by-step instructions.
Port and lemon Christmas ring
Stunning and detailed fondant decorations make this the perfect centrepiece
1
The day before 
Prepare fruit by removing any pieces of stalk.
Wash the syrup from cherries, drain and pat dry.
Halve cherries then place in a bowl with the fruit, lemon rind and juice and 60ml (4 tbsp) of the port.
Soak for 24 hrs.
2
Cream the mixture
Grease a 25cm (10’) ring mould, a microproof mould, or grease and line a 20cm (8’) round tin.
Preheat oven to 150°C (300°F, Gas 2).
Cream butter and sugar together until light and fluffy, using an electric whisk.
3
Add the fruit
Gradually beat in the eggs, adding a little flour with each to prevent the mixture curdling.
Sift in remaining flours, cocoa and spice.
Stir in fruit, treacle, carrot, almonds and remaining port.
Spoon into mould and level top.
4
Bake the cake
Following chart above either bake in conventional oven or microwave.
The cake is ready when a skewer inserted into the deepest part comes out cleanly.
If cooking by microwave the surface may appear sticky.
5
Mix the almond paste
Mix sugars and almonds together.
Whisk remaining ingredients, stir into sugar and almonds and knead.
Wrap and store in a cool, dry place for 1–3 days.
Brush cake with boiled jam.
Roll out paste and position on cake.
6
Make the royal icing
Leave the marzipanned cake to dry out for at least 48 hrs.
To make the icing, first place egg whites in a bowl.
Sift in half the sugar, beat until smooth, then sift in remaining sugar.
Beat for 15mins, then beat in glycerine.
7
Ice the cake
Using a small palette knife, spread icing all over the cake.
Make large swirls in the icing, working from the outer edge into the inner circle.
Leave the cake to dry out for 24 hrs.
Attach ribbon round the base.
8
Shape the roses…
Take a tiny ball of fondant and flatten into a petal shape.
Make five petals for each rose.
Dry out for 24 hours.
Dab royal icing onto the base of each petal and stick together.
Dry out for 24 hrs.
Pipe yellow dots in the centres.
9
…the holly
Colour scraps of fondant red for berries and dry out for 24 hrs.
Colour 25g (1oz) of fondant green, rolling out thinly.
Using a cutter, stamp out nine leaves.
Mark on veins and pinch base together to shape.
Leave to dry.
10
…and the ivy
Colour 25g (1oz) of fondant pale green with diluted colouring.
Roll thinly and stamp out 16 small leaves.
Mark on veins then pinch ends together to shape.
Dry for 24 hrs.
Paint the centres a darker green.
Get the timing right
Baking times:Preheat oven to 150°C (300°F, Gas 2) and bake the ring cake on centre shelf for 1–1/4 — 1–1/2 hrs.
Alternatively, bake in a 20cm (8’) round tin for 2 — 2–1/4 hrs.
Microwave method:Cook in a microproof mould on an upturned plate on Low or Defrost (30 per cent powder) for 35–40 mins.
If your model does not have a turntable, turn cake 2–3 times.
Test with skewer.
Stand for 25 mins.
Tips for perfect icing
A royal iced Christmas cake looks pretty, but the icing can sometimes turn very hard.
The secret to successful royal icing is to beat the mixture for at least 15 minutes to break down the sugar so that the cake cuts well.
Carmel Keens, the home economist for Tate & Lyle Sugars, recommends cane sugar when decorating for a perfect finish, as it is finer and easier to beat.
Ready-to-roll fondant icing can be bought in supermarkets.
Petal paste can be bought as a powder in cake decorating shops and needs to be made up with water.
Both are easy to colour and mould into decorations.
Now for the decorations…
Push the gold candles into the icing at regular intervals.
Position the six roses between the candles and stick them down with dabs of royal icing.
Position the holly and ivy alternately, around each candle.
You can easily make the curls by twisting gold gift tie and sticking it into the cake.
YOUR MENU PLANNER
ONE POT MEALS
Chicken casserole
Preheat the oven to 180°C (350°, gas 4).
Heat oil in a large, flame-proof casserole.
Add chicken, breast down.
Cook for 8–10 mins, moving it around so the breast and legs brown evenly.
Transfer the chicken to a plate and set aside.
Add the onion to the juices and cook for 2–3 mins, or until softened, stirring occasionally.
Place the chicken on top of the onions, then arrange the tomatoes, bay leaves and potatoes around the chicken.
Season with salt and pepper.
Cover the dish with a tight-fitting lid and cook for 1 hour.
Add the beans and cook for a further 30 mins before serving.
To serve, carve the chicken into chunks and serve in bowls with the vegetables.
Crusty bread is an ideal accompaniment to mop up the juices.
If you wish, you can make this casserole in a saucepan, simmering it over a low heat on top of the cooker.
Meatballs with chilli sauce
Place the mince, breadcrumbs, coriander, egg and seasoning in a large bowl and stir well until they're thoroughly mixed.
With slightly wet hands, carefully form the mixture into 16 even-sized balls and chill in the fridge for 10 mins.
Heat the oil in a large casserole dish, add the meatballs and cook for 5–6 mins, or until they are evenly browned, turning them over frequently.
Remove, using a slotted spoon, and put to one side.
Spoon the excess oil from the pan to leave about 15ml (1 tbsp).
Add the onion and cook, stirring, for 2–3 mins, or until softened.
Add the garlic, chilli and pepper and cook for a further 1 minute, stirring.
Add the tomatoes, beans and sugar, then season to taste.
Bring to the boil, reduce the heat and simmer for about 10 mins, or until sauce is slightly reduced and thickened.
Add the meatballs to the pan and continue to simmer for a further 10 mins, or until they are cooked through.
Garnish with coriander leaves and serve with boiled rice and warm pitta bread.
Port chops with Roquefort
Heat the oil in a large, flameproof casserole.
Add the chops and cook for about 12 mins, or until browned, turning once.
Remove and put to one side.
Trim and turn the leeks.
Cut halfway through the stem from top to bottom, then rinse well with cold, running water until no grit remains.
Drain thoroughly and then slice them thinly on the diagonal.
Add the leeks to the pan and cook for about 3 mins, or until they have begun to soften.
Sprinkle them with flour, stir well and cook for 1 min.
Gradually stir in the stock, then the mustard.
Add the chops to the casserole.
Bring to the boil, stirring all the time, then simmer for 15 mins, stirring occasionally, until the chops become really tender.
Add the cheese and cream, then season.
Cook gently for 2 mins until the sauce is smooth.
Serve hot with creamed potatoes and broccoli.
Cook's notes
Roquefort is a tangy, greenish-blue marbled cheese from the south of France.
It is made with ewes' milk and is left to ripen for three months in limestone caves.
It has a distinctive flavour that blends well with pork.
If you're unable to find Roquefort, another blue cheese, such as Stilton or Danish Blue, will make an ideal alternative.
Menorcan lemon lamb
Preheat the oven to 150°C (300150°F, gas 2) Using the tip of a sharp knife, create a pocket next to the bone.
Push the smaller cloves of garlic into this cavity.
Place the lamb in a large casserole and arrange remaining garlic, the lemon chunks and herbs around the edge.
Pour the stock, wine and sugar over the lamb and season.
Cover with tight-fitting lid and cook for 4 hrs, or until the lamb is very tender.
Adjust seasoning, serve hot with salad and crusty bread.
Cook's notes
There may seem to be a lot of garlic involved here, but don't let that put you off — this country-style stew is based on a Menorcan recipe and the traditional slow cooking gives the dish a sweet, mellow flavour.
KNITTING
Apricot delight
Keep out the cold in a cosy sloppy joe — warm yellow and soft tassels update this classic sweater
Perfect for bright, winter days, our jumper is made in Sirdar Balmoral Double Knitting — a mixture of wool, alpaca and silk.
It has a large collar and deep pockets — the tassels are an optional feature added once the garment has been made up.
Knitted entirely in broken rib, the pattern needs a little concentration as it is possible to confuse right and wrong side rows; but don't let that put you off.
For yarn stocklist details contact Sirdar plc,.
Instructions overleaf  
Cartoon Capers
‘If I must collect their newspaper, I'll do it my own way’
‘Good old Acapulco — someone's always dropping in for lunch’
REVIEWS
****
Don't miss
***
enjoyable
**
average
*
weak
Music
Rendezvous
Christopher Cross **
Although Mr Cross has been making music since the early 80s, he's best known for Ride Like the Wind and the theme tune to Dudley Moore's film Arthur .
If you liked those, then you'll love this.
It's an album that's jammed full of placid love songs — the title track helps set the tone and, from there on, it can be a little difficult to know when one song finishes and the next begins.
Not a lot of variation — but it is very easy listening.
Kerrie Hamilton.
Cross: romantics will adore him!
Video
Hook (U) ***
This unexpected sequel to Peter Pan begins many years after J M Barrie's original left off.
Peter, played by Robin Williams, is now a successful American businessman — very busy and very serious.
In short, he's lost his magic.
And, up to now, neither of his children have reaped the benefits of Peter's extraordinary youth.
Then, he brings his family to London to spend Christmas with Wendy — played superbly by Maggie Smith.
It's here that the magic begins again, when Peter's children travel to Never-Never Land meet Tinkerbell (Julia Roberts) and the menacing Hook (Dustin Hoffman).
Will the children ever see their parents again — and will Peter be able to revive his childhood powers and save them?
Williams and son Charlie Korsmo hit the high seas
Fatal Love (15) **
The shocking true story of Alison Gertz who, at the age of 22, learns that because of a one-night stand she is now dying of Aids.
A cautionary tale, and one that is very relevant to life in the 90s.
Astro Farm (U) ***
Contemporary Magic Roundabout -style animation with happy, brightly coloured characters and an inventive storyline.
Kerrie Hamilton
Cinema
Unlawful Entry (18) ***
A taut thriller, in the Hollywood mould that's currently in vogue, with Kurt Russell and Madeleine Stowe as a happy, wealthy couple who find themselves held at knife-point in their designer home.
Raised to believe the police are ‘born to serve’, they have no hesitation in calling them to their aid.
A big mistake, as it turns out, because the friendly neighbourhood cop, played by Ray Liotta, is not what he appears — especially when he falls in love with the lady of the house.
As he changes from professional saviour to personal friend, then rampant psychopath, the film develops into an intriguing game of cat and mouse.
Good, tense entertainment.
Liotta (left) investigates a burglary and goes beyond the call of duty…
Books
Love in the Modern Sense by Carol Clewlow ***
The author of A Woman's Guide To Adultery packs some punches in this, her third novel about the war between the sexes.
Expect laughter and tears all the way through this spicy tale of highbrow Alice Potter divorced from an infamous husband, and now pursued by the Press gang.
Only Jim Crane, ambitious but a little more human than the other hacks, can break Alice's wall of silence.
After a faltering start, the novel speeds along — firing insults and insights with style.
(Penguin, £4.99)
The Country Diary of an Edwardian Lady by Edith Holden ****
This classic, a superbly illustrated celebration of nature, finally appears in paperback.
A hit a decade ago, it's bound to inspire all over again.
(Penguin, £7.99)•Joanna Briscoe  
TRAVEL
Discover the magic of Venice
Wander down medieval alleys and cross a maze of canals to enjoy this bewitching Italian city that seems to belong to another time.
By Cathy Smith
The story of Venice began over 1,000 years ago, when early settlers drove a base of wooden piles into the lagoon.
The surface was paved with massive stones and on these watery foundations Venice was built — a floating city!
In recent times it was feared that Venice was sinking, but modern engineering has come up with a way of pumping water from the mainland to boost the underground water base on which the city rests.
In summer Venice is crammed with tourists and the heat is often stifling, but autumn is perfect for a short break.
The crowds have disappeared and the weather is still warm.
Leave your map at home and get lost.
The city is a maze of narrow medieval alleyways and bridges, and it's fun to explore among the ornate buildings and candy-striped landing stages.
The city is only about two miles long by one mile wide, so you can walk from end to end in less than two hours.
A good starting point is St Mark's Square, which contains two of the city's top attractions: the Basilica of St Mark and the Doges' Palace.
The Basilica is one of Europe's loveliest churches and tucked away in the sanctuary behind the altar is its most precious altarpiece, encrusted with priceless jewels.
The splendour of the Grand Canal, Venice's ‘high street’— the waterways are the lifeblood of this ancient city
The top of the Campanile in the square gives a bird's-eye view of Venice.
The bell  tower is the highest building in the city, and from there you'll see a carpet of red-roofed houses rolled out below you.
Yet, by some strange trick of perspective, you cannot see a single canal!
The Doges' Palace was home to the rulers of Venice for centuries.
It was also a prison, and at the back of the palace is the beautiful Bridge of Sighs connecting it with the dark, damp cells.
Legend has it that the bridge got its name from the plaintive cries of the prisoners as they were escorted across it.
After a morning's sightseeing stop for a coffee, but beware the cafés in St Mark's Square…a cup of coffee at Florian's or Quadri's costs around £3, but prices improve the further away you get from St Mark's.
There are more than 400 small bridges crossing the network of narrow canals, but the Grand Canal itself is spanned by only three: the Rialto, the Accademia and the Scalz.
It's the main ‘motorway’ through the city, and there are a dozen or so stalls on the Rialto selling souvenirs — including the painted masks you'll see on sale all over the city.
There are no cars in Venice — you'll often see the locals coming out of their front doors and leaping into the boats tied up outside — and everything must be delivered by water.
The Grand Canal bustles with life: boats deliver vegetables, collect rubbish, and carry people to work.
It loops for two miles through the city, lined with splendid palaces dating from the 14th century.
When your feet are tired, why not hop on a water bus, or vaporetto .
The No 1 — called accelerato but in fact the slowest — calls at all the main stops and gives a good, overall impression of Venice.
The fare is less than £1.
The most romantic boat ride is by gondola.
They cost around £40 to £50 an hour, but these elegant craft are the epitome of Venice and are worth the splurge just once.
Glide up the Grand Canal or tour the labyrinth of smaller canals for a close-up view of everyday Venetian life.
For more information contact the Italian Tourist Board,.
Where and what to eat
There are dozens of restaurants offering tourist menus — a three-course meal — for £6 to £10.
Menus are displayed outside, so check prices first.
Sandwich bars are everywhere — for lunch try a ciabatta-bread sandwich, which comes stuffed with ham and mozzarella cheese, plus a cappuccino, for around £3.50.
In a narrow street called Frezzeria is a trattoria next to a sign with a kitten painted on it.
It sells delicious risotto with peas and Parmesan cheese for £2.50, or try calf's liver with onions — a classic Venetian dish.
Eat in style at one of the many canalside cafés
St Mark's dominates the city and is surely one of Europe's finest churches
A gondolier doesn't come cheap — but punting down the canals is the very best way to explore
Getting there
Magic of Italy (081–748 7575) has three-night breaks in a two-star hotel, including flight, from £349 per person.
Regent Travel Services (081–960 9066) offers return flight with three nights' twin accommodation from £239.
BANISH WINTER BLUES
Capital city breaks
Take in all the famous sights that you always wanted to see on a budget short trip
Dublin's Trinity College — an architectural gem
Paris — where new meets old
From the bohemian atmosphere of the left bank to the cool elegance of the Champs Elysées, Paris has something for everyone.
The city effortlessly blends the old with the new, and La Défense and the Pompidou Centre are now as much a part of it as Notre Dame, Sacré Coeur and the Arc de Triomphe.
The infamous glass pyramid outside the Louvre caused outrage when it was built — but then so did the Eiffel Tower.
Now, of course, there's also Euro Disney, a few miles outside the city at Marnela-Vallée.
Travel Direct (081–335 3030) offers three-, four- and five-day coach breaks to Paris, including a one-day passport to Euro Disney, from around £119.
Rome — a centre of ancient beauty
It's as hard to do justice to the beauty of the Eternal City in a few words as it is to see everything in a few days.
But don't miss Michelangelo's ceiling in the Sistine Chapel, St Peter's Cathedral and Square, the Colosseum, the Trevi Fountain, the Pantheon, the Castel Sant'Angelo and the Spanish Steps.
Even apart from the famous sights, Rome's piazzas, fountains and gardens are a delight, and simply wandering is a pleasure in itself.
Three nights in Rome with The Magic of Italy (081–748 7575) start from around £217 per person.
Citalia (081–680 5336) offers holidays from two days up to a fortnight, with B&B prices from around £259 per person.
Madrid — city of discovery
Madrid is one of Europe's most beautiful cities.
In the Prado you can see one of the finest collections of paintings in the world, including works by Titian, Goya, Velázquez and El Greco.
The Royal Palace, too, is a stunning sight, and in the charming cafés in the Plaza Mayor, at the heart of the old city, you can enjoy tapas, the varied snack dishes so beloved of the inhabitants of Madrid.
Two nights in Madrid with Time Off (071–235 8070) cost from around £200.
Thomson Citybreaks (071–387 6534) offer two, three and four nights from around £215.
Dublin — inspirational and relaxing
The Irish capital's charms have inspired countless writers.
George Bernard Shaw and Oscar Wilde were both born here, and the James Joyce Museum, at Sandycove Point, is housed in one of the Martello towers build to defend Ireland from Napoleon's threatened invasion.
You'll never be short of things to do in Dublin — whether it's shopping in its modern centre, or simply relaxing over a Guinness in one of the city's excellent pubs.
Time-Off (071–235 8070) two-night breaks start from £150. •Steve Le Comber.
Coffee break fiction
Richard was besotted with his wife, Susan.
But now a face from the past threatened to destroy their happiness…
By Mari Nicholson
Richard ran his fingers over the expensive-looking business card his secretary had just handed to him: ‘Simon Middleton — Financial Consultant’, it read.
‘Mr Middleton said he knew the area years ago and now wants a weekend cottage or holiday flat.
I thought of old Mrs Drury's place,’ said his secretary.
So the debonair Simon had made it big in the financial world.
They'd all known he would eventually.
Richard's fingers played with the card as he recalled their first meeting, 13 years ago, at Adam's party.
‘Richard and Susan, I want you to meet our new member of staff, Simon Middleton,’ Adam said, as a stylishly dressed young man held out his hand in greeting.
Later that evening, Simon had been one of the crowd that had ended up at their house for coffee.
Richard recalled looking across at his wife, her face glowing from the wine she'd drunk, her manner relaxed.
Susan had looked up as she felt his glance and had smiled towards him before moving to the group by the window.
Adam's wife was expounding on the trials of being the mother of a pre-school-age daughter.
As he watched his wife, Richard sensed, rather than saw, her stiffen as the conversation flew around her.
Only he know how parents complaining about their children upset her.
Her longing for a child was something she kept hidden from others; she wouldn't even discuss it with Richard.
‘I don't want us to apportion blame,’ she said.
That had been the start of their friendship with Simon, who had joined in all the social events of the group that summer.
It was a happy time, and only occasionally did Richard see the old sadness return to Susan's eyes.
She'd been very happy that Sunday, 13 years ago, when they'd all gone to Adam's for lunch.
Susan had insisted on doing all the washing up by herself; they'd all had too much wine and might break something, she said.
Simon, however, wouldn't hear of it, and had joined her in the kitchen to help with the dishes.
Susan was doing the washing up and Simon had insisted on helping her
Later when he had to leave, Richard was sorry to break up the party.
‘I'm sorry folks, but we really must get along, I'm afraid.
I've got a lot to do tonight.
Are you coming Susan?’
Simon's lazy voice had interrupted.
‘If Susan wants to stay on, then I can run her home later.
It would be no trouble, Richard.’
‘Yes please,’ said Susan.
‘You don't need me if you're working, do you darling?’
‘Of course not,’ he had replied, happy for Susan to enjoy herself.
And he was glad to have an excuse to put off telling her the news that he'd been keeping to himself.
‘Great,’ said Simon, and he'd smiled at them both.
Later, at home, he'd sat engrossed in his work.
Susan had entered quietly, and stood looking over his shoulder, watching him work.
Suddenly, she threw her arms around him and hugged him fiercely in a way she had never done before.
As he held Susan he knew that something was very wrong.
He also knew this was not the moment to tell her what he'd learnt today.
It would have to be his secret now, perhaps forever.
Tests had proved that he could never father a child.
And now, all these years later, Simon was back.
Richard shook his head and closed his eyes against the pain his memories brought.
With a frown he pulled a file towards him and buzzed the outer office.
‘Mandy, would you get me Mrs Drury, please.’
A few minutes later the elderly owner of ‘Primrose Cottage’ was on the phone.
‘Good afternoon, Mrs Drury.
I've had a letter from Mrs Duncan, a teacher at the local primary school, and she's interested in leasing your cottage.
However, I must tell you that another prospective tenant has appeared on the scene.
He can offer more money but he may not be suitable.
Do you want time to think about it?’
‘I'll do whatever you suggest.
You know what's best.’
As he replaced the receiver he felt faintly sick.
He'd done something dishonest for the first time in his business life, and it sat uneasily on his conscience.
The intercom buzzed.
‘Mr Middleton for you, Mr Ellison.
Shall I send him in?’
‘Yes.
Send him in now.’
He straightened his tie and steeled himself for the meeting.
But he wasn't prepared for the shock of seeing those eyes, his daughter's eyes of startling green flecked with gold, that looked out from Simon's face.
‘Good to see you again, Richard,’ he said.
Richard tried to remember how much he'd liked Simon.
He smiled.
‘Sit down, won't you?’
‘How's Susan, by the way?
Well, I hope.’
‘Yes, never better.
She's shopping with our daughter today,’ he said vaguely.
‘Ah yes, of course.
I heard you had a daughter.
Do you only have the one child?’
‘Yes, only one.
But our Kate is very beautiful.’
And she's mine, all mine, he wanted to shout.
For he knew what Susan had done to present him with this daughter, his beautiful Kate, born just 12 years ago, six months after Simon had left their village.
But she had done it out of love.
Love for him, and her long-held desire for a family.
He continued: ‘I'm sorry, but I'm afraid the cottage you were interested in has gone.
We'll keep a lookout for something else suitable.’
He looked across at Simon and smiled.
For he was the one who had Kate and Susan; they were a family.
‘Susan will be sorry to have missed you — it's a pity you have to leave so soon,’ Richard said hesitantly ushering Simon out of his office, and his life, forever.
YOUR WEEK IN THE STARS
Our stargazer Barbara Dunn is a member of the Association of Professional Astrologers.
Here she gives her predictions for the week ahead and answers your letters
Sign of the week: Aries
Now that lucky Jupiter is making such an exciting connection to your sign, you'll start to feel you're really going places.
At present it is mainly Ariens born between March 21 and 26 who have the best of this good luck, but those of you born in April will experience a surge of good fortune from June 1993 onwards.
Make the most of all opportunities because this planetary movement only occurs once every 12 years.
SCORPIO Oct 23–Nov 21
Love The Full Moon in your Seventh House of relationships exposes your partner's feelings in a dramatic way.
You have no need to worry — the support he has provided over past months will continue.
Money Lucky Jupiter and materialistic Venus ensure that you stay afloat financially, despite the fact that you have been careless with cash recently.
Health Minor illnesses connected tot he throat could surface around the 10th.
SAGITTARIUS Nov 22–Dec 21
Love The passage of love planet, Venus, through your own sign is a splendid time for romance.
However, on the 11th, Mercury, planet of sociability and communication, turns backwards, slowing down progress in these areas.
Money Any blunders you make will be highlighted at the end of the month, so be extra careful, especially if you are in charge of other people's cash.
Health Watch out for potential injuries while exercising.
CAPRICORN Dec 22–Jan 19
Love You are particularly open to the troublesome influences of Mars this week, which could cause confrontations between yourself and those closest.
If you can't agree to disagree, then take a back seat and let others have their way on this occasion.
Money Your finances are looking healthy and you feel confident that you're in command of your cash.
Health If you control the amount of stress in your life, good health will continue.
AQUARIUS Jan 20–Feb 18
Love You and your partner face new challenges in your relationship — use them as a way of finding out just how deep your feelings are for each other, and how much you are prepared to sacrifice in order to make it work.
Money For most of you, achieving financial security is a long–term project.
However, for Aquarians born in 1934, 1946, 1957 and 1969, the picture is infinitely more positive.
Health You feel at your best this week.
PISCES Feb 19–Mar 20
Love The 5th and 6th are excellent days for togetherness and intimacy, because the Moon, planet of sensitivity, passes through your own sign.
Despite the general downturn in planetary good fortune, you love life is healthy.
Money Mercury is about to turn backwards on the 11th, so try to tie up all outstanding financial matters before then.
Health Optimism and positive thinking are your greatest assets in keeping fit and well.
ARIES Mar 21–Apr 19
Love Powerful angles made to your sign by a number of important planets make this a remarkable week.
Any problems arising, both now and over the coming weeks, will be swiftly counteracted by the harmonious vibrations of lucky Jupiter.
Money The full Moon in your Second House of money could coincide with a minor financial hiccup, but on the whole this is a good time for you.
Health Resist the urge to over-exert yourself.
TAURUS Apr 20–May 20
Love The Full Moon in Taurus on the 10th offers you the chance to finally get things moving in the direction you've chosen, without being influenced by the demands of a lover or spouse.
Money Expect to be challenged and opposed every step of the way as far as your long-term financial plans are concerned, but don't give up.
Health Tiredness and feelings of frustration will surface this week, but they're only temporary.
GEMINI May 21–Jun 20
Love Take time to re-evaluate your behaviour now that Mercury, your ruler, is about to turn backwards.
Don't initiate new ideas within a relationship, because they aren't likely to succeed: wait until next month.
Money Joint finances are highlighted — a thorough investigation of each other 's spending is called for.
Health Typical Geminian nervousness re-emerges this week, but can be helped with a soothing massage and herbal remedies.
CANCER Jun 21–Jul 22
Love Your natural tendency to be possessive is getting out of hand.
Less emotional people, such as Geminis and Sagittarians, find this sort of behaviour difficult to tolerate.
Planet Mars is most unhelpful this week, but do try to allow partners more freedom.
Money With better management of resources you will be able to stay one step ahead.
Health Push yourself to a higher level when working out — the benefits will be worth it.
LEO Jul 23–Aug 22
Love Dynamic planetary influences give your confidence a much-needed boost.
Plan an intimate weekend with your partner on the 7th and 8th.
Money The backward movement of Mercury on the 11th will mark the start of a three-week period dominated by setbacks and frustrations concerning personal finances.
Health A difficult connection between the Sun, your ruler, and planet Pluto may give rise to backache and tension.
VIRGO Aug 23–Sep 22
Love Virgos involved in a new relationship should not expect much progress until at least early December.
Those of you in long-term relationships are impatient with your partners, but they are unlikely to retaliate, unless they are Scorpio or Aries.
Money Don't take on too much work: the extra cash isn't worth it.
Health Virgo is a sign known for its interest in health and dietary matters.
Use your knowledge in this area to maintain well-being.
LIBRA Sep 23–Oct 22
Love The planetary vibrations are excellent right now, but be aware that over the coming weeks upheavals are likely.
Your ruler, Venus, will form a very powerful connection to erratic Uranus at this time, so be prepared.
Money Planet Mars could be responsible for unfairness from superiors at work, or from those in a position to help you financially.
However, this is short-lived.
Health Good, but you're liable to eat and drink too much!