

Best of the week
Are we killing the countryside?
If, like me, you love the country, maybe one way you can help preserve it for future generations is to stay away from it.
The sad fact is that our beautiful scenery is being destroyed through sheer weight of visitors.
We disturb wildlife, pollute air, drop litter and literally wear out the footpaths.
Vast areas are given over to car parks and souvenir shops.
This week's Talking Point suggests how we can help to save our threatened beauty spots before it's too late.
I'm sure you'll find it's food for thought.
‘Irish red settee puppies, ready now’‘Hand slicing machine, stainless steel blade, suit kitchen.’
‘The bride wore a dress with mutton sleeves…
’‘The first man was white, about 15ft 5ins, with dark hair.’
Salt was once used instead of money 
DOUBLE TAKE!
If you have an amusing or wacky photo at home, send it to Double Take!(include a SAE if you want it returned).
WE PAY £25 FOR EACH PICTURE
PAPER SMILES
Know any good jokes?
Seen any howlers in print?
We'll pay £5 for every one used — but sorry we can't return anything you send
OUR FASCINATING WORLD
Our ancestors didn't realise how essential salt was to their well being until they started to grow crops.
Eating less meat, which has a high salt content, meant that they needed to supplement their salt intake.
Salt, therefore, became highly prized.
Roman soldiers received a salt allowance, called salarium, the origin of the work salary.
The oceans contain enough salt to cover the land 150 metres deep 
The salt we sprinkle on our food today is produced by the same methods our ancestors used, but we operate on a bigger scale.
Sea or bay salt comes from evaporating sea water.
It has a much ‘saltier’ taste than rock salt, which is mined or pumped up with water from underground layers of salt caused by pre-historic lakes drying up.
‘What does the invisible man call his mother and father?
His transparents .’
‘What do phones do when they fall in love?
They get engaged .’
Laughter lines
Sometimes it's a pain in the neck being Cher.
But it's a good job.
Don't be afraid to play with colour — this basic cream trouser suit is given instant chic with a pastel body suit and some co-ordinating accessories.
Flattering belted jackets are in fashion.
Wear them without a blouse and fill the neckline with pearls.
The easy cut of this trouser suit makes it comfortable enough for office or weekend wear.
TROUSERS SUIT
There is nothing masculine about these new trouser suits in summer's soft pastels.
Smart and acceptable for city wear but soft enough for relaxed days
A soft cotton wrap gives a relaxed look to a smart tailored trouser suit.
This short sleeved trouser suit looks cool and elegant in pastel pink — try wearing it with dark colours, and stand out in the crowd.
AROUND AND ABOUT Compiled by Rosalind Lowe
Lip-reading in style
When Karen Stephens trained as a hairdresser she had to learn more than just the rudiments of cutting and blow-drying/ She also had to tackle the problems of learning how to lip-read in a mirror, as 20-year-old Karen has been deaf all her life.
Now she works as a stylist at Highbury Hair in Cosham, Hampshire.
The owner Janet Stokes says, ‘Of course, it hasn't always been easy for Karen.
She can't look after the salon at lunchtimes, as she's unable to answer the phone.
And the other stylists occasionally have to interpret if clients don't speak clearly enough for her.’
However, Karen's quick intelligence and enthusiasm make up for any problems caused by her disability, and Janet says, she's a big asset to the salon.
Being deaf hasn't stopped Karen fulfilling her ambition to be a hairdresser.
‘I really enjoy my job and especially like keeping up to date with all the modern styles,’ says the enthusiastic young stylist from Hampshire.
Bert beats the litter louts
Seventy-three-year-old Bert Hardy has declared a one-man war on rubbish in the Sussex village of Ringmer.
His battle with litter louts began when he joined the village car committee, and he regularly zooms around on his bicycle, stopping to pick up refuse with his hand-operated stick.
‘We collected 30 bags of rubbish in one day, and realised we had a serious problem,’ he says ‘From then on I decided to blitz the village a couple of days every week.
Using the bike and the pick-up stick I find that I can cover quite a large area of ground and take some very good exercise at the same time.’
Bert's public-spirited efforts haven't gone unnoticed either — his fastidiousness has won him a thank-you scroll from the Keep Britain Tidy group.
Armed with only his trusty pick-up stick, Bert is ready for battle with Ringmer's litter louts.
‘I like to blitz the village twice a week.
It's very good exercise,’ he says
Children learn to drive…a tractor
Life down on the farm is kiddie-sized in Niedersachen, German, where Thorsten, Manuela and Kornnelia Pape have been treated to a mini tractor by their father Klaus, who farms land around the village.
‘The kids used to watch me working with my own tractor so I decided to make then their own version,’ says Klaus.
‘Now the children help out with various things.
I think it subconsciously gets them interested in the work.’
The Paper family pet dog, Franz, hitches a ride with Thorsten, Manuela and Kornelia for a drive around the farm
Scaring the birds
Pigeons thought they had found a regular roost on a Shrewsbury office block.
But when Bob Cliff placed a numerous replica owls on the roof the noisy birds were successfully frightened away.
‘But I have to move the owls around each week,’ he says.
Newsflash
Keep your hair on
Stress makes you bald, say experts at Manchester's Trichological Centre.
They surveyed 288 people for nine months and found that in seven out of 10 cases anxiety was making hair loss worse.
The bottling up of emotions loosens the hair roots.
Working relationship
Executives have discovered that they achieve better results in the workplace if they fall in love with a colleague, according to an American report.
Three in 10 workers admit to having a ‘spouse’ in the office while remaining faithful to husbands or wives at home.
The work-relationship gives them drive and commitment.
Bad diets
More people are killed by poor diet than by smoking, alcohol, drugs, accidents and AIDS put together, according to the Health Education Authority.
Nine in 10 people eat too much fat — which can be a trigger of heart disease.
MATTER OF OPINION
Should we wear whatever we like to the office?
The typical office ‘uniform’ of suits, blouses and respectable tights provides warmth during cold winter months.
But it all gets rather over-powering when the sun shines.
So should we be able to wear what we feel comfortable in, even if it means going casual in shorts and T-shirts?
u People feel more relaxed if they are allowed to wear casual clothes , says Samantha, 22.
‘They become withdrawn and irritable if constricted by a tight collar or itchy rights.’
u Can you imagine doing business with someone in a Mickey Mouse T-shirt ? says Simon, 28.
‘I work in sales and am sure none of my clients would take me seriously if I didn't turn up in a sharp suit.
It makes me feel more businesslike.
I would find it offensive to be confronted by my colleague's knobbly knees , says Jim, 34.
It's very tempting to leave your jacket and tie at home when the temperature starts to soar.
However, the thought of sweaty flesh exposed by cut-off jeans and short-sleeved T-shirts is horrible.’
u It shouldn't matter what you wear to work as long as you get the job done , says Lisa, 49.
Being well-dressed doesn't improve a person's ability to do accounts, or whatever.
Job of the week PRIMARY SCHOOL TEACHER
The children make sure I never have a straightforward day
Children really keep you alert, according to primary school teacher Sarah Gwynne.
The 22-year-old has a class of four- and five-year-olds at Devons Primary School in the London Borough of Tower Hamlets.
‘You never have a straightforward day.
There is always something different to deal with,’ she says.
When Sarah herself left school at the age of 18, she wasn't sure whether she wanted to be a teacher or a nurse.
However, doing some voluntary work in schools and on a holiday camp for the under privileged convinced her that she really wanted to carry on working with children.
‘They're constantly entertaining,’ she says.
‘One of my pupils, Fiona, aged five, always comes to school with her shoes on the wrong feet.
I usually remember to swap then over, but last week I forgot.
Mark, four, came to me looking terribly concerned and said, ‘I feel sorry for Fiona — she's got such funny feet!’
Sarah secured her post at Devons School immediately after completing a four-year Bachelor of Education degree at Bath College of Higher Education where she specialised in four to eight-year-olds.
The funny things her young pupils say and do provide Sarah with a little light relief, but teaching isn't all fun and games.
‘The kids aren't very independent.
When I'm doing work with one group, the others will come up to me, saying ‘Miss miss…’ and I'll have another problem to sort out,’says Sarah.
Even though the children don't arrive until 9.15am, Sarah starts work at 8.15am.
‘I always have to prepare for the day's lessons, If I want everything to go smoothly,’ she explains.
Nor does she finish when her class leaves at 3.30pm.
After school hours, there is work to look at and reports to fill out.
One compensation, however, is the long school holidays.
‘I'm really ready for them.
I feel burnt out,’ says Sarah.
Time spent away from the children is important for another reason, too.
‘I find it hard to switch off when I go home.
The children do become part of your life,’ she says.
‘If one of them starts behaving out of character, I know that something's upsetting them.
They'll usually tell me what's wrong — and them I have to decide what to do about the problem.’
Flexibility is the key to being a successful teacher.
‘You have to be able to judge the children's moods,’ says Sarah.
‘If we've been doing lessons all morning, they've usually had enough by the afternoon, so we'll sing some songs together or I'll tell them a story.
It's never the same from one day to the next.’
Are you caring, lively and alert ?
Children respond to the mood of their teacher.
Are you prepared to study ?
A Bachelor of Education course lasts three or four years.
Those who have already completed a degree course can do a one-year intensive Post Graduate Certificate of Education.
For further details contact the Department of Education and Science  
FACTFILE
Sarah Gwynne's pupils look so angelic — but appearances can be deceptive.
‘I often feel I've spent the day nagging,’ she says
New furniture by design
After they'd decided to restore a 200-year-old country cottage on the outskirts of Stroud, Gloucester, housewife Amanda Rawson and her husband scouted around auction rooms looking for furniture to suit it.
But Amanda wasn't content with the anonymous look of the items she found.
‘I decided to pain floral designs on the wood to match my curtains,’ she says.
Soon friends were offering to buy Amanda's work, and she decided to turn her hobby into a business.
She calls it ‘Hooliz’, after a game she played as a child.
‘And I am still having fun,’ she says.
Amanda claims she got her eye for good antique furniture from her grandfather.
She strips the pieces in her home and paints on her own eyecatching floral designs to coordinate with her house's decor
FASHION
STYLISH CHIFFON
Lightweight, sheer and soft — cool chiffon is the perfect fabric for hot days.
Whether you wear it as a skirt, trousers or a floaty shirt, you'll always feel comfortable
Layers of chic
Be bold in chiffon and go for underlayers that show, like this black body beneath an orange hooded shirt.
Long and easy
Tunic knits elegantly complement chiffon trousers and ass interesting contrast in texture
Elegant cover
A lightweight chiffon shirt (right) is the perfect cover over swimsuits or bodies when you're gliding from beach to bar.
Night and day
(left) Dressing up or down this versatile outfit can be as simple as changing your shoes — comfy espadrilles for daytime, sophisticated heels for evenings.
Good investment
a lot of chiffon separates, such as this long-line vest, come double layered for discretion.
YOUR RIGHTS
CONSUMER
Will your water bill be affected by metering?
If you don't use much water now, the new system may even help you save money
Few of us have any idea of how much water we use on an average day.
Each washing machine cycle, for example, takes a staggering 90 litres, while flushing the toilet uses another nine.
Because we pay a set charge based on the ratable value of our homes, we don't think twice about turning on a tap — but this may change.
Many of the water companies are now considering installing meters so that they can charge us for the amount of water we have actually used.
The change is the result of the 1989 Water Act which privatised the water industry and make it illegal for water companies to continue using ratable value as the basis for charging for water after March 2000.
Because metering would be such a major change, trials are underway to assess the likely benefits and costs.
The results so far suggest that although meters are expensive to install they do lead to a drop in consumption.
Around 65% of people with meters found they were paying the same as or less than they did under the old system.
Consumer organisations warn that compulsory metering could lead to higher bills if water companies increase their charges to cover the costs of meter installation.
The National Consumer Council is worried that this could cause severe hardship.
‘Some people, like kidney dialysis patients or families with young children, have to use a lot of water.
Metering would mean they would be paying an unjustifiably high price for a service that they cannot do without,’ says Chairman Lady Wilcox.
So what are the alternatives?
The NCC believes there should be a fixed licence fee or 100% standing charge per household in the future and that people who are in Income Support or other benefits should be able to have part of their water charges met.
Another possibility is to charge water according to the type of property you live in, for example, one band for a detached house and a lower band for a terraced houses.
For now, many companies are offering optional metering and some — those who are living in high ratable properties and don't use much water, for example— this can be a way to cut down costs.
Remember though you will have to pay for the meter to be installed.
Recycle water — for example, put washing up water on the garden.
Keep plumbing well maintained to avoid any dripping taps.
Take showers.
A shower will use approximately 30 litres of water compared to 90 litres for a bath.
Collect rainwater to use on the garden rather than using your hose.
Hosepipe bans over recent summers have meant keeping watering to a minimum — and digging out the old watering can.
With metering you can keep a close eye on what you use
WAYS TO CUT BACK
IN COURT TODAY
Boss wrongly sacked for sexual harassment
A company executive, who lost his job after being accused of groping office girls and returning drunk form champagne lunches on his £1,000-a-month expense account, has successfully cleared his name.
An industrial tribunal ruled that he was unfairly dismissed from his job on the basis of unjust accusations.
The 47-year-old man has been given nicknames by his disgruntled staff, the tribunal was told.
But he denied claims that he harassed his 25-year-old secretary.
She had also claimed that he took long liquid lunches and had even been thrown out of a wine bar for fondling another girl.
In a written reply the industrial tribunal ruled that ‘the man's consumption of alcohol from time to time was part of his job.
It didn't prevent him from running a successful office, despite the lack of support from some staff’.
The tribunal went on to condemn the man's employers for their handling of the situations, and it also ‘doubted that the man had ever indulged in sexual harassment or over-familiarity with staff.
He had only gone out socially with his secretary for after-work drinks and may then have only been less formal than if her were at work.’
After the judgment the man, who now runs his own company in Wales, said ‘The allegations were absolute nonsense.’
And his wife, who is in a wheelchair, commented, ‘I realised it was all rubbish — he's a wonderful man.’
ASK THE LAWYER
Are you worried by legal problems?
Let barrister Fenton Bresler tell you exactly where you stand
He refused to change the goods
At an open air market, my daughter bought a jumper that had been reduced in price.
But it was too small and the next week she took it back.
But the stall keeper refused to change it and was very nasty to her.
There was no notice to day ‘Sales goods cannot be returned’.
Is what he did legal?
It wouldn't have mattered if the stall had a sign like that.
All such notices are illegal because they try to limit a customer's right to return defective goods.
But none of this will help your daughter.
There was nothing wrong with the jumper and legally it is her fault for not checking the size.
The stall holder is being unpleasant but he is entitled to refuse to change it.
How do I apply for a birth certificate?
Could you tell me where to apply for a full birth certificate with all my parents' details on it?
Also, is it possible to trace my family records from this?
Write to the Certificate Application Department of the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys  giving all the details you can about your parents, with a postal order for £12.
They will send you a copy of your full birth certificate which should give you enough detail to start enquiries into your family history.
Can you be breathalysed in your own home?
My boyfriend drank too much the other night and was followed home in his car by the police.
He's just got inside the house when they knocked on the door and asked to breath-test him.
He was over the limit and will now lose his licence.
But was it legally correct for the police to breathalyse a driver in his own home?
Parliament changed the law 10 years ago simply because so many drivers were abusing it.
The 1981 Transport Act now states that once the police have reasonable cause to believe that a driver has been drinking, they can follow him home and breath test him there if they wish.
THE LAWYER ADVISES
How to get the most from your duty free
Try and resist the temptation to buy before you fly — prices are often much cheaper when you're abroad
Who can resist a bargain?
Duty- and tax-free alcohol, tobacco and perfume are standard perks of a holiday abroad and there are other duty- and tax-free savings you can make as well.
Duty is the government payment levied on goods at source.
It varies with the product — reaching as much as 85% on spirits.
The tax is VAT, levied at 17.5% of the total cost including any duty.
So the cost of a bottle of whisky that you buy on the plane home from holiday, is made up of both the manufacturer's price and the airline's profit.
It's a bargain for you and a money spinner for the airline, which can take the lion's share of the profits.
Duty-free shops in the UK are expensive compared to many other countries — the profits are used to subsidise the running of airports.
So it's nearly always cheaper to buy in the airport before you come home or to buy duty-paid goods in a local store.
The advantage of buying in a local store in Europe is that although you have to pay local duty, it is likely to be much less than in the UK.
What's more, you can bring home a larger allowance than if you buy duty-free — usually half as much again.
As well as all the usual  allowances, you can bring home £265-worth of other goods from EC countries £32-worth from elsewhere .
If you go over the limit you have to pay duty on the excess when you go through customs.
If you don't declare excess goods and you are caught, you'll have to pay duty and tax on the lot, the goods will probably be confiscated and you could be prosecuted too.
Keep receipts for things you buy abroad and be prepared to show them to customs.
If you are over the limit and have goods to declare, keep them at the top of your luggage or in a separate parcel.
When you intend to buy an expensive item which you think will be cheaper than here, estimate the amount of duty you will have to pay by checking the duty tariff at your local Customs and Excise office..
Check list
Next week: what is a ‘citizen's arrest’?
It happened to me
‘Taking out legal protection insurance saved me endless hassle’
When Otis Griffith's car was written off in an accident, he was able to relax and let someone else fight his legal battle for compensation, thanks to a little preplanning
Otis Griffith, 21, has always been a car fanatic, but when it comes to his own set of wheels, he admits he's never had much luck.
So when he bought a B-registration Cavalier SRI, he was keen to give himself as much protection as possible.
‘I've been involved in a number of minor accidents before and have always escaped fairly lightly,’ says Otis, an electrician.
‘But I realised that one day I might not be so lucky.
I wanter to make sure I was properly covered, not only in case of damage to the car, but in case something were to happen to me too.’
Otis had heard about a special policy being offered by The Legal Protection Group, which you can add on to your motor insurance policy.
‘It costs around £8 a year and the main benefit is that if you're involved in a car accident, even if it's not your fault, the company will pursue the claim for you,’ he explains.
‘They will pay up to £50,000 of legal costs whether you go to court or not, as well as fees and expenses for any personal injury claims.
It turned out to be just what I needed.’
And Otis is relieved that he did take out the extra cover, because, in September in 1989, just five months after he bought the car, he had an accident.
‘It happened only two minutes from home,’ he recalls.
‘As I came to a junction, a car pulled out in front of me from a road on the left.
There was nothing I could do.’
the car his the front passenger wind and sent Otis's car flying across the road, straight into a waiting bus.
‘The front of my car was completely gone, it was a wreck,’ says Otis.
‘The police and ambulance arrived on the scene very rapidly and the other driver admitted that it was her fault.
I was so shocked that I didn't think about whether I was hurt or not.’
Otis wrote out an accident report for the police and contacted his insurance broker.
‘they then passed all the details on to the legal protection company,’ he says.
‘I didn't have to do a thing, they just took over.’
‘I didn't do a thing — they just took over’
But shortly after the accident he began to have difficulty turning his neck to the left.
He was suffering from whiplash and ended up spending several weeks with his neck in a collar.
‘I also found that I couldn't sit down properly,’ says Otis.
‘My doctor wrote a report to say this could well have been caused by the accident.’
All Otis could do now was wait to see how much compensation he would be given.
‘The legal protection company paid all the expenses and fees and did all the chasing,’ he recalls.
‘It took seven months to settle the claim for the car and well over a year to sort out compensation for both my injuries and for the inconvenience,’ says Otis.
‘But without the special cover I'd have had to pursue that claim on my own and it would have cost a great deal more.
In the end the insurance company settled out of court with payments of £3,700 for the car and £1,250 for personal injury.
‘My policy saved me so much time and money,’ he says.
‘You need the back-up of a big organisation to have any power behind your voice.
They came up with a far better deal than I could have got on my own.’
In the end Otis received nearly £5,000 towards a new car
OUR EXPERT REPLIES
‘This type of policy isn't limited to motor claims’
Stewart Patterson, Barrister
Most people prefer to avoid pursuing a claim if it means going to court because of the expense, which can sometimes end up being more than the amount of money in dispute.
And if you lose, you may have to pay the other party's costs as well.
Otis's costs could have amounted to hundreds of pounds.
Taking out legal protection insurance is an excellent way of protecting yourself.
It can also increase your bargaining powers if the other side knows you are not afraid to go to court.
Otis had taken out a Driver-plus policy which included full damages for personal injury.
An ordinary fully comprehensive car insurance policy usually includes damage to your own car, but sums for serious bodily injury may be strictly limited.
However, legal protection cover isn't necessarily limited to motoring claims.
It can also cover you for defending or bringing an action for personal injuries caused at work or elsewhere.
You can be indemnified against breach of contract for sale of goods or services, disputes with your neighbours, claims for professional negligence, ruined holidays and son on.
the Legal Protection Group specialises in this type of insurance, but other companies provide it as well.
Lloyds Bank and American Express both offer a family legal expenses plan designed to suit their customers' needs.
Next week: getting a fair deal from dentists
How to have a BEAUTIFUL BODY
BEAUTY
Make sure your body is fit to bare this summer by following our routine for smooth, firm skin that is glowing with health.
We give you our hints and tips to make you feel and look good in or out of the swim
After months spent under cover, the thought of donning a swimsuit fills most of us with dread.
Dry, calloused skin, goose-pimpled arms, dimpled thighs, mottled flesh and spotty backs are all part of the legacy of the winter.
It's clinical fact that the outer layer of the skin, drying out the natural moisture.
When it's cold, the body sets its own range of defence mechanisms in motion.
For example, goose pimples are formed on the upper arms and legs when the roots of the body hairs contract, trapping a layer of air to provide insulation.
Even when the weather changes, the bumps remain.
The good news is that, with care, you can restore your skin's natural radiance and wear that swimsuit with confidence…
Because the back is well supplied with oil-producing sebaceous glands many of us get the occasional crop of spots.
Reduce the risk by regularly using a long-handled body brush to keep your pores clear of grime and to prevent dead skin cells building up
Get rid of dead skin cells with exfoliating products
The skin, which is the largest organ in the body, replaces its top layer completely about once every 28 days.
Dead cells are shed constantly from the upper layer and replaced by cells from the lower layers.
You can help this natural process by using friction to remove the top layer of dead cells, making the skin look clearer and fresher because it enables the surface to reflect the light.
A smooth skin also tans more evenly because you have removed dead skin cells.
Loofahs are pieces of dried vegetable gourd which swell when immersed in water.
The longer variety is ideal for reaching neglected areas like backs, and the short ones or ‘mitts’ are good for underwater massage on flabby areas like the tops of the legs and upper arms.
Body brushes should be used on dry skin and can help stimulate the circulation, bringing blood flow to the surface and stimulating the lymph system which rids the body of toxins.
Always brush towards the heart and start with a gently pressure, building up to what feels comfortable for you.
Start at your feet and use long sweeping movements and even pressure, from knees to thighs.
then brush up towards armpit.
Work down the neck and over and across shoulders, continuing until you feel a pleasant warm glow all over.
Use a good quality bristle brush — find one in your local health food shop.
Or, invest in a purpose-made body brush form Annemarie Borland £5.95 
Pumice stones are blocks of volcanic lava which are ideal for treating goose pimples.
Each day, while you are bathing, soap the pumice stone and gently rub the area to be treated.
A pumice is also ideal for dealing with tough skin on the heels or soles of feet.
Using circular movements, run lightly until skin is smooth.
Dry, moisturise and repeat as necessary.
Exfoliants include granules incorporated into creams or pads.
They are good for conditioning skin that is prone to roughness on elbows, knees and on upper arms.
Use twice a week to begin with, then once a week for skin maintenance.
Massage cream or moistened pad into damp skin using firm, upward circular movements.
rinse thoroughly and pat dry, then apply a body massage oil or body lotion.
Cellulite — is there such a thing?
Although British doctors are still sceptical, the existence of cellulite as distinct from fat is not disputed by the medical profession on the Continent.
Research from Elancyl Laboratories, in France, who have spent 20 years studying the problem, states that cellulite results from localised excess of fatty matter, fluid and toxins being trapped in the network of fibres.
Unlike normal fat which is smooth and functions as the body's spare energy larder, cellulite has a granular texture and no known function.
It is rare in men but occurs in women of every age group[.
Statistics  show that 12 per cent of this lumpy skin is formed in puberty, 16 per cent occurs when women put on weight and 27 per cent forms just before the menopause begins.
A healthy diet and plenty of exercise can reduce cellulite
Massage gloves These are one of the simplest ways to treat cellulite.
They are designed to stimulate the circulation which in turn helps to eliminate the toxins and fatty particles.
Try Elancyl Active Toning Kit, which includes massage glove, soap and gel, or Elancyl MP24 Specific for stubborn zones — including the upper arms, lower legs and ankles.
the active ingredient is crushed during massage, then absorbed by the skin over 24 hours.
BREAKING DOWN THE FAT Use a massage mitt to break down fatty deposits.
First wet your skin, then dip the glove in water and massage the area, vertically first, then horizontally, and finally using light circular movements.
An alternative treatment method is with an electrical body toner.
These feature non-vibratory massaging ‘fingers’ which softly manipulate the flesh in gently circular movements to give a natural massage.
Try Elancyl Active Toning Kit, £18.95, or Babyliss Body Toner, £34.95
HOW TO DEAL WITH SPOTS
Blemishes on your back and sometimes on the buttocks can be caused by friction, perspiration and micro-organisms.
Prevent them by showering frequently, and always wear cotton underwear and absorbs perspiration and allows skin to breathe.
A back brush is a good way to treat these area.
Then use some dusting powder.
An outbreak of spots may leave a brown discoloration on the skin which can last for several months and leave it looking mottled.
In time the marks will fade, but a golden suntan will give a short-term disguise.
Product Choice: Cuticura Mildly Medicated Talcum Powder, £1.59 for 80g.
Soothing care for your legs and feet
If your skin's rather mottled after months of warming your legs too near a fire or against a radiator, benefit from a simple foot and leg routine which incorporates massage.
Start by soaking your feet in a bowl of warm water to refresh, cleanse and soften the skin.
After 10–15 minutes, dry feet thoroughly and apply a massage cream or oil.
Use gentle movements upwards from toes, concentrating on the ankle and working up leg to knee.
Pay particular attention to the skin on the shins which is often very flaky and dry because there are fewer sebaceous glands here.
If you suffer from broken veins or swollen legs soothe the problem with Organic Product Company Leg & Vein Cream Gel, which contains extracts of horse-chestnut and yarrow with natural cider vinegar in an easily absorbed gel.
Corns and callouses are best treated by a chiropodist — book an appointment soon so that your feet will look and feel their best in time for the summer.
tone your breasts by spraying them with alternate bursts of warm and cold water then smooth on lots of body lotion to keep them looking their best.
Always rinse off all salt and chlorinated water after swimming, as these have a drying effect on the skin.
Most European beaches have a shower on site
Spa treatments at home
Once a week set aside a little time to give your body a conditioning and moisturising treatment.
Shower power Jets of warm water from the shower can be used for a soothing skin work out.
Allow the water to cascade down up-stretched arms while you massage elbows and upper arms.
Tone up tummy muscles by letter the water play over the stomach while you massage with the palms of your hands using circular movements.
Pummel flabby thighs working from the knees towards your hips.
Tone your bottom using circular movements again.
Pat skin dry and moisturise with a body lotion.
Massage benefits A massage will help to relax your mind and body, and give your skin a thorough moisturising treatment.
Start with a long, warm, aromatic bath.
Then dry yourself and lie down somewhere warm and comfortable.
Moisture matters Now that your skin is toned and refreshed the key to keeping it soft is regular moisturising.
Lotions or creams smoothed on while the skin is still damp will seal in extra moisture.
Massage cream or oil into your skin, using light upward strokes, working up the body.
Applying a fake tan
Your skin may now be soft and smooth but it's probably lily white too.
So why not give your legs a golden glow with a little fake tan?
These days the products, if applied as directed, can achieve very good results.
Basically there are two varieties to choose from: temporary bronzers and longer-lasting stains.
Types of tan Bronzers are normally gels that contain colour pigments and can be washed off easily at night — do remember to do this or your sheets will have a golden glow too!
Stains literally ‘dye’ the skin.
Before applying, them it is a good idea to use an exfoliating cream to remove patches of dry skin, or these areas will tend to absorb more colour than smoother areas and give a patchy result.
Application Apply bronzer evenly and don't go over the same area twice or you will end up with streaks.
Wash hands thoroughly afterwards.
You can achieve more intensive colour with further applications.
SPECIAL REPORT
Why we're loving our countryside to death
From the Highlands of Scotland to Land's End in Cornwall, Britain has some beautiful and varied landscapes and coastlines.
Yet, in our enthusiasm to enjoy our great outdoors, we are destroying it through over-use
Visitors to the beautiful Yorkshire Dales could hardly believe their eyes last Autumn.
There, amid the rugged crags and splendid views of six people from the National Park plastering an odd concoction over the footpaths.
Gooey, brown and revolting is the best way to describe what was, in fact, hydraulic seeding mixture.
A blend of grass seed, fertiliser and cellulose glue, it was being spread over the paths as a last ditch attempt to save an area the size of four football pitches from irreversible soil erosion caused by the 250,000 walkers who tramp around the area every year.
The Yorkshire Dales is by no means the only beauty spot threatened by the sheer number of tourists and day trippers.
Fourteen million holidaymakers go to the Lake District every year, while 12 million visit Snowdonia in Wales.
And the British Tourist Authority expects figures to rise as our recent warm summers, the effects of the recession and the threat of airport delays encourage more and more people to holiday at home rather than abroad.
But, in our enthusiasm to discover our heritage, we are ruining the very scenery we go to enjoy, damaging natural habitats, wearing down footpaths, disturbing wildlife, polluting the air and dropping litter.
Efforts to make places more accessible have resulted in a proliferation of signposts, turnstiles, fences, car parks, souvenir shops and snack bars which do nothing to enhance the beauty of an area, but in many cases spoil its character as well as the environment.
The West Highland Way is one such example.
Running for 147 kilometres between Loch Lomond, just north of Glasgow to the foot of Ben Nevis, near Fort William, it was opened by the Countryside Commission for Scotland in 1980 as the country's first official long distance path.
Once just a rough track, it is now passable and marked by little yellow arrows to show people the right direction.
The number of walkers on the West Highland Way rose to 90,000 last year, generating income in local communities, but the visitors also brought problems of erosion and litter.
Putting car parks further from beauty spots will deter visitor
‘There have certainly been lots of changes since the path was opened 11 years ago,’ says Bridget Jones, 24, a ranger for the northern section of the route.
‘One part which has been spoiled by people taking short cuts is known as the Devils's Staircase.
It's a steep, zigzag path up a mountainside.
People cut corners, creating new tracks and damaging the land.
So, rather than fencing off the path, we use boulders to block the new tracks and put plastic netting over damaged areas.’
Traffic congestion is not yet a major worry around the area, but in very popular spots, such as the Lake District 90% of the visitors arrive by car.
The only solution, as far as the National Parks Authority is concerned, is to close certain roads during peak periods, such as bank holidays.
The NPA has also proposed ‘park and walk’ schemes to spread the load of visitors and vehicles.
By putting car parks a long way from vulnerable spots, it's hoped the long ‘walk-in’ will mean fewer people reach places under threat.
An organisation always on the lookout for insensitive developments is the Council for the Protection of Rural England, whose president is film producer David Puttnam.
One battle the CPRE is fighting concerns a planning application for a theme park in the historic grounds of Woburn Abbey, Bedfordshire, even though the grounds are within an ‘Area of Great Landscape Value’, as designated by the local county council.
Giving a place a special label, and, in some cases, fencing it off, may raise people's awareness, but offers only a flimsy barrier against developers.
Fences round sites such as Stonehenge, in Wiltshire, and the Major Oak in Sherwood Forest, Nottinghamshire, are a necessary evil, but those in the open countryside still provoke criticism.
‘It's unfair to suggest that nature conservation is always about fencing off pretty sites,’ says naturalist David Attenborough.
He defends the Nature Conservancy Council's ‘Sites of Special Scientific Interest’, which contain rare plants and wildlife.
‘The role of SSSI is not to say that the rest of the countryside doesn't matter, but show up areas which should be preserved at all costs.’
The most feasible way to reduce the number of visitors to one area is to open up more scenic spots and footpaths in another.
This is the long-term aim of the Countryside Commission, which wants all existing public footpaths to be accessible by the year 2000.
Cath McKay, 43, chair of the South Yorkshire and North East Derbyshire area of the Ramblers Association, supports this policy.
‘The more footpaths we open, the less pressure there'll be on the most well-used routes,’ she says.
‘This way we stand a change of saving our countryside.’
Vehicles spill out of the car park at Dovedale and their occupants crowd the Derbyshire peak District beauty spot (right)
Our 10 most threatened beauty spots
Sutton Windmill on the much-visited Norfolk Broads where the river banks are being severely eroded
All over the country, there are attractions being ruined by erosion, pollution, traffic congestion and over-development 
1
The Three Peaks, Yorkshire: footpath erosion
2
parts of the Pennine Way (which runs from Derbyshire to the Scottish border): footpath erosion
3
Snowdonia:soil erosion, building of car parks, cafeś and caravan sites
4
Lake District:traffic congestion and pollution
5
Solent estuary, Hampshire: loss of waterfowl and wading birds caused by over-development of water sports and other facilities
6
West Highland Way, Scotland: footpath erosion, especially around the shores of Loch Lomond
7
Norfolk Broads: erosion of river banks, caused by too many boats travelling too fast
8
Peak District, Derbyshire: footpath erosion, trampled ground, car parks, traffic congestion
9
Cairngorms, Scotland: loss of trees and soil erosion, caused by over-development of skiing and other leisure facilities
10
Pembrokeshire coast, Wales: over-development such as chalet building.
Cycling up Snowdon — the mountain and surrounding area are suffering from footpath erosion and building work
YOUR LETTERS
No joy for victims of car thieves
I am a teenager living in Northern Ireland.
Recently, in Belfast the police have had to deal with a spate of so-called joy riders.
On one occasion the police were chasing after one such reckless driver when he shouted ‘Don't shoot, I'm only a Joy Rider’.
he made it sound as if this was a perfectly sound reason for his dangerous and criminal behaviour.
What joy can there be in this kind of conduct?
Many innocent lives have already been lost because of people like him.
How many more must be sacrificed before something sensible is done?
We've got to show these criminals up for what they really are.
Don't let them hide any longer behind that misleading label ‘joy rider’.
I suggest the medial lead the way by tackling the problem at its roots, and begin by calling these miscreants car thieves, which is what they really are.
£25 letter of the week
Concern for tiny shoppers
As the mother of a nine-year-old girl, I often find myself questioning the wisdom of other parents in the light of recent attacks on young children.
I regularly see them sent out alone on shopping errands.
I shudder to think what might happen on their way home.
Come on Mums — think before you send your child out alone.
It's just not worth the risk.
Bite back at bad behaviour
My very well-behaved dog was sitting by my side in the building society when a young mother with a very boisterous son came in.
He was running riot, switching off lights and knocking things over.
Then in a loud voice his mother told him not to touch my dog as it would probably bite him.
Exasperated, I told her that given his behaviour, it was far more likely that her son would bite my dog!
Spread a little sunshine
Have any of your readers ever thought about writing a sunshine letter?
This is just a few lines to a friend or relative without any complaints in it.
I usually mention the little happy things that have happened to me.
It only takes a few minutes to write yet receiving a letter out of the blue can mean such a lot to somebody.
Why bother packaging?
I am writing to complain about manufacturers who use unnecessary packaging.
Items like tea bags and cigarettes are boxed, then wrapped in cellophane.
No wonder inflation is going through the roof and our environment ends up choked with litter.
JUST FOR LAUGHS
My niece Louise when to play in her new party frock.
She was warned not to get it dirty, but returned with it covered in chocolate.
Before we could say anything, she said in a loud voice, ‘If God had put my eyes beneath my mouth, I would know when I'd dropped something, wouldn't I?’
Standing outside our factory one lunch time, a smartly dressed woman asked for the office manager.
I gave her directions, adding, ‘You can't miss him.
He's got a really big nose and he smokes a horrible smelly pipe.’
‘I know,’ she replied, ‘He's my husband.’
PERSONAL STORY
When Down's Syndrome is no bar to success
As the distinctive gold badge was pinned on to her chest, Fiona Ray glanced across at her parents, Rosemarie and Bob, and beamed broadly.
It had taken six years of incredibly hard work, masses of courage and a measure of despair, but she'd done it!
She'd won a coveted Duke of Edinburgh Gold Award.
An impressive achievement for any young person, but more so for Fiona, who 22 years old, was born with Down's Syndrome.
‘It took a long time for me to get my Gold Award because some of the tasks were very difficult,’ says Fiona of the demanding project that included months of community service, braving the elements on an exploratory camping trip and writing a long and detailed historical thesis!
For Rosemarie and Bob Ray, from Eastbourne in Sussex, it was a stunning reward for the years they'd spent encouraging and supporting Fiona, who's the youngest of their four children.
‘She came home from Guides one day and said she wanted to try for the Duke of Edinburgh Bronze Award,’ recalls Rosemarie.
‘Bob and I told her we would help her all we could, I don't think any of us realised what was in store, though!’
Fiona Ray, who has Down's Syndrome, was sure she could win the tough Duke of Edinburgh's Gold Award, but experts doubted she'd do it.
They were wrong
Although her parents had always treated her normally, Fiona had still been a victim of society's tendency to view Down's children as low achievers.
Even the Award supervisors, Rosemarie remembers, doubted Fiona could finish the course.
But they reckoned without her courage and determination!
After sailing through her Bronze and Silver Awards, Fiona set her sights on the Gold.
Started in the 60s by HRH Prince Philip, the Award Scheme aims to encourage youngsters to expand their personal horizons, realise their potential and serve the community.
There are five sections to the Gold Award.
For the Residential Project Category, Fiona whose Christian leadership and spent several days with the Girls Brigade.
‘I didn't like it much’ she says now.
‘They kept praying all the time!’
From there things got tougher.
The Exploration section involved Fiona planning and leading a camping study trip to the river Avon, with two friends.
‘We stayed in a tent for four days and got very wet because it rained all the time,’ she says.
‘And it was so windy the tent nearly blew away!’
‘Some of the tasks were very difficult’
The task didn't stop here — Fiona also had to write up a detailed log of the trip, complete with samples, photographs and complex scientific data showing when the river had high and low tides and why it flowed in a certain direction.
It took Fiona, who has an attention span of only one or two hours, many days of determined effort to finish.
The next category called for meticulous historical research, which Down's Syndrome people would not normally be expected to achieve and, initially Fiona was rather daunted by the task.
But then, encouraged by her parents, she slowly got to grips with her studies.
‘I had to write all about the Mary Rose, Henry VIII's flagship,’ says Fiona.
‘It was very interesting learning about the crew and what they did on board.
I went and saw the Mary Rose at Portsmouth.
It's so big, I was amazed.’
Not as amazed as David Putter of Eastbourne's College of Art and Technology, who inspected Fiona's finished project.
‘I did think it might be too much for her, but her history of the ship was excellent,’ he says.
Although the next stage, Physical Recreation, involved just as much personal effort, Fiona loved it.
She chose the notoriously difficult carpet bowls.
‘I was quite good at playing bowls anyway, but I still need some more practice.’
The final part of the project was Community Service — Fiona chose to help with laying the dinner tables at the Brooklyn Nursing Home for the Elderly.
A choice that was to change her life in more ways than one.
‘They gave me a part-time job, so they must have liked me!’ she says.
‘Who knows what I might do one day!’
Then, with all her tasks completed, the nail biting waiting began.
It was a seemingly endless eight months before the letter arrived announcing Fiona had qualified for a Gold Award and that she was invited to St James's Palace in London to receive it.
The Duke of Edinburgh himself addressed the gathered winners — and there was a further thrill when distinguished actor Ron Moody presented her certificate and badge.
‘He was nice and funny,’ she says.
‘I like him.’
So what's next for the enterprising Fiona?
‘I'm having a little rest after all the hard work.
But I like learning new things and seeing new places, so one day who knows what I might do!’
Parents Rosemarie and Bob are both immensely proud of her achievements.
‘We've always treated Fiona like any other child, proving we were right to believe in her,’ says Rosemarie.
It was the unflagging encouragement and support of her parents Rosemarie and Bob (above left) that inspired Fiona to complete the difficult challenge she'd set herself which included planning and leading a camping study group and carrying out painstaking historical research.
But all three were rewarded when Fiona won her award.
‘It proves we were right to believe in her,’ says her mother
GOOD HEALTH
CHILDREN'S HEALTH
When an older child wets the bed
Surprisingly common, even in teenagers, this problem can cause real misery
Nocturnal bed-wetting, or enuresis, is most common among young children, and usually ceases by the age of four.
But one person in every 20 will continue to wet their bed well into adolescence, even adulthood.
And for these people the problem can become a nightmare.
From the age of six to 14 Daniel had never wet his bed.
But after his parents went through an acrimonious divorce, he started wetting it again.
Today Daniel is 23 and, unhappily, still unable to overcome his problem.
‘It's ruining my life,’ he admits.
Boys are more likely to become persistent bed-wetters than girls.
Some children remain dry for years, then relapse after coming under stress.
Very little research has been done into its cause among adolescents and adults.
As a result GPs often describe it as ‘idiopathic’— which means it happens spontaneously and no one really knows why.
If you have an older bed-wetter in the family, the first step is a visit to the doctor.
Nocturnal enuresis can be due to a urinary tract infection, or other medical conditions.
Drugs are sometimes prescribed as a last resort.
Rule out any medical reasons with your GP
The most widely used form of treatment is the bell and pad.
This comprises a thin metal-wire pad attached to a battery and bell.
The pad, which is placed below the under sheet, acts like a sensitive switch.
When moistened by even a single drop of urine, the alarm sounds, waking the sleeper who can then go to the lavatory.
After a while the person learns to wake whenever his or her bladder becomes uncomfortably full.
Although not suitable for every case, the bell and pad will lead to a full cure in up to 80% of cases, if it is used correctly.
You can also help encourage dryness by following these basic rules at night :
Never punish a bed-wetter, in the hope this will ‘shame’ or ‘Scare’him or her into becoming dry.
It only makes matters worse by increasing anxiety over the problem.
If your child enjoys a bedtime drink there's no point in refusing one.
It makes little or no difference to bed-wetting and denying the drink will seem like a punishment.
Suggest that your child trains their bladder during the day by regulating lavatory visits, using a pocket timer between visits.
This will help them to become sensitive to the bladder's warning signals.
When wet nights are only an occasional problem try and see whether there is any pattern.
Even dry children may wet the bed under stress, like a change of school, a divorce or moving house.
If no obvious dramas have occurred, suggest your child keeps a diary which indicates dry or wet nights.
It may become clear they are likely to have a wet night before or after an event.
When that anxiety is discussed the cause of the bed-wetting is removed.
Anxiety plays a part — check your child isn't hiding a problem
Where to get help
Next week: the hidden dangers of toxacara
GYNAECOLOGY
Pregnancy could trigger arthritis
Affecting one in 200 people, rheumatoid arthritis is an autoimmune disease in which the immune system attacks the body's own tissues.
It damages the joints of fingers, wrists, toes and other areas which can become swollen, stiff, and, in severe cases, even deformed.
More women suffer than men
Exactly what causes it is unknown; it may be virus or a bacteria, or many interacting factors may trigger the disease.
But what is almost certain is that around 60% of sufferers have some sort of genetic susceptibility to it, and three times as many women as men suffer from this distressing condition.
Because the disease is more common in women, female sex hormones are thought to play some sort of role in its development.
It's already known that women who take the contraceptive pill are much less likely to develop it.
Researchers supporting this include those based at the Arthritis and Rheumatism Council's Epidemiology Research Unit at Manchester University.
Doctors there have now begun extensive research into the connection between pregnancy and the onset of the disease.
A study at the unit was carried out on 80 women under the age of 40 who were pregnant for the first time.
Dr Alan Silman, director of the unit, and his colleagues, found that the women were nine times more likely to develop the disease in the three months after delivery.
Over the next nine months the risk factor fell to six.
The risk of the disease starting during pregnancy, however, was very small.
During pregnancy there is an increase in certain hormones in the blood.
According to Dr Silman, one possible reason for the link between pregnancy and rheumatoid arthritis is that oestrogen-type hormones in the body suppress the woman's immune system.
‘After delivery, the drop in the level of these hormones has a rebound effect on the immune system, which could trigger the disease,’ he says.
Dr. Silman is continuing with further studies to determine whether or not this is the case.
He is also trying to establish if there is some common genetic factor between women who develop the illness after having a baby.
Genetic factors play a role
While the chances of a woman developing rheumatoid arthritis after a delivery are small, the researchers have nevertheless provided new evidence that hormones do play a role in some cases of the disease.
When a woman is pregnant, the levels of female hormones in her body change.
Now researchers think that the sudden drop in oestrogen-type hormones after she gives birth to her baby may spark off rheumatoid arthritis
Next week: drugs for ectopic pregnancy
ALTERNATIVE HEALTH
Aromatherapy for the elderly
Aromatherapy is the use of natural plant essences in healing, relaxation and the reduction of stress.
Nurses at the Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford use aromatherapy to enhance the care given to elderly patients.
Sue Punton, the senior sister at the hospital's gerontology department believes that essential oils help geriatric patients in several ways.
The most obvious benefit of aromatherapy oils is their fragrance.
A few drops of tangy lemon oil in the bath will freshen up a hot and clammy patient.
It may also help to boost the spirits and is used in the care of stroke patients who are left feeling despondent.
A few drops of eucalyptus, or bergamot, in a small bowl of water can help clear the sick room smell.
Eucalyptus oil will also help patients with a cold as it clears nasal passages.
A few drops of lavender or marjoram oil in a small bowl of warm water by the patient's bed may aid relaxation and promote sleep.
And a little added to an almond base, and used as a massage oil, can help those who find it hard to sleep.
Aromatherapy is also used in pain control.
Pain is often made worse by anxiety, so lavender oil, which helps reduce anxiety, is used in conjunction with painkillers.
‘Patients seem to be able to cope better with pain if both treatments are given,’ says Ms Punton.
Because Lavender is versatile and cheap, it is the oil used most commonly by nurses at the Radcliffe Infirmary.
If you want to use aromatherapy oils when caring for an elderly relative, be prepared to pay for the best.
Pure essential oils are not cheap, but you get what you pay for.
Beware of those that don't declare their contents; some contain only cheap vegetable oils with just a tiny amount of fragrance.
Follow instructions carefully and don't take them internally.
STOP PRESS
Five facts on condoms
Over £28 million (retail) worth of condoms are currently sold every year in the UK.
That means over 130 million individual condoms.
According to Durex, whose condoms account for 80% of the British market, purchases made by women have risen steadily over the past 10 years.
At least 40% of purchases are currently made by women.
Durex condoms are made by dipping shaped glass moulds into liquid latex, which is then dried.
During the production process every condom is individually tested electronically.
The condoms are made in one size only.
Under rigorous testing conditions they can expand to hold over 35 litres of air, and stretch to a height of 40 inches and a width of 12 inches!
Always look for the Kitemark printed on a condom pack.
This is an independent guarantee of each condom's quality.
It happened to me
‘My skin was so bad, I'd dread going outside’
It took over two years of treatment and months of distress before 28-year-old Bethan Roberts found a cure for acne
Bethan Roberts sailed through adolescence and early adulthood with hardly a blemish to her name.
It wasn't until she was in her late twenties that the spots struck.
‘Even now nobody seems to know what triggered it off,’ says Bethan 28, an ophthalmic optician from Nottingham.
‘At the time I was convinced it was an allergic reaction to something because I couldn't believe I could be suffering from acne at my age’.
‘Whatever I tried the spots still wouldn't go’
Bethan's spots first started to appear in clusters on her chin, neck and the bottom part of her face, back in 1987.
‘I wasn't too anxious at first.
I eat plenty of vegetables and I don't like chocolate.’
But when a rigorous regime of medicated face washes, creams, cleansing and moisturising didn't help Bethan grew more worried.
‘My GP prescribed an oral antibiotic which I took for five months, but it didn't do anything.
In fact, it got worse and became embarrassing,’ she says.
Different treatments work for different people, so Bethan's doctor prescribed her a topical antibiotic instead — a cream to apply to her face.
But still there was no visible improvement.
It wasn't until she was put back on a different oral antibiotic — these work directly on the inflamed cells in the spots — that she started to notice a change.
‘It was wonderful,’ says Bethan.
‘The doctor gave me a month's course and by the time I had finished it, the spots had completely gone.
I really thought that was it, then I stopped taking them.’
But Bethan's problems weren't over.
To her dismay, the blemishes soon started to reappear.
With a holiday in Rhodes planned she thought the sun might help.
She couldn't have been more wrong.
Within three days her face once again erupted into a mass of sore, red spots.
‘It was so painful I was actually in tears,’ she recalls.
‘People would say it didn't look so bad, but they do notice all the same.
And there's still this myth that you're unclean if you have acne.
I couldn't even go out because I was in such a state.
When the oral antibiotic I'd used before didn't work this time around, I insisted on seeing a specialist.
That's when I was finally diagnosed as having Acne Vulgaris.’
So in December 1 ‘990 Bethan started using another lotion, applying it twice daily.
At the same time the specialist advised her to take walks in the fresh air and sunshine and also to stop using foundation on her days off work.
By the time Bethan went back to see the dermatologist in February this year, her acne had cleared.
‘I was really excited’ she says.
‘I'd begun to wonder if anything would work — it was beginning to take over my life.
But so far the spots haven't come back, which is brilliant.
It's so good to feel smooth skin again and not to have to dread looking into a mirror!’
‘My face was so painful I was nearly in tears
‘It's such a relief to have a clear complexion again,’ declared Bethan
FACT BOX
Acne vulgaris is the most common type of acne.
It usually starts when the suffer is in adolescence.
Sufferers tend to have greasy skin due to an increase in the secretion of sebum, the oily substance from the sebaceous glands.
This blocks the hair follicles, which leads to spots.
There is not evidence that diet plays any part in acne.
Curative acne treatments include creams, antibiotics, and other drugs.
Next week: what causes dizzy spells
OUR EXPERT REPLIES
‘Nowadays there are preparations to help virtually everybody’
Acne is thought to be the world's most common disease.
It usually occurs in the teenage years, but as Bethan's case proves, it can also persist, or even start, later on in life.
There's no evidence that a bad diet, or poor hygiene, causes the condition.
It seems that the hair follicles in the area become extrasensitive to the androgen hormones (produced by both men and women).
This increases the amount of sebum, the oily substance produced by the skin's sebaceous glands and causes the follicles to become blocked, so causing the inflamed spots.
Acne can affect the face, chest and back and, in severe cases, cause painful cysts.
Luckily only Bethan's face and neck were affected.
Treatment varies depending on how bad the problem is, but nowadays there are preparations to suit virtually everyone.
Topical treatment (a cream that is applied to the skin), is used for mild or moderately severe acne.
In more serious cases your doctor may prescribe you an oral antibiotic which will reduce the number of sore and inflamed spots.
Whatever the treatment, remember it will take many weeks to take effect.
And as Bethan found, it may also take some time to find a treatment that's right for you.
However, most cases of acne do improve with time, so once you've found a suitable preparation, stay with it until nature finally cures the problem.
HOMESHOP IDEAS BY POST
Our choice of the best mail order buys
Take down a tall order
Watering and tending hanging baskets can be an arduous task, particularly if you need to balance on a chair to do it.
The Strongbeam Water Low bracket and pulley makes it simplicity itself to lower and raise the basket as required.
The steel bracket comes complete with all fixings and is available in black or white.
The basket comes lined with natural coco fibres and is easy ‘petal’ cut to allow for easy sideplanting.
Water Low hanging basket bracket and 30cm ready-lined basket, available at the special best price of £15.49 inc p & p.
Ordering goods
When buying by mail order, keep a copy of the details relating to both the company you are buying from and the item.
If you haven't heard from the first within 28 days, write to find out why.
Never send any cash with your order.
All catalogues mentioned on this page are free to best readers unless otherwise stated.
Every effort is made to ensure prices are accurate and goods available, but best cannot take responsibility for either.
Tidy time
keep time on your side and all your bills in order with this hand clip clock.
It has a magnetic back to stick to the fridge or cabinet and an easy-to-read face.
The clock requires one AA size battery, not supplied, and is available in black or white.
New Brew
Specially commissioned by The Tea Council, Teapot 2000 has a unique design that allows you to brew it to the exact strength you like, from the first cup to the last.
When the brew is at your preferred strength, just push down the plunger to halt the brewing process and strain the leaves.
Made in heat-resistant glass, it comes with a cork mat.
WHAT A GIFT!
Snap happy this summer
Supasnaps, the leading photographic and film processing chain, have recently launched a new reusable range of summer cameras — Monster Snappits.
Available in four luminous shades plus black, they can be transformed into your very own ‘Monster’ with the stickers provided!
To obtain a free camera take any film along to your nearest Supasnaps branch for standard overnight film processing.
But if you write in we have 100 Monster Snappit cameras and cartridge film, each worth 5, to give to 100 lucky readers.
Sunnyside up
This Art-Deco style gold-plated sun design brooch and earrings will make great summer companions.
Fun and games in the sun
If you need something to keep children busy and out of mischief this summer try this stylish games mat.
Choose from chess on one side or if you fancy something a little less taxing on the mind simply turn the mat over and set the ‘board’ for a fun game of checkers — you could even use it to lie on when you come out of the sea!
Games mat, 189 ×91 cm, comes complete with playing pieces   
White nights
show off your tan this summer in this cool little number comprising a cream jersey tunic vest, 50% cotton, 50% viscose,
Back on the bench
Relax and enjoy your garden on this pine bench which can be painted to blend in with the surrounds.
Made in pine and measuring 1.27m long × 84cm high × 48cm wide it comes flat packed.
B E A U T Y — F O R M — F I T N E S S
DIET
Lose weight and look great in a swimsuit!
If you've booked your holiday but aren't quite in shape, here's how to shed pounds so that costume fits
This three-day Swimsuit Diet Plan, which makes use of plenty of fresh summer fruit and vegetables, will certainly get you started.
Then follow the advice for continuing the diet.
Persevere and keep going until you reach your ideal weight.
Day 1 850 Calories BREAKFAST : 159g (6oz) pot natural low fat yoghurt or 200g (7oz) very low fat fromage frais followed by 1 sliced peach and 2 teaspoons raisins.
LUNCH : 4 crispbread, 50g (2oz) low fat liver pâté, sliced tomato, cucumber and lettuce; 1 apple.
MAIN MEAL ; Skin 2 small chicken thighs and place in ovenproof dish with a 225g can tomatoes, 2 sliced mushrooms, 1 crushed clove garlic, seasoning and ½ tsp of herbs.
Serve with 100g (4oz) pasta, 100g (4oz) broccoli and 50g (2oz) peas; 100g (4oz) strawberries, 2 tbsp low fat aerosol cream.
DAY 2 1000 calories BREAKFAST : 2 slices granary toast with Marmite.
LUNCH : Cucumber and lettuce, 25g (1oz) curd cheese and 50g (2oz) prawns, served on 4 crispbreads; 1 low fat yoghurt.
MAIN MEAL : Grill one small turkey breast and cut into strips.
Chop ¼ red pepper, 2 spring onions, 1 celery stalk, 2 cooked new potatoes, cucumber and 2 mushrooms.
Mix 2 tsp peanut butter with juice of 1 orange and 1 tbsp oil-free dressing.
Toss together and serve on salad leaves; finish with 100g (4oz) raspberries with 2 tbsp low fat aerosol cream.
Day 3 1000 calories BREAKFAST : 25g (1oz) muesli with 150ml (¼ pint) skimmed milk.
LUNCH : 1 poached egg served on slice of granary toast; 100g (40z) cherries and 1 Shape fromage frais.
MAIN MEAL : Marinade 225g (8oz) cod in 2 tbsp tandoori paste for 2–4 hours.
Bake at 180 ° C (350 ° F, gas 4) for 25–30 mins.
Serve with 100g (4oz) brown rice, 100g (4oz baked beans heated with a pinch of curry powder, and 50g (2oz) mushrooms; 2 plums.
Breakfasts 25g (1oz) cereal with 150ml (¼ pint) skimmed milk; 2 small slices toast and 2 tsp marmalade.
Lunch Four crispbread with either 1 small jar of fish paste, 2 triangles low fat cheese spread or 40g (1 ½ oz) low fat curd cheese and salad; 1 piece of fruit.
Evening Meal Any ready meal up to 400 calories; 100g (4oz) lean meat and seasonal vegetables; 225 (8oz) white fish and vegetables or 2 egg omelette with new potatoes and salad.
Never eat anything between meals
Drink plenty of water and calorie-free drinks
Keep to a daily allowance of 150ml (¼ pint) skimmed milk for use in tea and coffee, 25g (1oz) low fat spread and 150ml (¼ pint) unsweetened fruit juice topped up with mineral water (total = 200 cals).
Allow 150 cals for breakfast, 250 cals for lunch and 400 cals for main meals.
Go out and treat yourself to a new revealing swimsuit so you have got something to aim for.
Go for a new hairstyle too boost your confidence.
Weigh yourself once a week only.
Stick an inspiring picture of a beautiful model on a beach on your fridge.
b ALTERNATIVE MEALS
How to make sure you stick to your diet
Apart from willpower and determination the tips below will help you reach your ideal figure and look healthy too
NATURAL BEAUTY
5 Steps to steaming with herbs
Ordinary cleansing gets rid of most impurities by occasionally the skin needs something more thorough.
Steaming softens and opens the pores so that the skin is more receptive to other products and ingredients.
Cleanse your face as usual and take off any residue with toner.
Then tie your hair back so it doesn't get wet or frizzy.
Take two handfuls of herbs of your choice and put them in a class bowl.
Pour over 1 litre (2 pints) of water that's almost boiled.
Lean over the steam so you're about 12 inches away from the water.
The heat should feel comfortable at this distance.
Drape a towel over your head to trap the steam.
Close your eyes and stay in this position for 10 minutes.
Emerge for a breath of fresh air as necessary.
Afterwards, rinse your face with tepid water and two minutes later splash with cold water.
Blot skin dry and apply plenty of moisturiser.
Avoid going outdoors for about an hour or so.
For oily skin try calendula flowers;For dry skin try parsley or cornflower;For mature skin try dandelion or elderflowers;To soothe skin try camomile or thyme.
Leaves to use
OVER THE COUNTER
For baby and you
Cotton wool has always been useful for cleaning and washing babies, but it's never been particularly convenient — until now.
this roll of 50 perforated and easy-to-tear-off sheets couldn't be handier as you pull off precisely what you need.
It's just as soft as pads or cotton wool balls and is thick, extra-absorbent for mopping up jobs and it won't fray either.
And if you haven't got a baby you'll find it a great for all sorts of household jobs.
Wrinkle prevention
Between the ages of 25 and 30 most of us start to notice lines radiating out from the corners of our eyes.
To help keep the delicate skin here as youthful as possible this new eye cream acts by ‘filling in’ the wrinkles and also penetrates into the epidermis therefore hydrating the skin.
It's rich in silicium giving the skin's tissue more strength and also has mother of pearl added which reflects the light and cleverly hides lines.
It's not cheap but the dispenser means a little goes a long way and it's more hygienic than a pot.
1
Throw back the quilt and move onto your side supporting the top half of your body with your elbow.
Raise the top leg as high as feel comfortable.
Lower it slowly with control, then lift it again eight times.
Now swap sides.
2
Now lie cross-legged and use your arms to slowly lift your back and bottom off the mattress.
Bend your arms at the elbow to lower body.
Straighten up.
Repeat 16 times.
3
Just before you get up, have a final stretch out.
Still lying down, clasp your hands together and reach them as high as you can above your head.
Move your knees from side to side and feel the pull in your waist.
You'll feel inches taller than usual.
10 MINUTE WORK-OUT Early morning exercises
Set the alarm clock a few minutes earlier and exercise before you get up.
You'll feel more ready to face the day
FREE
Perfume for your daughter
Princess Anne's daughter, Zara likes Sugar & Spice by Little Miss Perfumes so much that she bought her school friends sets for Christmas!
In the shops a bottle of eau de toilette, hand and body lotion and a toilet soap costs £9.15, but best readers can receive the set of three for just £.99.
Postbag
‘My hair's generally in good condition but the ends are slightly dry and tend to kink.
What can I do?
Make sure you use a moisturising shampoo and conditioner for dry hair.
You should also try using a hair serum like L'Oréal's new Rayonnance Ends Repair, 25ml, £4.49.
Charles Worthington, the Creative Director of Worthington's hair and beauty salon recommends you wash and condition your hair as normal, towel dry it and apply any styling products like mousse or gel.
Then massage just four or five drops of the serum between the palms and run your hands through your hair, paying, special attention to the ends.
A word of warning
Be careful not to use too much serum as it's very rich and can clog the hair at the roots and make it lank.
After drying you can always apply a little more to ends that refuse to lie flat.
Super dry Sure, Active ‘It doesn't sting but my underarms became incredibly hot for five minutes after applying.
It's too highly fragranced — you can smell it 24 hours later — but very effective.
Glass bottle is a bind.’
3/5 Amplex, Aqua ‘I'm a fan of this anyway.
It's fresh, pleasant to use, doesn't irritate skin and keeps me fresh all day.
It needs to dry for a full two minutes before you get dressed because it's quite sticky.’
5/5 Natrel Plus, Ylang ‘This is much better than my usual brand.
I prefer the smell — very feminine — and it kept me fresher.
It did sting me a bit the first time I used it but hasn't since.
I'll be taking it on holiday.’
4/5 Mum Quick Dry, Azure , ‘The fragrance is pleasant — not overpowering — it's amazingly quick drying and it's effective all day even in a hot office.
But the roller is terribly stiff, as if it's blocked and needs force to work.’
3/5 Boots Non-sting, Pink , ‘Ouch!
I'm afraid this does sting.
It's also rather sticky.
It's a shame because the fragrance is really nice.
I had to stop using it after a couple of days.’
2/5 
TESTED FOR YOU
ROLL ON ANTI-PERSPIRANT DEODORANTS
Don't get yourself all in a sweat trying to find the most effective product for underarm freshness.
Just take some tips from our testers who've done the hard work for you
PRODUCT
COMMENT & RATING
THIS WEEK'S PEOPLE
WE MEET MELANIE GRIFFITH
Drink, drugs and Don Johnson nearly ruined the sought-after actress.
But now she's back with a new healthy image, two young children — and has remarried her ex-husband
You have a strange relationship with Miami Vice star Don Johnson.
You've been married, divorced, spent 12 years apart, and then married again.
Can it work ?
We were married when I was 18.
He was my first love, and that will always be very special.
We were both dabbling in drink, drugs, and all that.
But now Don and I are so straight it's not true.
How much do you regret your fling with alcohol and drugs ?
I just wish I'd had more respect for my body when I was younger.
But I can't change that.
Now the wrinkles are starting to show, all I can do is be good to myself.
Is it true you have a tattoo on your body ?
Yes, it's a ripe pear on the left cheek of my bottom!
I was only 14 when I first fell head over heels for Don.
I used to call him Pear, and one day I had this tattoo done.
As a child actress you had some nasty moments on the film Roar, didn't you ?
I was 13 and it was all about a family living with lions, starring my mother, Tippi Hedren, and stepfather Noel Marshall.
In one scene this lioness turned nasty and mauled me.
I had to have plastic surgery to my face.
Do you have any outstanding childhood memories ?
My mother made two movies with Alfred Hitchcock —Marnie and  The Birds .
He gave me a toy coffin with an effigy of my mom inside it.
I was six years old — it gave me goose pimples.
You had your son by your second husband, actor Steven Bauer, and now you have a baby daughter, Dakota, with Don.
How much have your children meant to you ?
A lot, Being a mother has made me less selfish.
It has taught me that the world doesn't revolve around me.
What was the real low point in your life ?
When I was hit by a drunk driver in 1980, crossing the road in Los Angeles.
I was unconscious for five hours, and suffered concussion and fractures.
But it taught me how quickly life can go.
And the high point ?
Right now — I've got Don and my children, I'm as happy as I've ever been.
I hope it stays that way.
Another blockbuster from Jeffrey
There's no stopping Jeffrey Archer.
He has survived bankruptcy, libel, and having to resign as deputy chairman of the Conservative Party, and he's still come out on top.
His latest in a long line of thrillers, As the Crow Flies (Hodder and Stoughton, £14.99), is published this month.
It tells the story of the rise of Charlie Trumper who is born in the East End at the turn of the century.
It's his first novel for five years.
Jeffrey, 51, commutes between the house he shares with his wife, Mary, a university don, and their children William and James, in Granchester near Cambridge, and his London penthouse.
‘People assume my books will go to number one on the best-sellers list,’ he declares.
‘The last six have.’
Jeffrey, 51, commutes between the house he shares with his wife, Mary, a university don, and their children William and James, in Granchester near Cambridge, and his London penthouse.
‘People assume my books will go to number one on the best-sellers list,’ he declares.
‘The last six have.’
Love-all for Boris
He's been seen with glamorous celebrities like Princess Stephanie and East German ice-skater Katarina Witt, but Boris Becker always seems happiest with ex-waitress Karen Schulz.
‘There is a strong bond between us,’ Boris admits.
But will she come to watch him play at Wimbledon this week?
Their on-off relationship, which seemed to come to a sudden end two years ago, was re-kindled earlier this year with a romantic holiday to Mauritius.
Pictures of the two of them, hand in hand on the beach, fuelled rumours that the tennis champ was finally committed to Karen.
At 29, Karen is five years older than Boris.
She says, ‘He knows he can trust me, and that's important to him.
I don't give him any advice, I just listen and that's enough.’
Boris struggled to cope with all the fame and the money after his early success, ‘I had won Wimbledon twice, the youngest player ever, only I was unhappy,’ he says.
After a serious stuttering bout during one interview, and the admission that he'd thought about suicide, Boris obviously appreciates Karen's support.
‘After a few days with me he starts to calm down and see things in perspective again,’ she reveals.
Tennis may have brought him fame and fortune, but it still didn't bring happiness to Boris Becker.
‘Money buys you certain things, but it can't buy you the simple pleasures in life like going around the corner into a bar and having a drink,’ he says
Helen can't resist falling in love
Long dubbed, ‘the thinking thespian's tea cake’ British actress Helen Mirren says, ‘I think that sexuality — but not the ‘cor, sexy crumpet’type — is present in most powerful acting.
It's the animal side of one's nature coming out.’
Helen, 45, impressed audiences with her roles in The Cook, The Thief, His Wife and Her Lover, Cal and The Long Good Friday .
Now she's in the film of E M Forster's novel Where Angels Fear to Tread .
She lives with her partner, director Taylor Hackford, in Los Angeles, ‘I really resisted falling in love, but was pulled by this tidal wave.
It was so overwhelming I couldn't do anything about it,’ she says.
Tragic Caroline becomes a businesswoman
She's still in mourning after the death of her husband, but brave Princess Caroline is determined to make a success of his ailing businesses.
As well as bringing up their three children — Andrea, six, Charlotte, five, and Pierre, three — on her own, Caroline, 34, has become the boss of the eight companies owned by the Italian oil heir.
But, rather than sell them she has chosen to raise money to save them, pledging her jewellery against the debts.
WHERE ARE THEY NOW?
JAMES FOX
Becoming a successful film actor was the easy bit — what wasn't so simple was trying to reconcile his religious beliefs with his career
He was one of the biggest cinema stars of the 1960s. appearing in films like The Servant , opposite Dirk Bogarde, but James Fox abandoned his career in 1973 to become a born again Christian.
Now 52, James is acting again, most recently starring in The Russia House .
‘Today I'm able to square my profession with my religious beliefs, which I wasn't able to do when I left acting,’ he explains.
‘For a time there were certain roles I thought I shouldn't do.’
He admits his spell away from showbusiness was important, but adds, ‘I regret being away, of course.
You don't improve your craft by not working.’
And he blames his rapid rise to stardom, while still in his early 20s, for much of his reaction against acting.
‘Being successful at that age was a great blessing,’ says James, who's the broth of Edward Fox, the star of Day of the Jackal , and also theatre impresario Robert Fox.
‘Every young person wants quick success, but there's a price.
I think I paid it,’ says James, who also appeared in classic films like Performance (1970) and Those Magnificent Men in their Flying Machines (1965).
‘In fact, I think my whole career at the end of the 60s was probably a guilt trip of some sort.
In some ways I thought it had been too easy for me.
I mean, how silly.’
Being a 60s film star and a member of an impressive theatrical family was too much for the young James Fox, seen here with his brother Robert and their mother Angela.
He eventually found solace in religion.
‘It's all about how you manage to cope with the success,’ he explains
STOP PRESS
Brattish Shakespearian actor Kenneth Branagh , married to entertainer Emma Thompson, is tipped to play Simon Templar in a new film version of The Saint .
Roger Moore will play his father.
You never know what Madonna is going to do next with her hair.
But one thing's for sure.
Her hairdressers warn it will fall out if she continues to dye it!
George Michael isn't the only singer in his family — his sister Yioda Panayiotou took a starring role in a recent production by the St Albans Operatic Society.
Any megastar George has just one word to describe his sister's debut —‘Excellent’.
Quote of the week comes from Mae West.
‘Marriage is a great institution, but I'm not ready for an institution yet.’
Happy birthday to :
b Anyone could be a presenter, says Muriel
She hates being photographed and wonders if she should ever have chosen a career in television.
But with programmes like The Tube, The Media Show and Walkie Talkie behind her, Muriel Gray is now co-presenter with Jimmy Mulville of a new Channel 4 series Just for Laughs , looking behind the scenes at the Montreal Comedy festival.
‘I've never wanted to be a jobbing presenter,’ reveals Muriel, 32, who lives in Edinburgh.
‘If I do a good piece of journalism, fine.
But don't admire me for just being able to speak and stand still.
Anyone could do it.’
Veteran Kirk says he owes his success to his wife
His son Michael has in recent years become the more famous actor, but with the re-release of Spartacus , Kirk Douglas, now 74, is back on the big screen again.
It's been an eventful year for the man who was recently awarded the lifetime achievements award by the American Film Institute.
In February he was seriously injured in a helicopter crash at Santa Paula Airport, 75 miles north west of Los Angeles.
Two fellow passengers died in the accident.
The veteran of 80 movies, Kirk says, ‘My wife Anne deserves 75% of my success.’
YOUR WEEK IN THE STARS
Astrologer Carol Morris looks at what the heavens hold this week
Cancer
(June 21–July 20)
The presence of a full moon in your opposite sign this week means you're heading for conflict with your loved ones.
You may find it becomes hard to keep track of what's going on between you.
Take care to avoid needless misunderstandings.
Virgo
(Aug 22–Sept 22)
Love turns your life upside-down this week, causing confusion and uncertainty for those of you with long-term security.
The final crunch could come with the full moon on Thursday — but you will be well able to handle any problems that may arise.
Scorpio
(Oct 23–Nov 22)
Your personal life is threatened this week as Pluto, your ruling planet, comes under mixed influences.
You should try not to feel so tense and let things get on top of you.
Cultivate a more relaxed and positive approach to life to see you through.
Capricorn
(Dec 21–Jan 19)
The full moon's appearance in your sign calls for changes to be made in your personal life.
Your love life is hotting up, but beware of embarking on short-lived involvements.
Now is the time to prepare the way for possible new opportunities for the future.
Pisces
(Feb 19–March 20)
You are having more than your fair share of troubles with friends and colleagues at the moment., You're sensitive by nature and can only take so much of this.
Perhaps now is the right time to bring an unproductive relationship to an end.
Taurus
(April 21–May 20)
This is a great weekend if you're planning to entertain a gathering of family and friends.
Your upbeat mood means you'll be the life and soul of any party.
However, a partner needs gentle handling to tread gently and with extreme caution.
Leo
(July 21–August 21)
Venue and Mars are united in your sign this week, giving your personality some warmth and sparkle.
However, beware of jealousy between members of the family.
Try to keep the volatile situation under control with understanding and patience.
Libra
(Sept 23–Oct 22)
The position of Venue and Mars guarantees that you have a lively weekend in store.
However, unsettling influences could make you over-emotional at home.
Remember that changes are necessary if you are to obtain the stability you crave.
Sagittarius
(Nov 23–Dec 20)
If problems arise over relationships, they are likely to be caused by money.
The influence of the Full Moon on Thursday makes you feel irritable — expressing this by losing your temper could well clear the air, and boost your morale.
Aquarius
(Jan 20–Feb 18)
From Monday your work schedule becomes absolutely hectic and you'll be rushed off your feet.
Make sure you air your grievances to your superiors or both your health and a special relationship could start to suffer under the pressure.
Aries
(March 21–April 20)
Changes in your life are needed just now and major decisions concerning your work and your personal life have got to be made.
Mars and Venus this weekend means your love life will start to sparkle.
Gemini
(May 21–Jun 20)
Neptune and Uranus are in opposition to your ruler Mercury — and this combination will hit your pocket.
Take extra care when signing any financial arrangements by making sure you read them through closely, including the small print.
and listen to our tarot hotline.
The computer will select the cards and your personal prediction will be read.
Calls are 45p per min, 34p per min cheap rate.
Phone for your tarot future on 0898 200101
DOSSIER
The food addict's diet
Many foods can be addictive — and what you love to eat most could be making you ill.
Our new plan will mean you will feel better than you have in years — and help you lose weight
As a food addict, you probably find it hard to do without items you crave.
If you are over-weight, and must cut down the amount you eat, you will repeatedly lapse, to satisfy your cravings. persistent minor symptoms, such as headaches, aching limbs or a lack of energy are often put down to nerves or stress but they can be caused by a reaction to food.
This diet was developed by Trish Hayton, 49, who had a longstanding weight problem.
In 1984 her son was diagnosed as intolerant to four foods.
The results of his treatment were so good she decided to try a similar diet.
In 1987 she advertised for ‘guinea pigs’ to try out the three-week diet and fill in questionnaires.
The vast majority felt much more energetic and many found relief from depression, headaches and other symptoms.
How it works
The first stage : three weeks completely avoiding four foods, while eating as much as you like of everything else.
The four foods eliminated are wheat, milk, sugar and potatoes , and are known as ‘zero’ foods.
(See the following plan, overleaf.)
The second stage : the rest test where foods are re-introduced to see the effects of eating them again.
The third stage : the five-day restart plan.
By the end of the first stage you'll know if you are addicted, and what to do about it.
Once you have overcome the effects of food addiction, you will find you have automatically changed to a healthier way of eating, because of what you eat instead of the ‘zero’ foods.
The 4 zero foods
Milk, wheat, potatoes and sugar are our four ‘zero’ foods — they are staple ingredients of the British diet and turn up in various ways at almost every meal.
All four foods (except sugar) are nutritious and healthy eaten in moderation.
Let's look at each in turn, and see how easy it is to live without them for a short period.
1
Wheat 
Addiction to wheat is very common among the overweight.
A lot of foods we make from wheat flour often tend to be very high in calories, seem to be almost irresistible to hungry slimmers, and are often used as ‘binge’ g=foods by compulsive eaters.
Wheat is among those foods most likely to cause food intolerance.
‘Hidden’ wheat
Batter, biscuits breads (except rye, barley or corn), breakfast cereals, cakes, cous cous, crispbreads, croû, some drinks (eg whisky, gin, vodka, beer, lager), fishpaste, pasta, pastry, pizza, rusk in sausages, semolina, stuffing, taramasalata.
Wholemeal flour can be an important source of B vitamins and fibre but other cereals — corn, rice, rye, barley, oats — are also good sources.
Small amounts of the various B vitamins can be found in almost all foods: B1 in nuts and seeds, seaweed, most vegetables and port; B2 in liver, heart and kidneys, yeast, pulses, leafy green vegetables; B6 in seeds, yeast, offal, cabbage, eggs and beef.
To guarantee a good intake of fibrè eat plenty of pulses and vegetables.
2
Cow's milk 
Milk is one of the most likely causes of food tolerance, but it's also an important source of protein and calcium.
However, you can also get protein from meat, beans and seeds while the richest alternative sources of calcium are: seeds, fish, nuts, goat's and sheep's milk, dark green leafy vegetables, dried fruit, wholegrains, beans and pulses.
Take a 500mg calcium tablet daily until your diet includes plenty of calcium-rich non-milk products.
As casein in soups and stews; cheese biscuits, cocktail snacks; as dried milk powder in biscuits and cakes; as lactic acid in prepared salads; as milk solids in chocolate, as whey powder in margarine.
‘Hidden’ milk
3
Sugar 
Sugar is the most addictive of the zero foods.
Sugar addicts gain weight, rot their teeth, and in extreme cases may even develop diabetes.
Sugar is not usually a major culprit in food intolerance, but high intakes do require massive hormone adjustments, and put a strain on your body.
Your body simply does not need sugar and you could live without and come to no harm.
In the first few days of the experiment, you may feel a need for sweetness: make sure you have enough dried fruits or artificial sweeteners to satisfy cravings.
This is found in breakfast cereals, baked beans, soups, canned fruit, canned pasta, muesli bars, yoghurts, cook-in-sauce.
‘Hidden sugar’
4
Potatoes 
Potatoes themselves are not very high in calories, but we love to eat fat, such as butter and cheese, with them.
When they're excluded, a great many calories will go with them!
Intolerance of potatoes is quite common.
There are plenty of alternative starchy root vegetables — such as swedes, turnips, carrots, parsnips, sweet potatoes, yarns.
You can obtain starches from breads and crispbreads made with non-wheat flour, and other starchy foods such as millet and rice.
Canned soups, Cornish pasties, crisps, fish cakes, meat and vegetable pies, potato snacks, potato starch/flour, prepared frozen meals, stews, hot pots.
‘Hidden potato’
You'll enjoy a new way of eating, based on natural, whole ingredients, with this diet plan — and you won't have to go hungry
Do you crave food?
How hard would it be for you to live entirely without each of the following basic ingredients in their various forms for just three weeks?(choose one answer.)
Wheat impossible/very hard/hard/easy/very easy Sugar impossible/very hard/hard/easy/very easy Cow's milk impossible/very hard/hard/easy/very easy Potatoes impossible/very hard/hard/easy/very easy
After going on the diet ask yourself these questions again — you may be surprised at the difference!
(Choose one answer.)
HOW OFTEN DO YOU EAT?
I eat breakfast every day/most days/occasionally/rarely/never.
I eat lunch every day/most days/occasionally/rarely/never.
I eat an evening meal every day/most days/occasionally/ rarely/ never.
I eat snacks about…times a day.
My usual snack foods are:…
Ask yourself these questions again to see if your eating habits have changed after the diet.
(Choose one answer.)
How fast do you eat?
I eat: very quickly/quite quickly/at a normal speed/quite slowly/very slowly.
Many people, especially the overweight, eat too quickly.
Even before you begin the diet, notice how fast you eat, and slow down.
HOW MUCH DO YOU DRINK?
Choose one day to record all your drinks.
On this day I drank:…glasses of water…cups/mugs of tea…cups/mugs of coffee…glasses of fruit juice…other drinks, including alcohol This makes…litres.
Every day your body needs about 1 ½ litres of water to function normally.
A litre is about 2 pint glasses/4 large mugs/5 small mugs/6 glasses/7 cups.
Most people do not drink enough plain water — so invest in a water filter to try mineral waters.
Tea and coffee will not improve your fluid balance much, because these increase urine production.
It's become one of our favourite foods, but spaghetti is made from durum wheat, which falls into the zero foods category.
Wheat has been found by allergy experts to be one of the foods that are most likely to cause a reaction in the body.
Addiction to wheat seems to be very common among the overweight
‘I can fit the diet into the family meals’
‘When I first heard about the Food Addict's Diet I was about 12st 8lb,’ says Andrea Smith, 34, of Harpenden, Hertfordshire, who's married with two children: Hannah, seven, and Nick, three.
‘I knew all about calories, but I really enjoyed food and found it difficult to lost weight!
I decided that anything which said that you could have as much mayonnaise, avocados and nuts as you like and still do yourself good must be worth trying!
‘I was warned that I'd miss the thing I was addicted to.
I was sure it would be dairy products — but it was bread.
‘After a few days I wasn't half as hungry and found it easier to cut down.
With extra exercise and lots of lapses I lost nearly a stone, and it stayed off!
This New Year, I resolved to start the diet again and found it less difficult second time round.
I can fit it into family meals.
My weight is down to 8st 10lb and my appetite is not much easier to control.’
‘Giving up was easy’ says Andrea who lost almost four stone on the plan
How to discover if you're allergic
Food intolerance may be the cause of many minor ailments, which may make you feel under par.
The zero foods experiment will help you discover if you too can gain relief.
Do you ever have attacks of any of these symptoms?
NOSE AND CHEST
Runny nose, catarrh, dry cough, sneezing, sore throat, wheezing, hay fever, mouth ulcers, sinusitis, asthma, hyperventilation.
HEAD
Dark rings around eyes, red itchy eyes, red ear, itching noises, dizziness, headaches, dry scaly scalp, dandruff, itchy scalp.
CIRCULATION
Rapid heartbeat, irregular heartbeat, faintness, feeling of cold or heat.
DIGESTION
Nausea or vomiting, frequent belching, indigestion, abdominal bloating, alternating constipation and very loose motions, excessive flatulence, acid stomach, constipation, frequent bouts of diarrhoea, bad breath, irritable bowel syndrome, piles or haemorrhoids.
SKIN
Redness, acne, dry scaly skin, rashes, eczema, hives, psoriasis, itching, blotches, excessive sweating.
MUSCLES AND BONES
Aching joints, aching muscles, swollen joints, stiffness, backache, tremor of the hands, head etc, stiff nick.
URINARY
Fluid retention, excessive urine production, scanty urine production.
WOMEN'S PROBLEMS
Menstrual difficulties, thrush.
Make a list of those symptoms that you experience most often, and compare them with how you feel after completing the diet.
ARE YOU ADDICTED TO SALT?
If you sprinkle salt over every meal, stop it!
Notice how much salt you use, and start trying to live without it.
If your food tastes bland at first, add flavour with herbs and spices, particularly garlic.
In time you will begin to appreciate the subtle natural flavours of your food that were once masked by salt.
Putting the diet to the test
Complete the three-week, four zero foods experiment to see if food addiction is at the root of your eating problems.
Then you will be able to adapt the plan to suit you and put cravings, binges and compulsive eating well behind you.
Make it work
One of the principal causes of breakdown on the Food Addict's Diet is the food we are offered by our friends.
It is almost always based on the four zero foods, and if we attempt to resist it, our friends insist that ‘a little won't hurt’.
Explain that you have an allergy to certain foods and that these will trigger a reaction.
Introduce them to dishes free of the four zeros, offer alternatives to tea or coffee, and see how many of them accept.
Follow the plan
The four zero food experiment consists of three stages: three weeks following the zero plan, four days on the rest test, and five days on the restart plan.
To follow the zero food plan :
Avoid cow's milk, sugar, wheat and potatoes
The only alcohol allowed is dry white wine and cider
Avoid salt
Avoid refined or hydrogenated oils
Drink a litre of fluid a day
Choose real, whole food To follow the rest test :
Eat what you fancy.
Note what you eat, how often you take any of the four zero foods.
Note symptoms, mood and weight on day four.
To follow the restart plan :
Repeat first four days of four zero foods experiment.
‘My weight fluctuated wildly according to how I ate’
‘Before I was introduced to the Food Addict's Diet my weeks were made up of ‘bad days’ and ‘good’days.
The good days were starvation days, and the bad days consisted of bingeing and vomiting.
All of this was hidden behind the ‘normal’ lifestyle that I tried to project to my family and friends,’days Paula Farrance, 28, from St Albans.
‘I had tried all kinds of diets, but I didn't have a weight problem — I had a food problem.
I was tall and slim but I had an eating disorder and my weight fluctuated wildly according to how I ate.
I started the Food Addict's Diet and stuck to it as if it were my shadow.
Miracles didn't happen, but there were nice changes.
‘No diet is easy and I found the first few days hard, but by the end of the first week my skin became clearer, my nails grew stronger and my hair was healthy and shining.
My weight began to stabilise, unlike before.
‘In the second week, I knew what I wanted from the allowed foods, my body told me what I needed.
Food took on better flavour, meals became enjoyable instead of a chore,’ she says, ‘If I break the diet, I know I haven't failed, but have a chance to learn from the experience.
I still have my good and bad days, but now I have another choice.
I have learned to adapt the eating plan to my needs.
Following it for a while is like giving myself a good spring clean.’
By the end of the first week Paula's skin was clearer and her hair shone
‘Today I feel wonderful and full of energy’
‘For several years I had suffered tiredness and bouts of depression which had been put down to overwork, disturbed nights with the children and stress,’ days Lyn Perry, 40, of Rickmansworth, who's married and has three daughters, aged between 10 and 15.
‘Anti-depressant pills a few years earlier had a disastrous effect on me: I was allergic to them.
The doctor felt there was nothing more he could do for me.
I was convinced that my problems were diet-related.
I answered an ad for guinea pigs for this diet and managed to stick to it.
When I tried to re-introduce the zero foods my problems were milk and wheat, with milk the main culprit behind my symptoms.
Several times when I've had foods with hidden milk products, the symptoms have come back almost immediately,’ she says, ‘Now I am full of energy.
I'm building up my own business as well as looking after a husband and three children.
Without this diet, I couldn't achieve all this.’
Lyn discovered the main culprit behind her lethargy was milk
Healthy food
What you eat should be real, whole, live and fresh that day.
Real food Choose from products with no artificial ingredients.
Whole food Try eating sunflower seeds instead of using the oil, whole pineapple instead of juice, whole grains rather than flower.
Live food Try to eat freshly picked or freshly killed foods.
Fresh food Much of our food is many days old.
Eat fresh if possible.
How to lose more
Once you master the plan, choose an option to lose more weight.
1
No grains This bans the four zeros and also seven grains: rye, barley, oats, rice, corn, cheat, millet.
2
The slim week Cut down food for one week then return to the basic plan.
(See Slim week menus, below.)
3
Eat early Make the big meal breakfast and take the smallest in the evening.
4
Fasting One or two days — when you drink plenty of clear fluids, but do not eat — is not harmful for most people.
Do not fast if you are pregnant or in any way unwell.
5
Exercise Do this in conjunction with any other slimming option.
Try to have 20 minutes of vigorous exercise every day.
6
Adapt any other slimming diet by using substitutes for the four zero foods.
On rising 2 glasses mineral water Breakfast Fruit salad 100g (4oz) poached kippers black tea or coffee Mid-morning black tea or coffee 1 piece of fruit Lunch 100g (4oz) cold lean meat tasty salad 1 glass fruit juice black tea or coffee Mid-afternoon 2 glasses of mineral water 1 piece of fruit Evening meal omelette made with 2 eggs herbs and olive oil selection of green vegetables lightly cooked On rising 2 glasses of mineral water Breakfast 1 whole grapefruit 2 rashers lean bacon, 3 mushrooms fried in 15ml (1 tbsp) olive oil 1 glass fruit juice Mid morning 1 glass fruit juice Lunch 100g (4oz) canned tuna or salmon (in brine) large crunchy salad 1 glass fruit juice Mid afternoon 2 glasses of mineral water 1 piece of fruit Evening meal 1 large or 2 small lamb chops braised in olive oil, with onion celery and carrot with herbs and seasonings green vegetables mineral water to drink On rising 2 glasses of mineral water Breakfast large slice melon 75g (3oz) chicken or lambs' liver fried with ½ onion 1 glass fruit juice Mid-morning 1 glass fruit juice Lunch 100g (4oz) minced meat braised with onion, olive oil and vegetable stock green vegetables 1 glass fruit juice Mid-afternoon 2 glasses mineral water 1 piece of fruit Evening meal lentil soup 1 hard-boiled egg and 50g (2oz) prawns or shrimps tasty salad On rising 2 glasses mineral water Breakfast 1 piece of fruit 100g (4oz) smoked haddock 1 glass fruit juice Mid-morning 1 glass fruit juice Lunch 175g (6oz) gammon rasher peas, green beans and carrots 1 glass fruit juice Mid-afternoon 2 glasses mineral water 1 piece of fruit Evening meal vegetable stock soup bean and green salad 1 glass mineral water b On rising 2 glasses of mineral water Breakfast 1 whole grapefruit 100g (4oz) kippers poached 1 glass fruit juice Mid-morning 1 glass fruit juice Lunch 100g (4oz) chicken mixed salad 1 glass fruit juice Mid-afternoon 2 glasses mineral water 1 piece of fruit Evening meal vegetable soup lamb shop braised in olive oil carrots and peas On rising 2 glasses mineral water Breakfast 1 orange and 1 apple Mid-morning 1 glass fruit juice Lunch 2 hard-boiled eggs crunchy salad 1 glass fruit juice Mid-afternoon 2 glasses of mineral water 1 piece of fruit Evening meal 1 pork loin chop, grilled mixed vegetables banana On rising 2 glasses mineral water Breakfast 2 whole fruits chopped together in orange juice 2 lambs kidneys with onion 1 glass fruit juice M Mid-morning 1 glass fruit juice Lunch 100g (4oz) cooked beef peas, carrots 1 piece of fruit 1 glass fruit juice Mid-afternoon 2 glasses mineral water Evening meal bean salad prawns or crab with lettuce 1 piece of fruit 
The slim week menus
Day one
Day two
Day three
Day four
Day five
Day six
Day seven
Choose delicious meals with fresh ingredients such as the crunchy salad (above) made from mixed green leaves and carrots, the chicken salad (left) or the green and red pepper omelette (below), which is fried in olive oil
Menopause
Many women notice mood swings and weight changes after the menopause.
If you have occasional bad attacks of your minor symptoms, mark your calendar.
After three or four months, you'll see a pattern emerging.
Expect your appetite to get out of control once a month or so: if you predict it, you can cope with it more readily.
Menopause symptoms are similar to those of food intolerance and may in fact be triggered off by hormone changes.
Women who gain weight during the menopause have been helped with the Food Addict's Diet — the grain-free slimming option in particular.
ANIMAL WORLD
URBAN WILDLIFE
Usually only seen at night, the badger is well established in quiet urban areas.
This shy creature is good news for gardeners because it eats many pests
THE BADGER
Although they are not yet quite as common a sight as foxes in towns, badgers have established themselves in quiet urban area where they can excavate their under ground home, or set.
Railway embankments are a favourite because there's little to disturb them as they forage through adjoining gardens for food.
Badgers usually only venture out after dark, so they can be difficult to spot.
How they live
Their diet is varied: slugs, snails, earthworms, young mice, rabbits, and berries when they are plentiful.
In winter, badgers sleep for longer but they don't hibernate.
Females give birth to as many as five offspring in late winter, after a gestation period of up to 10 months.
At least half of these are likely to die before they reach a year old.
Sadly, large numbers of badgers in urban areas die every year as a result of being knocked down by vehicles, swallowing pesticides and becoming trapped in out-buildings and starving to death.
How can you help
If you find a trapped badger don't attempt to handle it as they have a vicious bite.
If it appears healthy, simply let it go, or if it needs attention, try to direct it into a clean dustbin, tie the lid on and take it to the vet.
For further information read Badgers by Michael Clark .
If you would like details of how to help badgers in your area, contact the National Federation of Badger Groups  
Did you know?
Badgers have been linked with the spread of tuberculosis in cattle.
If you find a dead badger contact your local Ministry of Agriculture offices as they may order a post-mortem.
A good read
OUR EXPERT REPLIES
Q I am just about to leave school and would be interested to know about any available equestrian courses I can take.
A Contact the Admissions Secretary, Cambridgeshire College of Agriculture and Horticulture .
They offer a range from a Combined Studies Certificate in Horse Husbandry and Secretarial Skills to British Horse Society Instructor courses.
For more general information contact the British Horse Society 
Q Should I take any special precautions before allowing my guinea pig out onto the lawn this summer?
A Ensure that it has a secure run as guinea pigs can be difficult to catch if they escape.
Place the run in shade with a drinker of fresh water attached to the side.
A covered area complete with bedding where the guinea pig can shelter is essential.
Never leave it out in its run overnight at the mercy of foxes.
HELP AND ADVICE
A PROBLEM SHARED
Psychologist Elizabeth John is here to help, with expert advice and practical suggestions
‘I had an abortion five years ago and don't know how to forgive myself’
As a child I felt very unloved.
When I was 19 my parents made me leave home, and after a series of disastrous relationships I became pregnant.
I had an abortion, without telling anyone; the father left me when I told him of the pregnancy.
I coped at the time but now, five years on, I feel guilty and resentful about the whole affair.
I know it would help to talk to someone but I find it so hard to open up.
My current boyfriend knows there's something wrong but is losing patience with me.
Should I contact my ex or my parents?
After all, I feel they are the ones responsible for my misery not my boyfriend.
Our psychologist replies
With so many confused emotions simmering away inside you, it's difficult to know where to turn.
Professional counselling is the best way forward for you because your feelings have been bottled up for so long.
Talking to people directly involved, such as your ex-boyfriend, will not necessarily help you any further.
You recognise the anger you feel against your parents, but at this stage there's little point in contacting them if it's only to unload your bitterness.
They won't understand the role they have played and the rift will only become wider.
It would be better to wait until you have a more positive attitude towards them.
You obviously harbour some resentment against your ex-boyfriend too, but telling him about the abortion now won't necessarily help you to cope with the guilt you are feeling.
Your current boyfriend feels concerned, but was not around when the problems began so may not feel able to help.
You have the sense to realise that taking out your anger on him is not the answer and will threaten your relationship.
So ask your GP to refer you for counselling.
Talking about your worries to someone not directly involved will help you to express your feelings and come to terms with your previous experiences.
It may be difficult to open up at first, but when you do you'll be on the way to overcoming the traumas of the past and rebuilding your self-esteem.
‘A gang of youths has made me too frightened to go out’
Since my wife died two years ago, I've lived in a flat on my own.
Over the past year I've been threatened and blackmailed by a gang of youths.
I'm frightened of these teenagers so I give in to their demands for money.
I hate myself for being weak, and wish I were younger and stronger, but I'm 68 years old and no match for them.
My fear has made me a prisoner in my own home; I go out only for essential shopping.
In the beginning they demanded small change, but now they ask me for £2 or £3 every time they see me.
Yesterday one of them knocked on my door.
I pretended not to hear, but he shouted a message that he would return.
They have threatened to beat me up, if I go to the police.
Do you think the council could find me another flat?
Who can help me?
Our psychologist replies
This situation is putting you under a lot of strain, and things will only get worse if you don't act now.
these youths are criminals and must be brought to justice.
It's quite possible you're not their only victim.
Don't be afraid to go to the police.
They are expert at handling situations like this in strict confidence.
Contact Victim Support (see box), a counselling service with branches all over the country.
Your local branch will be able to offer advice and reassurance.
Don't fell you must move out of your home in order to feel safe.
The police can stop these criminals harassing you.
‘My boss finds fault with everything I do’
Although people generally consider me to be a very tolerant person, my moody male boss at work is driving me to the end of my tether.
I am fed up with being put down and made to feel stupid by him.
He finds fault with everything I do.
If I stick up for myself he either ignores me or suggests that I'm being impertinent and that I risk losing my job by being out-spoken.
All this mental harassment has affected me so much that my doctor has warned me that I'm of the edge of a nervous breakdown.
I'm currently seeing a psychotherapist, but this isn't helping me.
On top of this, I face my final exams at the end of the year.
I don't want what's happening at work to affect their outcome, especially as success will mean I can get a better job elsewhere.
How can I improve the situation?
I don't want to lost my job, but it's very unfair that my boss should be able to abuse his authority and make my life so miserable.
Our Psychologist replies
Unfortunately it is unlikely that your boss will change his ways.
You should discuss the situation with someone more senior than your boss within the company.
If you have a personnel department, you'll be able to speak to the personnel manager in confidence.
It's a good idea to write down all of the incidents concerning your boss which you believe to be unfair.
This will help you put forward a clear argument against him.
Whatever you do, don't let your work situation affect your studies.
After all, good results will qualify you for a better job, and give you the added satisfaction of proving to your boss that you are good at what you do.
In the run-up to your exams, try to avoid confrontation, but if things get nasty and your boss sacks you, you still have legal rights.
Contact your local Citizens' Advice Bureau, who will be able to advise you.
Meanwhile, persevere with the psychotherapy — it will be worth it in the end.
And remember, no job is worth having a nervous breakdown over.
Your replies
Readers share their own experiences of problems featured on this page, and offer advice and support
She Can't face the future without her husband'
Pam's husband died suddenly just six months ago.
She has an 18-year-old son, who plans to go to university in a few months' time and the thought of life on her own fills her with anxiety.
I was widowed four years ago and I know only too well what a terrible thing it is to suddenly find yourself alone.
Until I plucked up the courage to go out by myself.
I found a lot of comfort in letter writing.
I wrote to just about everyone I knew, and then I found some great pen pals through a dog magazine.
I'm a keen dog owner and I can't recommend a dog enough for its constant company and affection.
I also correspond with a lady counsellor from Cruse Bereavement Care, who has been marvellous.
You say that there is no group in your area, but you can still contact them by letter.
I found that I gained a lot of strength from all this regular correspondence with people and, four years on, I now feel much more myself again, although of course I still miss my husband tremendously.
My husband died nearly 15 years ago and I would like to reassure you that, although the pain never goes completely, time is indeed a great healer.
But you know, I think it's important to feel that pain.
It's because you loved your husband so much that you feel so much.
So, if you can, make a friend of the pain.
It's a manifestation of the marvellous relationship you had with your husband and that's something you should hand on to dearly.
My husband died when he was only 33, and unfortunately we never had time to have children.
I know it sounds trite, but you're so lucky to have your son.
You're quite right to let him live his own life, but he will always be a reminder of your love for your husband, and his for you.
I know that it seem shard to believe now, but, take it from me, things will get better.
You won't forget your husband — and I'm sure you wouldn't want to — but you will manage to rebuild a life without him.
It won't be the same life, but it will be a valuable, worthwhile one.
‘He had an affair and left me, but he keeps coming back’
I am 30, have been married for 10 years and have two children.
Five months ago I found out that my husband was having an affair and, after confronting him about it, he decided to move out.
He said he was unhappy and needed to think about what he was going to do with his life.
But he doesn't seem able to stay away.
He comes back, swears he loves me and the children, but claims he cannot live with us any more.
I have tried to help him with his problems but we both get upset.
He often says unkind things to me, blaming me for the break-up of our marriage and accusing me of being a useless wife.
I'm now on Valium to get me through all this and feel desperate with worry about how I'll manage alone.
But as time goes by it just gets harder.
I don't want a lonely life, just a normal family life again.
Can anyone help me?
Our psychologist replies
The unkind things your husband says to you not only make you feel bad but also make him feel better.
He knows his affair caused the split but instead of accepting responsibility he is trying to ease his guilt by upsetting you.
You want a happy family life again, but are you sure your husband can restore that balance?
If you are both keen to save your marriage, talk to a Relate counsellor.
But if you decide to separate, be firm and stay apart so that you can find out how to cope alone.
Two organisations which can help are The National Council for the Divorced and Separated and the National Council for One Parent Families (see box).
Try not to rely on Valium — it's highly addictive and will cause more problems in the long run.
FOR FURTHER HELP AND ADVICE
How can he convince his wife that it's wrong to spank her boys?
Peter married a woman with two sons, aged non and 12. he had always been impressed by the boys' good behaviour and hadn't realised it was because their mother hits them whenever they do the slightest thing wrong.
Peter is most unhappy about his wife's views on physical punishment and still more unhappy about the fact that she now expects him, as head of the household, to be the one who does the spanking.
Please, please, please don't do it.
I was beaten and spanked by my father as a child, teenager and young adult, and it was the most distressing and hurtful thing I have ever been subjected to.
I have grown up to be distrustful of men, doubtful of my own goodness, extremely resentful and explosively angry.
This stems entirely from the violence I encountered from my father when I was young.
Violence of any sort solves nothing — it only breeds more violence.
Your wife says you have a lot to learn about being a parent, but it is she who has a lot to learn.
If only she could understand the excruciating pain her boys are suffering when she treats them like this, and realise that they will carry that pain for the rest of their lives.
This is a pain that will inevitably turn to anger and might even make them wife or child batterers themselves.
Please put your foot down.
The boys are so lucky to have you to protect them.
I would have been grateful to someone like you when I was little, but I was not so lucky.
I am a teacher, used to problems of discipline, and I am not surprised you feel uncomfortable in your situation.
Your wife is quite wrong to rely on corporal punishment to instil good behaviour.
It doesn't say much for her ability to command respect — and respect is not the same as fear.
For all your sakes you'll have to talk sense into her.
Ask her why she does it and point out that fear teaches nothing.
The boys obviously like you so perhaps you could show your wife that a relationship with them based on mutual love and respect is far more likely to give better results.
Then maybe she'll change her mind.
IF YOU HAVE A PROBLEM OR ADVICE TO GIVE…
NEXT WEEK IN best
DOSSIER
How to beat back pain
Discover how exercise reorganising your life, technology and alternative medicine can take the ache out of your days.
EASY ENTERTAINING
Luscious menu ideas: Seafood croûtes, tasty home-cooked ham, turkey galantine, special salads.
To follow Bavarian creams and chocolate chestnut swirl.
Plus Sunday lunch ideas and step-by-step to ravioli.
Tracing your family tree
Where do you start?
And what do you do when to come up against a brick wall?
Our expert's tips will help you to cover your roots.
TRAVEL TIPS
Holiday beauty that means you can take the essentials and still travel light — follow our guide.
Talking point — Cosmetic surgery
Would you spend thousands on a new face?
Meet the woman who did.
Personal story
‘I was obsessed with cleaning’ The story of Diane White who has spent years fighting her compulsion.
WEAR IT WITH STYLE
Gingham's back this summer — we've teamed lots of different colours.
And show your cleavage in our dazzling separates.
HOME EQUIPMENT
HAVE BABY, WILL TRAVEL
Going away with a small child is easy — thanks to a variety of items from lightweight buggies to portable potties!
When selecting any kind of baby product, the essential requirements to consider are comfort, safety and ease of use.
Pushchairs should be lightweight and compact, easy to fold and capable of withstanding rough treatment.
Look out for models that are freestanding when folded and which can be collapsed using one hand only, leaving you with a spare arm to hold the baby.
Most car boots will take a folded pushchair but it's wise to check before you buy that it is easy to lift in and out.
Seats that can face wither forward or to the rear are standard on many models, which is useful as the seat will have a longer utility value.
Choose a pushchair with a handle height that is comfortable for you and your partner — some are adjustable.
Swivel/lockable Wheels are easier to manoeuvre in a busy shopping area while fixed wheels are probably more comfortable over bumpy ground.
Make sure that the pushchair you choose is covered in easy-clean fabrics and, most important, has an efficient set of brakes.
Prams can be the traditional spring chassis carriage, a carrycot on wheels type or the versatile three-in-one chassis that can take a reversible pushchair seat or a carrycot.
The carrycots can double as a bed un the first few months, which is ideal if you're staying away overnight, but make sure that the cot doesn't get damp from rain during the day.
Baby carriers/slings leave your hands and arms free, and are a good way of transporting your baby in the first few months.
When your baby is old enough to hold its own head up, a more robust back pack is a variation on the front carrier.
They still have all the advantages of slings and are designed to balance out the child's weight more evenly.
In the car babies must be in a restrainer appropriate to their age and weight.
From birth to nine months the best method is an approved rear-facing carrier held in place by rear seat belts.
These rear-facing seats should incorporate an energy absorption pad wish avoids too much pressure being put on the spine.
From nine months to four years a child can use a seat in the back that faces forwards and which can be secured by rear seat belts or their anchorage points.
Never hang shopping bags from the handles of your pram or pushchair.
Use a harness in a pushchair to prevent your child climbing out.
Apply the brakes before you let go of the pushchair, even on the flat.
Metal buckles get hot in the sun and can burn.
Prevent this with sunscreens.
Replace any belt or harness after an accident.
GET A SET OF WHEELS
A pushchair that's easy to use means more freedom for you
Getting about in style
The many features of this pushchair include a reversible, multi-position seat which can be removed for cleaning, balloon tyres for a smoother ride, a mesh shopping net that can be left in situ when the pushchair is folded, and a chassis which converts for use with a carrycot.
Two for travel
here at last is a narrow twin pushchair that will go through a single doorway.
Both seats have sit up and snooze positions and the pushchair can be folded to make a cot.
It comes with a protective hood and shopping tray.
Ideal for car journeys
If you go on car journeys frequently with your baby make sure you choose a pushchair that is lightweight, compact and quick and easy to fold.
This one is free standing; l when folded and can be collapsed easily with one hand only.
It also has adjustable handle height so it will suit both you and your partner.
There is a study shelf with generous space beneath the chassis to take toys, shopping or accessories.
Double value This pushchair has a clip-on foot section which means that it can be swiftly converted into a pram.
The seat can be used in both forward and rear-facing positions and it only needs one hand to fold it down.
STRESS-FREE TRANSPORT
There are many products which will help take the hassle out of getting from A to B
Sit in comfort For ages six months to four years, this reclining car seat has been approved by the Civil Aviation Authority for use in aircraft when fitted with a lap belt
Shoulder high This waterproof carrier has a padded seat.
It's suitable for babies who can support their heads.
Fun tray Children soon learn how to undo buckles on car safety restraints, but tying or turning them is not the solution as they won't come undone quickly in an emergency.
Instead, distract your child's attention from the buckles by fitting a play tray over the top.
When not in use this play tray swings conveniently to one side.
It fits all Kangol framed child seats.
Both hands free A sling like this enables you to hold your baby close without using your hands.
This one has adjustable straps for your comfort and a high-back padded headrest for your baby's.
Not just a seat This rear-facing baby carrier for the car is also a carrycot, rocking chair and feeding cradle.
It is easily lifted out from front or rear seat belts.
Suitable for babies up to the age of about nine months.
MAKE YOURSELF AT HOME
If you're away from home, you'll need to take some portable substitutes with you
The height of style The unique design of this foldable resin highchair means that you can set it a seven different height positions and it also doubles up as a low chair with removable tray.
Cost in a bag Staying overnight is no problem with one of these folding frame costs with its own foam mattress.
the high spot For babies from six months to three years this portable high chair fits securely onto any suitable, stable surface.
Travel tub Ideal for holidays or overnight stays, this portable bath has a cushioned seat support for baby and a plug for easy emptying.
It folds up into a neat, easy-to-store carrying case when not in use.
Ready potty Small enough to fold down and be popped into the glove compartment, this portable potty is invaluable during potty training days.
It is used with absorbent disposable potty pouches, which can be removed when the job is done, and disposed of in the same way as a disposable nappy.
SAFETY TIPS
GRAPH PATTERN
Summer shift
The shift is a summer essential.
Dressed up or down it fits the fill for every occasion and will be one of the easiest things you have ever made — try it in linen, washed silk or a floral print
You will need
1.60m (1 ⅓yd) of 150cm (60″) wide fabric
matching thread
5 × 2.5cm (1 ″) buttons
dressmaker's graph paper
To cut out
Following cutting diagram, draw pattern pieces full size on dressmaker's graph paper.
Pattern is for size 10–12.
For size 14, add 12mm (½″) side seam of sleeve, tapering to nothing at lower edge of sleeve only.
For size 16 add 2.5cm (1″).
Hems and 1.5cm (⅝″) seam allowances are included.
Fold fabric and pin on pattern pieces as shown in cutting diagram.
cut out.
Cut and join 4cm (1 ½″) wide bias strips to form a 76cm (30″) length.
To make
Seams are stitched with right sides together taking 1.5cm (⅝″) seam allowances.
Edges are neatened and pressed open unless stated otherwise.
Stitch sleeves to armhole edges of fronts and back.
Stitch fronts to back and underarm and shoulder seams above circle.
Neaten shoulder seam allowances together and press towards front of sleeve (1).
Neaten lower edge of dress and sleeves.
Turn up and top stitch 1.5cm (⅝″) hem around lower edge of sleeves and 2.5cm (1″) around lower edge of dress.
Neaten centre edge of fronts.
Fold 5cm (2″) facing onto right side of fronts.
Tack at neck edge.
With raw edges level, tack bias strip around neck edge with ends on top of facing.
Stitch neck seam.
Trim seam allowances and clip around curve.
Neaten outer edge of bias strip or turn under raw edge.
Press facing and bias strip onto wrong side.
Topstitch 6mm (¼″) away from neck and centre front edges finishing stitching 25cm (10″) below neck (2).
Lay right front over left front, overlapping by 4cm (1 ½″).
Then topstitch through all layers front end of previous topstitching right down to hemline.
Sew three buttons, about 10cm (4″) apart, to top of right front, stitching through all layers of fabric.
Then sew button to lower edge of each sleeve front (3).
HOMECRAFT
Stylish Curtain
TIE BACKS
Add the finishing touch to your curtains with smart yet practical tie-backs.
They are easy to make and we have three designs to for you to choose from
You will need
Furnishing cotton fabric
2 curtain rings
An easy-to-fix wall hook
Medium to heavyweight iron-on interfacing
Piping cord or colour co-ordinating ready-made piping (if making the classic tie-back)
Medium-weight wadding (if making the plaited tie-back)
How to measure for a tie back
You will need to measure round the curtain to gauge the length of the tie-back, but first decide on its best position.
It's usually two-thirds of the way down the curtain or at sill height in some cases.
Stick self-adhesive hooks to the wall in the appropriate place behind the curtain.
Hold the tape measure loosely round the pulled back curtain and hold back against the hook.
Read off the length, this will be the measurement you work to when making the tie-back.
Techniques
This traditional shaped tie-back is outlined with elegant piping
To make the pattern
Cut a strip of paper 12cm wide by half the length of the measurement taken (see below left, How to measure for a tie-back).
Gently curve the lower edge of the strip up to a 4cm point at the opposite end.
Follow the picture as a guide.
When satisfied with the shape use it as your pattern.
Cutting out
Fold the fabric in half.
Place the wide end of the pattern on the fabric fold.
Cut out twice for each tie-back, adding 1cm allowance for the seam.
Also cut one from interfacing, without a seam allowance.
Iron the interfacing centrally to wrong side of the one tie-back piece.
Making up
Measure round the tie-back pattern, and cut a length of piping adding 5 cm for ease.
Cut out 3cm wide bias strips to this length and cover piping cord.
Position and tack the covered piping to right side of interfaced tie-back piece, with cord facing inwards and the stitch line following the edge of interfacing; trim and join cord ends together to fit.
With right sides together and edges matching, pin and stitch the tie-back pieces together following the edge of interfacing.
Leave an opening on one side, trim, turn to right side and stitch to close.
Stitch curtain ring to wrong side at each end, just overlapping the edges.
Plaited tie-back
An attractive effect made from three toning strips of fabric.
Cutting out
Measure round the curtain.
Cut out three strips 10cm wide to this length plus 10cm to allow for plaiting.
Cut three pieces of wadding to the same size.
Sewing
Tack wadding to wrong side of fabric pieces.
Fold strips in half right sides together; stitch down length, allow 1 cm for seams.
Turn in end and neaten.
Plaiting
Place the three strips one on top of the other with seams at the back; slipstitch ends together.
Plait strips loosely together then overlap the ends as before and slipstitch together.
Add a curtain ring to each end.
Bow tie-back
The bow is made out of a separate piece of fabric and stitched to a basic straight tie-back.
Making the tie-back
Measure round the curtain to calculate tie-back length.
cut two strips of fabric 10cm wide to this length, adding 1cm seam allowance all round.
Cut one piece of interfacing to finished size.
Sew together as in making up techniques but without piping.
For the bow, cut two pieces of fabric 95 × 12cm.
With right sides together, stitch allowing 1cm for seam all round.
Leave an opening in one side.
Turn to the right side and stitch to close.
To make the bow
Tie a knot centrally in strip.
Pass one end through the central know, then the second end.
Pull ends until the bow is desired shape.
Pin the bow to the front of the tie-back.
Handsew in place.
DOSSIER
MAKE YOUR HOME A HEALTHIER PLACE
You may not realise it, but no matter how you clean you manage to keep your house, toxic chemicals and harmful gasses still lurk there.
But, by using some alternative cleaners and taking a few simple precautionary steps, you can avoid many of the hidden hazards
Concern for the environment has focused out attention on the world's ecological problems.
But many of the household products and home improvements that we take for granted are potentially harmful.
Health warnings are not considered necessary because the chemicals and gases are released in such minute quantities that there is not immediate effect.
But in our draught-proofed and often over-heated homes, there is no way for the chemicals and gases to escape, so they accumulate.
children, pregnant women and the elderly are particularly vulnerable.
Knowing where the hidden hazards are makes them easier to avoid, and there are plenty of safe and practical alternatives to choose from to make your home a healthier place fore you and your family.
IN THE BEDROOM
Mattresses Choose one made from natural materials to reduce the risk of allergies, and it should also have a hollow interior to allow air to circulate and discourage bed mites.
Ventilation Make sure your room is well ventilated, and avoid using hairsprays and deodorants in your bedroom.
Buy non-aerosol and chemical-free products.
Fitted wardrobes These are often made of chipboard which contains formaldehyde.
Reduce the amount released by painting with a natural organic paint.
Linen Bedlinen is treated with formaldehyde, so new sheets should be washed before using.
Add some bicarbonate of soda to the wash to absorb the chemicals.
Ionisers Air contains electrical charges, ions, which are either negative or positive.
electrical equipment generates positive ions and too many of these can result in irritability and depression.
Ionisers (below) release negative ions to restore the balance.
IN THE LIVING ROOM
Sofas and chairs Shop around for furniture filled with natural fibres — cotton, hair or feathers are best, although the last two can cause allergies.
Avoid foam filled sofas — they are a serious fire hazard and give off fatal fumes and petrochemical vapours when burning.
Humidifiers Centra heating can make the air too dry, so use a humidifier (below) to bring moisture back into the atmosphere.
The best models are ultrasonic.
Real fires Always use smokeless fuel.
Never start a fire in your house using coloured newspapers or magazines, as they release lead into the air.
Dispose of them or recycle them!
Other fires Gas or paraffin heaters should only ever be used in well ventilated rooms as they give off carbon monoxide.
Painting Decorate in the spring and summer so you can work with the windows open.
Look out for non-toxic, organic paints.
Electrics Always turn off the television, video and stereo when they are not in use.
Electrical equipment is a source of low radiation and it also releases chemicals when warm.
The long term effects have not been established, but sit two metres away from the TV screen to be safe.
IN THE HALL
Fill the hall with plants, as they improve the air quality by releasing oxygen and water.
Try spider plants, as they absorb formaldehyde, which is found in synthetic carpets, underlay, chipboard and wood treatments.
Stripped wooden floors don't harbour unpleasant chemicals and are inhospitable to dust and house mites, which can cause allergies and asthma.
Stain or varnish the wood with non-toxic products such as those by Auro Organic Paints.
IN THE GARDEN
Clear up any pet droppings immediately as they may contain a parasite which causes toxicara in children.
When washing clothes use mild, non-biological washing powder like Ecover and Ark which are made from natural ingredients and are now available in most supermarkets.
Tough stains should be soaked before washing.
Always hang out clothes that have been dry-cleaned to air before putting them back in your wardrobe.
The dry-cleaning process involves a cocktail of chemicals such as ammonia and benzene which shouldn't be inhaled.
and encourages condensation.
Open the windows for a while every day to let stale air escape.
just as effective and contains no hazardous ingredients.
pesticides, but it's better not to seal the wood.
Instead, paint or varnish with organic products.
long as it is sealed, but if it escapes in large quantities, when a hole is drilled for example, the tiny fibres can cause serious lung diseases.
The Environmental Health Department of your local council will advise on removal, or you can send an sae to Asbestos Information Centre 
ROOF/LOFT/WINDOWS
double glazing
Clean your windows
Wooden window frames
Insulation
Few insulating materials are non-toxic, but one of the safest is Micafil.
IN THE BATHROOM
Natural air fresheners such as pot pourri scented candles and dried flowers will keep the bathroom smelling sweet without releasing chemicals.
Ensure the room is well ventilated to prevent condensation and fungal growth.
Special anti-condensation and anti-fungicide paints are available, but they contain a range of harmful chemicals and are best avoided.
Instead, mix ordinary wallpaper paste with borax to inhibit mould and fungus.
Never combine powerful cleaners such as bleach and ammonia, as this releases highly toxic vapours.
monoxide, nitrogen dioxide and sulphur dioxide, so make sure the kitchen is well ventilated.
shelf, if possible near a window.
Even with the lids on tightly, they release minute amounts of chemicals which may be dangerous if they accumulate.
Choose products with natural ingredients instead.
the impurities frequently found in tap water.
Use a filter to eliminate them.
model, check that the seal on the door has not been worn away, or else electromagnetic radiation could leak out.
Microwaves should be serviced according to the manufacturer's instructions — usually about every five years.
IN THE KITCHEN
Cook clean
Avoid chemicals
Filter your water
Seal your microwave
Instead of using clingfilm, which contains plasticisers, store food in durable containers with lids.
Always keep your fridge temperature below 5 ° C to prevent bacteria from multiplying.
Avoid aluminium saucepans, kettles and teapots as this metal may be linked to Alzeimer's disease.
Choose steel or ceramic kitchenware instead.
The shape of things to come?
The houses of the future will be designed with energy efficiency and our health in mind.
At the Findhorn Foundation in Scotland, an ecologically sound housing scheme is being developed.
Their principles include:
Using untreated natural materials which allow the building to ‘breathe’, and so prevent damp setting in.
Suspended floors to allow air flow and prevent radon build-up.
Triple glazing for warmth and less noise.
It also causes less condensation than double glazing thanks to improved air flow.
Cellulose insulation made of recycled newspapers is used.
It's both non-toxic and non-irritant.
Curved walls recirculate warm air around rooms, so heating is much easier and more effective.
Sharp corners and edges are avoided in fittings and furniture — curved structures are safer.
Non-toxic paints and formaldehyde-free products are used.
KEEP BUGS AT BAY
Try these natural but equally effective alternatives to unpleasant chemicals:Dried lavender is effective at discouraging both flies and moths.
Kill flies with a swat or fly papers rather than aerosol or chemical fly traps.
Plant mint or sprinkle cayenne pepper by a doorway there ants may get in.
Store clothes in a moth-proof container, such as a suitcase, with dried rosemary and mint rather than mothballs which contain naphthalene.
Lure cockroaches into a jar containing sweets or stale beer.
Borax will also kill them, but don't sprinkle it in areas children or pets go, as it's harmful.
Beetles and fungus only flourish in damp, poorly ventilated conditions.
Dry out damp areas, and don't decorate until the plaster is completely dry.
Block up any holes where insects could enter.
Commercial flea collars usually contain a health warning.
But there are safe ways to ward off fleas.
Pennyroyal, a type of mint, is effective against fleas so attach a few dried pennyroyal leaves to your pet's collar.
An occasional bath with some drops of pennyroyal oil added will also help.
Raw garlic added to your pet's meal also deters fleas and gets rid of worms — but it may make its breath smell for a while!
Flea-free pets
FOR MORE INFORMATION
DIY and home hints
Dealing with wet rot
If you discover your window frames are rotting, don't panic — they're easy to repair
If water penetrates window sills, doors or their frames, the result is wet rot — a softening of the timber and blistering of the paint.
Test for it with a screwdriver.
It will pierce rotten wood easily.
You can fix it yourself with a wood repair system such as Ronseal's or Cuprinol's.
1
Clean the surface 
To assess the damage, strip off the existing paint.
An effective way to do this is with a peel-off paint stripper.
Wearing rubber gloves (and with the floor protected), apply this 3mm thick with a filling knife.
After a couple of hours, peel it off in one layer and scrub the wood thoroughly with water and a stiff brush.
2
Remove rotten wood 
When the wood is quite dry re-check the rotten area.
If the frame is extensively damaged it will need replacing but on localised areas use a mallet and chisel to chip out all soft and crumbly timber until you get back to fairly firm wood.
Brush away any remaining loose material and vacuum the surface to remove dust.
3
Paint on hardener Brush on special wood hardener quite liberally around the areas where the wood has been removed.
Again wear rubber gloves and repeat the treatment until the wood can absorb no more.
Leave for at least six hours and clean brushes with cellulose thinners (available from motorists accessory and DIY shops).
4
Add preservative 
With Ronseal system, wood preservative pellets are provided to prevent additional decay.
Using a 10mm drill, make holes 20mm deep and 50mm apart and push the pellets right to the bottom of the hole.
Stagger the holes and position them around the affected area, at the joint and on the sills, which could rot.
5
Fill in the gaps 
Mix up the filler paste with its catalyst and apply immediately with a filling knife.
Cover the holes made for the preservative pellets and build up, in layers, the areas that were cut away.
It's best to overfill slightly, then when the filler has hardened, and it level with abrasive paper wrapped round a cork block.
6
Finish off 
If you intend varnishing the window, first use wood dye on the filled area to match it to the surrounding timber.
For an easy to apply paint finish, use microporous paint.
It can be applied directly onto a stripped wooden surface without the need for primer.
Use two coats, rubbing down with fin abrasive paper between.
Quick tips for summer stain removal
Grass
Grass stains on polyester cricketing flannels can be removed with Swarfega or methylated spirits.
Rinse before laundering.
Tar
On washable clothes scrape off as much as possible then sponge with eucalyptus oil, working from the back of the fabric.
Lighter fuel can be used to remove more stubborn stains.
Wash as normal.
Suntan oil
For washable clothing, sponge the fabric with a proprietary grease solvent using a thick pad held underneath.
Wash in detergent and rinse.
Anti-perspirant
You can rid of deodorant stains by making a paste out of bicarbonate or soda and salt and applying this to the stain for 15, minutes or soak the garment in a biological detergent.
Afterwards wash as normal.
Iron mould
If you discover an iron mould stain, cover thickly with salt and moisten with lemon juice.
Leave for an hour or until the stain fades and then wash as normal.
Beetroot
Soak a piece of bread in water and dab it on both sides of the cloth.
The bread absorbs the stain.
Sports socks
Grubby white sports socks should first be soaked in a biological detergent solution or with Stain Devils Stainsalts added to the washing water.
If hand washing, add bicarbonate of soda to the wash and lemon juice to the rinse.
TIP OF THE WEEK
To remove pet hair from soft furnishings and clothing, Mrs. L. Roy of East Sussex suggests putting on a dry rubber glove and rubbing your hand downwards over the fabric.
The hairs will come off easily.
PLANTWORLD
A BUYER'S GUIDE
FASHIONABLE ROSES
Every year, nearly 100 new roses are launched.
With so many different varieties to choose from, the perfect rose for you is ready and waiting to be planted out
You can take your pick from thorn-free blooms, ground cover species or small varieties that will look particularly good on your windowsill.
The bourbon shrub rose ‘Zéphirine Drouhin’ is widely grown as a climber because it produces scented pink flowers and its lack of thorns makes pruning easier.
Inwins have also launched three smooth-stemmed bush roses ideal of patios or places where there's risk of people pricking themselves.
‘Smooth Angel’, white with a pink flush and the pink ‘Smooth Lady’, grow up to 1.5m, while the magenta rose ‘Smooth Velvet’ reaches about 1.2m.
These will be available as root-wrapped plants from garden centres at around 5.99 in autumn.
‘Laura Ford’ is a short climber introduced last year by Warner's Roses and because of its size is ideal for the smaller garden.
It grows to 2.1m in height with a 80cm spread and has pink-tinged, deep yellow flowers.
Ground cover shrub roses which flower continuously from June to October, are popular at present.
There are 11 varieties to choose from in the County Series — ideal for posts or mixed borders.
Look out for ‘Weeping Standards’ which are repeat flowering ground cover roses grafted onto standard stems.
They cost £16.50 from Notcutts garden centres or mail order from Mattocks Roses .
Wild and beautiful
New English roses from David Austin look and smell like old roses but flower for longer and are more compact.
Shell pink ‘Heritage’ is a best seller followed by the yellow rose, ‘Graham Thomas’.
New English roses like ‘Heritage’ look and smell like old roses but flower for longer
Rosa Excelsa normally a rambler, has been trained as a standard here
Planting plan
Container-grown roses can be planted out at any time.
Dig a hole bigger than the container and make sure you plant them with the graft union just below the surface.
In dry conditions check that the hole and rootball are well watered before planting and continue to water weekly.
Indoor blooms
Miniature roses, growing no more than 40cm are widely available as house-plants.
Once the flowers have faded, put the plant in the rockery or repot it, using John Innes No 2 compost.
Plunge the post, up to the rim, in a sheltered spot in the garden.
In January bring it back into a cool, airy room for a few weeks.
Prune and thin out any old growth and place plant on moist gravel in a bright window.
Give fortnightly liquid feeds to encourage new growth.
The thornless climber Zéphirine Drouhin can grow up to 2.75m and is well-known for its fragrant blooms
Further information
How to…smarten lawn edges
Seeded lawns can be edged with a spade or a half moon edging tool, once the grass is established.
Edges are then maintained by clipping with shears or a special attachment on your mower.
The level of the grass should always be above the level of the beds or path.
Cut away a neat edged circle around the base of trees and where the shrubs overhang the lawn.
Prune old-fashioned roses like ‘Penelope’ and ‘Buff Beauty’.
Not only will this keep the bush compact but it should also give you another flush of flowers.
If the compost heap seems dry, water it with the hose and cover with old carpet to speed up the natural rotting process.
Continue to snap off the side-shoots which will appear in the leaf joints of your tomato plants.
To aid watering sink an empty plastic pot between tomato or courgette plants so that water reaches roots.
Place a metal strip around borders to prevent damage to the lawn edges
TOPICAL TIPS
CREATIVE GARDENING
Window box foliage
Longer-lasting evergreens mean no replanting — saving you time and money
While geraniums and nasturtiums provide a perfect balance of foliage and flowers for your box, evergreen plants with interesting leaves, berries or flowers add variety and height throughout the year.
A wide choice Clipped box and dwarf conifers like Juniperus communis ‘Compressa’ look smart when mixed with trailing ivies and a few single-colour busy Lizzies or white marguerites.
Hebes make a good long-term window box plants; look out for the silvery blue-green Hebe Pinguifolia , ‘Pagei’.
But if you prefer variegated leaves try Hebe fortunei ‘Albopicta’ or the fold or silver  Euonymus fortunei .
The small dark leaves of Cotoneaster microphyllus also look good, especially in autumn and winter then they produce scarlet fruits.
The Good Gardens Guide 1991  gives comprehensive details of over 1,000 gardens in Great Britain and Ireland.
All the gardens have been chosen by local inspectors, and 80 have been awarded the highest accolade of a two-star rating.
Anyone who buys the book can nominate their favourite garden for the County Garden of the Year Award.
Slow growing dwarf conifers add body to this window box
A GOOD READ Garden guide
Speedy summer meals
FOOD TALK brought to you by best and Nestlé
‘Whether you want a fuss-free dish or something a little more special — try these dishes — they take just a few minutes to prepare,’ says cookery editor, Felicity Salter
AVOCADO, PRAWN AND STRAWBERRY SALAD
An unusual combinational that tastes good mixed either with ‘Waistline’ Cocktail Dressing or ‘Waistline’Reduced Calorie Dressing
Preparation: 15 mins Cooking: none Serves 4 ¼ cucumber 225g (8oz) peeled prawns 225g (8oz) strawberries 1 avocado |juice 1 lemon 75ml (5 tbsp)Waistline cocktail dressing salt and black pepper ½ iceberg lettuce few sprigs of dill to garnish (optional) Halve cucumber length-ways and slice thinly.
rinse prawns, then dry with kitchen paper.
Hull and slice the strawberries.
Peel avocado, halve and slice.
Place in a bowl.
Squeeze lemon juice over.
Place all these ingredients together in a bowl.
Add a pinch of salt and season generously with freshly ground black pepper.
Stir in Waistline Cocktail Dressing.
Mix in lettuce and garnish with dill if liked.
Chill and serve within 1 hour.
Preparation: 10 mins plus 1 hour marinating Cooking: 40 mins Serves 2–3 2 × 675g (1 ½lb) spring chickens salt and freshly ground black pepper juice of 1 lemon 75ml (5 tbsp) olive oil 3 sprigs of rosemary or 15ml (1 tbsp) dried 60ml (4 tbsp) freshly chopped parsley or 30ml (2tbsp) dried 1 packet of Rice&Things Italian 1 lemon cut into wedges to garnish Cut the chickens in half lengthways.
Make a few slashes in the chicken flesh.
Season chickens generously with salt and freshly ground black pepper.
Place in a shallow dish and squeeze over lemon juice, then drizzle over oil.
Gently remove sprigs of rosemary from the stalk and sprinkle over chicken with chopped parsley.
Cover and leave to marinate for about 1 hour.
Cook under medium-high heat frill or on a barbecue.
Cook chicken for about 15–20 mins each side, spooning over remaining marinade until golden brown.
When a knife is inserted into the flesh, the juices should run clear.
Cook Rice&Things Italian according to the packet instructions.
Arrange rice in a ring and place chicken in the centre.
Garnish with lemon wedges.
Preparation: 5 mins Cooking: 6 mins Serves 1–2 40g (1½oz) butter 50g (2oz) button mushrooms, sliced 50g (2oz) Italian salami, chopped 150ml (¼pt) milk 150ml (¼pt) water 1 packet Crosse&Blackwell Sweet Pepper Pasta Choice Heat 15g (½oz) butter, add sliced mushrooms, cook for 2–3 mins to soften slightly.
Stir in salami.
Make up Pasta Choice as per packet instructions.
Add salami and mushrooms.
Serve immediately.
Microwave : Heat 15g (½oz) butter on High for 1 min.
Add mushrooms and cook for 2 mins, then add salami.
Cook Pasta Choice according to packet instructions.
Mix with the mushroom and salami mixture.
Serve.
For more recipe ideas send away for a free booklet to ‘Salads through the seasons’
Capture the flavour and atmosphere of Italy with grilled chicken with herbs on a bed of rice
TUSCAN GRILLED CHICKEN
Delicious cooked on the barbecue — serve with Rice&things for a great tasting meal
Take the worry out of cooking rice with this easy to use variety — it cooks perfectly every time
PASTA WITH PEPPERS, SALAMI AND MUSHROOMS
Try this as a snack for two or a substantial meal for one
SHOP NEWS
Did you know that as many as 82% of mums are concerned about the healthiness of their family's lifestyle?
Not only that, but 76% are actually doing something about it and gradually introducing more healthy foods into their diets.
Having healthy foods doesn't always mean you have to spend hours on preparation — there are several convenience canned foods that not only taste good but are enriched with vitamins too.
We tried and liked one of the new products in the Crosse&Blackwell Healthy Balance range.
Baked beans with vegetable sausage enriched with B vitamins help you and your family enjoy a healthier balanced diet.
It's high in fibre with reduced sugar and salt.
Why not give it a try? ct If you'd like to know more about nutrition write to Healthy Balance Nutrition Advisory Service  
Non-meat eating habits
Even last year the nation's eating habits changed significantly.
Ten per cent of Britons profess to eating meat only rarely and nearly 50 per cent agreed that they much less than they used to.
And that's official according to recent figures from the National Health Survey.
Results showed that there is an increasing interest in meat-free meals, so it's not surprising that the products from the healthy Balance range have become even more popular.
make the most of strawberry time
Nothing beats real English strawberries, at their best now, all ruby red and with a fabulous flavour
Berry compote
Serves 6 Preparation time: 10 mins Cooking: 5 mins 75g (30z) caster sugar 450g (1lb) strawberries, hulled 175g (6oz) raspberries 175 (6oz) black seedless grapes 100g (4oz) blackcurrants or blueberries ½ a honeydew melon, made into balls 150ml (¼ pt) rosé wine mint, to decorate heat caster sugar in a heavy-based pan with 90ml (6 tbsp) cold water until sugar had dissolved.
Add strawberries, raspberries and grapes, blackcurrants or blueberries.
Cook for 2 mins until fruit is soft but not mushy.
Remove the pan rom the heat and gently stir in melon and wine.
cover and chill for at least 1 hr.
Serve with fromage frais.
Decorate with mint.
Serves 12 Preparation: 35 mins Cooking: 1½ hrs 2 eggs 50g (2oz) soft dark brown sugar 25g (1oz) plain flour, sifted 25g (1oz) cornflour 4xtimes200g (7 oz) tubs Philadelphia full-fat soft cheese 175g (6oz) fromage frais grated rind of 1 lemon 175g (6oz) caster sugar 3 eggs, lightly beaten 25g (1oz) plain flour 100g (4oz) strawberries, halved 225g (8oz) Greek yoghurt 1 fig, cut into wedges 50g (2oz) seedless grapes, halved 50g (2oz) strawberries, halved 100g (4oz) raspberries Preheat oven to 180° C (350°  C , gas 4).
Whisk eggs and sugar until thick and pale.
Fold in flour and cornflour.
Put into a greased and lined 23cm (9″) round shallow tin.
Bake for 15 mins.
Remove from tin.
Cool.
Reduce heat to 150° C (300° F, gas 2).
Blend Philadelphia and fromage frais until smooth.
Add l lemon rind, sugar, eggs and mix.
Fold in sifted flour and strawberries.
Grease and line a 21cm (8’) deep, spring-clip type.
Trim sponge if necessary to fit base of tine tightly.
Pour in strawberry mixture.
Bake for 1¼ hrs until firm and shrinking away from the sides of the tin.
Carefully remove greaseproof paper and place cake on serving plate.
Top with yoghurt and the fig, grapes, strawberries and raspberries.
Baked Cheesecake
Tips on buying and preparation
Buy fruit that is bright, firm and unblemished with fresh green leaves.
If possible eat on the same day that you buy them.
Store in a cool place.
They have a better taste if not eaten straight away from the fridge.
If you have to wash the fruit, rinse very quickly before removing the stalk otherwise water will get into the fruit and destroy the delicate flavour.
However, you may find that all you need to do is gently wipe the strawberries with absorbent kitchen paper.
Hull, if liked, before using by gently twisting off green stalks — they should come out easily.
However, you may need to cut around the stalk and then twist, to hull some strawberries that are less ripe.
Serves 8 Preparation: 2 hrs Cooking: 20 mins For the pâte sucrée (sweet pastry) 75g (3oz) caster sugar 75g (3oz) butter 3 eggs 175g (6oz) plain flour, sifted pinch of salt For the crème pâtissière (custard) 300ml (½pt) milk 50g (2oz) caster sugar 25g (1oz) plain flour 15ml (1 tbsp) cornflour 1 egg 25g (1oz) butter 225g (8oz) strawberries, sliced 30ml (2 tbsp) redcurrant jelly 50g (2oz) redcurrants To make pâte sucrèe: work together sugar, butter and egg yolks with fingertips until well mixed.
Gradually add flour and salt and knead pastry lightly until smooth.
Wrap and chill.
meanwhile, make the crème pâtissière.
Heat milk, then blend together with sugar, flour, cornflour and the egg in a bowl.
Gradually stir in the warm milk.
Return to pan and stir over a low heat until it thickens and just comes to the boil.
Remove from the heat, stir in butter.
Cool.
Preheat oven to 200° C (400° F, gas 6).
Grease and flour a 23cm (9″) petal shaped flan ring tin.
Roll out pastry and line tin.
Press into corners and repair any cracks.
Chill for 10 mins.
Prick with a fork and bake for 15 mins until golden.
Cool.
Carefully remove from ring.
Fill with crème pâtissière.
Arrange strawberries on top.
Warm redcurrant jelly and brush over strawberries.
Decorate with redcurrants. freezing Freeze pastry case for up to 3 months in a sealed plastic bag.
Microwave Stir all crème pâtissière ingredients together in a bowl.
Heat on High for 15 mins, stirring every minute or so.
Fruit and cream meringue nests Slice strawberries and drizzle with kirsch.
Use to fill meringue nests and top with whipped cream.
Luxury sorbet with strawberry coulis Blend together strawberries with a little icing sugar in a good processor until it forms a smooth purée.
Serve the purée in a pool around 2 scoops of ready-made sorbet such as passion fruit.
Yummy yoghurt swirl Blend strawberries in a processor until just broken up.
Mix a little honey with Greek yoghurt.
Swirl strawberry purée into yoghurt.
Pour into glasses, top each one with a whole fresh strawberry and serve with a few amaretti biscuits.
Flaky pastry layer Bake flaky pastry sheets until golden brown.
Layer together with whipped cream, strawberry jam and sliced fresh strawberries.
Dredge the top with icing sugar, and slice into bars.
Strawberry fool Fold whipped cream into a large can of custard, with 225g (8oz) chopped strawberries.
Glazed strawberry tart
Other ideas for you to try
KITCHEN NOTES
News, views and recipe ideas for your each week
Win a bottle of white wine
New Zealand has a growing reputation as a producer of world-class wines.
Why not discover a taste of New Zealand with a superb Chenin Blanc from the Cook's Wine Company?
The Chenin Blanc grape, originally from the Loire Valley, has a high acidity, which means it keeps well.
As it ages, it becomes softer, with even more intense apple-like fruit and honey flavours.
When young, it is one of the few wines that makes a good partner for salads.
Cook's Chenin Blanc sells at around £3.79 a bottle from Tesco and leading off-licences.
We have 60 bottles to give away to the first readers to answer the following question and send their answer, with their name and address, to:.
Question: Cook's New Zealand Wine Company is named after which world famous navigator?
SHOP NEWS
for special ingredients
Here's good news for adventurous cooks.
When a recipe calls for tamarind or jalapeno chillies, save fruitless searching in local shops by calling Deliline.
The Delicatessen & Fine Food Association has set up this telephone service to help you track down your nearest supplier of almost any specialist ingredient.
SEASONAL CHOICE
Peaches & Nectarines
Make these sweet juicy fruits your summer choice for healthy snacks, desserts or even jazzing up a roast
They originate in China but are now grown in warm countries all over the world, and the ones we enjoy from June to September come in the main from France, Italy and Spain.
Nectarines are a smooth skinned variety of the fuzzy peach, and are usually a deeper, red-orange colour.
Like most fresh fruit, they are a good source of fibre and Vitamin C and are a useful slimming food.
An average 175g (6 oz) peach contains 55 calories; a nectarine around 80.
Choosing Choose fruit that's just softening; it will soon ripen at room temperature.
Storing Once ripe, wrap loosely, refrigerate and use within five days.
Poach in sugar syrup flavoured with vanilla or ginger.
Cool and serve with whipped cream or ice cream.
Slice and cover with brandy.
Leave for 45 mins for a luxury fruit salad.
Halve, remove stones and fill with crumbled macaroons or Amaretti biscuits mixed with butter.
Sprinkle with sugar and grill for 5 mins.
For a savory accompaniment, poach in stock with a few cloves to serve with ham, chicken or duck.
Flavour tips
How to peel peaches and nectarines
Place fruit in a bowl, cover with boiling water for 15 seconds then plunge into iced water.
Skins will come off easily.
Brush at once with lemon juice to prevent browning.
After rapid heating and cooling, the skins will almost fall off the fruit
GADGETWISE Hand Blander
Keep your hand blender near to the hob or worktop — it's marvellous for smoothing out sauces which start to go lumpy and is great for making dips, soups and shakes.
The blades rotate inside a plastic cup, so the blender can even be used in nonstick kitchenware.
Try this with pasta, grilled meat or fish Serves 4 1 onion chopped 1 clove garlic, crushed 15ml (1 tbsp) oil 400g (14 oz) tin tomatoes or 450g (1 lb) fresh tomatoes, skinned and roughly chopped 60ml (4 tbsp) stock 5ml (1 tsp) sugar salt and freshly ground black pepper 15ml ((1 tsp) fresh chopped parsley 1 bunch fresh basil (optional) Fry onion and garlic in oil until soft.
Add tomatoes, stock, sugar.
Season to taste.
Simmer for 20 minutes.
Add the parsley and basil, if using, at the end of the cooking.
Blend in the pan.
Add a can of drained tuna in brine, if liked, as shown in picture above, and serve.
Easy tomato sauce
COOK'S TIP
How to make breadcrumbs
Don't waste stale bread — make it into dried breadcrumbs for coating fried food.
Trim crusts and leave bread at the bottom of a very low oven for several hours until crisp and pale brown.
When cold, break bread pieces into a plastic bag and crush with a rolling pin until fine.
Keep in a screwtop jar.
Sweet and sour gammon steaks Gammon steaks soy sauce vinegar soft brown sugar fresh or unsweetened pineapple chunks tomato ketchup Fry gammon steaks in a non-stick pan.
Remove and keep warm.
Add remaining ingredients, and stirring bring to the boil.
check seasoning and pour over steaks.
Garlic tomatoes beefstake tomatoes Le Roule/1 garlic and herb cheese breadcrumbs a little oil Halve tomatoes, scoop out pips and fill gaps with cheese.
Sprinkle with breadcrumbs and oil and grill for 5–10 mins.
Best served warm.
Salmon parcels butter fresh chopped dill or chives salt and pepper salmon steaks lemon slices Mash butter with herbs, salt and pepper.
Place salmon on pieces of buttered foil — top with lemon slices and herb butter.
Seal foil around fish and bake in a moderate oven for 15–20 mins.
Serve immediately.
keema ana Finely chopped onion crushed garlic chopped ginger oil chilli powder salt and pepper garam masala minced beef beaten egg nan bread Fry onion, garlic and ginger in oil until soft.
Add spices and beef and cook for 10 mins.
Cool, then mix with egg.
Press the mixture on to non bread and bake in a hot oven for 10 mins.
Atholl brose honey whiskey oatmeal double cream Heat honey and whisky together until just blended.
Toast oatmeal in a pan or under a grill.
Whip cream until thick.
Fold in the cooled honey, whisky and most of the oatmeal.
Serve in whiskey tumblers, topped with remaining oatmeal.
QUICK 5
Looking for inspiration?
Here are some recipe ideas for cooks in a hurry
QUICK DISHES
Lemon Trout
Preparation: 10mins Cooking: 10mins
Serve with a mixture of brown and wold rice and a salad
Serves 4
4 small trout, gutted, heads removed
salt and freshly ground black pepper
60ml (4 tbsp) freshly chopped parsley
60ml (4 tbsp) freshly chopped dill
1 lemon
50g (2 oz) butter or margarine
60ml (4 tbsp) oil
few sprigs of dill
For the lemon mayonnaise
60ml (4tbsp) mayonnaise
15ml (1 tbsp) finely grated lemon rind
30ml (2 tbsp) lemon juice
lemon wedges, to serve
Method
Rinse trout under cold running water and pat dry.
Make 3 diagonal slits in both sides of each trout and season generously.
Rub parsley and dill inside the body cavity of the fish and outside over the body and in the slits. use a zester or a knife to remove lemon rind, and cut into find strips.
Reserve a few for garnish.
Sprinkle the rind inside and over the fish.
Heat butter and oil in a heavy-based frying pan.
Add trout and cook over a medium-high heat for 10 mins, turning once, until golden and cooked.
Do not overcook.
Squeeze over the juice of the lemon towards the end of cooking and add the sprigs of dill to the pan.
Meanwhile, mix the mayonnaise, lemon rind and lemon juice.
Serve the fish immediately, accompanied by lemon mayonnaise and garnished with lemon zest and lemon wedges.
Freeze uncooked trout, with herbs and lemon, for up to 1 month.
Microwave to cook 2 trout: heat butter only in a micro-proof dish on High for 1 min.
Add trout, lemon juice and dill, cover with pierced clingfilm and cook on High for 8 mins, or Combination Med/200° C for 5–6 mins.
Chicken with garlic sauce
Preparation: 20 mins Cooking 30–35 mins
Garlic cloves are cooked in their skins so they become soft enough to purée into a delicious sauce
Serves 6
25g (1 oz) butter
30ml (2tbsp) olive oil
6 chicken portions
6 cloves garlic, unpeeled
150ml (¼ pt) white wine
90ml (6 tbsp) red wine vinegar
15ml (1 tbsp) tomato purée
5ml (1 tsp) Dijon mustard
salt and freshly ground black pepper
300ml (½pt) soured cream
25g (1 oz) toasted pine nuts, and 25g (1 oz) sultanas, to garnish
Method
Melt the butter and oil together in a large, deep, heavy-based pan.
Add chicken portions and cook over a high heat for a few mins on each side until brown.
When all the chicken pieces are thoroughly browned, add unpeeled garlic cloves.
Reduce heat and cook, covered for 30–35 mins until chicken is cooked through.
Test by inserting a knife; the chicken juices should run clear.
Remove the chicken pieces from the pan and keep warm, in a low oven, covered with foil.
Add white wine, red wine vinegar, tomato purée and mustard to the pan with the garlic.
Season generously with salt and freshly ground black pepper.
Bring to the boil, reduce heat and simmer until liquid is thick and syrupy, stirring and scraping the bottom of the pan.
Squeeze the skin of each of the garlic cloves until they release the softened garlic into the sauce.
Discard the skin.
Add the soured cream and cook, stirring, until just warm.
Pour garlic sauce over hot chicken pieces and sprinkle with toasted pine nuts and sultanas.
Vegetable cous cous
Preparation time: 10 mins
Cooking: 7 mins
This light and healthy supper dish is ideal for vegetarians
Serves 4
225g (8 oz) cous cous
45ml (3 tbsp) olive oil
1 clove garlic, crushed
225g (8 oz) courgettes, diagonally sliced
1 bunch spring onions, trimmed and sliced
225g (8 oz) tomatoes cut into wedges
15ml (1 tbsp) lemon juice
30ml (2 tbsp) each of freshly chopped mint and parsley
Salt and freshly ground black pepper
Method
Place the cous cous in a bowl, pour over warm water to cover and leave to soak for 10 mins.
Tip cous cous into a steamer or sieve over a pan of boiling water and steam for 5–7 minutes until tender.
heat oil in a large frying pan or wok.
Add garlic, cook for a few seconds then add courgettes.
Stir-fry for 2–3 mins, then add the spring onions cook for 2 mins and add tomatoes.
Cook for 2 more mins then add the lemon juice, mint and parsley and season generously.
Stir into the cooked cous cous and serve.
Microwave oil on High for 1 min.
Add garlic and cook on High for 30 secs.
Add courgettes and cook on High for 2 mins.
Add spring onions, cook on High for 2 mins, then add tomatoes and cook on High for 1 min.
Cook's notes
Cous cous is flour coated grains of semolina, and makes an interesting change from rice or pasta.
Look for it in larger supermarkets or delicatessens.
Spaghetti with pesto 
Preparation: 10 mins
Cooking: 8–10 mins
If you haven't got a food processor, look out for jars of ready-made pesto
Serves 6
For the pesto:
1 bunch fresh basil
1 clove garlic
25g (1 oz) pine nuts
50g (2 oz) freshly grated Parmesan
salt and freshly ground black pepper
105ml (7 tbsp) olive oil
For the spaghetti:
175g (6 oz) spaghetti verde
175g (6 oz) spaghetti
salt and freshly ground black pepper
1 red chilli, de-seeded and chopped
freshly grated Parmesan cheese, to serve
15ml (1 tbsp) freshly chopped parsley, to garnish (optional)
Method
Place basil, garlic and pine nuts in a processor.
Blend for a few seconds to crush.
Add cheese and seasoning.
Blend for a few more seconds.
Then, keeping the motor running, gradually add the olive oil, to form a smooth paste.
Meanwhile cook the two types of spaghetti together in a pan containing plenty of boiling salted water for 8–10 mins until ‘al dente’: tender, but still retaining some bite.
Drain the spaghetti well, return to the pan and add the pesto, mixing thoroughly to ensure the spaghetti is completely coated.
Season generously with freshly ground pepper and add salt to taste.
Garnish with chopped red chilli, grated Parmesan and parsley.
Serve with crusty Italian bread.
COOK'S CLASS
Step-by-step
PRAWN AND PEPPER SOUFFLÉ
A gold-crusted, feather light soufflé is one of the most delicious supper dishes.
Based on a simple thick white sauce, this meal is much easier to make than it looks
Serves 4–6
Preparation: 25 mins
Cooking: 40 mins
½ medium red pepper, deseeded
75g (3oz) butter
50g (2oz) flour
300ml (½pt) warmed milk
2 spring onions, finely sliced
15ml (1 tbsp) Noilly Prat, Cinzano or Martini
100g (4oz) peeled prawns
4 eggs, separated
salt and black pepper
50g (2oz) Gruyère or Emmental, finely grated
STEP 1
reheat the oven to 190° C (375° F, gas 5).
Grill the pepper until skin chars.
Peel and chop finely.
Meanwhile in another pan, melt 50g (2oz) butter and whisk in the flour and cook gently for approx 30 secs.
STEP 2
When smooth remove from heat and gradually add milk.
Simmer for approx 12 mins, whisking until thickened.
Season.
Fry the onions in remaining butter until soft.
Add alcohol and simmer for 2 mins.
STEP 3
Add the chopped, skinned peppers and peeled prawns to the onion mixture, and cook for about 1 minute to soften the peppers.
Mix well into the flour and milk paste.
Season and leave to cool.
STEP 4
Whisk the egg whites until stiff.
Beat the yolks into the milk sauce one at a time.
Pour into the bowl with the prawns, then, with a long spoon, gently fold in the egg whites using a figure of eight movement.
STEP 5
Butter a 20cm (8 inch) soufflé dish thickly, the sprinkle over the grated Gruyère cheese to coat the base and sides.
TIP: use dried breadcrumbs instead of the cheese, or use another hard cheese.
STEP 6
Pour the soufflé mixture carefully into the coated soufflé dish.
Spread the top level and bake for 30–40 mins or until well risen and the top is golden brown.
Serve immediately straight from the soufflé dish.
Run a sharp knife around the inside of the soufflé before baking as this will help it to rise more evenly.
Make the soufflé up to step 3, cover with clingfilm and store in the fridge for up to two days, or, freeze without prawns and peppers.
Thaw at room temperature, add peeled prawns, peppers and beaten egg whites and bake as in Step 6.
Soufflé tips
Basic variations
Alternatives
Once you've mastered the art of making soufflé you can vary the ingredients to suit the occasion.
Make an impressive starter for a dinner party, or even a light lunch for friends.
Follow the basic method as before, but try adding some of our alternatives.
Crab, Omit prawns and add 100g (4 oz) canned or defrosted crabmeat.
Mushrooms.
Leave out the peppers and add 50g (2 oz) sliced mushrooms.
Dill.
Instead of spring onions add 45ml (3 tbsp) freshly chopped dill.
Ham.
Omit prawns and add 100g (8oz) smoked ham, sliced and chopped.
Blue Cheese.
Omit hard cheese and use either Danish blue or Stilton.
CABLE AND LACE
REVIEWS
CINEMA
Where Angels Fear To Tread
Based on a novel by E M Forster and set at the turn of the century, this is an elaborate and visually handsome period piece.
Lilia, played by Helen Mirren, is a middle-aged widow who falls for a handsome young man form Tuscany.
When she dies tragically in childbirth, her in-laws from her first marriage travel to a remote hill town in Italy to claim the newborn baby.
but the young father has no intention of giving up his son to them.
Turbulent Italian passions leave the sedate Edwardians at a loss and create an oppressive sense of melodrama.
The high-class cast is headed by Helena Bonham Carter as the prim girl transformed by her experiences in Italy, and Judy Davis as the perennial spinster, whose sensuality is dulled beyond recall.
A romantic comedy, with Steve Guttenberg as a man with a new face and Shelley Long as his novelist sister.
After the success of Jean de Florette , which was based on a novel by Marcel Pagnol, here is another dramatisation of one of his charming and sentimental takes of friendship in Provence.
Luna, known as Loony, is not quite the chic, sophisticated person she would love to be.
Her best friend, Wren, on the other hand, is.
But their lives are shattered when a nutty friend goes on a shooting spree, injuring Luna and killing Wren.
Wren's grief-stricken mother gives all her daughter's possessions to Luna.
Equipped with a new wardrobe and address book, Luna cannot resist taking on a whole new identity and she soon finds that bad behaviour can be fun!
Tough, challenging and up-to-the-minute.
On trial for the murder of her father, Davina finds the onset of war disturbs ancient secrets.
An ordinary man is plunged into politics and espionage.
Tension in Moscow and Whitehall.
Since the release of their first album, this band has recruited some new blood in the form of singer/songwriter Phil Thornalley who sounds remarkable similar to George Michael.
Unfortunately the resemblance ends there as his songs are nowhere near as good as the master's.
The Last To Know is the most exuberant track, helped by a vibrant horn section and a catchy melody.
In contrast, the single Let Me Change your Mind is turgid soft rock with too many wailing guitars.
The remaining tracks are frothy, cliché-ridden love songs.
A disappointing album from a band who at one time seemed to show a lot of promise.
Successful and loving couple Jessie and Mark are looking forward to life in their new love-nest.
But their privacy is disrupted by a series of uninvited guests, ranging from Mark's long-lost cousin Fred, to their neighbours, whose own home has been gutted by fire.
The improbable plot is not helped by a weak script.
Jessie is played by Kirstie Alley of Cheers fame, but even her devoted fans may be disappointed.
Hardly a barrel of laughs but it might raise a few smiles.
Revenge and the search for justice change the life of Jimmie Rainwood played by Tom Selleck.
A hard-hitting action movie.
Don't Tell Her It's Me
My Father's Glory
Young Marcel Pagnol and his mother as portrayed in My Father's Glory, a story drawing on the novelist's childhood memories of Provence at the end of the last century
BOOKS
Wicked Women
Snare of the Serpents by Victoria Holt
The Kremlin Armoury by Matthew Hunter
MUSIC
Tall Stories
Jonny Hates Jazz
VIDEO
Madhouse
An Innocent Man
Selleck's character wonders how to clear his name in An Innocent Man
Festival time in Santiago do Compostela in Galicia, a place of pilgrimage since the ninth century
NORTHERN SPAIN
Unspoiled and tranquil
Discover a very different region where the Spanish themselves love to go
One would find it hard to imagine two more utterly different aspects of the same country than the southern and northern coasts of Spain.
If lager and lying about, boutiques and boozing, sun and seduction are what turn you on, forget the north.
All it shares with the south is the language, and even that would no doubt be questioned by the separatist Basques.
As well as fabulous beaches and scenery, the region offers idyllic inland villages, such as those nestling in the Pico de Europa range of mountains (far right).
Here, a slower way of life still prevails (right)
From Navarra in the east, to the greener-than-green Galicia in the west, the northern coast is all about nature before ‘civilisation’ got to it.
The beaches here are incomparably superior to those of Torremolinos.
Their litter-free sands are attractively broken up by bays, colourful fishing harbours, impressive rock formations, and, to the west, fjords more akin to Norway than that of the sandy Ibereian peninsula.
The weather, too, attracts a different kind of tourist.
The region's intense greenness is the giveaway that it often rains.
But generally the climate is comfortably warm — ideal for small children and perfect for the Spanish ritual of the paseo , the evening parade when grandmothers, mothers and their offspring, dressed up to the nines, ride their bikes, push prams, sip coffee, choose ice-creams, and gossip like a noisy flock of birds settling down before bedtime.
This phenomenon can best be observed in Santander, that most elegant of ferry ports.
It has a leisurely, turn-of-the-century ambience, in which strolling in the many green parks, sitting in one of the string of cafés along the Paseo de Pereda, or shopping in the strikingly smart shops a few streets back, are the best ways to spend the day.
In August, the main square, the dignified Plaza Porticada, is the setting for an international festival of drama and dance, culminating in a magnificent firework display.
Santander has no less than three glorious beaches to choose from.
The biggest, La Concha, regularly wins prizes for cleanliness.
High above Le Magdelena beach, with its sheltered coves, stands the summer palace of Alfonso XIII.
The grounds and small zoo are open to the public and it's a favourite place for picnics, and for people-watching.
Ten miles inland from Santander is the almost-too-good-to-be-true Santillana-del-Mar.
All that is missing from its picturesque streets — geraniums spill from every aperture, a stream gushes from a well down an unpaved track, cattle low in shelters below the villagers' cottages — is a cast of yokels and buxom wenches bursting into an operatic aria.
The glorious Romanesque collegiate church and fine signiorial mansions from its 15th century heyday are added reasons for not missing the town, so take a camera and lots of film with you.
Some of the finest beaches in Spain lie westwards towards Asturias.
Lovers of wide open sands might choose Comillas, a little fishing port where a simple meal with wine at Il Puerto will cost under £5.
For sheltered rocky coves follow the pine-shaded lane along the river Tina Menor to the horseshoe-shaped beach at Pechón.
Stay at San Vicente de la Barquera.
There is enough of interest in its arcaded streets, hill-top cathedral overlooking the estuary, and fish restaurants, to occupy your time on wet days.
The finest beaches lie to the west
The cities contain splendid medieval architecture, including this gate in Burgos (left), the birthplace of El Cid.
fine stone carving lies in the cathedral of Santiago de Compostela (below left)
But you must wait for good weather to appreciate the mighty Picos de Europa range of mountains, just follow the river Deva through the dramatic La Hermida Defile ravine to the pretty Alpinesque town of Potes and on the Fuente Dé, where a cable car ascends the last 800 metres up to the sheer rock face.
The snow-capped summit, 2,642 metres high, offers astounding views.
If you're lucky you'll spot chamois and golden eagles; in the forests there are boars, wild cats, and even bears.
It's all very different from the wildlife found on the Costa del Sol.
Those on longer stays should visit Leon, with its stunning cathedral, lively medieval plaza, and San Marcos, the unique 16th century monastery-turned-parador.
Take the pilgrim route into Galicia to see the resting place of St James at the cathedral in the unforgettable Santiago do Compostela.
Here, there's another parador contrived from a 16th century building — the Hostal de Reyes Catolicas, which was built by Ferdinand and Isabella as an inn for pilgrims and is still fulfilling its original purpose.
there's also the old town or Burgos, elegant San Sebastian, the pre-his-toric caves in Altamira, the running of the bulls in Pamplona, and the wine district of Rioja.
While Galicia and Leon produce some of the better known names like Albariño and Condado, the most famous of all is Rioja.
Although it's more expensive than the regional wines, it is sold all over the country.
Take in just a few of Northern Spain's options, and discover the Spain that the Spanish truly love.
Enjoy all modern comforts in an historic parador
Regional delicacies
Each region has its own specialities.
In northwest, Galicians like stews such as caldo made with ham and turnip greens, while the Asturians enjoy fabada , a hearty stew of white beans, Spanish sausages and ham.
Basque food is traditionally based more on sauces than stews, although you should look out for marmitako , tunny fish stewed with tomatoes, potatoes, green peppers and bread.
And then there are tapas — a wide variety of delicious snacks — served in bars throughout Spain.
Getting there
New look Spain
Now there's a better class of service for holiday-makers to the sunshine country
palms have been planted on Benidorm's cleaner beaches
Top beaches
The beaches at Benidorm, San Sebastian, Santander and Calvia in Majorca have been judged as four of the world's eight cleanest by the British environmental group, Clean World.
Spain also has nearly 150 beaches that have won EC Blue Flags for their cleanliness and safety — more than any other EC country.
Also receiving praise is the city of Santander, chosen as the most elegant in the world by the Jaguar Press Agency of California.
Better hotels
As visitors to Spain this summer will notice, the Government has been encouraging hoteliers to go ‘up market’.
Many 2 and 3 star hotels have been smartened up, and some of the lowest-grade accommodation has actually been demolished.
Improvements have also been made to resorts.
Benidorm has had a thorough spring-clean, unsightly hoardings have been taken down and 1,000 palm trees planted.
And on the Costa del Sol, £400 million is being spent on bypasses around the main towns and cities.
In the countryside, many working farms on Formentera, Ibiza, Majorca and Menorca have started taking in guests, and in Andalucia some historic country mansions offer luxury accommodation.
Special deals
This year two children under 16 can travel free on Falcon Family Holidays to the Costa Blanca, Costa del Sol, Ibiza, Majorca, Menorca and Tenerife.
Seasun Tentrek has dropped under-occupancy surcharges on its apartments and tents for any holidays taken after August 21, which can make a considerable saving.
Fuengirola's promenade has been extended
sample the rural like on an Andalucian farm
5 MINUTE FICTION
Just Desserts
Peter just couldn't resist young blondes, and being the boss he knew he could take his pick — until he met Vanessa…
Vanessa yawned, and patted her wide open mouth rudely.
Peter pushed a prawn around his plate with a fork, pretending not to notice, but he was hurt by her obvious boredom.
If she was already this tired of his witty conversation, he wondered, how would they ever make it to the coffee stage?
‘Is the meal okay?’ he offered tentatively, trying to fill the vast void of silence.
‘Actually,’ Vanessa began, not bothering to lean closer or lower her voice, ‘the chicken these wings came from must have died of old age.’
‘I don't understand.
The food has always been good here when I've brought — er — when I've been here before.’
‘You were going to say: ‘When I brought my wife here,’ weren't you?’
Vanessa's mouth twisted.
Peter glanced around the restaurant.
Was her voice loud enough to carry to the next table?
Could they be overheard, he wondered.
Vanessa giggled.
‘It's okay, I don't mind, really.’
‘I'm glad to accepted my dinner invitation.
You know, I haven't been able to take my eyes off you ever since you came to our office.’
It was true, but then he never could take his eyes off any woman.
Vanessa smiled inanely.
It looked to Peter like the gin and tonics she had sunk at the bar earlier that evening had gone straight to her head.
He continued undeterred, ‘But I want you to understand my situation.
You see, I love my wife in my own way, but we lead our own lives…
’ Vanessa waved a scarlet-tipped hand, her many bracelets jingling noisily.
‘I don't want to know anything about your wife.’
Peter was pleased to hear that.
‘But the thing is, it could be difficult — us working together.
You know how people talk…’
Vanessa looked knowing.
‘I can see what you mean, well, don't worry, my lips are sealed!’ she giggled.
Peter frowned.
The risk he was taking was no joke.
The lobster and another bottle of champagne arrived — her choice.
I hope she's worth all the expenses, he thought, as be refilled her glass.
This was costing him a small fortune.
‘I'll want a pay rise, of course.’
Vanessa said calmly.
‘What?!’
Peter spluttered.
‘You did promise you would get me the promotion that's coming up.
It will mean better pay, won't it?’ she asked, blinking her long eyelashes.
She was much more ambitious that the others
Peter mopped himself down with his napkin.
‘Yes, yes.
It will all be taken care of.
Have patience, darling.’
He patted her hand.
‘Remember, I can't work miracles, I'm only the assistant manager.’
Vanessa's face grew very serious.
‘But you said you'd swing it for me!
I will get that promotion, won't I?’
Peter didn't like her tone.
She was much more ambitious that any other the others.
Still, he could handle it.
He looked at her thoughtfully.
She was pretty, like all the other young things who came to the company.
His thoughts wandered to his wife.
She'd had three children and it showed.
Her hair was greying, and she refused to wear that seductive perfume he'd bought her, saying it made her feel cheap.
She looked old.
And looking at her made him feel old too.
It wasn't like that with the girls at the office, all heady scent and pouting, glossy lips.
When he chased them around the office, he felt young and alive again.
He gave her his most disarming smile.
‘Look, I am Simpkin's right hand man and he believes that I tell him.
Take it from me, the job is as good as yours.’
She relaxed, a smile creeping across her lips.
They clinked their glasses and she tucked into her lobster.
Peter relaxed too.
He could handle her.
He'd play her along until she got fed-up and started making too many demands.
Then he'd tell Phil Simpkin that he was having trouble with one of the staff, and she'd be out on her wiggly bottom before she knew what hit her.
After the main course Vanessa disappeared to powder her nose.
Peter refilled her glass with champagne, a smile of anticipation touching his lips.
Vanessa returned, stumbling over the table leg, then falling into her seat.
‘Oops!
I think the champagne's gone to my head!’ she giggled.
He laughed nervously, glancing about to make sure her clumsiness had gone unnoticed.
Was she trying to embarrass him?
The sweet trolley arrived, and he was dismayed to see she still had appetite for a generous wedge of Black Forest Gâteau.
‘It's very kind of you to help me,’ she said, as the waitress left.
‘We blondes aren't often taken seriously.
People assume we're all dumb.’
‘I take you seriously,’ Peter said, grasping her hand.
‘You do?
Vanessa looked at him with earnest blue eyes.
She believed every word.
Peter thought with satisfaction.
‘You must admit though,’ she went on, ‘I wouldn't get this job without you.
I mean, Kathy Freeman should be getting this promotion, shouldn't she?’
‘Well…
’ Peter said coyly.
‘I must admit Kathy could do the job blindfolded and Simpkin would never consider you for the job unless I happened to suggest it.
But think of this as us helping each other— you get the promotion, and I get to take out the most beautiful woman in the office!’ he winked.
Vanessa giggled, ‘I feel bad about Kathy, though.’
Peter placed a hand on her bare shoulder.
‘Don't.
Kathy's nose will be out of joint for a while, but she'll calm down.
I can fix your promotion but it will take time.’
He shovelled the last of his roll into his mouth.
‘How much time?’
Peter's eyes twinkled.
‘That depends,’ he said softly.
She frowned.
‘On what?’
‘On whether you make it worth my while.’
Peter smiled a predatory smile.
‘You be nice to me, darling, and you'll have that promotion in no time.’
Vanessa gave him a long look, then delved into her handbag and produced a small object.
Peter could see what it was instantly.
The tiny wheels inside the cassette were turning slowly, showing that it was recording.
‘Wh-what's that?’ he asked, although he knew.
‘A tape recorder of course.’
Peter's mouth had gone dry.
‘But why?’
‘Do you remember bringing a girl here six months ago?
A blonde, like me, only few years younger?’
Vanessa asked.
‘You offered to give her some help with her career, too.
Only she, being 17 and in her first job, really did believe you wanted to help.
Unlike me, she couldn't see you for what you are.’
Peter reddened.
‘I think there must be a mistake…
’‘There's no mistake — it was my sister.
Once she realised what you were up to and told you where to go, you seemed to lose interest in her career.
In fact, she soon found herself out of a job.’
Peter swallowed.
‘Really, you've got the wrong man…
’ Vanessa's eyes narrowed.
‘I doubt it.
When I got myself transferred over to your department, I discovered that you're well-known among the girls in the office.
The trouble is,’ she went on, ‘Mr Simkin wouldn't believe it when they tried to tell him — as you said yourself, you're his right hand man.
So I thought I'd help.’
She held the tape recorder in the air triumphantly.
‘Maybe he'll listen now.’
She emptied her glass of champagne and stood up.
‘Well, I'll see you in the office tomorrow morning, shall I?
And thanks for the meal — it was lovely.’
Peter called the waitress over and ordered a large brandy.
Suddenly the champagne had gone very flat…