

ISSUE NO. 150
Vestment Guild's Centenary Thanksgiving
IN GIVING thanks for a century of Vestment making in the Diocese, the Diocesan Vestment Guild was invited to stage an exhibition of Vestments and Flower Celebration in The Cathedral.
Months of planning, led by Mrs Angela (Feetenby) Bell, Needlework Administrator; Mrs Barbara Boyes, secretary and treasurers, together with Mrs Joyce Barlow, N.A.F.A.S., coordinator of floral arrangements, culminated in a four-day festival in The Cathedral.
The preview evening and following three days enabled many people to come and appreciate the variety of gifts and talents which helped to enhance the natural beauty and lines of the Cathedral.
Celebration
A wide range of vestments over the decades in liturgical colours of white, gold, red, green, violet and black, were displayed artistically.
Nearly 30 displays were complemented by the colour co-ordinated floral arrangements ranging from delicate table centres to dramatic displays of imported flowers and foliage.
A festival of music, vestments and flower celebration including a recital at the preview by Alan Barbar, of Middlesbrough.
Also a concert evening with the Dalesmen Singers directed by Stephen Hartley, including organ pieces played by himself.
Bishop Harris led the celebration of the Vestment Guild's Thanksgiving Mass with Guild members from around the Diocese gathering from the occasion with musical accompaniment by the Cathedral Choir with Director Pat Ryan.
Vestments and linens made by members in the preceding year were displayed and later given to churches as requested.
Lunch was served in the Cathedral Hall after Mass in a relaxed atmosphere; followed by the Centenary annual meeting.
Details of the Guild's activities and achievements appear elsewhere in ‘Voice’.
Many thanks
Behind the scenes many members of the Cathedral parish were actively involved in preparing the Cathedral, in welcoming the many visitors, as guides; in arranging some of the exhibits and, perhaps most importantly of all, in providing an extensive buffet at the preview and in brewing countless cuppas and refreshments for all the visitors.
Sincere thanks were extended to all those who contributed to the success of the exhibition, celebration and festival, by the Cathedral Administrator, Canon P. Harney, who personally welcomed many of the visitors.
Donations given by the visitors will benefit the new Pastoral Centre in Hemlington, now nearing completion.
Under the direction of the St John of God Brothers the day care centre will assist those with communication difficulties.
Bishop leads diocesan pilgrims to Walsingham
NEARLY 300 pilgrims from the Diocese converged on Walsingham last month for the annual Diocesan Pilgrimage, led by Bishop Harris.
Statue carriers lead the way during the Diocesan Pilgrimage to Walsingham.
A Pilgrim writes: ‘As October arrived we prepared once more, for the annual pilgrimage to Walsingham.
We gathered in the Holy Name of Mary Church, Middlesbrough, with our luggage, for the celebration of Mass led by Father Ronald Prince SSS, in which we were reminded of the purpose of our pilgrimage.
Grey skies failed to cast gloom over the pilgrims as they greeted friends made on previous pilgrimages and settled in their coach seats determined to make the most of their time together.
The two coaches were filled to capacity as pilgrims assured each other that Sunday would be true to its name, through many carried an umbrella ‘just in case’.
Priest pilgrims included Frs.
Prince, Spaight and Bluett.
The Rosary was recited and later Bernard Connelly, the organiser, told the story of Walsingham and the generosity of Charlotte Boyd, re-establishing the Slipper Chapel to become the national Shrine of Our Lady.
A story which never fails to enthral and inspire even those who have heard it previously.
Capacity
The distinctive sloping pantile roof of the Chapel of Reconciliation came into view and soon we were descending stiffly from the coaches and joyfully into church to receive a special word of welcome from our Bishop, in which he reminded us of the purpose of a pilgrimage, together with our special intentions.
After the short service we were soon at Elham House in Friday Market where most of us stayed and busy discovering our rooms and overnight neighbours.
The dining room was filled to capacity for our evening meal, a chance to renew friendships and meet up with pilgrims travelling by mini-bus to be with us all.
Refreshed bodily we filled the nearby Church of the Annunciation for our Holy Hour, followed by a torchlight procession to the Grotto in the grounds of Elham House.
The wind only blew out the candles but not the enthusiasm in our hearts as we prayed and sang in honour of Our Lady.
Sunday dawned dry and we gathered in the church again for morning prayer; followed by breakfast.
A variety of opportunities awaited us: some explored the wealth of spiritual devotion to be found in Walsingham; the Anglican Shrine; the Greek Orthodox Church; the Carmel Convent etc., etc.
Others followed the history of the Shrine as they toured the priory grounds guided by Bernard Connelly.
Some of us walked the blustery Holy Mile for our private visit to the Shrine, Slipper Chapel and Chapel of Reconciliation.
Time for souvenirs for loved ones: a candle lit and a cuppa, all too soon lunchtime and then the gather in Friday Market where we met with the pilgrims from Hull, Middlesbrough (day group) and Stroud Green, N. London — all bathed in sunshine.
Over 400 pilgrims in all!
Francis, on his feast day (4th October), enjoyed a rendering of ‘Happy Feastday to You’, once again carried the Cross at the head of the procession, with Bishop Harris leading the pilgrims.
Willing volunteers formed teams of helpers to carry the Statue of Our Lady of Walsingham as with hymns and rosaries we trod the Holy Mile, conscious of those many pilgrims who had gone before us.
Good Voice
Pilgrims filled the Chapel of Reconciliation to capacity as Father Peter Allen, Shrine Director, welcomed us.
Father Allen said that he would be leaving the Shrine at the end of the year but hopefully another Marist Father would welcome us all again next year.
We will miss Father who had a special place in his heart for Middlesbrough Diocesan Pilgrims.
Pilgrims were still in good voice for the concelebrated Mass led by Bishop Harris, with diocesan priests and also the two priests who led the Stroud Green Group, Bro.
Anthony SSS, assisted at the altar as MC.
Music was provided by the Shrine authorities with pilgrims assisting with readings, bidding prayers and the offertory procession.
The pilgrimage intentions together with our own personal needs were included in prayer led by the Bishop.
Last minute visits: to the Slipper Chapel, in Thanksgiving; a prayer for a safe journey home for all pilgrims and a view of the memorial stone to Charlotte Boyd in the grounds.
A word of thanks to the Marist Fathers and Sisters for their care of the Shrine and hospitality to pilgrims and all aboard their respective transport.
A peaceful journey home with lots to reflect on and pray and share with others.
A most enjoyable pilgrimage.
Thanks to all who made it possible.
— A grateful pilgrim.
Our Lady of Walsingham, pray for us.
Bishop Harris flanked by Fathers R. Prince and D. Spaight walk the Holy Mile at Walsingham.
640 attend Special Ministers' Study Day
On Saturday, 3rd October, 640 members of the Diocese converged on York University for the annual Formation and Recommissioning Day of the Dioceses' Special Ministers of the Eucharist.
Sister Susan McGuiness FCJ, was the principal speaker who took as her theme, ‘The Road to Emmaus — a Journey Through Grief’.
The first talk was a skilful weaving of scriptural insights, personal experiences, interspersed with the music of the Iona Community.
The thought provoking verses of the songs and Sister's words served to challenge the ministers to be open to meeting Christ in the daily situation of life.
Sister's talk will be published in the next Diocesan Year Book.
After the lunch break Sister shared her experience as a nurse and bereavement counsellor in a busy London casualty department.
She reflected on the reasons why people in modern society have difficulty in expressing and ritualizing grief and responding to loss and bereavement experienced by others.
Responding
Ministers were invited to look at ways in which they could help people in responding to or coping with grief.
The Recommissioning Liturgy was presided over by Bishop Kevin O'Brien.
In his homily, the Bishop urged the Ministers to follow the example of the two disciples at Emmaus.
They returned to the community — to the Church, always see ministry in the context of the Church.
Love and embrace the Church despite its human failings.
The Church is where Christ's ministry of mercy and compassion is centered.
At the conclusion of the liturgy, Bishop O'Brien presented Faculty Certificates to 150 Ministers who were recommissioned for a further five years service.
Thanks were expressed by the chairman, Canon O'Mahoney, to Sister Susan for her presentation and to Sister Madeleine for leading the music and to Fr.
Morgan for all the organisation involved in the day.
More reports — page 2.
SOCIAL THANKS
PROCEEDS from the recent Bishop's Annual Charity Social at the Marton Country Club were donated to the Hemlington Day Care Centre.
Bishop Harris presented the cheque to Brother Bonaventure, Prior, at the social evening.
Full report in next month's ‘Voice’.
Thanks to all who supported the event.
The centre will be run by St John of God Community.
NOVEMBER — MONTH OF THE HOLY SOULS
Opening address welcome…
SPEAKING at the opening of the Diocesan Vestment Guild Centenary Exhibition at the Cathedral, Middlesbrough, Monsignor David Hogan, Chancellor of the Diocese, said:
‘I was delighted to be asked to speak at the opening of this exhibition to mark the Centenary of the Diocesan Vestment Guild.
‘In the life of any organisation, a centenary is a very considerable period of time, a good deal longer than is given to most of us.
On this occasion I would like to mention your Guild is only 14 years younger than the Diocese itself.
‘The celebrations which took place to mark the centenary of the Diocese in 1978 took place in a time of great change.
A new Bishop has just been appointed and now in 1992 we are in the throes of the same process.
‘In all of this there is the wonderful thread of continuity yet change, the changes of fashion, but woven all through like in a tapestry we find continuity, of faith, of worship.
The quiet dedicated work of the members of your Guild to enhance the worship of the one eternal God by your labours is more than worthy of mention.
Praise of God
‘The vestments which have been made adds immeasurably to the praise of God.
So on my behalf and of many others, may I offer sincere congratulations to the Diocesan Vestment Guild and express also true thanks and appreciation.
‘When I was asked to speak on this happy occasion, my mind went back to when I was seven years old and with my twin brother and others, we were being prepared for first Holy Communion.
‘First Confession had just take place.
We were bring led through the sacristy at school on our way to the chapel.
On the sacristy press a set of vestments was laid out.
‘We were told by the teacher it was a mortal sin to touch them P of course we all did!
Only later did the teacher's foolish comment cause anxiety in the minds of children where none should ever have existed.
Visible sign
‘Nevertheless, this incident did teach me to have respect for all things associated with the Mass.
Vestments are saying something very important about our relationship with God.
We are saying at the liturgy we come into God's presence, we speak with him, offer him our thanks and praise, open our hearts to him especially in our darkest moments and he speaks to us of his love and grace.
‘Vestments are a visible sign for us that what we are about in the liturgy is something very special, they help us to appreciate we are approaching the holiness of God Himself.
‘I believe we live in a world which is marred deeply by crudity and vulgarity, bereft of beauty, culturally impoverished to an amazing degree.
We believe in a God who made this world and all in it as something beautiful to behold.
‘In your labours in the Vestment Guild you are creating things of beauty to lead us to the wonder of God.
This is taking us from the mundane and the ugly and helping us to see something of the reality of the splendour of God in our lives, particularly when we worship Him.
‘It is a great joy for me to declare this exhibition open and to pray for God's blessing on you all who have worked with such tireless dedication over the years.
‘God bless you all.’
Formation Day Liturgy
A CELEBRATION of Mass or a service of the Word?— the choice will sometimes present itself when our speaker's witness calls for time and flexibility for a worthwhile presentation.
Over the years our speakers have unveiled first-hand experience of the Eucharist, of service and of human need.
Fresh and wider insights have been offered for the ongoing formation to which ministers of the Eucharist are committed, whether ordained or for special needs.
The two liturgies of Word and of Eucharist are one in the Mass, but a liturgy of the Word in any circumstance should serve our next and further celebrations of Mass.
The Eucharist is served by our Formation Day Liturgy when this expands and deepens awareness and closeness to Christ, to his Spirit and to his Way.
Real people in real life are served and nourished by the Lord Jesus of the Maundy and the Supper.
Our openness to them and to our real selves are brought to our celebration and ministry of the Eucharist.
What we bring to the rite of Mass can draw out from it our response to God's grace and friendship.
This is how a sacrament ‘works’, its dynamism, its power in action.
In some years the rite of Mass can serve our next and further Masses.
Sometimes a fuller Word will better serve a more fruitful ministry as we return to our parishes.
Word and Eucharist remain table of the one Lord.
Chairman, Diocesan Liturgy Commission
Recommended as Minister
OVER 600 Special Ministers of the Eucharist gathered in York for the annual study day led by Sister Susan McGuiness FCJ.
One Minister comments: Why did I go to York on October 3 to be recommissioned as a Eucharistic Minister?
Sister Susan McGuiness F.C.J. Sister Madeleine F.C.J. and Bishop Kevin O'Brien all helped me to answer this question.
The words and melodies of the hymns used during the day all helped to put me in a receptive mood.
Right from the outset I was struck by Sr. Susan's outgoing, down-to-earth, compassionate and cheerful approach to life: she is certainly a Faithful Companion of Jesus.
Her personal anecdotes as a hospital chaplain showed a real sense of fun intermingled with her obvious dedication.
She interwove the Emmaus story into her talk, mentioning words such as‘companioning’, ‘accompanying’— which made me realise that we are all here to help see one another to the heavenly Jerusalem:— the word meaning a place of peace —‘Jerushalom’.
I felt that as a Minister of the Eucharist I am privileged to accompany Our Lord to my fellow pilgrims, particularly those who are sick or bereaved in one way or another.
Sister stressed how important it is to speak to the troubled, to have time for listening and not to evade the issue.
The final Liturgy of recommissioning was introduced by Sr. Susan, who referred to Isaiah's theme of goodness of the Lord past, present and future.
The lighting of three candles for our intentions, the readings from Isaiah  accompanied by quiet music, the distribution of tiny paper scrolls with a prayer of blessing inside each, all contributed to my renewal.
I know how my sick friends enjoyed hearing about my day, and appreciated the prayer from my little scroll, when I took Our Lord to them on Sunday morning.
Recommissioning
Bishop Kevin O'Brien led the Liturgy of Recommissioning for Ministers Commissioned in 1987 or previously recommissioned in 1987.
In summing up the day the Bishop emphasised the fact that there are weak as well as strong, failures as well as successes, amongst the people of God.
But we must all help each other as we make our pilgrim way in the company of Christ.
Here is the verse and chorus which appealed to me the most.
Christ is the world in which we move,
Christ's are the folk we're summoned to
love,
Christ's is the voice which calls us to care,
And Christ is the one who meets us here,
To the lost Christ shows his face,
To the unloved he gives His embrace,
To those who cry in pain or disgrace,
Christ makes with his friends a touching place.
Thanks were expressed to the Diocesan Liturgy Commission who arranged the day.
A. Minister 
Reflections on a century of Vestment Guild
SPEAKING at the annual meeting of the Diocesan Vestment Guild following the Thanksgiving Mass in the Cathedral, Mrs Barbary Boyes, secretary and treasurer for the past 42 years, gave her account of some of the Guild's activities and achievements over the past century.
The following are extracts:
I welcome you all here today.
It is a special occasion as it coincides with a lovely Flower Celebration and we have Canon Harney to thank very much for allowing this to happen in our lovely Cathedral.
I do welcome those who have travelled from York and Hull, perhaps seeing their new Cathedral for the first time.
It is a delight to have Bishop Harris with us once more— he has only missed being present twice in 14 years.
Report
We are indeed indebted to him for his loyalty to the Guild — today marks the end of two eras — 100 years for the Guild and the end of the Diocesan Episcopate of Bishop Harris — it only remains for me to express on your behalf our very best wishes to his Lordship for a very happy, healthy and long retirement.
You have in your possession a copy of my report, I feel I cannot thank members adequately, those who collect subscriptions and those members who made such lovely vestments; for their dedication to the Guild.
I must mention one member — Angela (nee Feetenby)— for her help to me has been second to none — not only do I congratulate her for that but on your behalf I want to wish her every happiness in her new life — she was married last July to Harry Bell.
I was looking through the archives recently and some rather fascinating facts may interest you!
Bishop Lacey — our first Bishop — was desirous of setting up a Guild to oversee the making of vestments and the provision of linen items for the altar.
Bishop Lacey asked Lady Alice Dundas and her sister Charlotte to form a Guild, which they did by 1892 — 14 years after the Diocese began.
By the time Bishop Shine had become Bishop in the twenties the Faith C.J. became very involved and have been the mainstay of the Guild to this day.
Mother Mary Theresa became involved about the time of the outbreak of World War II.
Some of our long-serving members will remember her collecting donations on buses and trams and in public houses — a marvellous character — she collected hundreds of pounds.
Support
The Guild did not function during the war but their first meeting after hostilities ended, was held on October 4, 1944 (??)— the actual day I was married!
In 1950 Mother Theresa F.C.J., invited me to become a member of the Guild.
The clergy were very supportive and Bishop Brunner persuaded me that I should extend the membership of the Guild so that it was more Diocesan oriented.
In 1954 and 1956 branches were begun in Hull and York.
By this time I was beginning to gather a few ladies together who were interested in having a go at making vestments.
It so happened that about this period the trend was towards vestments on more simple lines.
In the early sixties building of new churches and halls gave the Guild much work to do.
Every new church and chapel of ease was provided with five sets of vestments, altar cloths, albs and altar linen and our remit was to help foreign missions where needed.
These are still our aims.
Concelebration Masses were becoming commonplace and Bishop McClean asked if we could provide 52 sets of white Mass vestments for use on important occasions with a particular view to the Diocesan Centenary Celebrations coming in 1978.
In the mid-eighties there was the building and opening of this lovely Cathedral and therefore the Guild was again very busy making 13 sets of cream vestments together with 52 Stoles — 13 of each of the four liturgical colours.
Doing a little research I can give you approximate numbers of the various things the Guild has made since the turn of the century as follows: 645 sets of Mass vestments, 121 copes, 226 altar cloths, 211 albs plus hundreds of pieces of small linen corporals, purificators amices, etc.
During the lifetime of the Guild there have been: 5 bishops, 4 spiritual directors, 3 secretary/treasurers.
In all this, I feel I must pay tribute to our present Spiritual Director, Canon Harney.
He has been most supportive and indeed we have the Canon to thank that our Centenary Celebrations have taken the form they have, and I think you will agree it has been a very fitting culmination to our 100 years history.
I wish to thank the Endsleigh Community for hosting our meetings in Hull.
To Angela I convey my grateful thanks for undertaking the needlework responsibility in 1986; without whom this exhibition would not have taken place in such a lavish way.
Last I have a very pleasant task to perform, namely to ask Angela to kindly present to His Lordship a token of our loving esteem for all he has done for the Guild over the years and hopefully when he wears the vestment he will say a prayer for us all — AD MULTOS ANNOS.
Barbara Boyes and Angela (Feetenby) Bell.
Bishop says ‘welcome’
WELCOME to the Cathedral Church of St Mary, the new Mother Church of the Diocese of Middlesbrough.
The new building is of importance for a number of reasons.
First and foremost, it is the spiritual centre of the whole diocese and, also, a parish church serving the needs of the local community.
It is very obviously quite unlike the former, much loved Cathedral in Sussex Street, Middlesbrough.
The very word ‘Cathedral’ evokes beauty and grandeur, but this new building is uncomplicated.
It is among a small number of churches designed specifically to accommodate the liturgical changes which followed from the Second Vatican Council.
A Cathedral is the principal church of a Diocese, not necessarily the largest or most magnificent.
It is the sign and centre of spiritual authority.
St Mary's Cathedral is thus the focal point of the Middlesbrough Diocese, the centre of its liturgical life, and its link with all the Bishops of the world in communion with the Bishop of Rome.
As a building, it stands in testimony to the skills and industry of those who contributed in so many ways to its design, construction and furnishing.
But our Cathedral is more than an architectural achievement — it is an affirmation of belief, a place of community and worship, a symbol of unity and faith, a source of inspiration.
It is a House of God.
My thanks and congratulations to all who have provided this opportunity to admire the works of natural beauty, and the works of artistic worth, all combining to give glory to God.
Enjoy your visit and, please, come again.
Augustine Harris Bishop of Middlesbrough
HISTORY OF THE GUILD
THE Diocese of Middlesbrough was formed in 1878, and the Vestment Guild was established in 1892 to provide vestments and altar linen for use in the poor parishes.
Vestments on display spanned the century of the Guild but, in the passing of time, most of the original vestments have been lost.
Examples were sown of the style of vestments worn when High Mass was celebrated — when the celebrant would have the assistance of Deacons who would wear the Dalmatic.
The vestments were more elaborately designed and embroidered, much of the work being undertaken by the Religious and ladies who could devote hours of leisure to this work.
Over the century, as changes have taken place in everyday living, so changes have followed in the style and choice of materials for use in church services.
There would appear to be less need for heavy garments richly  embroidered , which necessitate special care and attention.
Vestments using the modern fabrics contrast sharply with the old.
The exhibition, hopefully, showed how the changes have gradually taken place, and that there is still a small group of women prepared to give their time and talents for the enhancement of church services.
— Angela M. Bell, Needlework Administrator of the Middlesbrough Diocesan Vestment Guild.
Sincere thanks to you all!
SINCERE thanks are extended to all those who have contributed to the success of this Exhibition of Vestments and Flower Celebration, in particular:
Around the Diocese
Annual meeting of the SVP
THE St Vincent de Paul Society held its annual general meeting in Newcastle upon Tyne in September.
Cardinal Basis Hume told SVP members that their work with the old, sick, bereaved, lonely and the poor was at the centre of the mission of the church; by showing the face of Christ to those with needs, they were bringing Gospel values to the community.
Elena Long, of Catholic AIDS Link, said that the Gospel gave reasons for helping and supporting those who are HIV positive or who have developed AIDS.
She gave examples of men and women rejected by family and friends who had found acceptance and love and friendship in the church.
This enabled them to become reconciled with family and faith.
St. Joan Moriaty, Daughter of Charity, gave a very moving description of life in Romania for children with AIDS.
She has recently returned from a journey in Romania to see the conditions of at least 1,000 children under the age of one, who had contracted AIDS through injections with dirty needles or contaminated blood.
She said that two Daughters of Charity are going to Romania to set up a training programme for nursing staff and care assistants.
The SVP hopes to offer help as well.
Members of the Youth Conference gave a lively drama impression of ‘Camp Vincent!’ which is for young members of the society, and those who would like to be in the society, to come together to share views, aspirations, experiences of working in the society, and enjoy fellowship together.
Deanery discusses the baptismal programme
THE second meeting of the Middlesbrough District Deanery was held at the Cathedral on 23rd September.
The main purpose of the meeting was to consider baptismal programmes in the eight deanery parishes.
The meeting, chaired by the Dean, V.Rev.
Tom Brophy began with a reading and meditation by Fr.
Michael Bayldon on the theme of baptism.
This was followed by a presentation by Mr Michael Foley on ‘Celebrating Baptism as a Parish Community’.
Michael presented annual statistics of infant baptisms in the Deanery (nearly 200) and suggested ways in which programmes should be initiated at parish level.
A selection of excellent resource material was available to illustrate the many and varied schemes/programmes.
Parish representatives were then asked to examine (a) baptismal preparation in their parish,(b) to consider the advantages of baptismal programmes and (c) to decide the way in which the laity could be encouraged and equipped to share in the leadership of such programmes.
During the feed-back session, it was clear that the parishes approached the sacrament of baptism in many, different ways.
However it was agreed that the setting up of programmes could bring many benefits to a parish if it was seen as a partnership between priests and people.
It was also agreed that appropriate training and support should be made available to the laity.
A further meeting was arranged to consider the training needs of potential leaders.
Fellowship holidays '92
ONCE AGAIN THE Middlesbrough Catholic Handicapped Fellowship enjoyed successful holidays in Whitburn and Alnwick.
Much of this success is due to the commitment of our helpers, nay of who have been good friends over a considerable number of years; others are regular helpers at our playgroup and youth club sessions throughout the year and are established ‘old friends’ before the holidays begin.
Others were with us for the first time — students from the Darlington area.
Their energies and enthusiasm are greatly to be admired.
Successful though holidays may be they would not take place without a large bank balance.
Our holiday funds are raised by countless and most often unnamed people who work hard all through the year to swell our funds.
The largest slice of our cash comes from the ‘Charity Shop’ and so we wish to express our thanks to all those involved with it — those who give goods to sell — those who staff it — those why buy and keep on coming back for more.
Our best wishes and thanks to all.
MASS venues for November and December: 15th November — Corpus Christi 20th December — Holy Name of Mary 
Crisis at Newlands School!
STRANGE pupils were seen wandering about Newlands School, Middlesbrough, at the end of September when the school decided to raise money for ‘Crisis in Africa’ with an ‘Own Clothes Day’.
Lack of suitable clothing forced many of the staff to arrive in school uniform.
Sadly many of them did not show quite the high standard of dress they expect of their pupils.
. Newlands School F.C.J. Headteacher Mrs Joan Pickering with her unruly form who invaded the staffroom.
Deputy headteacher Stella Postlewhite wearing the pupils' idea of uniform with English teacher Susan Gardiner, modelling the authorised version.
History of Walsingham
WALSINGHAM became a shrine to Our Lady at a difficult time when the Turks overran the Holy Land and stopped pilgrimages to Jerusalem and Nazareth for which the English were already renowned.
Pilgrimages stopped in 1058.
In 1061, a Saxon lady Richeldas de Faverche of Walsingham had a vision of Our Lady and was asked to build a model of the holy house in her grounds.
She did so, it was a time before statues were used for devotion.
The ‘house’ was a symbol, for 500 years English and Continental pilgrims flocked to ‘England's Nazareth’.
A statue was put in.
It is the one of which a copy is used today.
A protective chapel was built around, and an Augustinian Priory to guard it and to organise the crowds.
Great wealth accumulated.
We know a lot about it; William of Worcester wrote about it, Kings and Queens came often barefoot.
It was the Lourdes of the 13th and 14th centuries.
All the English kings from Henry III to Henry VIII — a notable benefactor, but he turned!!
The Chapel of Reconciliation, Walsingham
It was the first Shrine to go in the Reformation, burned to the ground.
After years, legends, memories, lived on.
Our Lady remembered.
In 1891 another holy lady, Charlotte Boyd bought the Little Gen of a Chapel, The Slipper Chapel and restored it.
In the 1930's two movements took place: The English Catholic Hierarchy restored the shrine in the Slipper Chancel and declared it ‘England's National Shrine.’
Almost simultaneously, and Anglican vicar, Fr.
Hope then built a beautiful shrine at the other end of the village.
Both shrines flourish today and co-operate  ecumenically .
Almost simultaneously, an Anglican vicar, Fr.
Hope then built a beautiful shrine at the other end of the village.
Both shrines flourish to day and co-operate eceumenically.
Cleveland Newman Circle new season of talks
ON Wednesday S.M. spoke to the Circle on ‘the Old Testament and Christianity’ in the parish room of St Patrick's, Fairfield, Stockton.
He began by indicating that Catholics, in general, had some experience of how the O.T.
and Christianity were related through hearing the readings from Scripture made on Sundays at Mass.
The first reading, formed from passages in the Old Testament, focused on a theme found in a passage from the Gospels that was expressed in the third reading.
Sometimes the second reading, usually made from the Apostolic writings, had the same theme especially in Lent or Advent.
The Bible
He then turned to consider the historic background to the relationship.
After Alexander the Great's victories in the near East towards the end of the fourth century B.C., Greek became a common tongue over a wide area.
The Septuagint appeared in Egypt, this was a Greek version of the Hebraic scriptures of which the Law, the first five books of our Bible was the basis.
The Scripture in Greek was used in the infant Church in whatever locality her members were.
The Jews regarded the Law or Torah as a guide to right living.
The Church looked to Jesus as the new lawgiver who had abrogated the ceremonial precepts of the Old Covenant or Testament but retained its moral precepts.
A body of writings emerged among Christians, known as the New Covenant or Testament.
Many pages of the New Testament contain quotations or allusions to the Old Testament.
St Paul in an embryonic creed in I Corinthians, says Christ died for sinners and was raised on the third day according to the Scriptures (meaning the O.T.).
The Jews divided their Scripture differently from that familiar to Christians.
Fr.
Duckworth recounted how in Palestine he had met a scribe whose  craftsmanship had weakened with age and so was only permitted to make copies of the ‘writings’ a part of the O.T.
that excluded the Torah and the prophetical books
Lord's advent
Another contrast is that the Jewish O.T.
ends with Chronicles II on a positive note in which Cyrus is seen as the saviour of the Jews who restored their inheritance in  Judah while the last the prophetical books, Malachi, in the Catholic Bible finishes looking forward to Elijah's coming at the Lord's advent.
Many features of the N.T. cannot be fully appreciated without the O.T., e.g. the Jewish fear of ritual contamination by a corpse, implicit in the story of the Good Samaritan.
Fr.
Duckworth discussed many other aspects of the N.T. and its relation to the O.T.
Commenting on the many questions asked he pointed out that a literal understanding of what was said in the O.T.
did not particularly interest the  Semitic mind, what was meant did.
What was recorded in the O.T.
was understood in relation to Christ.
At the next meeting of the Circle, at 7.30pm on Wednesday, 11th November, Fr.
Aelred Smith will speak on ‘Paul, the Lord's Journeyman’ at St Patrick's Parish Room, Fairfield, Stockton.
All are welcome.
Polish Appeal thank-you
RE: PAEDIATRIC SYMPOSIUM KRAKOW '92
Mrs Carol Rushton, superintendent physiotherapist has returned form the above and presented me with a report on the course.
May I thank you on behalf of Carol, Lindsay Hardy, occupational therapist and Dr Peter Morrell, consultant paediatrician and all concerned for enabling this event to take place.
The symposium was held in September as announced in ‘Voice’ to complement the previous course led in 1991 by Carol and Lindsay.
This year Dr Peter Morrell was also invited to discuss neonatal screening and provide an overview.
The course extended through four days involving videos, practical demonstrations, workshops, seminars and open discussions and debate.
The success of the symposium may be measured by the invitation from our Polish colleagues for 1993 and also, in the Development Centre, the implementation of techniques taught last year and reinforced by the June exchange visit.
Needs have been identified for high quality therapy equipment at the Developmental Centre and for possible further exchanges of staff in July 1993.
May I thank all who contributed to the KSC Polish Appeal recently; for your generous donations which have enabled this work to be carried out.
—J.Linton (Mrs), District Physiotherapist.
York LIFE
PAULINE Connor, LL.B. will speak out against the abortifacient drug, RU486, in York, on 9th November.
The organisation she represents, Feminists Against Eugenics, considers the drug dangerous, experimental and misogynistic.
‘What has been presented as a simple pill-popping exercise is, in fact, an intensely medicalised and painful procedure which can need four clinic visits and last 12 days.’
Counsellors, in LIFE Pregnancy Care Centres, who help women who have suffered abortions, are concerned that the consequences of RU486 abortions will be worse than those of surgical abortion.
With RU486, the mother received no general anaesthetic.
She is in control.
She takes the pills lethal to her child.
She is awake when the procured miscarriage happens.
Pauline will be speaking at York LIFE annual meeting at 7.30pm, Huntington Room, King's Manor, near the Theatre, 9th November.
York LIFE hopes to open a Care Centre soon.
Publications for the blind
A Braille Edition of the Sunday Missal is now available.
Not only does this enable blind people to follow the liturgy but it also makes it possible for those who wish to become readers.
It is published in 15 volumes by the Royal National Institute for the Blind.
It is available to blind people at a concessionary cost of £17.55.
The Association of Blind Catholics has a lending library of books recorded on standard cassette.
Details about the Association can be obtained from Mr Paul Questier.
‘Mayfield’.
Saneline
SANELINE is the first helpline for people suffering from mental illness, their families, professional helpers and those generally involved in assisting people who suffer in this way.
It aims to offer information and support to callers on a special ‘phone service and will be staffed by trained and supervised volunteers, using a special database of all statutory and voluntary health care services.
INTENTIONS OF THE PILGRIMAGE '92
For stability in marriage and family life
For the unemployed and people threatened by redundancy
For a deepening of faith and the life of prayer
For greater understanding between
Churches and peoples and faiths — and an end to strife
For the disabled, less abled and underprivileged
For a generous response to vocations to the
priesthood and religious life
For Our Lady's prayers and help in all our endeavours.
Walsingham Slipper Chapel
Poppy Appeal
REMEMBRANCE Sunday this year falls on November 8th.
The Royal British Legion have again requested support for their appeal which this year commemorates the 50th anniversary of the Battle of El-Alamein.
The Legion sends thanks for your past support and asks for helpers with this year's Poppy Appeal.
Volunteer should call and they will be put in touch with their local Poppy Organiser.
Ascent Movement
THE ‘Ascent’ Movement was started to help the elderly develop their praying in line with their state of life, and look for guidance and help.
It has a threefold purpose: Spirituality, Apostolate and Friendship.
This Movement now exists in many countries and fulfils a need in elderly people.
If you would like further information, please contact Mrs Paula Conrad.
Youth News
TONGUES OF FIRE.
Youth Sunday 1992 — November 22.
This year we see the third and final pack on evangelisation.
The theme of the pack is ‘Tongues of Fire’ and it concentrates on evangelisation in society.
The contents include exercises; dramas; topics for reflection and discussion; prayers; readings; songs and hymns.
The packs have been sent to parishes form the Youth Office.
This is the third Youth Sunday pack in a series of three which have focused on the notion of evangelisation.
The first pack concentrated on the individual's renewal of personal faith, the second looked at the need for the Church itself to be open to, and continually responsive to the message of Christ through growth, development and change from within.
This year we focus on the role of the Church in the renewal of society.
It has been said that the Church has a responsibility to ‘engage the culture of our nation with the gospel.’
For this to happen the Church must be like a beacon shining through the darkness, an example of love and justice to the rest of society.
In this decade of evangelisation it is important for the Church to ‘teach publicly on moral issues and for its lay members to become more involved in the social and political life of the country…that all members of the Church should take part in the Church's mission of bringing Christ to the world.’
(report on Bishop's Conference, April 1990).
In preparing this pack a number of concepts have influenced our thinking:
Firstly, the image of FIRE which symbolises energy, power, light and human aspiration.
Secondly, the challenge to the Church to bring about a renewal of society.
Thirdly, the fact that each of us has a responsibility to be involved in bringing about that renewal.
The theme of the pack ‘Tongues of Fire’ immediately reminds us of the power of the Holy Spirit coming to the apostles at Pentecost and their going out to spread the gospel message fired up with enthusiasm and courage.
We too, like the apostles have our part to play in the building of the kingdom because we are not just members of the Church the apostles founded, we are the Church.
The various items offered in the pack have been chosen to reflect the concept of the Church attempting to bring about a renewal in society.
CAYA conference
EVERYONE who attended the 12th national CAYA conference at Wistaston Hall, in July, gained something out of it, ranging from ‘inner peace’ and ‘closeness and sharing’to ‘a beautifully relaxing weekend’.
Thanks to Fr.
Michael, Fr.
John and the rest of the staff of Wistaston Hall for their kindness and hospitality.
The theme for the weekend ‘reconciliation’, was explored by Fr.
Vladimir Felzmann, youth officer in the diocese of Westminster, and Gordon Wilson, remembered for his words spoken after his daughter Marie was killed by a bomb blast at Enniskillen in 1987.
Fr.
Vladimir broke down reconciliation into five steps: God, sin, guilt, forgiveness and reconciliation, but stated that the real key is love:
‘God loves, and thus understands, and thus forgives’.
Gordon Wilson shared with us his personal experience of reconciliation through love and the Holy Spirit, which followed on perfectly from Fr.
Vladimir's talk.
Gordon showed us clearly the path of forgiveness, and gave us the strength to forgive from his experience.
It is always hard to forgive people because forgiveness is often seen as a sign of weakness and we feel vulnerable enough after we have been hurt that we tend to build a wall between ourselves and those who have offended us, rather than to have the strength to forgive them and therefore become reconciled with them.
True reconciliation is a process in which all those involved can grow.
Forgetting is not the same as forgiving.
Fr.
Vladimir described the difference as ‘white washing’ and ‘washing white’: white washing is quick and relatively easy, just covering up what was there, but there is always the danger of it chipping off and revealing what is underneath.
Washing white is a longer process of removing the dirt and stains.
 It is harder but more permanent, once it is gone, that is it.
New stains may appear, but once they have been cleaned they have gone forever.
Thanks to Gordon Wilson and Fr.
Vladimir on the behalf of CAYA for coming to speak to us, and making clearer such a complex subject.
Special thanks too Gordon for sharing the whole weekend with us, and I ask you on his behalf to pray for the people of Northern Ireland.
Life is rarely easy, and we do not gain anything by holding a grudge against someone, especially if we love them.
Bitterness and hatred are only self-destructive, yet they are often the chosen path.
Youth right to honesty
HONESTY is the bedrock of any healthy relationship.
Without this foundation, misunderstanding arise.
With it, constructive argument is provided for.
Our young people deserve honesty from ourselves and have a right to it from the Church.
Clarity is vital here.
Having worked with young people at school, on the streets and in prison one has been consistently struck by their thirst for clear information on and about the Church and her teachings.
Whether the teachings are warmly welcomed or fiercely rejected, the clear information is always gratefully received.
It helps everyone to know where they stand.
It is imperative therefore that the Church utilise all available media to communicate herself clearly.
Her two most efficient means though remain her liturgy — the source and summit of the Christian life — and her personnel — you and me.
Dialogue
Communication, of course, is two way.
Of equal, if not greater, importance as clear information is an open ear.
For all of us, to be able to talk in an atmosphere of trust and support is often all that is needed.
In so doing anxieties are at least identified if not solved.
However, if we fail to listen to our young people not only will we remain ignorant of their concerns and problems but we will also be starved of their insights and talents.
To determine that dialogue with the young and prayer with God is what is needed is, admittedly, hardly the most astonishing conclusion to have reached.
Practising each of course if the key.
If your young people are allowed to share their aspirations with the wisdom of their elders the benefits, one knows from experience, will be mutual.
A bit of patience will not go amiss in this area either: what one sows another reaps.
So do not let ourselves go seeking instant conversions or any of that jazz.
On the other hand though, precisely because this is God's work, not ours, let us not set our sights too low.
A nod across the classroom, a wave across the street is evidence that God is doing the hard graft.
John Bane
John, who is a student at Ushaw College, spent his summer placement assisting Father Patrick Cape: Diocesan Youth Officer, based at Postgate House, Lartington .
POSTGATE HOUSE PROVES POPULAR THE Residential Youth Centre, Postgate House, Lartington, is now used extensively by parish groups and schools throughout the Diocese.
We thank you for your response.
Brochure available on request.
All enquiries about Postgate House direct to Therese Hynes.
The Diocesan Youth Service is available to offer training and advice and continued support to all those involved in working with young people throughout the Diocese.
For further information please contact Fr.
Patrick Cope at the Diocesan Youth Office.
Catholic Countryside
I WAS interested to learn that a New Moon Festival was a feature of biblical times.
This was one of the great Hebrew festivals and involved a sacrifice of two heifers, one ram and seven one-year-old lambs.
These were a burnt-offering with other ingredients such as flour, oil and wine mixed in different proportions according to which beast was then being sacrificed and eaten.
On some occasions, a kid goat was also offered as atonement for the sins of the Hebrews.
The moon has been featured as a deity since the beginning of human life on earth.
This was especially the case among the early Oriental religions for whom the moon appeared in a cloudless sky as a thing of immense beauty and mystery.
The people of India worshipped the moon as a goddess called maja.
The Phoenicians called her Astarte or Ashteroth while Greeks and Romans termed her Artemis and Diana.
In the Old Testament, Job alludes to the moon's power over the human soul and there is another reference in Gen. i. 16 which refers to the moon as the lesser of the two great lights of heaven.
Sacrifice
The greater light was, of course, the sun which, in early mythology, was considered masculine while the moon was feminine and in some cultures, she was called The Queen of Heaven.
In Jeremiah xliv.17 there is a suggestion that the moon was worshipped by the Israelites
It says, ‘We will certainly burn incense to the queen of heaven and pour out drink offerings to her as we have done, we and our fathers.’
To worship the moon, as queen of heaven, they also sacrificed burnt offerings and made cakes, while the Jews made vows to the moon.
During Biblical times, some ancients thought moonlight was dangerous for one's eyes but a more modern belief was that if you took a child, suffering from whooping cough, outside to look at the new moon, then it would effect a cure.
Perhaps the most enduring of all moon-associated beliefs is that moonlight helps the crops to grow.
Primitive man believed this; this is one reason why the moon has long been considered feminine.
She is regarded as passive (because the light does not have the intensity of the sun), and productive because it was believed that her shining, heavenly presence encouraged the growth of crops.
If we think those ancient people were silly, we should look to ourselves in modern times.
Even now, some gardeners arrange the planting of their seeds to coincide with the phases of the moon.
Superstition
Some seeds are always planted as the moon is waxing while others are always planted as the moon is waning.
Some believe that new plants flourish if their early growth coincides with the growing of a new moon.
There are lots of superstitions which are linked to the moon, such as turning over the coins in one's pockets as a form of luck when seeing a new moon through glass, while the phases of the moon used to dictate the timing of weddings and other important aspects of life.
THE RAMBLER 
HERE I AM…
A Religious Education Programme for Primary Schools
‘HERE I Am’ is a Religious Education Programme for Primary Schools approved by the hierarchy for use in Catholic primary schools for children from nursery age to eleven years!
Launched at Westminster, the Middlesbrough Diocese was represented by Sister Felicity Dobson and Sister Bernadette O'Malley — Diocesan Religious Education Advisers.
In his address Bishop Mullins, emphasised the prime role of parents in passing on the faith to their children.
He pointed out the importance that the Church has put on education from the earliest times and the duty and responsibility of local bishops to be guides and teachers in handing down the truth of Christ.
Speaking in his capacity as Chairman of the Bishops' Committee for Catechetics, he continued:
Witness
It is to teach our young people about Him, it is to bring them to a conscious faith in Him so that in the heart and life of the Church, they can proclaim and witness to the faith of the ages, that Jesus is truly God and truly man, the Lord and saviour of us all.’
BISHOP HARRIS , writing to the headteachers of Catholic Primary Schools in the MIddlesbrough Diocese recently said:
‘You will now have started on the programme ‘Here I Am’.
‘No programme, syllabus or  catechism is complete in itself.
They all require a great deal of input from the teacher and I write to encourage you in the task which lies ahead.
The ‘Here I Am’ programme is officially to be used in the diocese as the structure within which the faith is to be presented.
‘There may be questions to be asked and problems to be solved concerning the implementation of this programme.
Do remember to be in touch with Sister Felicity, who is anxious to help the programme forward.
‘May I take this opportunity to thank you all for the good work you are doing and assure you of my prayers.’
A force to be reckoned with
ON a windy day in September, 1,000 delegates and members of the Catholic Women's League arrived at York University for National Council 1992, hosted by Middlesbrough Branch.
It was to be a very full weekend of well organised and highly enlightening meetings; the opportunity to hear some excellent speakers: and the chance to renew old friendships and make new ones.
Guest speaker, Mrs Rosemary Gallagher, Editorial Director of Redemptorist Publications, talked about Evangelisation and the Family.
‘The family, our school of life, is the Church in miniature,’ she stated, and went on to tell us that we must recognise our unity in diversity and cherish our differences.
She added that 50 years ago society tolerated things that were considered intolerable now and that many of our laws coming up in the social area were the result of pressure from families.
Rt.
Rev. Francis Walmsley, C.B.E., Ecclesiastical Assistant to the League and Bishop to the Forces, spoke about the environment, urging us to consider what we were doing to reduce the consumption of the earth's resources.
‘How many of us,’ he asked, ‘really try to buy goods made of recycled materials or at least protest at the extravagant use of costly and unnecessary packaging?’
Congratulations
Mass was celebrated on Saturday morning in the Great Hall by Bishop Walmsley followed by a welcome from Middlesbrough Diocesan President, Mrs Maureen Nelson.
On Sunday morning Bishop Harris of Middlesbrough celebrated Mass and delivered the homily in which he welcomed us into his diocese and congratulated us on the work we were doing.
National President, Mrs Joyce Triggs, advised members to find out if their MPs supported Christian values and what their views were on important issues.
She warned that family life was increasingly under threat from debt and house repossession.
Referring to falling numbers in the League, she reiterated the words of our foundress, Margaret Fletcher, saying that we were still ‘a force to be reckoned with.’
Awareness Day
‘THEY Shall be Comforted’ is the theme for the next Awareness Day for those experiencing bereavement or involved in Bereavement Ministry.
It will be held on  in St Thomas More's Parish Hall, Middlesbrough from 9.45am and will conclude with Mass at 4pm., celebrated by Fr.
Tom Zoller of Madonna House.
The key speaker for the Day will be Sr. Susan McGuiness F.C.J. who is making a return visit to the event following her very successful previous contribution.
The day will, hopefully, provide an opportunity for listening, quite prayer and safe sharing.
Please see your parish bulletin/notice board or contact Kath Crossen or Pat O'Connor for further details.
Pastoral Council
A TOTAL of 26 people attended the meeting of the Yorkshire Coast Pastoral Council at St Hilda's, Whitby, in October.
Members wished the annual Days of Recollection to continue at Madonna House and arrangement of suitable dates will be made with the Community.
Bishop O'Brien reminded the meeting that the Pastoral Council was meant to be a means of bringing the thoughts of the people to the Bishop.
Prayer and good works benefit both the individual and the parish and we should always remember our priests in our prayers.
At our last meeting it was suggested that two groups should meet to discuss the future work of the Council.
It was hoped that this would be remedied in the near future.
General discussion then took place on possible work which the Council members could arrange within the parishes.
Bible Study meetings, talks on improving our prayer life, discussion on the Mass, were all suggested.
The Community of Madonna House expressed their willingness to go out to parishes and help with prayer or study groups if requested.
A number of seminars and talks have been held in both Whitby and St George's, Eastfield, in the past.
A new series of seven weekly talks are planned in St Patrick's, Whitby.
More ideas and experiences were shared and discussed and