

Issue No. 19
Church regret over ordination decision
But ecumenical work continues
THE Church of England Synod voted on November 11 in favour of the ordination of women to the priesthood.
This decision was received with disappointment and regret by the Roman Catholic Church.
Cardinal Hume, in a statement issued immediately after the vote was announced, said: ‘I am disappointed but not surprised by the vote today in the General Synod.
I accept that the vote reflects accurately enough the majority view within the Synod of the Church of England.
The Synod's decision does not, however, reflect the teaching of the Roman Catholic Church.
The Vatican spoke of ‘a new and grave obstacle to the process of reconciliation.’
The Catholic Church's position, which is based on its experience of the constant tradition of faith since the time of the apostles, is that ‘the Church, in fidelity to the example of the Lord, does not consider herself authorised to admit women to priestly ordination’(Introduction, declaration on the question of the admission of women to the ministerial priesthood, CDF 15 October 1976).
This position is in danger of being misunderstood as an opposition to the changing position of women in society.
This is not the basis of the Catholic position which is instead concerned with the nature of what it is to be a priest.
The Cardinal's statement continued: ‘The question of the ordination of women affects the understanding each Church has of its own identity and of its sacraments and worship.
It is not simply a matter of quality or justice.
Nor can it be decided exclusively because of changed values and attitudes of society towards women, significant though these are.
‘It involved important questions: about the very meaning of ordination, about the nature of the Eucharist and the unique role of the priest in that celebration, and most particularly about the authority vested in any individual Church to overturn  unilaterally the unvarying practice throughout the centuries of the Catholic and apostolic Church.
‘A change of such importance has to be in harmony both with Scripture and tradition, and it must reflect a moral unanimity of believers.’
The Synod's decision does not signal an end to ecumenical relations.
The great steps forward taken over the last 30 years have not been undone.
Bishop Brewer has assured the local Anglican communities of our prayers and support during these difficult times and reaffirms our commitment to continuing dialogue with the Church of England and to tackling together the serious obstacles to full communion between us.
Action on Poverty group
FAMILIES in receipt of state benefit are forced to go hungry because of lack of money according to a National Children's Home survey just published.
Unemployment in Preston as well as nationally is rising steeply as the recession continues to deepen.
More and more families are living inadequate homes with 190 families currently living in temporary accommodation in Preston, most of which is in bed and breakfast hostels.
Against this background, Preston Church Action on Poverty Group  organised a one-day conference: ‘Poverty in Preston; should the Churches care?’
At the Foxton Youth and Community Centre, Avenham, Preston.
Its purpose was to discuss the local situation and consider how the churches should respond to rising levels of poverty.
Sessions
The main speaker was Mrs Hilary Russell, the National Chair of Church Action on Poverty.
The conference also included sessions led by local people with personal knowledge of poverty in Preston who will share their experiences.
Among the issues considered were homelessness, unemployment, children and young people in poverty and the benefits systems.
For information on the group's work contact James Hawks, chair.
ADOPTERS NEEDED
IN BRITAIN today there are more than 60,000 children in care.
Many will return to their families, but some will need new families through ADOPTION.
Finding those who could adopt a child is the pressing need of today, especially as we Catholic Caring Services, need all sorts of families from all sorts of religious and cultural backgrounds for all sorts of children.
We need families for children of school age who find it difficult to trust grown-ups; for children who have learning disabilities; for children of various ethnic origins; for children who have physical disabilities and groups of brothers and sisters.
These children need you.
If you feel that you might be able to adopt a child please ring for details, asking for Mary Hollingsworth, Mary Clark or Grace Dangerfield.
This will not commit you in any way but you may find that your interest is aroused.
Catholic Caring Services is an approved adoption agency for the Diocese of Lancaster and has been involved in this work for 60 years.
Catholic Caring Services is a registered charity.
Our Decade of Evangelisation
Christ Came To Bring Light Into The World
THE Editor, the staff of the Catholic Voice, St Annes, our typesetters — Ian and Alan — and all concerned with the production of your diocesan newspaper would like to wish all readers and advertisers a very happy and Holy Christmas and every blessing for the New Year.
As a foretaste to things to come, this year's card design is from the ‘Diocesan Decade of Evangelisation Group’.
We reproduce it here with their logo which you will seeing a lot of in the months ahead.
Look out for it, it will be accompanied by very important messages.
Go in My Name OUR DECADE OF EVANGELISATION 
Memories of the 1992 Diocesan Pilgrimage to Lourdes
Helen Leech Fund
HELEN Leech died from Cystic Fibrosis on 15th January, 1985.
She was a pupil in the 1st year Juniors at St Peter's School, Lytham.
Helen was a determined little girl who bore her illness with great courage.
Towards the end of her life she paid a visit to Lourdes and, despite her suffering, she was greatly comforted by this experience.
Those who had the privilege to know her wanted to remember her.
Consequently as a memorial to Helen, and in or der to benefit other sick children, the above Trust Fund was set up in 1985 with the object of sending a sick child of any denomination, together with a parent, to Lourdes each year.
This year the fund sponsored ten sick children, and their parents, making a total of thirty-two altogether to date.
Donations to treasurer, Mrs. P. Moss.
From Mike
‘This was my second visit to Lourdes but only my first with the Helen Leech pilgrimage.
As one of the ‘older’ helpers it was a little like going back to school as my two ‘children’are now 28 and 25 and I do not have any grandchildren so holding babies of 18 months upwards and playing with youngsters was quite a change.
However, I must say that it was a privilege to be there with them and their Mum's and to help in whatever way I could, be it baby sitting or helping to push a baby buggy round the ‘stations’(who thought that one up?’).
I hope that my being there was helpful because I certainly came away with many happy memories and no one can take that away.’
Timothy's mum
TIMOTHY and I had a wonderful time in Lourdes and I feel so much comfort from it.
I know that Our Lady is looking after Timothy now.
Jessica's mum
LOURDES is a very special place, there I felt humble and I had a realisation that no matter what pain or trouble I had I was by no means alone.
Physical miracles may not happen for each person but I felt miracles can happen within everyone.
Our Lady is a Mother herself therefore she  sees each of us as her own child and will listen to our prayers and pleas.
The experience of being there was a very profound, private and personal time, each person must feel something to benefit themselves.
Richard and Rebecca's mum
IT was a wonderful pilgrimage.
I got very close to God, I felt emotionally drained but I benefited tremendously from the trip.
I would hope to go back again.
Samantha's mum
It made me realise that other people have the same problems and it helped enormously to share with the other mums.
I now feel I understand people much more now than I did before.
I gained a lot from the pilgrimage.
Nathan's mum
WE had a lovely time in Lourdes, I want to thank everyone for looking after us both.
We were so lucky to be chosen to join your pilgrimage.
The Baths are the thing that stand out most in my mind.
I could not explain how I felt other than very special.
Lisa's mum
THE atmosphere in Lourdes is something you can't describe.
It was a very moving experience, barriers were broken between the mums and we could talk from our hearts.
Lisa was very happy in Lourdes she loved the little spring inside of the Grotto, as soon as she saw it she could cling onto the railings and keep saying ‘hello, hello’.
She enjoyed all the hustle and bustle of people and music.
Since we came here she seems to by trying to talk much more.
It has given me many happy memories and I am looking forward to our all meeting again soon.
Zoe's mum
THE feeling I had when I pushed Zoe through the Grotto was so powerful.
I put my hand in the water trickling down the rock and put it on to Zoe.
I didn't go to Lourdes for a miracle but Lourdes makes me appreciate each day and thank God for Zoe.
When we were in the meadow opposite the Grotto and Father was talking about Bernadette I felt as though I could see her.
I read my Lourdes Prayer Book every day and the memories are so real.
I didn't realise that I had not completely accepted Zoe.
I asked why?
Now I know that God loves us all just as we are.
I shall take Zoe back to Lourdes as soon as she takes her first step as I know she will.
I will never be able to thank the people who took us to Lourdes enough.
Bishop Brewer with baby Timothy
Family pilgrimage of love
I HAD been to Lourdes before.
I went when my son, Sam, was just turned three-years-old.
Four and a half years later I am returning with three of my children and my husband.
As we set out I wonder if I can be allowed more miracles and how the rest of my family and fellow pilgrims will be affected.
We are a small group of 10 special children with their mothers and a band of helpers and medical staff.
The larger Diocesan pilgrimage joins us later in the week.
I'd like to share some of the special moments of our pilgrimage with you.
The first evening we left the children with some of the helpers and my husband, David, and I set out to Mass at the convent.
We passed by the Grotto together on the way and I felt the same wonder as before.
Sam is now seven, and received his First holy communion at this convent on the next day.
The service was simple and touching.
Sam's eagerness and delight in the Eucharist is an example to us all.
He was so proud and wanted everybody to share with him.
He told us how he was now ‘older’ and had received ‘Our Father’.
When we returned to the hotel for dinner a surprise awaited us.
For the dessert the waiters fetched in a beautiful cake aglow with candles and everybody sang, ‘For he's a jolly good fellow’.
Sam was so delighted and went round the room shaking hands, offering peace and cake.
Candles are special to Sam as he is allowed to blow out the altar candles after Mass at church.
He is always delighted when extra candles are lit on special feasts and at Easter.
At 11pm that night we left Terry helping the barman, George,(who was to become his close friend), and Becky asleep whilst we visited the Grotto.
It is quiet and peaceful there at night and we took Sam to buy candles.
We lit several and he was overawed by the number of candles there and in the splendour of the largest special candles.
We touched the walls and felt the waters on them, Sam licked and kissed the walls and kissed one or two of the sick pilgrims there.
He then went to the special candle stand in the centre of the Grotto and lit his candle.
He carried it alight up the hill to the gates and then blew it out.
I will always treasure it.
In the morning we sat opposite the Grotto, on the meadow, and listened to Father Hibbit tell Bernadette's story.
Our daughter Becky sat on David's knee.
As we said the ‘Hail Mary’, she joined her hands and prayed in her simple way with her Dad as she does her night prayers.
One afternoon we all went to the baths.
These are at the far end of the Grotto and filled with the waters from the spring of the Grotto.
We queued in turn as people from all nationalities prayed the rosary and sang.
Becky did not flinch from the cold water but took a deep breath as I lowered her down beneath Our  Lady's statue.
I did not know what to say or do at this moment but just said ‘Thy will be done’.
As I lifted Becky she raised her hand and touched the  statue .
The ladies and I were all very moved.
I gave Becky to them and lowered myself into the water.
Becky allowed them to dress her and kissed them goodbye.
I rejoined the group and we were all tingling and aglow with the experience.
One evening we joined the torchlight procession.
Sam had enjoyed this as a baby.
The repetition of many verses of ‘Ave Maria’ had made him sing.
I pushed him round that time as a baby of three that could not walk properly or talk clearly and had never sung.
The repetition of many verses of ‘Ave Maria’ had made him sing.
Now I walked with him and he sung heartily, loudly and with pride raising his special candle for each chorus.
I was so proud of him and gave thanks for his specialness.
We made many friends in Lourdes.
The other children were all special and it was a privilege to share a week in their lives.
As parents we shared our hopes and fears for our children and laughed and cried together.
I think the sharing and the emotional experiences are part of the miracle of Lourdes.
From the ‘Young Ones’
AS young helpers we found the Lourdes experience something worthwhile and never to be forgotten.
We were a small group and could get to know and help each child individually.
The parents were glad of a helping hand so them could have some time to themselves.
We enjoyed looking after the children very much.
We saw God in the  children's faces and the way in which the mums learned to trust us with their children.
We felt this was a real privilege.
The Grotto was a beautiful experience.
At about midnight when all the children were tucked up in bed we visited the Grotto.
There were none of the crowds that had been there during the day and we could really pray.
We particularly enjoyed the torchlight procession.
One of the young people from our party carried the banner that led us.
The amount of people present was amazing.
We are all in agreement that we will return to Lourdes when the opportunity presents itself, and are very grateful to the parishioners of St Bernadette's Parish, who donated money to pay for us to go.
The helpers
THE memories of the love and caring that went on in Lourdes is something I shall always treasure.
These mothers and children are very special people and it was a great pleasure to be involved with the pilgrimage.
Thank you — from one of the helpers.
Grand ‘Old Man of Coniston’ celebrates his Golden Jubilee
THE year of 1992 was one of considerable milestones for Father Edmund McCarten who celebrated his 80th birthday on 30th March and his Golden Jubilee of his ordination to the Priesthood on 26th July this year.
Edmund McCarten was born in Millom on 30th March, 1912 and he went to school in Millom until the age of 14 when he transferred to the seminary at Ushaw and there studied for the priesthood.
During the period of his studies, he was laid low by tuberculosis, and spent long periods in the sanatorium undergoing treatment.
In actual fact, he was allowed out of the Kingussie sanatorium for two weeks so that he could be ordained and then on being discharged from the sanatorium, he went to St Joseph's Parish, Ansdell as a curate.
Unfortunately, he suffered a further relapse and returned to the sanatorium for further treatment before being appointed the curate at St Mary's Church, Morecambe.
Ill health dogged his period at St Mary's, and he returned for a further period of treatment while he was the curate, and in September 1962 he came to Coniston as the Parish priest and significantly, no further setbacks were experienced to his health while he was living in proximity to Coniston Old Man and during the period he was Parish Priest.
In 1982 he was appointed Parish Priest at St Andrew's, Cottam, before his retirement from active Parish duties in 1987.
Since his ‘retirement’, Father McCarten has acted as supply throughout the Diocesan area, covering the parish priests while they are away on holiday and has provided a most useful service for many of his colleagues.
The Mass of Thanksgiving was celebrated by Father McCarten with Father Austin Roddy and Father Gerard Corcoran,(who were ordained from Ushaw in the same year) together with priests from the Lancaster Diocese.
The parishioners and guests at the Mass, filled Sacred Heart Church, and included many family friends.
At the end of the Mass, Father McCarten was presented with a Papal blessing, a spiritual bouquet and among other gifts, a pilgrimage to Walsingham where he concelebrated Mass in the Church on the birthday of Our Lady.
He was introduced to the large congregation as ‘The Grand Old Man of Coniston’.
After Mass, the parishioners and family gave a reception in honour of Father at Coniston Hall, Coniston, which was attended by over 100 people and  was a superb setting for the occasion, situated on the bank of Coniston Water and being overshadowed by Coniston Old Man.
The parish expressed their appreciation to the National Trust for the use of the Coniston Hall and also to all those who made the occasion such a happy family affair.
The reception of honour of Fr.
Edmund McCarten
Fr.
McCarten's Golden Jubilee cake.
‘Work with us’ say youth of our Diocese
MESSAGE from the Young People of the Diocese read at all Masses on National Youth Sunday, Feast of Christ The King, 22nd November, 1992.
My Dear People.
Today, The Feast of Christ The King, is dedicated to the Catholic Young People of the Diocese.
I therefore hand over to them:
You will soon realise that this is no ordinary bishop's letter, since it has been written by some young people from this deanery.
We, the young people of this area, extend our greetings to you and thank you for listening to us on this Youth Sunday.
National Youth Sunday is an opportunity to remind the young people, and older parishioners, that we all play an equally important part within the Church.
It is a day to celebrate the rich variety of people within our parish rather than create unnecessary divisions.
Both individually and as a parish, we need to develop our understanding of our faith, our God and our Church.
We believe that all of us, whatever our age, can learn something from one another for the good of the parish as a whole.
Generations
Together, we are the Church of the PRESENT — but we need to work as ONE to be the Church of the future!
Though young and inexperienced, we do have things to offer.
However, we need the help and understanding of others able to welcome and value the younger people who can easily feel ignored.
After all, young people are still part of the Church even if they do not attend Mass.
The media often emphasises the conflict and divisions between generations.
Yet young people, as well as older ones, are people of faith.
Our different understandings add richness to the Church, and our need to continue developing our faith is something we share in common.
Combining the experience of age and the energy of youth might help all of us to understand God better and recognise him in our lives today.
Barriers
This is the ‘Decade of Evangelisation’ but 1993 has also been dedicated as the ‘European Year of Older People and Solidarity between the Generations.’
These two event encourage communication and co-operation between different age groups.
Both provide a real opportunity to start breaking down barriers.
As young people of the diocese, we are prepared to do our bit to help create the kind of world God wants for us — but we can't do it alone.
We hope you will work with us to achieve this.
Such is their letter to us all.
God bless them and may we take to heart what they say.
Your devoted bishop.
Thank-you to Cathedral fund raisers
I WISH to thank all your readers who have contributed towards the Cathedral Restoration Fund.
To date we have received £31,000 towards the Dry Rot Fund and nearly £8,000 towards the Bell Restoration Fund.
This is a tremendous response in so short a time.
We still have some way to go but if this magnificent generosity continues we can be sure that the future of the Cathedral is in the safe hands of the people of the Diocese.
Although it is not possible to list here the groups, individuals and parishes who have helped us so far, I wish all to know that not only is their contribution needed but also greatly appreciated.
Thank you — P. Mulvany,(Administrator).
CORPUS CHRISTI HIGH SCHOOL, PRESTON
THE amalgamation of St. John Southworth and St. Thomas More High School on the St. Vincent Road site, to form Corpus Christi High School, involved extensive alterations and upgrading, to provide accommodation equal to that in either of the existing schools, and conforming to current D.E.S.
requirements for pupil provision up to 6 F.E.
Weightman and Bullen Ltd were appointed by the Governors to undertake the re-development of the St. Vincent Road site with a brief, which in addition to the specialist and general teaching requirements, incorporated the need for essential modifications, specifically, increased staff accommodation/toilets, improved Administration facilities and a general improvement in pupil toilet provision, to cater for the increased population of the School.
There was also a need to create several small office areas, for Year Heads, and Heads of Department.
Due to the complexity of the internal alterations it was necessary for the work to be programmed and undertaken in several phases, within the overall contract period of 18 months.
In order to allow the school to function without undue disruption, during building operations, close liaison with the Headmaster was necessary to establish phasing sequences, and the manner in which building works could be undertaken.
This agreement was an essential item incorporated into the Form of Tender, and allowances made accordingly, although some adjustments to the programming were made as work proceeded on site.
Specialist teaching requirements were the main provisions of the brief and these were created and accomplished in the following manner:
The Science Department situated on the 2nd Floor of a three storey block was supplemented with two additional laboratories, including project and practical areas, by undertaking alterations to the 1st floor accommodation.
This work of removal of internal load-bearing walls involved structural implications monitored by the appointed Consulting Engineer, Messrs. Taylor, Whalley and Spyra of Manchester.
The ground floor of this block was modified to improve the administration facilities, incorporating the Headmaster and Deputy Headteacher's Rooms, Waiting Area, General Office, Cloak Room and reconstructed Toilet facilities.
A single storey building housing the C.D.T. Department was redesigned to facilitate the need for additional classrooms, by means of demolition and construction of new subdivision walls to create the necessary spaces.
The existing craft department was subsequently upgraded to provide a Design Graphics Room, Technology Workshop and two multi-purpose Technology rooms complete with material storage, and servicing areas.
In the adjoining two storey block nominal alterations were carried out to improve the Ground Floor Art Department, and substantial upgrading of the Kitchen was undertaken to cater for the increased requirements, involving replacement of all catering equipment and servery counters, improved washing-up facilities and new tiled floor and wall finishes.
An unused kitchen located on the first floor of this block, provided the necessary space for a new Staff Room, Kitchenette and Toilets, with supplementary Staff Toilets, Lockers and Resources Area being located in the link to the three storey block.
The remaining space afforded by the removal of the existing kitchen was used to provide areas for a Computer Room, two Business Studies Areas, Typing and Office Procedures.
A two storey building linked by a bridge to the main building, and which incorporated the Library was substantially modified to provide a Modern Languages Suite situated at First Floor Level, with additional Classrooms and Offices, located on the Ground Floor.
The existing Chapel Building was made available, and by sub-division of the space, provided accommodation on a split level for the Library.
This was achieved by the introduction of a mezzanine floor.
The remaining space was used for Music, Drama and Recital and incorporated a minstrel's gallery, with ancillary rooms providing additional accommodation for Music and Recording.
In the existing School Assembly Hall the introduction of sound resisting sliding folding partitions across the Assembly Hall stage allowed the creation of a new Drama Studio without impairing the use of the stage for other functions.
In addition to internal alterations, general repairs and redecoration of all buildings externally were carried out as part of the Contract, together with associated site works and provision of additional car parking.
The building works associated with this Contract were undertaken at a total cost of £800,000 by G.J. Seddon Limited, Builders and Contractors, within the specified contract period.
In addition to the basic building work Lancashire Education Authority provided furniture, fittings and equipment for the newly created accommodation.
The total cost of the project was in the region of £1 million.
Bishop John Brewer and Canon Michael Taylor Chairman of Governors, and associated parish priests concelebrating Mass at the feast of Corpus Christi at the opening of the school.
Bells ring out for cyclists' safe return
By Fiona Lees and Stuart Keeley
From St Peter's, Rome, to St Peter's, Lancaster
THE Cathedral bells rang out to celebrate the safe return of three cyclists who had completed a marathon trip from St Peter's Rome, to St Peter's, Lancaster, in order to raise money for the restoration of the bells.
Amid cheers of welcome and congratulation from the parishioners, Martin Wain, Bill Shaw and Joe Hind were greeted with a well-earned celebratory drink and a bell-shaped cake.
Three weeks earlier they had flown out to Rome where they had been able to spend a few days as guests of the staff and students at the Venerable English College before setting out from St Peter's Square on Wednesday, 30th September to cycle more than 1,700 miles across Italy, Switzerland and France, then up through England.
The cyclists carried a letter of introduction from Bishop Brewer which helped them secure accommodation at a few churches along the way, including the Cathedrals at Assisi and Chartres.
One of the most memorable nights was spent in a Romanian refugee camp at Terni where some refugees gave up their beds to that the three friends wold be as comfortable as possible.
These three young men have demonstrated a personal commitment and sacrifice which inspired them to attempt this daunting journey with enthusiasm.
Imagine how they must have felt in St Peter's Square at the start of their journey — apprehensive, isolated and with no knowledge of either Italian, French or German.
Martin Wain at the top of the Alps
Two days into the journey then met with torrential rain in northern Italy; this was only to serve as a sign of things to come; the icy roads and driving snow that faced them as they climbed the Alps!
After a full day of hard effort they rose above the clouds into the cold, crisp atmosphere.
At the top of the Alps they were able to rest and enjoy the blue sky, the panoramic view and the sense of looking down from on top of the world.
As Martin said, the scenery was ‘Dead ace!’
By the time they reached France both bikes and cyclists were beginning to show signs of fatigue.
Then, as they headed north towards Paris, the weather took another turn for the worse.
‘There were times when I just wanted to give up and catch the next train home,’ said Bill, ‘but it was the thought of all the people at home praying for us and wishing us well that kept us going.’
Joe summed up the feelings of them all when he said, ‘It was a wonderful experience, but I'm glad it's all over and pleased to be home.’
We must ask ourselves, ‘Why did these three young men undertake this task?’
It is very heartening to us to realize that over 130 years ago the faith of many individuals, both young and old, rich and poor, built our beautiful Cathedral, adorned with bells which proudly rang out through the City of Lancaster, not only for themselves but also for their children and future generations.
What it cost them then would equal £6.6 million today.
Joe Hind in St Peter's Square
First class honour for Cathedral
OCTOBER 20th saw the first ever ‘Academic Mass’ held at the Cathedral in Lancaster and the  fulfilment of a life long dream for a lady in Altrincham.
This autumn Anne-Marie Kelly, a parishioner at the Cathedral and former student at S. Martin's College, decided it was time to celebrate a Mass at the beginning of the Academic Year.
However, the story starts twenty seven years ago when Anne Marie's mother Therese worked as a P.A. to Father Benjamin Winterborne at the time of the opening of the chaplaincy centre at Manchester University.
She had the idea of bringing staff, students, parents and all interested parties together to celebrate a Mass at the beginning of the Academic Year.
Although, it didn't happen the ‘seed had been planted’ and when Anne-Marie became a student at S. Martin's College, ‘the seed, began to grow!’.
Earlier this year, with her studies behind her, Anne-Marie decided to write to Bishop Brewer.
The response was swift and positive.
Not only did the Bishop think it a good idea but he would be very happy to preside.
At this point the hard work began, Anne-Marie Brogan, Lay Chaplain at Lancaster University and Rev. Paul Marley, Vice Principal at Lancaster and Morecambe College helped Anne-Marie with the organisation of this event.
On the night interest had mushroomed to include several schools and colleges in the Lancaster area.
The ‘joyful modern music’ as one lady accurately described it, was provided by a group from Lancaster University, students from S. Martin's presented he Offertory Gifts.
Mixture
The bidding prayers were given by the head boy and girl from Our Lady's High School.
The readings were given by Mark Barker from Lancaster and Morecambe College.
The Mass was concelebrated by Father O'Connor and Father Lazar from the University, Father Walsh and Father Callaghan from the Cathedral, with the Rev. Paul Marley acting as M.C. (Please excuse me if I've missed out anyone).
The congregation was a colourful mixture of students, teaching staff, and parishioners and at least one College Principal was in the congregation.
It is clear from everyone I asked to comment that I was not alone in thinking the evening was a resounding success.
Bishop Brewer expressed the feelings of all present with a ‘one-liner’ worthy of Bill Clinton: ‘Marvellous, let's do it again!’
The two Anne-Marie's are now known in Lancaster as the ‘dynamic duo’.
They are not content to stop now, they're thinking big for the future.
They want schools and colleges throughout the diocese to participate next year.
They are discussing organising a barbecue and disco for after the Mass.
My advice to anyone who's interested is to get in touch soon, because I've got a feeling next year it will be ‘standing room only!’— Andrew Mercer
Another side of ‘Life’
ON Saturday, 3rd October, the Cathedral Local Centre in Lancaster saw members, friends and well-wishers of the Lancaster Life Group, tripping the light fantastic — with varying degrees of success but no shortage of enthusiasm and enjoyment — at the first Barn Dance to be held by the group.
The Houghton Band provided the music and an admirable caller who managed to direct even those of us with two left feet through an amazing number of turns and convolutions which somehow always managed to bring us back to our starting point.
Much hard work had gone into preparing the evening not least by Theresa Gardener and Anne Wright who, at half time, conjured up a most delicious home-made hot pot and a superb apple pie and cream — for 100 people!
Keith Floyd eat your heart out!!
Donations to the raffle ranged from champagne to ‘coasters’ and together with the bar, helped to swell the profits from the evening to just over £400, a sum which will be put to good use in helping us to continue to offer free pregnancy testing at our Lancaster office, together with confidential counselling for those with problem pregnancies and a helping hand for those experiencing difficulties following an abortion.
Our grateful thanks go to all who participated in any way and helped us to have such an enjoyable and satisfying evening.
PRO-LIFE CHAIN AND STALL
LOCAL members and supporters of The Society for the Protection of Unborn Children held a Pro-Life Chain and Educational Stall in St Anne's to commemorate the anniversary of the passing of the 1967 Abortion Act.
Local spokesperson Yvonne Stewart said: ‘We hope to bring home to people that abortion affects us all.
We cannot say we are concerned about social problems if we are not concerned about abortion.’
The sheer number of abortions makes this a huge issue, more than 3 million babies have been aborted in Great Britain under the 1967 Act.
One pregnancy in five now ends in abortion, only a tiny fraction of 1% have ever been carried out to save the life of the mother.
Abortion is not a painless procedure, it kills a living unborn baby and can scar a woman both emotionally and physically.
When the Act was passed, we  were told that ‘abortion means every child is a wanted child’, yet child abuse has increased enormously since 1967, in the single decade 1979–89 the NSPCC reports that physical abuse has doubled.
For further information, please contact Yvonne Stewart.
Carlisle Walsingham Pilgrimage 1992
ON TUESDAY, the 27th October, Carlisle Walsingham Pilgrims' Group met together for Mass in St Bede's Church at the start of our 39th annual pilgrimage
This year there were 49 of us from various parishes in Carlisle and from Cockermouth, Cleator Moor, Whitehaven and Penrith.
We were particularly fortunate to have Father John Watson, Father Tony Quinn and Father Michael Murray with us.
Despite the atrocious weather conditions on our journey south, our driver, Paddy, brought us safely to the Shrine in good time for our first Mass in the Chapel of Reconciliation.
We offered this Mass for all our pilgrims — past and present — and especially for those who are sick or have died.
As so often in the past, Our Lady blessed us with fine weather so that were able to hold our group procession on Wednesday morning, carrying her statue along the holy mile to the Shrine, singing hymns and reciting the Rosary.
Penance
In the afternoon we visited the Priory ruins where we prayed for unity and for the Decade of Evangelisation and finished off with a lusty rendition of Faith of our Fathers!
The theme of this year's pilgrimage is ‘Mary Guides the Faithful to the Eucharist’ and our Procession of the Blessed Sacrament and the Blessing of the Sick was a deeply moving experience, as were Our Lady's Stations of the Cross.
In true pilgrim tradition we prayed and did penance together and we also took our recreation together and we also took our recreation together and so on Wednesday evening we met together for a very happy celebration.
Anne Donnelly, our pilgrimage organiser, first walked to Walsingham in 1953 and celebrated her fortieth annual pilgrimage this year.
As a token of our love and thanks Father Murray made a presentation to Anne on behalf of all the pilgrims
Renewed
Appropriately, it was of two water colours of the Slipper Chapel and the Priory which had been painted by Tess McNulty, one of our pilgrims.
In the impromptu concert that followed a wide variety of talents were displayed, notably Father Quinn's updated version of John Peel.
Sadly, all too soon, Friday was upon us and it was time to return home, renewed and refreshed.
We all had our recollections of our own special moments, but the abiding memory is of the blessed peach and  tranquillity of the Shrine and the almost tangible bond of companionship and caring, love and laughter which bound us all together.
We will be back next year to celebrate our fourth pilgrimage.
WORDS OF LIFE
Reflections on the Sunday Gospel readings of December by Fr.
Paul Billington CMS.
First Sunday of Advent
We come this Advent Sunday to the wonderful season of hope.
Hope is a lifeline for many people.
Hope for the return of rain to make Ethiopian grain lands fertile.
Hope for the success of peace negotiations between Bosnian and Serbian peoples.
Hope that interest rates decrease to release mortgage holders threatened with repossession.
Hope that our miners may not be faced with long term unemployment.
Second Sunday of Advent
Life and death situations bring out the reserves of human resilience.
Our instinct for survival is greatly dependent upon the power of our hope.
It is not only in difficult times that hope comes to the rescue.
When things are going well every day circumstances are heavily invested in hope.
A child hopes the tooth fairy remembers to visit, look under the pillow, leaving a little something.
Sixth formers in the midst of A-Level examinations hope their grades match university requirements or job expectations.
Third Sunday of Advent
All of our fair weather and times of trouble hope pale in comparison to the hope described in the readings of Adventide.
The prophets announce their visionary hope of nations gathered into the kingdom of God's eternal peace, when the dangers of darkness are cast aside and light is victorious.
Fourth Sunday of Advent
There are no limits to the power of this hope.
Those who have learnt to accept their difficulties without the glimmer of hope are set free.
The deaf hear, the lame leap like the deer, the blind see.
All our other hopes seem small alongside the visionary hope of this beautiful eternity.
This hope is brought in the person of Jesus, descendent of David, born of Mary.
He is not just another prophet, He is the Emmanuel, God-with-us.
Christmas
The angels tell the shepherds and wise men —‘Do not be afraid’.
Do not be lost in the deep darkness of despair and hopelessness.
Have hope.
The light has come among us.
The appearing of God's glory is here.
A child has been born who will be greatly titled.
He is our hope.
From this time onwards and for ever, the jealous love of the Lord of hosts' will be known in this child.
He is our hope.
UCM celebrates Annual Rally
THE Union of Catholic Mothers, Lancaster Diocese, held their Annual Rally in the Parish of St. Maria Goretti, 125 members attended travelling from all parts of the Diocese.
The Rally began with Mass, celebrated by Reverend Joseph Hothersall, Parish Priest assisted by the Deacon, Reverend Graham Lavery.
The theme of the Mass was ‘Thanksgiving’ and this was reflected in the reading, Gospel and bidding prayers.
The members were generous with the collection which was donated to C.A.F.O.D. The organist was Mr J. Baron and the singing of the mothers was a joy to listen to.
The meeting which followed took place in the parish centre.
Values
Fr.
Hothersall welcomed everyone and opened the Rally with the U.C.M. prayers for vocations.
Mrs Mary McDonald, Diocesan President, in her address to the members, reminded us of the aims and objects of the U.C.M., one of which is to uphold the Sacramental Dignity of Marriage and to maintain Christian values in family life.
The Diocesan Secretary reported on the recent national Council meeting and the events of the past year in the Lancaster Diocesan foundations.
The U.C.M. held many days of recollection, retreats and study evenings.
Members played a large part in their local communities working with the many charitable organisations.
The guest speaker was Miss Mary Thomas, who gave a very humorous and entertaining talk entitled ‘The Dark House Venture’.
This is a project aimed at encouraging older people to take up new interests.
Professional help is on hand to anyone taking part and certificates awarded for each activity undertaken.
Closing the Rally Mrs McDonald thanked Miss Thomas for her talk, also Fr.
Hothersall and the members of St Maria Goretti foundation for arranging the lovely Mass and the Rally.
A welcome buffet tea followed.
It was a very successful Rally, enjoyed by everyone and was a fitting climax to the U.C.M. year.
Next year is the 80th anniversary of the founding of the Union of Catholic Mothers and many events are now being planned, both at National and Diocesan level, including a pilgrimage to Lourdes.
RETREAT AT BRETTARGH HOLT
A GROUP of parishioners from St Mary of Furness, Barrow, were recently joined by friends from other parishes in the town to take part in a retreat at Brettargh Holt, near Kendal.
The Salesian Sisters, who were their hostesses for the weekend, gave them a warm and friendly welcome, and the retreatants quickly settled down in the beautiful house.
The nuns led them through a series of exercises which encouraged them to think about the good in themselves, and to know that God, in His love for them, has forgiven their sins.
Everyone was invited to use the chapel, the prayer room and the lounges for quiet prayer and meditation.
In spite of the inclement weather there were opportunities to stroll in the beautiful grounds, and some people visited the salmon leap in the River Kent.
In the evenings everyone was drawn to the blazing log fire in the entrance hall, where Sister Margaret recounted the history of Don Basco and the Salesians, and of the house at Brettargh Holt.
On Saturday evening Fr.
Peter Groody celebrated Mass for Sunday, and on Sunday morning the retreat ended with a Eucharistic Service.
After lunch the Community gathered at the door to wave goodbye, and as the coach drew away, several happy people promised to return soon to Brettargh Holt.
Nigerian Sisters' Profession
THE nineteenth of September was a great day for the Sisters of Notre Dame de Namur.
On that day their first three Nigerian Sisters made their final profession.
Sisters Virginia Egwuchukwu, Apollonia Ibekwe and Rosemary Uzochukwu pronounced their vows in Holy Ghost Cathedral, Enugu, in the presence of many Sisters, friends and members of their families.
Their vows were received by the General Moderator of the Congregation, Sr. Ellen Gielty, who was herself one of the first three Notre Dame missionaries to go to Nigeria in 1963.
Since then other Sisters of Notre Dame from England, Scotland and USA have worked together to bring to the people of Nigeria the Gospel message of God's goodness.
Among these is Sister Julie Ambrose Atkinson from Kendal, who is at present on leave but will shortly be returning to Nigeria.
Left to right, Srs Rosemary, Virginia and Apollonia
High school is choc-a-bloc
CARDINAL Allen High School, Fleetwood, was choc-a-bloc recently with WISPAS — the Cadbury variety!
In a ‘Keep Doing It With Wispa’ competition held by the chocolate manufacturers the nomination of the school was chosen as a winner, resulting in the delivery of over 800 Wispa bars.
The winning nomination, sent in be the school's assistant headteacher, Mrs. Brenda Hart, was a tongue-in-cheek statement that everyone worked together as a friendly and cheerful team to uphold school standards in spite of Government directives and the pressures of society!
Mrs Hart was delighted that this tribute to the pupils and to all of the staff working in every section of the school community had proved to be a successful entry.
Headmaster, Mr John O'Brien, commented: ‘It was a great surprise to everyone in our team to hear of the win, and it certainly boosted morale and gave us lots of enjoyment in distributing the Wispa bars’.
Mrs Brenda Hart and pupils celebrate