

Historical Perspective
Champagne with its foaming whirls
As white as Cleopatra's pearls.
Byron,Don Juan (1819–24)
The emergence of Champagne and its early wines
BEFORE THE ROMAN CONQUEST, the region we call Champagne was merely part of a fragmented group of Celtic kingdoms known as Gaul, an area of land roughly equivalent to present-day France.
Viticulture was then unknown in its cold northern reaches: according to the observations of Dioderus Siculus, a Greek historian of the first century BC, ‘the frigid climate of the uncultivated North forbade production of either wine or oil’.
By the first century AD, however, the Romans were cultivating the vine in Northern Gaul.
We know from Cato the Censor (234–149 BC), the author of De agri cultura , that the various methods of planting, grafting, training and pruning of the vine, which the Romans would have introduced into Champagne, had been in common use throughout the warmer parts of the empire for at least two hundred years.
Without a doubt, the Romans had achieved a sophisticated level of vine-growing, training the vines, much as today, in parallel rows, and ensuring proper spacing between each plant.
No less than six different methods of pruning were employed, the utilisation of each being dependent upon the variety of grape, type of soil and wind conditions.
Curiously, however, between AD 90 and 97, an imperial order went out to uproot all commercial vineyards throughout Gaul.
Issued by Emperor Domitian, the decree also prohibited the extension of vineyards in Italy.
It seems a strange edict for an empire so intent on spreading the culture of the vine, but it was one of economy and rationalisation, in an endeavour to effect a balance between the overproduction of wine and the shortage of basic food crops.
Wine was cheap and plentiful during this period, while corn was scarce and expensive.
Domitian's decree was the first recorded attempt to reduce a European winelake.
It is difficult to gauge how effective the ban was, but the vineyards were certainly flourishing again by AD 285, a mere five years after Domitian's order was rescinded.
Emperor Probus, perhaps appropriately a gardener's son, issued the directive in AD 280 to replant the vineyards of Gaul.
The third and fourth centuries, however, also saw the waning of the Roman Empire, when the protection it offered to the population of border provinces began to weaken, giving rise to waves of ‘barbarian’ invasions from the east.
In the early years of the fifth century the Roman province of Belgica, west of the Rhine frontier, was invaded by the Germanic-speaking Franks, the people who were to give their name to the country in which they settled.
In the heart of this early Frankish kingdom lay the region which, much later, was to be called Champagne.
The Franks were not savages, but they did not settle easily into the sophisticated urban life-style of the local Gallo-Roman population.
In a near-chaotic situation the formerly tranquil province — lying at a strategic crossroads for invading armies — became subjected to bands of looting Franks, Vandals, Burgundians and Goths.
The most ferocious of these invaders was the 500,000-strong army of Attila the Hun, which stormed into the Empire in the spring of 451.
Although repelled initially by the bishop of Troyes (a town destined to become the capital of Champagne) the eastern hordes were able to sweep on, virtually unchecked, until they reached Orleans.
The real turning point occurred just north of Châlons, during September when, in one of the bloodiest battles of human history, over 200,000 men were killed in hand-to-hand combat in less than twenty-four hours.
Victory fell to the Roman commander Aetius, but only after he had desperately allied his legions with the forces of the Empire's declared enemies, the invading Visigoths and Franks.
The Roman Empire was already split into eastern and western halves, but its growing impotence was now demonstrated by the inability of its imperial armies to deal with Attila independently — it was a warning that the Roman Empire in the west was almost dead.
Within twenty-five years it was.
In the 480s, the Franks, who were now established throughout Gaul, found a decisive ruler in their chieftain Clovis (465–511).
He united their clans and established an expanding kingdom around the former Gallo-Roman city of Durocortorum: once the capital of the Gaulish tribe of Remi, the city is still commemorated today by its name Reims.
Christianity came to the Franks when, in 496, Clovis was baptised by Bishop Remigius (better known to us as Saint-Rémy) whose name surely is a reminder of the ancient Remi.
There had, of course, been Christians here, as elsewhere in the Empire, since the middle of the third century, but it was by Clovis's example — in fulfilment of a vow made in battle — that the heathen Frankish warriors accepted baptism from Remigius.
The glory of the Franks reached its apogee towards the end of the eighth century when their chieftain Charlemagne was crowned emperor of a revived Roman Empire in the West by the pope on Christmas day 800.
The event to a large extent heralded the return of order and culture.
Charlemagne was succeeded in 814 by his son Louis the Pious (Louis I of France), the first in a long line of French kings to be crowned at Reims.
From this traditional privilege of Reims, the fame and popularity of Champagne wines first began to spread.
According to Alexander Henderson, in The History of Ancient Wines (1824), the ninth century saw the beginning of a distinction between the various wines of Champagne; references henceforth distinguish between the wines of the Vallée de la Marne and those of the Montagne de Reims.
After the death of Louis I in 840 the Empire — which stretched from the Pyrenees in the south-east to the Elbe and the Danube in the west — was carved up into three kingdoms, shared between Charlemagne's three grandsons.
In the tenth century, the peace of Champagne was shattered in ten violent years of political battle by the house of Vermandois in its bid to secure the bishopdom of Reims.
Bloodier, longer and also fought over Champagne soil was the struggle between Hugh Capet and Charles of Lorraine for the French throne.
Reims suffered four sieges in sixty years, Épernay was pillaged half a dozen times and burnt twice.
Hugh Capet executed the most proficient sacking of Épernay during the harvest of 947, when he set alight the entire region and carried off all of its wine.
Heribert of Vermandois eventually guaranteed the bishopdom of Reims for his son Robert and the house of Vermandois assumed the title of Counts of Champagne.
Hugh Capet paved the way for his son and namesake to be crowned king of France at Reims in 987.
Champagne became established as a political unit in the early eleventh century when the house of Vermandois united the counties of Troyes and Meaux.
For a brief period in the province's history, its affairs became entwined in the broader struggles for the monarchy.
Between 1019 and 1023, Champagne fell into the hands of Eudes II, the count of Blois and Chartres, who had a few years earlier annexed Sancerre.
The power of Blois-Champagne now threatened the Capetian rule whose royal domain around Paris was encircled.
But with the death of Eudes in 1037, the properties of Champagne were divided amongst his descendants while the strength of Blois naturally declined.
Champagne was reunited with Blois, however, under Thibaut IV who, upon the reunification of the two powerful provinces in 1125, became Thibaut II (‘the Great’) of Champagne.
Thibaut was considered the second most powerful man in France after the king.
A powerful rivalry developed between them, and the conflicts, first with Louis VI    and then with Louis VII, ended only when Joan of Navarre and Champagne, the heir to the countship of Blois-Champagne, married the future king of France, Philip Augustus.
France in the early eleventh century
Growth of the French monarchy, 1180–1350
But Philip still did not trust the loyalty of Champagne and allowed the office of sénéchal (steward of the royal household), which was customarily awarded to a member of the count of Champagne's family, to lapse.
The House of the Musicians in the rue de Tambour, Reims, haunt of the trouvères 
Thibaut IV of Champagne, the son of Thibaut III and Blanche of Navarre, was born after his father's death at Troyes in 1201.
For four years of his early life he lived at the court of King Philip II, to whom he did feudal homage in 1214.
After the king's death in 1223, he pledged his support for Philip's son Louis VII, but deserted him at the siege of Avignon in 1226.
When Louis died a few months later, Thibaut aligned with a league of dissident barons who opposed the regent of France, Louis's widow Blanche of Castile, but he soon abandoned the barons and reconciled himself with Blanche.
The court of Champagne had meanwhile become a place of development for the ideal of courtly love and the medieval romantic poem.
Thibaut IV was a musician and probably the most famous of the aristocratic trouvères , the epic poets of Northern France.
It was rumoured that he and Blanche were lovers and that many of his poems were addressed to her.
Champagne was also prospering during this time from the great trade fairs.
While in times of war its uneasy location between the Frankish and German kingdoms rendered it  prone to the ravages of invading armies, in times of peace, it was ideally situated at the crossroads to the great trade centres of Europe.
Fairs were held annually and throughout the seasons of the year: there was the ‘Warm’ June Fair and the ‘Cold’October Fair of Troyes, the May Fair and the September Fair of Saint Ayoul in Provins, the Lent Fair of Bar-sur-Aube and the January Fair of Lagny.
The fairs could last for up to forty-nine days and became a meeting place for merchants from Spain, Italy, England, the Low Countries and other parts of France.
The counts of Champagne were quick to realise the lucrative sources of income that could be made from these fairs and dropped any inhibiting feudal dues, guaranteed the safety of the merchants and generally policed the fairs.
Copious quantities of Champagne wine were consumed by such a large influx of visitors, enabling the vineyards to flourish and the vignerons to prosper, and leading to the export of both the wine and its reputation throughout the growing markets of Europe.
The importance of wine for Reims as a form of commerce in the early 1300s was demonstrated by the emergence of the courtiers de vin .
In 1323 the appointment of these professional wine-brokers by the city's municipal authorities was opposed by the archbishop, who had traditionally held a vested interest in the local winemaking from which they derived an income.
But his resistance was doomed to failure as the courtiers' position was confirmed by several royal decrees.
A century later a royal charter of July 1412 gave the municipal authorities of Reims the sole right to appoint courtiers and expressly mentioned that Champagne wines formed the city's prime source of trade.
The charter also attempted to curb the sharp practices of those courtiers who took commission from both seller and buyer.
In 1337, Edward III of England launched his assault on the French crown and so began the Hundred Years War, in which Champagne became one of the principal battlegrounds.
Charles IV of France had died leaving no male heir, and the contest opened between two rival claimants, Philip VI of Valois, Charles's cousin, and Edward, whose mother Isabella of France was the daughter of Philip III.
Ostensibly to recover lost English possessions, Edward's invasion of France followed almost immediately in the wake of Philip's unopposed seizure of the French throne.
King John II succeeded Philip in 1350 and, after a series of English victories during which John was captured and sent back to England, Edward led his army on to Champagne.
In 1359 he attempted to storm Reims in a bid to be crowned king of France in its cathedral.
His attempt failed, but the Treaty of Bretigny was concluded which gave Edward sovereignty over Calais and the whole of Aquitaine, almost a quarter of France.
Content with his achievement, Edward renounced his claim to the French crown.
But the plague returned to France in 1361, and the devastation it imposed, coupled with the laxity and incompetence of the English administration, weakened the English grip on its French territories.
War was resumed, and the French now succeeded in reclaiming most of Aquitaine, leaving only Calais and a thin coastal strip under firm English control.
Ten years earlier, on 19 May 1364, the coronation of Charles V had taken place at Reims cathedral.
The ceremonies and festivities attending the coronation of French kings at Reims did much to enhance the popularity and reputation of the wines of Champagne — though they cannot entirely have pleased the populace of Reims, who had to meet the  expense of such occasions.
Charles V's coronation, and the feast which followed it, cost the city over 7,712 livres , according to Varin's Archives Administratives de Reims .
The spectacle, however, must have been a splendid one: Froissart records that the king and his queen (Jeanne de Bourbon) were accompanied by King Peter of Cyprus, King Wenceslas of Bohemia and the duke of Brabant, the dukes of Burgundy and Anjou and the counts of Eu, Dampmartin, Tancarville and Vaudemont.
Ever-increasing demand stimulated a great viticultural expansion in the last half of the fourteenth century.
A list drawn up c. 1375 by Richard Pique, who as archbishop was due annual payments in the form of wine, reveals that virtually all the villages within a twenty mile radius of Reims were planted with vines.
Further anecdotes on the fame of Champagne wines in the fourteenth century are told by Max Sutaine in his Essai sur l'histoire des vins de la Champagne (1845); in particular he relates how, when the German king Wenceslas arrived in Reims in 1397 to discuss with Charles VI the division within the church over the popes of Avignon (a subject Henry Vizetelly describes in A History of Champagne (1882) as ‘very fit for a drunkard and a madman to put their heads together about’) he became so intoxicated on the local wines that he signed all the documents before him, departing without knowing what he had signed.
The further expansion of Champagne's vineyards suffered a temporary set-back in the early part of the fifteenth century when the old war with the English was resumed.
King Henry V of England was recognised by a mad King Charles VI as heir to the throne of France, with the signing of the Treaty of Troyes in 1420, and Reims passed once again into English control.
Charles VII, excluded from the succession by the treaty, was, however, recognised as king in the south of France and the bitter struggles for sovereignty continued.
The tide turned for the French when, under the inspired leadership of Joan of Arc, Charles was taken to Reims to be crowned king in the cathedral in 1429.
The triumphant coronation and surge of patriotic fervour which followed in its wake led a worried Duke of Bedford, the English regent in France and uncle of Henry VI of England, to call for his nephew's own coronation on French soil.
French successes faltered, however, when the maid of Orleans, failing in her attempt to wrest Paris from the English in 1430, was captured and burned at the stake in Rouen on 30 May 1431.
On 2 December Henry VI was crowned king of France in Saint Denis, Paris.
But this did little to consolidate control over a country claimed but not subdued and when Duke Philip of Burgundy broke from his alliance with the English to pledge support for Charles VII at Arras in 1435, the days of English rule in France were numbered.
Inspired by the martyrdom of Joan of Arc and backed by the forces of Burgundy, the French expelled the English from all their former possessions except Calais, bringing the so-called Hundred Years War to a successful conclusion in 1453.
Relative peace ensued in Champagne in the years which followed, although it was not until the coronation of Louis XI in 1461 that the French nobility were able to express their new solidarity.
The coronation at Reims was a truly grand occasion, with all the major peers and bishops throughout the realm in attendance at one of the most expensive banquets ever lavished on a French king.
Barely one month later, the city's generosity was rewarded by a special royal tax levied on its wines to fill the king's empty coffers!
In Reims during the early sixteenth century, visiting heads of state were often given wines of various growths from the Montagne de Reims and the Vallée de la Marne to compare with wines from the king's own vineyards at Aÿ.
The fame of Aÿ was at its peak, and its wines were set apart from other growths; as beautifully understated by Paulmier in his treatise De Vino et Pomaceo (Paris, 1588), Aÿ was ‘the ordinary drink of kings and princes’.
According to Henry Vizetelly in his History of Champagne , many nobles went to the expense of having their own special buying commissioners stationed in the village to secure the finest vintages of this royal wine.
It is also from Aÿ and from this date that the oldest surviving Champagne house can be traced.
In 1531 Jean Gosset was seigneur d'Aÿ and his son Claude Gosset was a vigneron .
No documentary evidence exists to establish whether Claude actually traded his wines, and since a Champagne house deals essentially in the commerce of wines, the house of Gosset is deemed to have commenced with a Pierre Gosset from a later generation in 1584, who both made and sold his wines.
The reputation of Champagne was growing fast, as can be assessed from the record of rapidly rising prices.
At the coronation of Francis II in 1559 a queue, a cask of ninety-six gallons, cost between 11/8d. and 15/10d., whilst at the coronation of Charles IX in 1561, just two years later, a queue had risen to between 23/4d. and 28/4d.
Fourteen years later, at the coronation of Henry III in 1575, it was between 45&shilling and 62&shilling.
France in 1483
The gouvernements of France in 1789
Towards the close of the sixteenth century, however, Champagne harvests suffered greatly from extraordinarily bad climatic conditions.
According to Jehan Pussot's Mémorial du temps the price of wine varied enormously: it could be sold as cheaply as  5/6d. a queue (as in 1579) if it was almost undrinkable, while on other occasions, the price would reach as high as 126/6d. (1587) due to its scarcity.
The vicissitudes of climate and harvest continued into the seventeenth century and Pussot goes on to record the contrast between the abundant vintage of 1604, when the vignerons were ‘at their wits’ end for vessels to contain their wine', and the devastating harvest three years later when the vintage was considered so poor that it ‘had not been known within the memory of man’.
Such vacillating fortunes of harvest were to become the norm for Champagne and, perversely, prove to be one of the reasons why this region is able to produce a sparkling wine superior to any other.
THE CITY OF REIMS IN 1635 (from an engraving of the period)
The development of Champagne as a sparkling wine
Up to the seventeenth century the wines produced in Champagne were not the sparkling, brilliant white wines we know today: they were still wines, or vins tranquils .
It is difficult for us to imagine the characteristics of wines described by critics writing a mere generation ago, let alone those of wines described centuries ago.
Nevertheless, it is useful to know that numerous contemporary sources described the various hues of the wines of this period as ‘pale coloured and tawny’, ‘with a rosy tinge’ or even like a ‘partridge's eye’.
Since earliest times it seems that attempts were made to make wine as red as possible: in those places where vines producing white grapes thrived, it is likely that any 
black grapes available would have been thrown into the brew to give the wine a little colour, but in Champagne's naturally crisp climate, the skins of black grapes rarely give much colour to a wine, hence the weak and insipid impressions of early descriptions.
However, as early as the sixteenth century, we know from the fame already achieved by the wines of Aÿ that a few winemakers had begun to experiment with wines made from white grape only.
Of course the cruder methods of pressing grapes in those days would often have resulted in rather murky-looking wines which failed to clear properly.
Later, in a treatise written in the eighteenth century,Mémoire sur la manière de cultiver la vigne et de faire le vin en Champagne (written, it is believed, by Jean Godinot c. 1718), it is stated that the Champenois had begun to study how to produce a ‘grey…almost white wine’ some fifty years before, that is to say approximately 1668.
If one takes wines such as these together with the inevitably ill-fated attempts to make a red wine from black grapes grown in a climate barely hospitable enough to ripen a grape, let alone colour it, a wealth of curiously coloured, clouded wines must have constituted the norm, despite a half-hidden glint of pink or red in a few instances.
We know that Champagne was not the first sparkling wine: references in the Bible like ‘wine…when it moveth itself’(Proverbs 23:31) and ‘Neither do men put new wine into old bottles; else the bottles break’(Matthew 9:17) confirm the existence of sparkling wine long before viticulture was even introduced to the Champagne region.
But because of the obvious difficulties encountered in the fermentation process, the wines of antiquity would have been drunk, more often than not, before the first fermentation had finished or whilst undergoing the second fermentation the following spring.
The earliest sparkling wines were undoubtedly discovered by accident, probably by the trial and error methods employed by anguished winemakers ironically trying to avoid the nuisance of fizzy wines.
Nobody can say for sure when the earliest purpose-made sparkling wine was produced, but documentary evidence exists to prove that the monks of the abbey of St Hilaire in southern France had intentionally produced sparkling wines as early as 1531, well over one hundred years before anyone attempted to do so in Champagne.
These sparkling wines of St Hilaire, known as vin de blanquette, were and still are produced, just east of Limoux, south of the old walled city of Narbonne, by the so-called ‘rural method’.
The ‘rural method’ entails no separate second fermentation; it is merely a continuation of the first process, the wines being bottled before it terminates and thus allowing the first fermentation to continue in the bottle.
The sediment deposited in the bottle during the final stages of the ‘rural method’ is not removed and the wine will thus be a little cloudy unless expertly handled.
Dom Pérignon
Nobody knows exactly when the first sparkling Champagne was made but the famous Benedictine monk from the abbey of Hautvillers certainly was a crucial figure in its early development.
The legend enshrines a popular belief that it was Dom Pérignon who created sparkling wine and invented Champagne as we know it today.
But he did not: the man's life has become a fable of great imagination and his prowess as a winemaker has assumed almost mythical proportions.
It is therefore important that the precise nature of his achievements should be clarified.
Pierre Pérignon was born at Sainte-Ménehould near the Champagne-Lorraine border in 1638.
Little is known of his early life, except that he was the son of a judge's clerk, of upper-middle class background, and that the male members of the family were engaged in either the legal or ecclesiastical professions.
On 3 July 1658 Pierre Pérignon entered the Benedictine abbey of Saint-Vanne at Verdun, a congregation founded by Dom Didier de la Cour (1550–1623), a strict monk who insisted on a high degree of learning and intellectual activity.
Didier's example was built upon by his successors and the esteem of the abbey grew.
The strict selection of monks applying to Saint-Vanne and the high standards of learning it demanded of them provide an early insight into Pérignon's own capabilities.
Moreover, within just eleven years he had been elevated to the honorific status of ‘Dom’ and sent to the abbey of Hautvillers to take up the post of cellarmaster, a position second only to that of abbot.
During his forty-seven years at Hautvillers, Dom Pérignon earned the reputation of being a generous, intelligent and meticulously minded man.
As a winemaker, his skills were greatly revered by other cellarmasters, who attributed, in part, the outstanding quality of his wine to the fastidiousness of his studies.
Even in his own day his wines were called, not after Hautvillers, but after the man himself, vins de Pérignon.
His fame spread far and wide and the price of his wines soared.
Hautvillers Abbey
Dom Pérignon grew blind in his final years but this did not prevent — it rather enhanced — his passion for the art of winemaking.
He died at Hautvillers in 1715 at the age of seventy-seven.
What did he specifically invent, create or achieve?
Patrick Forbes gets right to the heart of the matter when, in his scholarly work Champagne (1967), he refers to a treatise,Traité de la culture des vignes de Champagne , written by a certain Frère Pierre, a member of the community at the abbey of Hautvillers during and after the time of his mentor Dom Pérignon.
Written by Dom Pérignon's pupil and immediate successor at Hautvillers, the treatise must be regarded as the most authoritative contemporary account, not only of the state of viticulture and viniculture in Champagne in the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries, but also of Dom Pérignon's particular contribution to the art of winemaking.
From this treatise and other evidence, it can be deduced that Dom Pérignon achieved the following innovations: he was the first person in Champagne to produce a truly red wine; the first person to produce a perfectly limpid white wine from black grapes; he invented the traditional Champagne press; perfected the art of blending wines from many different vineyards to produce one consistent and superior cuvée , or blend; reintroduced the cork-stopper to France; and pioneered the use of stronger English glass to withstand the internal pressure generated by sparkling wine.
Because of Champagne's northerly latitude and the cold, wet influence of the Atlantic, all grapes must struggle to ripen in this region and black grapes rarely possess sufficient pigment in the skins to properly colour a wine.
The problem of how to produce a red wine was as acute in Dom Pérignon's time as it is today, but according to Frère Pierre he found a solution to the problem by using old vines and selecting only the ripest grapes; he was thus able to achieve three or four successful vintages of decently coloured wines for about every ten, when the vines might enjoy exceptional warmth during the summer.
In a letter dated 25 October 1821, Dom Grossard, the last cellarmaster of Hautvillers, informed Monsieur d'Herbes, the deputy mayor of Aÿ, that it was Dom Pérignon who had discovered the secret of making starbright white wines.
‘Before him,’ he said, ‘people only knew how to make a grey wine or one that was the colour of straw.’
Dom Grossard need not be correct; certainly Pérignon perfected the art of producing starbright white wines, but it is possible that others succeeded before him — the fame of the white wines of Aÿ, for example, suggests this.
But what Dom Pérignon did accomplish, which was unique at the time, was the production of a clear, untainted, white wine from black grapes.
The discovery is doubly important.
Since Pérignon's time it has become evident that although the climate of Champagne barely manages to colour black grapes one particular variety, the Pinot Meunier, is the region's most prolific producer and the vine least prone to the severe frosts experienced in the Marne valley.
Today nearly half of all the vines grown in the white wine vineyards of Champagne are of the Pinot Meunier variety — a practicality only possible because of Pérignon.
To obtain a clear white wine from black grapes Dom Pérignon would have had to employ sophisticated pressing techniques; it is most likely, therefore, that it was Pérignon who invented the traditional Champagne press, designed exactly for this purpose.
The juice of all wine-producing black grapes is clear, but in order to extract it it has to be pressed through the grape's skin which, even in chilly Champagne, contains enough  pigment to discolour the liquid.
Traditional Champagne presses can be either round or square, but both compress a wide and thin cross-section of grapes which, unlike those in other areas, are not de-stalked.
The press is uniquely designed to ensure that the pressure exerted is swift — to reduce the skin-contact time — and yet gentle enough to avoid the escape of unfavourable tannins and oils residing naturally in the pips and stalks.
It was Dom Pérignon who conceived of the idea that the stalks would act as channels through the relatively thin cake of grapes, allowing the flow of juice to be speeded up.
A further innovation, one of the most significant accomplishments of Dom Pérignon, was his creation of the cuvée concept, or the blending together of different wines, some of them inferior, to achieve one superior and consistent cuvée .
Both Frère Pierre and Dom Grossard record at length how Pérignon constructed his cuvées .
Grossard declared that it was the ‘marriage of our wines to which they owe their goodness’.
The blending of wines was not an uncommon practice prior to Pérignon's time, either in Champagne or elsewhere, but it was Dom Pérignon's innate ability to construct a final cuvée , far exceeding in quality any previous blends, which led to his esteemed reputation in his own lifetime, creating a unique demand for the vins de Pérignon .
Frère Pierre recorded:
He composed his blends not only according to the flavour of the juice, but also according to what the weather had been like that year — an early or late development, depending on the amount of cold or rain there had been — and according to whether the vines had grown a rich or mediocre foliage.
All these factors served him as rules for the composition of the blends.
Dom Grossard further informs us that ‘He could tell at once which grapes were from which vineyards and would say, ‘The wine of that vineyard must be married with the wine of that one’, and never once did he make a mistake.’
Grapes for pressing would be brought in from many different vineyards, following Dom Pérignon's explicit instructions.
According to Patrick Forbes, in Champagne , the abbey of Hautvillers owned one hundred arpents (an arpent is an old French measure which varied in size between thirty-five and fifty ares) of vineyards some thirty years before Dom Pérignon's time and this estate would have certainly increased in his lifetime.
In addition, the abbey received wines in the form of tithes.
The demand for vins de Pérignon far exceeded supply and, as a consequence, grapes had to be purchased from outside the abbey's holdings to meet increased production levels.
This meant seeking out even more diverse wines from hitherto unknown sources, which further taxed the new-found art of blending.
Dom Pérignon cared little for the wooden plugs wrapped in oil-soaked hemp which were in use during his time.
Not only did he find this crude form of seal unsuitable for his normal still wines, but when he began to produce sparkling wines the total inadequacy of wooden pegs for imprisoning the carbonic gas was such that he set out to discover a more efficient seal.
Cork-stoppers had been used by the Romans as long ago as 500 BC, but were ‘lost’ to the French when the Romans left Gaul some twelve hundred years before Dom Pérignon's day, though they were available elsewhere in Europe.
How exactly corks came to be adopted at Hautvillers remains a mystery, but one story relates that when Spanish monks stopped at Hautvillers on their way north from Santiago de Compostela, Dom Pérignon noticed that their water-bottles were sealed with corks and requested supplies of this spongy material to be sent to him.
Another suggests that Dom Pérignon spent several  years in the Benedictine monastery at Alcántara in Spain and that it was he, not the monks of Santiago de Compostela, who brought the cork to Hautvillers.
It hardly matters whether either of these stories is true, we know that cork was available, although not in France, and that Dom Pérignon did eventually use cork-stoppers for his wines, as corked bottles were dug up at Hautvillers when Moët & Chandon renovated the abbey in the late 1970s during its operations to turn it into a museum.
Once Dom Pérignon had learned how to produce a constant sparkling wine, and how to prevent any gas escaping from the bottle, through the use of a cork-stopper, the problem of breakages, a frequent occurrence, must have been acute.
It was almost predictable that a perfectionist like Pérignon would not rest until he found a bottle strong enough to withstand the internal pressure exerted by a sparkling wine.
The use of the bottle to store and contain wine was an English custom; the French at this time generally preferred the use of casks to store, serve and transport their wines.
Verre anglais , named thus because of its English origin, was the result of Admiral Sir Robert Mansell's concern for the future of British shipbuilding.
He was worried by the decimation of forests by charcoal burners and persuaded King James I to forbid glass furnaces to be fired with wood in 1615.
Turning to coal instead, the higher temperatures it achieved enabled English glass makers to develop an intrinsically stronger product.
How he heard of verre anglais is unclear, but it is not beyond belief that it stemmed from rumours that effervescing Champagne had become a popular drink in England.
Before Dom Pérignon had made his name as a great winemaker, the effects of sparkling Champagne had achieved sufficient significance in England to merit the occasional mention, as the following verse from The Man of Mode , written by Sir George Etherege in 1676, indicates:
To the Mall and the Park
Where we love till 'tis dark,
Then sparkling Champaign
Puts an end to their reign;
It quickly recovers
Poor languishing lovers,
Makes us frolick and gay, and drowns all sorrow;
But, Alas, we relapse again on the morrow.
The idea of ‘accidentally sparkling’ Champagne is far more plausible than it may at first seem.
In Champagne's chilly climate the fermentation process would stop when winter took its grip, probably before all the grape sugars had been converted to alcohol, but certainly before any malo-lactic fermentation could naturally occur.
The wine, transported in cask and bottled in London in the superior verre anglais , would remain dormant until the warmth of the following spring or, maybe, the warmth of a local tavern.
Alcoholic or malo-lactic fermentation would commence, possibly a combination of both, and the result would be a sparkling wine along the lines of Limoux's Vin de Blanquette.
If indeed this was how he happened upon verre anglais , it could well be that it was in England, not Spain, that Dom Pérignon rediscovered the cork.
I doubt whether the legend of Dom Pérignon would necessarily have survived to this day but for the fact that the Abbey of Hautvillers, where he devoted his life to the  perfection of wine, happened to be in Champagne.
One wonders whether he would still be so well remembered had he lived his monastic life in the Abbey of Saint-Hilaire in Roussillon.
Moreover, it should not be forgotten that in 1823 Moët & Chandon purchased the Abbey of Hautvillers, along with its vineyards, and they certainly (to their credit) cannot be accused of allowing the legend of Dom Pérignon to die.
Frère Jean Oudart
According to Henry Vizetelly in his A History of Champagne , another monk whose reputation in the art of winemaking rivalled that of Dom Pérignon's was Brother Jean Oudart, the cellarer at the abbey of Saint Pierre-aux-Monts in Châlons, and just sixteen years younger than Dom Pérignon.
The abbey of Saint Pierre-aux-Monts had considerable vineyard holdings at Pierry, Chouilly and Cramant which collectively boasted an average annual production of around 400 hectolitres.
As cellarer to the abbey it was Brother Oudart's responsibility to manage these estates together with a staff of some 130 women and 20 men.
Like Dom Pérignon, Brother Oudart was interested in perfecting the art of winemaking and we know, from a record of a transaction which took place at Pierry on 9 September 1713, that he was visited at least once by the older cellarmaster from Hautvillers.
It is uncertain exactly what contributions Brother Oudart made to the development of the Champagne method but we know that he also used corks from Spain and it has been suggested that he was the first to use a liqueur de tirage .
But it should be remembered that if there are doubts about the precise nature of Brother Oudart's accomplishments, there is also uncertainty about Dom Pérignon's.
It was not until the eighteenth century that the word Champagne became synonymous with the sparkling wine of the region.
Even with the fame of Dom Pérignon in the seventeenth century the name Champagne was strictly reserved for the still wines, although the slightly pétillant wines were also included.
Before the turn of the century fully mousseux wines were referred to simply as vins mousseux, sauté bouchant, flaçon mousseux or vins de Pérignon .
Champagne wines became immensely popular in the eighteenth century amongst the English aristocracy.
Princess Charlotte-Elizabeth declared the regent's passion for it in a letter dated 13 August 1716 exclaiming, ‘When my son gets tipsy, it is not on strong drinks or spiritous liquors, but on the pure wines of Champagne.’
In Champagne , Patrick Forbes indicates the indispensability of popping champagne corks for the success of a ball, stating that no less than 1,800 bottles of mousseux were consumed during a party held on 30 August 1739 at which  Louis XV apparently attended incognito .
But its boom in popularity was still a selective one — probably due to the fact that it was not until 1830 that the transport of Champagne in bottles became legally permitted.
Prior to this time it had to travel in cask and the resultant ‘sparkling’ wine must have been a sorry product, hardly an advertisement for its quality and reputation.
Only the very rich could afford to get hold of the real product, bottled and matured in the region itself.
The eighteenth century, however, saw the founding of ten Champagne firms, the first traceable houses since Gosset was established in 1584 and eight of which are still thriving today.
They were: Ruinart (1729), Chanoine Frère (1730), Forest Fourneaux (present-day      Taittinger, founded in 1734), Moët (present-day Moët & Chandon, founded in 1743), Vander-Veken (present-day Henri Abelé, founded in 1757), Delemotte (present-day Lanson, founded in 1760), Dubois Père & Fils (present-day Louis Roederer, founded in 1770), Clicquot (present-day Veuve Clicquot-Ponsardin, founded in 1772), Heidsieck (present-day Charles Heidsieck, Heidsieck & Co.
Monopole and Piper Heidsieck, founded from one firm in 1785) and Ernest Jacquesson (1798).
Many of the Champagne houses established at this time were born as a direct result of the Reims textile trade.
This city once possessed possibly the most important woollen manufacturing industry in France and the great textile barons took advantage of the rising reputation of Champagne by giving bottles away to customers.
In some cases customers would demand more Champagne than woollens which led the sharpest businessmen to quickly diversify into this lucrative new commerce.
The nineteenth century saw the emergence of two specific practices which separated the so-called méthode champenoise from the ‘rural method’ of Limoux.
These were:dégorgement (the act of removing sediment from the bottle after the second fermentation) and liqueur de tirage (the addition of sugar and yeast at the time of bottling to promote and guarantee a second fermentation).
Without these two crucial procedures Champagne would not be the sophisticated product it is today, yet we cannot trace the precise date when they first occurred, nor identify any particular person responsible for their innovation.
Dégorgement
The first documented mention of dégorgement occurs in André Jullien's Manuel du sommelier , published in 1813.
But dégorgement dates back at least as far as Dom Pérignon, who we know kept bottles stored, neck downward, in a bed of sand in order to encourage the sediment to drift down to the base of the cork.
Keeping the bottle in an inverted position Dom Pérignon would have carried the Champagne to the table, before removing the cork and releasing the sediment.
In a very fast and expert manner the bottle would then be brought to an upright position, thus preventing very little more than the sediment from escaping.
Early dégorgement à la volée performed by a caviste into a guérite to capture the cork and sediment
Such operations, although unquestionably dégorgement à la volée , would have been privately practised prior to any commercial application.
But even the ingenious Dom  Pérignon failed to grasp how close he was to radically improving sparkling wine production.
If only he had thought of recorking his wine after dégorgement , then the perfectly limpid sparkling wine he had managed to achieve for himself and, no doubt, passed on as a ‘tip’ to others, would have been available to everybody.
The commercial procedure of dégorgement crept in in gradual steps sometime in the latter part of the eighteenth century, or soon after, and might have been the producers' response to an increasing number of complaints about their clouded wines.
In 1821 J. MacCulloch published Remarks on the Art of Wine-Making stating:
Another process is sometimes adopted for getting rid of the sediment without the trouble of decanting in this mode; the bottles are reserved in a frame proper for the purpose, for a certain number of days, so as to permit the foulness to fall into the neck; while in this position, the cork is dexterously withdrawn and that portion of the wine that is foul, allowed to escape, after which the bottle is filled with clear wine, permanently corked and secured with wire.
Liqueur de tirage
Initially, sugar was added after fermentation (liqueur d'expédition ) purely to improve the flavour of wines which could sometimes be green and tart in a northerly region like Champagne.
In 1718 Jean Godinot claimed that Dom Pérignon added one pound of sugar per piece of wine, a charge which was hotly contested much later by Dom Grossard.
Whether or not Dom Pérignon added sugar is of little importance here, but it is likely that someone somewhere had engaged in the practice and, in all probability, the sugaring of wine may have been quite commonplace.
But the addition of sugar to promote or assist fermentation, as distinct from its use after fermentation to improve flavour, can be firmly fixed in the history of winemaking.
Adding sugar to the grape must to raise the wine's potential alcoholic content was first outlined in Chaptal's Traité théorique sur la culture de la vigne, avec l'art de faire le vin in 1801.
Jean-Antoine Chaptal (1756–1832) from whom the operation of assisting the grape must, chaptalisation, derives its name, was a brilliant chemist and technocrat who served Napoleon as minister of the interior from 1800 to 1805.
As minister, he issued instructions to vignerons on the advantages of adding sugar at the time of pressing and it was the vignerons of the more northerly winemaking regions, like Champagne, who benefited the most.
Shortly after Chaptal's publication a few Champagne manufacturers began to add the sugar, not at the time of pressing, but immediately prior to bottling in order to promote the second fermentation or, as the French call it, the prise de mousse .
The difficulty was in gauging just how much sugar should be added to yield the desired degree of mousse : too little would merely result in a vin pétillant ; too much would burst the bottle.
It was not until 1836 that it became possible to measure the amount of sugar left in a wine after the first fermentation, when Professor Francois of Châlons-sur-Marne published his Nouvelles observations sur la fermentation de vin en bouteilles, suivies d'un procédé pour reconnaître la quantité de sucre contenu dans le vin immédiatement avant tirage .
Francois invented a simple device called the sucre-oenomètre which provided a scale of measured dosages to add to the wine to obtain given pressures of mousse .
The  system, known at the time as réduction François , was not accepted immediately in the Champagne community, despite being held in great esteem elsewhere and, ironically — which was most damaging of all to the Champagne industry — used to further the production of German sparkling sekt .
Most nineteenth-century Champagnes continued to be made by methods akin to the old ‘rural method’, but with the additional advantage of dégorgement .
It was not until the 1880s that the calculated use of a liqueur de tirage (a mixture of wine, sugar and yeast) became widespread in Champagne, elevating it finally, rather late in the day, to its present revered status.
Nineteenth-century apparatus for delivering equal measures of liqueur de tirage to each bottle
Remuage
The simple method of inverting the bottles, as Dom Pérignon had done in his sand-pit, although adequate for the small amounts required by individuals, soon proved to be less than perfect for large commercial quantities.
Certain particles in the sediment would not descend to the base of the cork, often remaining firmly stuck to the inner surface of the bottle.
The sediment created during second fermentation is composed of various waste-products, several types of which possess a sticky character; to encourage these more cohesive particles to descend to the base of the cork requires a certain amount of physical persuasion and, as a result, a method of supplying this encouragement,remuage , was developed.
Remuage was pioneered by the house of Clicquot when, upon the death of her husband in 1805, the twenty-seven-year-old widow, Nicole Barbe (née Ponsardin), found herself in control of a major Champagne firm.
She took personal charge of the cellars and, well aware of the problem posed by the obstinate particles of sediment which refused to fall easily, spent night and day trying to rid herself of this nuisance.
It was her kitchen table that finally provided the ingenious solution.
Taking it down to her cellars she cut holes in its surface to accommodate the inverted bottles of Champagne.
Then, by periodically removing the inverted bottles from their positions, she would shake them, then replace them in the holes.
By 1806 the Widow, or Veuve as she was known, and her kitchen table were the talk of Reims.
Remuage in fact required a modification of the original shaking process developed by the widow, involving a fractional tilt of each bottle (from horizontal to perpendicular) following every short, sharp twist to loosen the sediment.
After several twists and tilts, the sediment is not only disturbed and encouraged to leave the sides of the bottle, but the bottle finally achieves a fully inverted position ready for dégorgement .
Sometime between 1806 and 1813 the twisting action we know today as remuage evolved, but it was the angled cut of the holes as much as the twisting motion which provided the key to the solution sought by the widow.
This enabled each bottle to start in an almost horizontal position, but finish perpendicular having gone through a full 90° of movement without leaving the hole.
The original planks with holes cut by Antoine Müller at an angle of 45° upon which the Veuve Clicquot carried out her remuage experiments
According to a letter from Alfred Werlé, the son of one of the widow's associates, it was an employee of Veuve Clicquot, Antoine Müller, who, in 1818, hit upon the supreme importance of cutting the bottle holes at an angle of 45°.
Antoine Müller became the widow's chef de caves , or chief cellarer between 1810 and 1822, although in March of 1822 he resigned from his position and was able to set up his own Champagne establishment, calling it Müller-Ruinart.
He employed the future founder of the house of Bollinger, Jacques Bollinger, then aged nineteen, to sell his wines in Germany, but it was Müller's experience at Veuve Clicquot which made him realise that the Russian market possessed the greatest potential for sales.
Consequently he placed advertisements in Russian newspapers, stating that he had been in charge of the production and clarification  of Veuve Clicquot wines for a number of years where he succeeded in achieving perfect limpidity.
Sometime between 1823 and 1824 the guarded secret of remuage , including Müller's angled holes, leaked out and, between 1830 and 1850, became common practice throughout the Champagne industry.
It was thus the house of Clicquot which placed the production of Champagne on a more sophisticated level than that of other sparkling wines.
Without dégorgement and Clicquot's remuage , the Champagne process would have been no different from the medieval ‘rural method’ utilised elsewhere.
Today, manual remuage is still widely used, but it is carried out on specially designed wooden boards, hinged together to stand like an inverted ‘V’ and known as pupitres (the French for reading desks).
Throughout the nineteenth century, following Madame Clicquot's inspired use of her kitchen table, wooden planks drilled with holes and supported on trestles were used for remuage , while some firms used similar planks but affixed to the walls of their cellars or caves .
Pupitres were adapted from these structures, although it is still uncertain who first employed them commercially for remuage .
Dégorgement à la glace
The à la volée method of dégorgement , as practised by Dom Pérignon and others, was totally inadequate for the enormous quantities of Champagne being produced in the last quarter of the nineteenth century.
Output had been steadily growing by about five million bottles every fifteen years, and was destined to reach a total of no less than thirty million bottles a year by the turn of the century.
With no trouble in selling their products, Champagne houses should have been heartened by such healthy expansion, but theirs was a labour-intensive business, where every bottle produced was taken through each stage of a complex operation by hand.
What was needed was a new system of dégorgement , able to cope with far greater capacity levels at a significantly higher speed than the traditional à la volèe process.
The à la glace or freezing method was invented by Armand Walfart in 1884 and is still the method of dégorgement most commonly used today.
The necks of the inverted bottles are dipped in a freezing brine which freezes the wine and sediment at the base of the cork sufficiently to make it adhere to the bottle's inner-surface; the dégorgeur can then bring the bottle back to its upright position without disturbing the sediment.
The frozen wine is not a block of ice, however, but a small amount of frozen wine with a consistency closer to slush.
When the cork is extracted the slush-like sediment shoots out of the bottle and, because the rest of the wine remaining in the bottle is at a much lower temperature than normal, the gas is reluctant to escape, hence there is no spray of foam and the bottle may be topped up and recorked with a minimal loss of pressure.
Anybody seeing this operation in the modern bottling halls of Champagne houses today will find it difficult to imagine that it was in regular use a hundred years ago, yet the two pioneers of the à la glace system, Moët & Chandon and Perrier Jouët, both introduced the process in 1891, independently of each other, and five years before it was patented by Walfart on 14 November 1896.
By 1908 the à la glace method was well enough established to be described by Ernest and Arthur Vizetelly in their book Wines of France .
These developments were the minutiae by which an intrinsically superior sparkling wine came to be refined, but without a raw product of unique potential there would have been nothing to refine.
Without the specific grape varieties that go to make Champagne; without the viticulturally begrudging climate — a combination of the region's northern latitude and its proximity to the Atlantic; and without the precise elevation found in the Montagne de Reims, the Vallée de la Marne and the Côte des Blancs, there would be no great sparkling wine called Champagne.
By the late nineteenth century Champagne had become big business, as the very industrialised impression of this drawing of Moët & Chandon's bottling hall depicts
Phylloxera
Phylloxera first appeared in the Champagne vineyards at Treloup, in the Aisne dëpartement , in 1890.
The dreaded disease had taken almost thirty years to reach Champagne since it was first identified in the Côtes-du-Rhône region, where it had arrived on experimental vine stocks shipped from America via London.
Initially, the vignerons in the south and south-west of France had tried to ignore the louse, but as its crippling devastation spread throughout the vineyards of the major wine regions various methods of eradication were attempted.
These were usually chemically based, many of which contained a high proportion of potassium, but perhaps the most imaginative scheme was the deliberate introduction of Tyroglyphus phylloxera .
Tyroglyphus , harmless to the vine but a deadly enemy of Phylloxera vastatrix , was imported in 1873 in an attempt to kill off the pest; unfortunately, however, unlike phylloxera,Tyroglyphus did not care for the European climate and failed to settle.
Eventually it  became apparent that every vine in every vineyard would have to be grafted on to phylloxera-resistant American rootstock.
Costly and time-consuming (the operation was unfinished at the outbreak of the First World War), it was nonetheless essential.
Phylloxera is generally considered to be the greatest disaster in French viticultural history, but in some respects it has also been a blessing.
Prior to its arrival in France, the greatest vineyards had undergone gradual devaluation as a result of the increasing demand for wine, which had led to the planting of inferior varieties and the extension of vineyards into unsuitable areas of land.
Grafting on to American rootstock led to a much needed rationalisation, whereby only the best sites in the classic regions were replanted and only noble vines were cultivated.
The Champagne trade: its evolution and expansion
Formation of syndicats 
A further setback, which directly affected the Champagne industry towards the end of the nineteenth century, was the publication of incorrect export figures by the French ministry of agriculture.
This led to American charges that inferior quality Champagne had caused the drop in shipments outlined by the ministry which, in turn, created increased domestic interest in Californian sparkling wine.
The ministry's figures had erred by no less than 8,2.43 dozen bottles of Champagne: shipments were not down — they were up.
Thus, but for their own agricultural ministry, there would have been no American criticism, nor would there have been such a well-publicised fillip for the Californian sparkling wine industry.
The Champagne houses were naturally outraged at the government's ineptitude and drew up a vociferous protest, signed by eighty participants, condemning the publicity given to the ministerial communiqué.
On 19 September 1882, at a special session of the Société Industrielle de Reims, three Champagne houses — Heidsieck & Co., G. H. Mumm & Co. and Giesler & Co. — tabled a motion to form a syndicat to defend the name and honour of Champagne.
The motion was unanimously adopted and the first meeting of the syndicat took place on 4 November 1882 when twenty-two houses were represented.
Aims were defined, certain statutory regulations laid down and five officers elected for the first three-year term.
Although only twenty-two houses were represented the syndicat recognised that it stood for the rights of some sixty Champagne houses, virtually the entire trade at the time.
The syndicat was soon put to the test.
In November 1883 a quantity of bottles purporting to be Champagne made by Deutz & Geldermann attracted attention in Munich.
They were of abominable quality and obviously not genuine Champagne.
The wine belonged to Herr A. Einhorn and the bottles had been dressed with forged Jockey Club labels.
After exhaustive investigations the supplier was identified as Herr Ignatz of Wurzburg and a solicitor by the name of Medicus was recommended by Deutz & Geldermann to settle the matter.
Another case in 1883 revealed that a marque of Veuve Clicquot-Ponsardine was being sold, but with the insertion of an extra ‘o’ in the label, reading ‘Veuve Cliocquot-Ponsardin' and going for a ridiculously low price.
The syndicat obtained some of the wine from an agent named Herr A. Centawer and its members were amazed by the almost identical labels; the spelling variation was virtually unnoticeable.
Again, the quality was strikingly poor, provoking the syndicat 's action, not simply to combat unfair trading, but to defend the image of Champagne.
The syndicat very quickly established a reputation for acting firmly, swiftly and in any country, in defence of Champagne.
On 21 March 1884 a law was passed establishing the legal existence of the Syndicat du Commerce des Vins de Champagne, comprising the following 61 houses:
Throughout the syndicat's first two or three decades of existence, however, its membership declined and in 1912 a second, alternative organisation was formed, the Syndicat des Négociants en Vins de Champagne.
Those remaining in the original syndicat took the view that they comprised the élite of the trade and, by protecting the élite, the syndicat would achieve the best possible image for Champagne.
The houses which established the break-away syndicat were less illustrious in name and thus believed little could be gained from an organisation run by the élite for the élite and they therefore grouped together.
On 11 May 1945 a merger of convenience took place between the associations of Champagne houses, the Syndicat du Commerce des Vins de Champagne and the Syndicat des Négociants en Vin de Champagne under the auspices of the Union des Syndicats du Commerce des Vins de Champagne.
Both syndicat s retained their separate titles, policies and regulations and continued to control their own destinies, the Union merely providing a co-operating and co-ordinating service which enabled all négociants in the trade to be represented should the need arise.
The Champagne Riots
It had been decided that the Champagne-producing area must be legally delimited in order to protect the quality of grapes being included in the cuvées and to safeguard the traditional areas able to grow them.
Everyone agreed that this was a sensible decision, with the exception of growers from the more outlying districts, in particular the Midi, who had a vested interest in selling to Champagne and who would certainly be excluded.
In the absence of any positive action from the government to stop the trade with the Midi, the Federation des Syndicats de la Champagne (which changed its name in 1919 to the Syndicat General des Vignerons de la Champagne) was founded by Marne vignerons in 1904 to protect the quality of grapes being used for Champagne.
Many of the rules laid down by this syndicat in 1904 were later taken as the basic framework around which the AOC regulations for Champagne were formulated in 1927.
Because of the continuing antagonism between the Marne (which includes the Montagne de Reims, the Vallée de la Marne and the Côte des Blancs), the Aube (the region south of Troyes) and, to a lesser extent, the Aisne (all the vineyards around Château-Thierry and to the east of Soissons), the government avoided all questions concerning boundaries.
Initially this satisfied the Marne growers, since they were pleased that the government had not ratified the Aube's claim that it too was part of Champagne.
But the arguments soon broke out again, because the Aube wines, although not officially included as Champagne wines, were not officially excluded either.
Aube wines had long been used by several Champagne houses, albeit on the quiet, and with no delimited region fixed the practice began to increase.
Fears soon began to be expressed that wines from the Midi too would again find their way back into Champagne cellars.
The rivalry grew acute, with the houses splitting into two camps.
Those which used Aube wines put forward the argument that the Aube was not only part of the historic province of Champagne, but its chief town, Troyes, was the ancient provincial capital and once the seat of the counts of Champagne.
The Marne camp pointed out that it would be ridiculous to include every hectare of the ancient province for purely historical reasons with no consideration for soil, aspect or other factors contributing to the quality of wine.
Furthermore, they argued, such an area would cover one-twentieth of all France, stretching into Chablis and part of the Loire.
The government finally gave way and, on 17 December 1908, passed a bill which restricted the term ‘Champagne’ to certain named communes in the Marne and Aisne départements only.
There was some dissent in the Aube, but not a great deal, for there was little chance of enforcing the law and the Aubois were content with continuing their business of supplying those houses in the Marne which covertly required their wines.
Marne growers (as opposed to Marne houses) however, felt much aggrieved by the continued blending of Aube wines, a situation aggravated by the financial hardship they faced after three bad harvests in 1907, 1908 and 1909 and culminating in the disastrous vintage of 1910.
Disquiet grew and, on 11 February 1911, the ever-appeasing government brought in tougher laws restricting the use of Aube grapes.
While a sigh of relief could be felt in the Marne, the Aube population nigh on fermented with anger.
In the face of government determination to enforce the February 1911 laws more than eight thousand Aube growers marched through the streets of Bar-sur-Aube carrying on their backs paniers de mannequin (grape harvesting baskets) full of tax-forms which they ceremoniously set fire to.
Everyone joined in the protest, town bands, mayors and priests.
An effigy of the prime minister, Monsieur Monis, was burned and thirty-six mayors resigned.
Such was the dismay of the Monis government that it hastily announced its intention to annul the laws of 1908 and 1911, weakly declaring that it was ‘abandoning the territorial  delimitations which may provoke divisions among Frenchmen’.
But such reconciliatory action only made matters worse, reawakening hostilities in the Marne.
On the afternoon of 11 April, when the news of the impending annulment was announced, word went out to all growers in the Marne and their supporters.
Men could be seen grouping together, bugles and horns were sounded.
The storm broke over the little townships north of Épernay: before dusk, the cellars and premises of producers in Dizy had been sacked, those in Damery soon followed and by noon the next day some ten thousand demonstrators descended upon Aÿ.
The protestors had intended to enter Épernay, but were prevented from doing so by a squadron of cavalry which had barricaded the road.
The squadron of cavalry was but a small contingent of a much larger military force despatched to Champagne by the Monis government: Épernay was to be protected at all costs and between twenty and forty thousand cavalry, dragoons and infantry poured into the town.
Civil war was averted, but while the 120-strong squadron of cavalry were able to hold back the rioters in Aÿ, they were unwilling to engage their fellow citizens in open conflict and failed to prevent the mob from sacking and burning the premises of Ayala, Bissinger and Deutz & Geldermann in Aÿ.
According to Cyril Ray in his penetrating profile Bollinger (1971), one house was spared and he records that fifteen years after the riots Madame Bollinger overheard a passer-by outside one of her windows say, ‘That's the Bollinger house, you know: we didn't touch it during the riots here — as a matter of fact, we lowered our flag to it when we passed!’ 'Probably the red flag,’Madame is supposed to have commented with pleased irony.
In the immediate aftermath of the rioting the vignerons tried to excuse their actions by claiming that only houses which practised the blending of wines from the Midi had been molested, but there was no evidence to bear this out and even houses which had kept strictly to the noble blends had been attacked.
The Monis government had been guilty of foolish panic, the Marne growers of mob violence.
One of the last acts of the short-lived vacillating Monis government was to draft a new bill recognising both the Marne and the Aube, but as two distinct districts.
The classic area of the Marne would be called ‘Champagne’, while the Aube and those districts of the Marne excluded by the I908 decree would be known as the ‘Champagne Deuxième Zone’.
Both sides seemed satisfied and although it is unlikely that a two-tier Champagne classification would have been workable in the long term, it sufficed for the present although it was still being debated in the Senate when war broke out three years later.
The First World War
In European warfare invading armies normally choose harvest to launch their attacks, and the year 1914 was no exception.
On 3 September Reims fell to the German forces at the end of their month-long advance; three days later Épernay too succumbed.
But the power of the German sweep faltered and French forces were able to regroup and mount a counter-attack from the Paris region.
There then followed, between 7 and 9 September, a most bitter clash of armies in the normally tranquil vineyards of Champagne, the Battle of the Marne.
Strategically, the Marne is important for the last line of defence it presents before the  Seine.
Once the Seine is crossed, Paris lies open to the invader.
It was therefore vital for the French to retake the north bank and this they achieved amidst vines heavily laden with fruit, reoccupying both Épernay and Reims by 13 September.
Waged on the high ground in the Montagne de Reims, between Épernay and the Marne to the south and Reims to the north, there followed one of the most gruelling and protracted battles in human history, the line of trenches moving barely a hundred yards throughout four long and bloody years.
Nobody who has ever taken the trouble to visit General Gouraud's observation post on a cold, dank winter's day, could ever escape the hell-hole ambiance of such a deathly place which seems to reach out over the decades of time to shame and sicken the human race.
My own memory is vivid: it was a bitterly cold morning, below - 14°, and the ground I trod, in which only days before I would have been up to my knees in mud, was as solid as rock.
As I picked my way through the frozen woods towards the observation post which commands a unique view over the former battle-ground of the Marne, I wondered what it must have been like to be a soldier.
It is a strenuous physical effort to scale on a good spring day, but in the pouring rain, amidst hailing bullets, laden with uniform and the tools of war…
The north-facing slopes of the Montagne de Reims bore the brunt of the hostilities, yet the damage done to the vineyards during the Battle of the Marne was negligible compared with the inhuman slaughter and tragic loss of lives in the trenches.
Work in the vineyards continued, with women and children dying while servicing the vineyards that the soldiers on both sides manipulated for their own strategic purposes.
More than twenty children were killed bringing in that first wartime crop of 1914.
The collapse of world markets
In October 1917, while the attention of all France, particularly that of the people of Champagne, focused on the progress of the battles on the Western Front, Russia rose in revolution.
This had considerable impact on the Champagne trade for, at a single stroke, 10 per cent of its annual production, normally consumed in royal and aristocratic Russian circles, suddenly had no market.
Quite predictably, the revolutionary government refused to pay any outstanding bills for their former masters' frivolous luxuries, a state of affairs which had disastrous consequences for champagne houses, like Roederer, whose main market was Russian.
Furthermore, after the Allied victory in 1918, Germany and the former Austro-Hungarian Empire were bankrupt and unable to make any significant purchases for a long time.
The bitterness and confusion over delimitation, which had led to the drafting of a bill in 1911 outlining the two distinct districts, ‘Champagne’ and ‘Champagne Deuxième Zone’, was still unsolved and an amended law was passed through the new government in 1919.
This instigated for the first time the right of appellation in the form of the Appellation d'Origine Controlée (AOC) and regulations were imposed including a cunning proviso which dumped the entire issue of the Aube wines and the controversial ‘Champagne Deuxième Zone’ firmly in the lap of the judiciary.
After six years of litigation, the courts decided in favour of the Aube growers and, in 1927, a new law quashed the deuxième designation once and for all, outlining a detailed list of communes eligible for the  appellation Champagne (see Appendix IV), the broad outlines of which are still in existence today.
Meanwhile, on 20 January 1920, the dwindling sales of Champagne suffered yet another downward spiral, when the American Prohibition Bill was passed (although ‘bootleggers’ still managed to smuggle in substantial consignments).
Prohibition was also imposed in various degrees in Scandinavian countries, another formerly prosperous market.
Traditionally the British had been Champagne's most lucrative customers — after the drink had been popularised in society by the Marlboroughs and the Prince of Wales in the last half of the nineteenth century.
Soldiers had since picked up the habit of wine-drinking in France during the war and upon returning to England had educated the middle classes, further increasing the popularity of Champagne in the immediate post-war years.
But when Britain went off the Gold Standard in 1931, the Champagne houses found themselves receiving just two-thirds of the price they had come to expect.
The disruption of world markets in the aftermath of the war, the waves of protectionism and concurrent fall in export sales inevitably affected the Champagne trade as it razed other industries; 1932 proved disastrous with virtually no buyers for Champagne.
Despite a run of small harvests, the cellars in Reims and Épernay were brimming, and it was estimated that had sales maintained their 1932 level, the Champagne houses possessed sufficient stock in hand to tide over sales for the next thirty-three years.
The last thing Champagne required was a plentiful harvest, but that was precisely what it got with the bumper crop of 1934.
Most houses simply refused to buy any grapes, even though the growers were practically giving them away.
But little could be done to redress the situation since the houses were in just as bad a position as the growers.
Some of the larger growers, however, who could afford the investment, began to make their own Champagne instead of relying purely on the sale of grapes.
It was a costly investment requiring several years to come to fruition and the vast majority of growers could not afford the necessary equipment.
It was at this time that many growers began to group together to form the earliest co-operatives in Champagne.
Unresponsive export markets led many houses to turn their attention inwards and focus on long-neglected domestic sales.
This they achieved with stunning success, building up a trade several times the size of their previous home market.
In 1927 Champagne sales on the French market accounted for eight million bottles, by 1935 it had passed twenty-four million.
The French domestic market remains to this day far and away the largest consumer of Champagne.
Prior to the setting up of the CIVC, the single most effective body responsible for guarding the quality of Champagne today, a decree was passed on 28 September 1935 creating an inter-professional organisation called the Commission Spéciale de la Champagne, which soon became known as the Commission de Châlons because its meetings were held in the Prefecture (the administrative centre) at Châlons-sur-Marne.
The Commission was composed of representatives from Champagne houses, growers, local officials, the ministry of agriculture and the treasury and its aims were ‘to ensure the respect of local custom and tradition, the observation of which is necessary in order to  preserve the quality of Champagne’.
But apart from establishing an annual committee empowered to fix the price of grapes each year, the Commission was an unimaginative and ineffective institution.
The Second World War
From May 1940 until August 1944 the Champagne region was occupied by German troops.
But the Champenois were not unprepared: many houses were able to seal up their cellars; those wishing to escape German occupation left for southern France, while others remained organising themselves into an effective network of resistance, the extent of which was unknown even to most Champenois.
The various houses hid as much Champagne as they dared by sealing up some of their cellars, but they had to be very careful not to attract attention.
A famous Champagne house sporting blatantly low stocks, or declaring cellars which could easily be judged too small for the firm's recorded production, would have invited the Nazis to make an intensive search.
Throughout its period of occupation, the region's wine industry was under the control of a Rhineland wine-maker, Herr Klaebisch, who assumed the title of Führer of Champagne.
As Patrick Forbes put it in Champagne , ‘The news of his appointment was received with a certain relief by most people, for, if you were going to be shoved around, it was better to be shoved around by a wine-maker than by some beer-drinking Nazi lout.’
The German occupation proved useful in one respect, however: it spurred the formation of the Comité Interprofessionnel du Vin de Champagne (CIVC), an organisation which has since established itself as the most successful of its type in France.
In November 1940 the Vichy government abolished the ineffective Commission de Châlons, intending to replace it with an organisation called Le Bureau de Repartition du Vinicole de Champagne, but in April the following year the Germans set up the CIVC.
Robert-Jean de Vogüé and Maurice Doyard, both members of the Commission de Châlons, convinced the German authorities that the Commission was powerless and unable to influence the trade on any matters raised, or to issue orders on the Führer's behalf or from other agencies of the occupation forces.
Together de Vogüè and Doyard indicated that the Bureau intended by the Vichy government to replace the Commission would be no better and what was required, if the Germans wanted their orders carried out quickly and efficiently, was a body with real powers.
Thus, playing to the Germans' appeal for order, these two brave Frenchmen secured for the trade a buffer in the form of the CIVC which took on the day-to-day unpleasantries of dealing with an alien administration.
The Germans naturally played the major role in shaping the CIVC and its undoubted success, both immediate and since, must to some extent be credited to the Germans' reputation for organisation, efficiency and detail.
The Germans had intended blowing up the cellars of Champagne before retreating, but on 28 August 1944 they were caught napping as General Patton and his 3rd Army swept into Épernay.
Terroir
Was it really a fact that a significant section of the public really did not know — not that Champagne came from a Province in France historically called Champagne — but from France at all?
André Simon debating the Costa Brava Spanish Champagne case,The History of Champagne , 1962
NO WORD IN THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE accurately captures the meaning of ‘le terroir’ when used in a viticultural sense.
Effectively, it refers to all environmental factors which can affect the production of grapes in a given area and thus the potential of the wines that area may produce.
It is, without doubt, a contentious subject, but there is no doubt in the mind of this author that it is only in Champagne that all these elements combine, albeit precariously, with a special method of production, to produce a sparkling wine of such incomparable finesse.
Location
Champagne is the most northerly of the AOC (Appellation d'Origine Contrôlée) wine regions of France, lying approximately I50 kilometres north-east of Paris, and separated from Belgium to the north by the hills and dense forests of the Ardennes.
The VDQS (Vins Délimités de Qualité Supérieure) production area Vins de Moselle is slightly further north but it is negligible in terms of quantity and quality.
The area legally delimited between 1908 and 1919 as the Champagne-producing region covers 34,500 hectares.
Of these, 31,050 hectares may be planted, about 26,400 hectares are planted and approximately 25,000 hectares are actually in production.
As can be seen from the table below, the area of Champagne under vine which is in production has increased by 40% since 1970.
There are two basic reasons for the apparent anomalies in what generally appears to be a steady expansion of the vineyard area: first, the uprooting of old, commercially non-productive vines; and second, the decimation of large patches of vines due to natural causes like frost, hail, disease, pests, etc.
In 1985, for example, one in ten vines was killed by winter conditions when the temperature dropped as low as - 23°C.
Before grapes are allowed the full AOC status of Champagne, the vines from which they come, whether situated in a virgin vineyard or an old one just replanted, must attain their ‘third leaf’, by which is meant that the plants, having produced foliage for the third time, will be three years old.
Vineyards under ‘first leaf’ and ‘second leaf’cannot, therefore, be considered as part of the area in production.
From 1970 to 1975, the planting of new vineyards was particularly hectic and the figures for 1982–5 are but an indication of yet another intensive period of viticultivating new land within the delimited region.
After a dismal harvest in 1978, exacerbated by increased pressure on stocks from the record sales of 1978–9, the situation worsened the following year with a poor flowering in the spring of 1980, and some 1,600 hectares were  released for planting between 1980 and 1983.
While many people frowned at such a huge expansion programme, it soon became apparent that it was insufficient to guarantee the avoidance of another crisis, and official approval was immediately secured for the planting of a further 5,000 hectares by the year 1990.
It is likely that in the next few years there will be pressure to bring into production the remaining hectares of delimited land, although economics and the overall strategy of the Champagne market will also play their part.
Location of the Champagne region relative to other major wine areas of France
The principal wine-growing areas of the Champagne region
Climate
The northern climate of Champagne is barely adequate to support the cultivation of the vine, let alone guarantee a crop of ripe grapes.
Yet it is precisely this unfriendly climate which is the most crucial factor in determining the inimitable quality and character of Champagne.
This viticultural twilight zone stretches the duration of the vine's growth cycle to the limit, resulting in a longer ripening period, providing grapes with a high degree of acidity.
But a fine sparkling wine must also possess a certain richness of flavour of ripe grapes.
Champagne's harvest must therefore reach a reasonable level of ripeness and as the ripening process, or véraison the French call it, increases the sugar content, the high degree of acidity necessary for these wines is important only in ratio to the sugar content.
In even a marginally warmer climate than Champagne's, the sugar-acid ratio would be unsuitable for a fine sparkling wine.
Champagne's high sugar-acid ratio — a quality which would seem horrendously out of balance for a still wine — is essential in order to carry the  flavour of the wine on to the palate through the sensation of thousands of bubbles bursting in the mouth.
In Champagne itself, in exceptionally hot vintages like 1947, 1959 and 1976, the sugar-acid ratios were inappropriate for the fine balance of Champagne.
The wines from these years attained great ripeness, but the véraison was far too quick and the Champagnes produced were very high in alcohol and extract and low in acidity, resulting in big, overtly rich, fat wines.
Great wines they may be, but it is hard to define these wines as good sparkling wines and classic Champagnes they most certainly are not.
It is not merely the northerly situation of Champagne which is responsible for its unique climate, the region is also influenced by the Atlantic.
Some German vineyards can be found in more northerly locations, but they are subjected to the greater continental influence of colder winters and hotter summers.
The Atlantic has a cooling effect on Champagne's summers and makes the seasons generally more variable.
The mean temperature in Champagne is 10.53°C sheltered at 2 metres above the ground and 11.21°C at 0.2 metres above the ground.
It can fall below -5°C but rarely rises above 25°C.
Because of the humidity, below freezing temperatures feel colder than they are and can have the harmful effect of biting deep into the vine and this can be fatal if the sap has started to rise.
Any frost of -4°C or less at 0.3 metres above the ground will affect the vine.
In the spring young shoots will be damaged by such frosts and, if the frosts are severe or prolonged, they may be killed.
Second or tertiary shoots will grow but the crop will be reduced and the fruit may not ripen in time.
Flat ground and the slopes of the Marne valley are particularly prone to frost.
There are, on average, between sixty and eighty days of frost a year throughout the region.
The average amount of sunshine the vines receive annually is only 1,537 hours (Bordeaux: 2,07I hours) spread over 289 days.
Some hold the view that there is an extra intensity to the sunlight due to its reflection from the chalky-white soil.
Whether this has any significant effect upon the vine's growth has yet to be determined but it is true that the light in Champagne is exceptional for so northern a latitude.
A vineyard needs at least 400–500 millimetres of water per year: in Champagne the vines receive an annual average of 662 millimetres of rain over 176 days.
Compared with  other regions, such as Bordeaux (750–950 millimetres), Burgundy (630 millimetres in the Côte d'Or; 700millimetres in Beaujolais) and the Loire valley (620–700 millimetres), however, this does not appear to be so high.
However, a combination of the limestone subsoil and the profusion of rivers, canals, lakes and reservoirs reduces Champagne's water requirement (due to low evaporation), making 662 millimetres of rainfall relatively heavier than it at first appears.
Hydrography
One of the most striking features of the hilly terrain of viticultural Champagne is its network of rivers and canals.
The contribution of Champagne's waterways to the prosperity of its vineyards is often neglected, but these waters together provide excellent drainage to the slopes on which the vineyards are planted, whilst also sustaining a reliable water table.
Overlooking the Marne valley from Hautvillers
The most important river in the region is the Marne which starts life in dramatic surroundings a few kilometres south of Langres, not far from the magnificent Château le Pailly.
Langres, a fortress town enclosed by four kilometres of ancient ramparts and perched on top of a 100-metre-high plateau, some seventy-five kilometres north of Dijon      and the Côte de Beaune, dominates the Marne valley.
From here the Marne flows north, maintaining a parallel course with the NI9 highway to Chaumont and the N67 to Dizier, before bending a little to the west, gathering strength, and flowing through Châlons-sur-Châlons-sur-Marne and Épernay.
Keeping adjacent to the N3 from Châlons, it rushes through Château-Thierry and out of the delimited region towards Paris, where it feeds the Seine at Charenton.
Aspersion is a method of frost-protection involving a water-sprinkling system (BELOW) which automatically switches on whenever the temperature drops below freezing.
The frost expends its energy in freezing the water, not the vine, as the delicate bud (RIGHT) safely cocooned in its igloo of ice so vividly demonstrates
Barely fifty kilometres from its source, the Seine flows through some of the southern Champagne vineyards in the Aube at Bar-sur-Seine.
Keeping parallel to the N71 until Troyes, it follows the N19 to Nogent-sur-Seine — just south of the often forgotten delimited districts between Sézanne and Villenauxe-la-Grande — before heading northwest towards Paris.
The Aube, the Vesle and the Ardre are the three other important rivers in the region.
With its source barely twenty kilometres south-west of le Pailly and Langres, the Aube flows through Bar-sur-Aube — whose vineyards, together with those of Bar-sur-Seine, provide about fourteen per cent of the total production of Champagne — before joining the Seine fifteen kilometres from Nogent-sur-Seine.
The Vesle and the Ardre play significant roles in the drainage of the vineyards of the Petite Montagne, the hilly extension of the Montagne de Reims just west of the city.
The Vesle rises just east of Châlons-sur-Marne and flows north-westwards, fed by a small tributary, the Noblette, and accompanied by the Aisne-Marne Canal, before flowing through Reims and part of the northern section of the Petite Montagne into the Aisne département , east of Soissons.
The Ardre starts life in the Montagne de Reims, just west of the N51, at a point roughly half-way between Reims and Épernay.
Gradually picking up strength, it flows north-westwards following the N386 through the vineyards until it joins the Vesle at Fismes.
Other more minor rivers, streams and tributaries of local importance are: the Cubry and Sourdon, in the area south and west of Épernay; the Semoigne, Belval and Flagot, all of which feed the Marne; the Berle and Gubersault, south of the Côte des Blancs; the Surmelin, Petit Morin, Verdonelle and Moulin, which skirt the southern parts of the region; and the Aisne river which, while not a minor waterway, dips into the northern Champagne vineyards in the area east of Soissons.
All classic vineyards in Champagne possess a very thin layer of drift (ABOVE LEFT), under which exists a seam of brilliant-white chalk up to 300 metres thick.
The infamous boues de ville (BOTTOM LEFT) contains anything from cigarette packets to Lego (INSET) but always, mysteriously, ends up dominated by blue plastic
Topography
The name Champagne comes from the Latin campagna , signifying open, unforested land: an ambiguous origin for those who have seen only the hilly vineyards of Champagne surmounted by forest.
But the classic viticultural region occupies only a small proportion of the old historical province which was, by and large, open and flat.
The viticultural zone occupies that part of Champagne known as the falaises or Champagne cliffs.
The chalk hills of the falaises are situated in the Reims and Épernay districts and comprise the Montagne de Reims, the Vallée de la Marne and the Côte des Blancs, the entire area of which, before human interference, was totally covered in forest.
It is difficult to offer a succinct description of the countryside of Champagne viticole .
On the one hand, the Montagne de Reims suggests a much higher, tougher topography  than it actually represents; yet, on the other, to talk of rolling hills would give too tame an impression of the region.
On the Reims side of the Montagne de Reims, from Chamery just north of the Ardre, through Rilly-la-Montagne in the Grande Montagne proper, to Verzenay at its edge, the vineyards mostly have north-facing aspects.
This is very unusual for a European wine region (in most cases, vineyards generally face south to some degree) and especially for one as northerly in latitude as Champagne.
From Verzy to Trépail, however, the vines face eastwards, after which they take more southerly aspects.
The vineyards of the Vallée de la Marne face both north and south, depending on which bank they are situated.
Going west, the vineyards on the right bank, from Mareuil towards Dormans, have an excellent south-facing aspect and far outmatch in terms of quality the north-facing, left bank vineyards of Mardeuil, Boursault, etc.
Going south out of Épernay into the so-called Cubry valley, the vineyards of Pierry, Moussy and Vinay have south and south-east facing aspects, while across the valley towards Vaudancourt and Chavot they again face north, yet like those in the Montagne, seem to thrive.
Further south, where the vineyards of Monthelon and Morangis face Mancy across a small valley, the vines are nicely trapped in east and west-facing aspects.
The south-west-facing vines of Grauves mix with those of Cuis before bending around the northern extremity of the Côte des Blancs to meet the superbly situated, east and south-east-facing vineyards of Cramant, Avize, le Mesnil and Vertus.
The vineyards in the Côte de Sézanne in the south-western Champagne district are noticeably less concentrated.
They are planted in east and south-east-facing aspects along a ridge which stretches from Allemant, seven kilometres north-east of Sézanne, to Villenauxe-la-Grande, twenty kilometres south-west.
In the Aube département between Bar-sur-Aube and Bar-sur-Seine, the patches of vine are even more scattered and, although the best sites face south-east, most seem to have no general trend of aspect.
Yet despite the generally low-lying and frost-prone valleys of this region, there are some good Champagnes produced from a handful of vineyards well situated on the steeper slopes of hillsides ranging between 200 and 300 metres in height.
Soil
Topsoil, which eventually becomes man-made when constantly cultivated, is of primary importance: some eighty per cent of the vine's root system, including most of the feeding network, remains in the upper sector of soil.
On the other hand, subsoil will always remain geologically true, however cultivated the vineyard may be.
Main roots penetrate several different layers of subsoil, the structure of which influences the root system's depth, its drainage and its ability to collect essential minerals.
In general, the ideal medium in which to grow vines for wine production is one that has a thin drift topsoil for good drainage and an easily penetrable, thus well drained subsoil of good water retention characteristics.
Thus the metabolism of the vine is well known, and the interaction between it and the soil generally understood.
But the finer details concerning the interaction between specific varieties of vine and particular types of soil are an area of knowledge which is still in need of serious research.
Dr P.H.T. Beckett, head of  the Soil Science Laboratory of the Department of Agricultural Science, University of Oxford, told me:
I did once try to collect information to that purpose…
Although I asked various qualified people if soil altered the flavour of wine from the same grape variety and district I got no clear answer…
I visited a one-man research station of the Cyprus Department of Agriculture who invited me to taste the products of many combinations of variety and soil.
It was my impression that slightly casual management may have turned them all to vinegar.
At least the wines tasted very curious to my inexpert palate.
Perhaps the greatest quality characteristic possessed by vines grown in Champagne is the ability to produce ripe grapes with a relatively high degree of acidity.
Certainly climate is essentially responsible for this but soil plays a part too.
A soil with free lime present (i.e. high pH) such as Champagne's Belemnite and Micraster chalk soil, provides grapes with a high cation, or acid, content.
There are other soil factors which influence plant growth and the most pertinent of these in the case of Champagne is lime-induced chlorosis.
High free lime content in soil restricts access to iron and, to a slightly lesser extent, manganese.
This interferes with the synthesis of  chlorophyll , an essential green colouring matter in the leaves which uses sunlight to convert simple elements into plant food, causing chlorosis, which is the yellowing of a plant's leaves.
In Champagne this is normally countered by the selection of highly resident rootstock varieties and through the choice of sites where the chalk is thinly covered by drift or where man has added rich sandy or clayey lignite soils to the surface.
Most arguments supporting the importance of certain soil types for the production of quality wines hinge on the availability of minerals and other nutrients.
These life-sustaining ingredients can be applied directly to the vine by man, indeed are so applied by man in commercial viticulture, yet according to Mike Woodhead, the owner of ‘Le Bonheur’ in South Africa, it is possible to effect a permanently natural and desirable nutrient cycle in soils considered inferior by some.
Mike Woodhead studied soil-science in Holland and put it to good use when he purchased his wine estate.
Composed of four basic soil-types, pot-clay, drained red loam, deep sand and quite deep sand over pot-clay, his estate had insufficient phosphorus, calcium and magnesium, with an unsuitably low pH.
But by an expensive, slow and very laborious liming, composting and cover-cropping, he has established a natural cycle which no longer requires topping up with nutrients.
The chemical analysis of his soil ‘before and after’ reveals an astonishing change.
Glossary of rocks and soils
Alluvium Material which has been transported by river and deposited.
Often sand and gravel, but in Champagne alluvial deposits may also include chalky pebbles and  concentrations of chalk debris cemented into convex banks several metres thick, and younger alluvial soils may contain chalk clay.
Belemnite chalk See Chalk first.
In Champagne , Patrick Forbes categorically states the gospel as held in Champagne: ‘Now, it so happened that most of the top layer of chalk found on the Falaises is of a type known as Belemnita quadrata , which is markedly different from the Micraster chalk found on the plain below.
Had the top layer of chalk found on the surface soil of the Falaises been mostly of the Micraster type, it is extremely improbable that there would ever have been champagne.
For only where there are seams of Belemnita quadrata chalk, covered by a layer of Tertiary debris, will the vines produce radiant crops on the Falaises, and grapes that can be turned into champagne which has champagne's unique, inimitable flavour.’
This implies something special about Belemnite chalk which is falacious.
As Dr Geoffrey Tresise, Keeper of Geology, Merseyside County Museum, has pointed out in a series of articles for the trade magazine Wine & Spirit , there is no physical or chemical property of Belemnite chalk which makes it either superior or inferior to Micraster for viticultural purposes and the grand cru towns of the northerly Montagne adequately demonstrate this.
About the number of authors who write that ‘the Champagne vineyards are confined to the belemnite-rich chalk and that the lower beds, where belemnites are lacking, produce inferior grapes which are never used for Champagne’, he comments: ‘They infer that the Campanian has some special but undefined property which makes it superior for vine-growing.
Geologically this seems unlikely, if only because the Campanian chalk is widely distributed in the Paris Basin and is certainly not confined to the Montagne de Reims.’
Indeed, belemnites, the small, dart-shaped molluscs whose strong rod-like fossilised calcareous shells encouraged geologists to name this particular Campanian chalk Belemnita quadrata , are only common in relative terms.
All chalks, including Belemnite chalk, are fundamentally composed of coccoliths; the belemnites are but a tiny percentage and are also to be found in some seams of Micraster chalk to a greater or lesser degree.
Geologists are notorious for latching on to the name of a particular life-form present in rock formations when thinking up names and equally notorious for changing their minds and the rock's name afterwards, hence Belemnita quadrata no longer exists because they have renamed it Gonio teuthis quadrata .
Chalk Chalk is commonly used as a synonym for limestone but, whereas all chalk is limestone, not all limestone is chalk.
Limestone applies to any sedimentary rock consisting essentially of carbonates, but chalk is geologically unique, the white, very fine-grained limestone of the Upper Cretaceous period.
Ninety-five million years ago, sea covered most of what is now Europe and, for thirty million years, while the earth experienced great calm, the microscopic calcareous material secreted by unicellular planktonic algae built up a lime-mud on the sea-floor.
During this monumental length of time, numerous forms of  sea-life evolved, flourished, and became extinct, their calcareous bodies forming thin layers in the ever-thickening lime-mud.
Some sixty-five million years ago this seemingly endless sedate marine activity was abruptly halted when earth movements lifted up part of the sea-bed to form the continental land mass.
The lime-mud dried up to form chalk up to three hundred metres thick, creating, for example, the South Downs of England, parts of the Loire and, of course , Champagne.
The geological conditions under which the chalk formed are unique, and, as a result, so is the chalk.
Clay An argillaceous compound with plastic characteristics when wet.
Colluvium Recent weathered material or hill wash transported by gravity.
Lignite The ‘brown coal’ of Germany, a brown carbonaceous material intermediate in character between peat and coal.
Limestone Any sedimentary rock consisting essentially of carbonates.
Loam A soil with roughly equal proportions of clay, sand and silt.
Depending on the proportions, clayey loams and sandy loams can be identified.
Loess An accumulation of wind-borne material, mainly silty in nature.
Sometimes calcareous, but usually weathered and decalcified.
Marl A calcareous clay.
Marlstone Clayey limestones.
Micraster chalk (See Chalk first, then Belemnite chalk.)
There are two main types, Santonian and Coniacian.
This is the chalk of the plains, although it encroaches upon the slopes, most notably in the northern Montagne.
If this was the chalk of the Falaises and Belemnite chalk the chalk of the plains, I wonder whether the Champagne gospel might not be extolling the virtues of the wonderful heart-shaped Micraster sea urchin?
Sand Particle-shaped quartz, often mixed with fine grains of calcareous origin in Champagne.
Local soil conditions
Montagne de Reims
Topsoil Soils developed in loess drift derived from sandy and clayey-lignite, chalk rubble and clayey colluvium.
Subsoil Principally Belemnite chalk on the upper slopes, with Micraster chalk on the lower slopes.
Also, but to a much lesser degree, lignite (the Montagne is dotted with lignite quarries), sand and sandstone.
Marlstone high up on some north-facing slopes, with an isolated stratum of fine calcareous sand up to fifteen metres thick in places.
Local conditions 
AMBONNAY: The south-eastern half of this commune is Micraster plain, but all vines are planted on the Belemnite continuation of Bouzy's vineyards.
BOUZY: An isolated patch of loess and granular decalcified chalk immediately west of the village, much of which has never been viticultivated, otherwise completely Belemnite chalk.
CHIGNEY-LES-ROSES: Fairly complex structure of interbedded subsoils: Belemnite and Micraster chalks, calcareous-silty deposits, colluvial clay and ferrous-brown calcareous clay.
Higher slopes reveal widening seams of calcareous marl, sand and thin seams of marl, sandy-lignites and clayey-lignites.
MAILLY: Complex structure of interbedded subsoils: Belemnite and two forms of Micraster chalks, calcareous-silty deposits, fine  gravelly beds, colluvial clay and ferrous-brown calcareous clay.
Higher slopes reveal widening seams of calcareous marl, sand and thin seams of marl, sandy-lignites and clayey-lignites.
PUISIEULX: Fine gravelly bed.
RILLY-LA-MONTAGNE: Fairly complex structure of interbedded subsoils and ferrous-brown calcareous clay.
Higher slopes reveal widening seams of marl, sand and thin seams of marl, sandy-lignites and clayey-lignites.
SILLERY: Fine gravelly beds and Micraster chalk.
TRÉPAIL: A white chalky-marl is exposed at the very top of the slopes.
VAUDEMANGES: The village itself and most of the commune is on Micraster but its vines are shared with Billy-le-Grand on Belemnite.
VERZENAY: Complex structure of interbedded subsoils: Belemnite and two forms of Micraster chalks, calcareous-silty deposits, fine gravelly beds, various layers of ferrous siliceous pebbles and colluvial deposits of ferrous-brown flint-bearing clay.
Higher slopes reveal calcareous marl, sand and thin seams of marl, sandy-lignites and clayey-lignites.
VERZY: Complex structure of interbedded subsoils: Belemnite and two forms of Micraster chalks, calcareous-silty deposits, fine gravelly beds, various layers of ferrous-brown flinty pebbles east of the village and colluvial deposits of ferrous flint-bearing clay to the north.
Higher slopes reveal calcareous marl, sand and thin seams of marl, sandy-lignites and clayey-lignites.
Vallée de la Marne
Topsoil Marl, lignite, sandy-loam and clay.
Subsoil No vines are planted on the alluvial soils close to the river, but on nearby higher ground Belemnite chalk can be seen as the major subsoil.
However, west of Vauciennes on the south bank and Damery on the north bank, the chalk outcrop narrows to an ever thinner strip, eventually petering out just before Troissy and Châtillon-sur-Marne.
The marl, lignite, sand, sandstone, clay and flinty-clay are in evidence above the narrow chalk slopes, taking over completely with an increasing emphasis on sandstone and clay.
Local conditions 
AVENAY: Brown coloured loess and granular decalcified chalk.
AŸ: Loess and gravel behind village, both planted.
BOURSAULT: Belemnite chalk on a few of the very lowest slopes, mainly sand, sandstone, clay and lignites mixed with various calcareous deposits.
CUMIÈRES: Belemnite chalk, with seams rich in sand, sandstone, clay and lignites exposed on the highest slopes.
HAUTVILLERS: Sand, sandstone, lignites and clay west of the village, and Belemnite chalk to the north-east, south and south-east.
The famous hollow beneath Hautvillers, the Côtes-à-Bras, has filled with an accumulation of loess, or colluvial weathered  calcareous  deposits , clayey-silts and iron-rich flint pebbles.
MARDEUIL: Belemnite chalk on the middle slopes, running down into alluvial soil, with sand, clay and lignites higher up.
MAREUIL-SUR-AŸ: Belemnite chalk on the slopes beneath Mutigny, alluvial soil approaching Mareuil-sur-Aÿ itself.
TOURS-SUR-MARNE: A continuation of Bouzy's Belemnite chalk slopes.
VAUCIENNES: Thin strip of Belemnite chalk, mainly sand, sandstone, clay and lignites.
Côte des Blancs
Topsoil Lignite, sand and clay.
Subsoil Principally Belemnite chalk, with some Micraster chalk at the edge of the lower slopes and lignite, sand, sandstone, clay and flinty-clay exposed in a thin strip on the  highest slopes.
The Belemnite chalk is less dense than the Montagne de Reims and turns sandy towards the bottom of its twenty-metre depth.
Local conditions 
AVIZE: Mainly Belemnite chalk, but with Micraster extending from the plains into lower vineyards east of the railway line on the south-side of the village and west, beyond the line, to the north of the commune.
An accumulation of weathered loess and colluvial deposits forms a band from the Cramant boundary, through the hollow between the two villages, beyond Avize and Oger, eventually petering out on the communal border of le Mesnil-sur-Oger.
In a bowl-like depression at the Cramant end of this band, rich deposits of clay, sand, sandstone and lignites are to be found.
BERGÈRES-LES-VERTUS: The accumulation of loess and colluvial weathered deposits of calcareous, clayey-silt and iron-bearing flinty soils radiating out from Vertus is found on the lower slopes of Bergères-les-Vertus, but the bulk of this village's vineyards are to be found on Belemnite chalk, with sand on some of the higher slopes.
CHOUILLY: Vines closest to the village are on Micraster chalk, but the Butte de Saran is pure Belemnite, becoming heavily influenced by sand, sandstone, clay and lignites.
CRAMANT: Those vines on the south face of the Butte de Saran belonging to the commune of Chouilly are planted on rich sand, sandstone, clay and lignite soil, while those which belong to Cramant, being physically beneath those of Chouilly, are of Belemnite chalk.
This Belemnite chalk extends to the border of Avize, but Micraster bites into the vineyards on the lower slopes, reaching as far up as the D9–D10 cut which runs around the southern edge of the Butte de Saran.
The vineyards on the Cuis side of the village are on rich clay, sand, sandstone and lignite soil, covered in places by an accumulation of loess and colluvium.
CUIS: Apart from Belemnite chalk on the west-facing slopes overlooking Mancy and on the slopes closest to the D10 between Cuis and Cramant, most vines are to be found on soils derived from clay, sand, sandstone and lignite.
LE MESNIL-SUR-OGER: The track skirting the highest slopes south-west of the village winds its way through a thin strip of clay, sand, sandstone and lignites.
Apart from this, the entire vineyard belonging to this commune is situated on Belemnite chalk.
OGER: Very little Micraster encroaching upon the Belemnite chalk hills of this village, just a small patch overlapping the D9 north of St Michel farm.
A central core along the côte of accumulated loess and colluvial weathered deposits of calcareous, clayey-silt and iron-bearing flinty pebbles.
Complex geological folds where the vines are planted either side of the village road leading west into the forest reveal various layers of yellowish-grey calcareous flint-bearing marl, sand, hard white limestone, clay, sand, sandstone and lignites.
OIRY: Entirely Micraster.
VERTUS: An accumulation of weathered deposits of loess and colluvial calcareous clayey-silt and iron-bearing flinty pebbles radiates outwards from the village, two particularly large legs of which follow the Côte north and south.
Beyond this accumulation Belemnite chalk predominates, encroached upon by Micraster in one small patch between the railway line and the D9 north-east of the village and by sand noticed on the highest strip of vines south-west of Vertus.
Côte de Sézanne
Topsoil Marl, clay, sandstone and sand.
Subsoil East and north-east of Sézanne the subsoil is substantially chalk, both Belemnite and Micraster.
South and south-west of Sézanne, the chalk subsoil exists in fairly large  pockets, broken up by marl, clay, sandstone, sandy-clay and sand.
Yellow and red sand north of Sézanne, giving away sandstone with high iron levels further south.
Lignite seams also exist as this Sparnacian deposit is quarried at Sans-Souci, just two kilometres north of Sézanne.
Aube Département
Topsoil Gravelly limestone, either weathered or oolitic, and granular limestone, Portlandian in origin.
Subsoil Kimmeridgian, mostly Upper Kimmeridgian, except for the Upper Oxfordian slopes of Trannes, Mussy-sur-Seine and on the Valanginien.
Local conditions 
BAR-SUR-AUBE: A cohesion of marl beds, calcareous marl (Upper and Middle Kimmeridgian) and much harder Portlandian calcareous rocks.
BAR-SUR-SEINE: Beds of marl and calcareous marl (Upper and Middle Kimmeridgian) covered by Portlandian calcareous rocks broken down by frosts in the glacial period, providing excellent surface drainage, yet reserves of water for deep penetrating roots.
BUXIÈRES-SUR-ARCE: A light-beige calcareous rock of Upper Portlandian origin called Barrois.
COLOMBÉ-LE-FOSSE: This village is huddled between Portlandian hills of Barrois limestone.
COURTERON: Local gravelly-textured limestone called la Bellerée.
ESSOYES: A local limestone called d'Oisellemont of early Kimmeridgian age.
MONTGUEUX: Heavily fissured Coniacian and Upper Turonian chalk, older than Belemnite and Micraster, both of which are Campanian.
PLAINE-SAINT-LANGE: Grey limestone and marl just north of the village.
VILLE-SUR-ARCE: Fine slopes for viticulture consisting of Kimmeridgian marls covered by Portlandian calcareous rocks broken up by frost in the glacial period, providing excellent surface drainage while deep roots can penetrate the marls for reserves of water.
VOIGNY: Gravelly and oolitic limestone of Kimmeridgian age approaching the village, nestling between the steep slopes of a pure Portlandian mount, topped by the Bois de Voigny.
Vineyard Classification
Very good in its way
Is the Verzenay,
Or the Sillery, soft and creamy.
Henry Wadsworth Longfellow (1807–87)
The échelle des crus
ALL GROWTHS within the legally delimited Champagne zone are classified on a percentage basis known as the échelle des crus (see Appendix v).
This was originally set at a minimum of 50% and a maximum of 100%, although recent reclassifications have increased the minimum échelle to 80%.
Villages with vineyards rated between go and 99% inclusive are considered to be premiers crus while those classed at 100% are grands crus .
Both terms are allowed to be used on the label by all Champagne manufacturers, although in general only growers who make and sell their own Champagne take advantage of this.
The échelle des crus is the basis upon which the price of grapes destined to become Champagne is fixed.
Every year at harvest time the CIVC announces the price per kilo of grapes after consultation with the growers and négociants or houses.
This is the price applied to grapes coming from 100%-rated grand cru vineyards, the produce of lesser rated vineyards commanding proportionately lower prices.
Thus, if one takes a hypothetical case where the price was fixed at 10 francs per kilo, all grapes coming from the 100% crus — like Avize, Cramant, Bouzy, for example— would cost 10 francs per kilo, while grapes coming from the 94%-rated Rilly-la-Montagne would cost 9.40 francs and so forth .
Added to this, a premium is usually paid for so-called ‘noble’ grapes, such as Chardonnay or Pinot Noir, which encourages the cultivation of these better, but less prolific, varieties.
The advantage of the échelle des crus system is that it recognises a distinction in quality between two undeniably fine and relatively similar growths.
This allows a premier cru to stand out and get appropriate recognition even if it should be considered a grand cru.
But it must also be remembered, too, that while a 95%-rated vineyard may be superior to a 94%-rated one, healthy, ripe 80% grapes are vastly superior to 100% grapes which have been affected by disease, rot, or damaging weather conditions like hail or frost.
Grand cru villages There are seventeen villages in Champagne officially rated at 100% and  thus designated grand cru status.
These are: Ambonnay, Avize, Aÿ, Beaumont-sur-Vesle, Bouzy, Chouilly, Cramant, Louvois, Mailly-Champagne, le Mesnil-sur-Oger, Oger, Oiry, Puisieulx, Sillery, Tours-sur-Marne, Verzenay and Verzy.
It is only recently that Champagne has been able to boast as many as seventeen grands crus.
Until the 1985 harvest-time declaration of the échelle des crus, Chouilly, le Mesnil-sur-Oger, Oger, Oiry and Verzy merely held premier cru status.
The event was an unprecedented one: Champagne's grand cru villages remained at twelve for almost forty years.
Yet, despite increasing their number by almost half and achieving this reclassification in one speedy stroke, the CIVC was curiously quiet about it.
No press release was made and I experienced extraordinary difficulties in trying to obtain the 1985 échelle des crus, Quite why this historic event was clothed in such secrecy is a mystery.
Le Mesnil-sur-Oger, Oger and Verzy were long overdue this honour and Chouilly and Oiry, both very fine premiers crus, are far superior to quite a few traditionally established grand cru villages.
Interestingly, only part of Chouilly and Tours-sur-Marne can claim the grand cru classification.
The black grapes of Chouilly and the white grapes of Tours-sur-Marne have an échelle of 95% and 90% respectively, and as such may claim only premier cru status.
This therefore means that of the 4,339 hectares cultivated in Champagne's top villages, only 4,309 hold the rank of grand cru.
Should Chouilly and Tours-sur-Marne replant these vineyards with the appropriate varieties, they would of course assume full grand status.
Of the 4,309 hectares of grand cru vineyards in Champagne, 2,251 hectares (52.2%) are planted with Chardonnay, 1,960 hectares (45.5%) with Pinot Noir and 98 hectares (2.3 %) with Pinot Meunier.
Premier cru villages There are thirty-eight premier cru villages in Champagne, plus those vineyards growing black grapes in the grand cru of Chouilly and those growing white grapes in the grand cru of Tours-sur-Marne, making a total of forty villages entitled to the status of premier cru.
These are, in descending order of échelle:
Of the 4,928 hectares of premier cru vineyards, 1,892 hectares (38.4%) are planted with Chardonnay, 1,412 hectares (28.7%) with Pinot Noir and 1,624 hectares (32.9%) with Pinot Meunier.
The reclassifications of 1985
The recent upgrading of grands and premiers crus has radically altered the proportions of grape varieties grown within these groups of villages.
Most importantly the Chardonnay in the grand cru sector has risen from nearly a third to over a half of the vines cultivated, while in the premiers crus it has dropped from just under a half to less than 40%.
The Pinot Noir in the grands crus has dropped from almost 65 to 45%, while the difference in the premiers crus is less than 3%.
Not much of a change for the grand cru Pinot Meunier, but a significant increase for the premiers crus, jumping from a less than 25% coverage to almost one-third.
Champagne's échelle des crus is essentially a fairer system than other classifications in France where, as in Burgundy or Bordeaux for example, villages or properties are either steeped in glory or barely known, as the case may be.
Yet this exceedingly sensible system has not always been applied in an even-handed manner.
While some grand and premier cru villages do not justify such illustrious titles, certain superior premiers crus are, even after the reclassification of 1985, still denied the grand cru status they truly deserve.
However, the issue is not quite as simple as that-many individual sites within premier cru villages can, and do, consistently produce wines as good as the best grands crus and infinitely better than the worst.
This also applies, to a degree, to some lower-ranking villages.
It seems a pity that the rationale of a percentage rating system is not extended a little further by incorporating a lieux dits scale classifying named sites within each village.
In the following village by village assessment of the famous grands and premiers crus of Champagne, I express my opinion on the merits and demerits of the major vineyards within each commune.
Some vineyards may not be mentioned because they have only recently been cultivated and, therefore, have not been in production long enough to establish any sort of reputation.
The reader should note that the term Grower Champagne used throughout this chapter refers to a récoltant-manipulant , that is to say a grower who sells Champagne under his own name.
More particulars about these growers can be located in the Village Directory of Champagne Growers.
As the definition of a true récoltant-manipulant is a contentious subject, the author strongly advises that the section in Chapter 12 headed ‘The Growers or Récoltants ’ is fully digested before consulting entries in the Directory.
The grand cru villages
Ambonnay
The village is thought to have been named after a Roman officer, Amboniacus, at the time when the Emperor Probus ordered the replanting of vineyards throughout Gaul.
A sleepy hamlet which has miraculously escaped the scars of many battles, with quaint narrow streets and a Gallo-Roman church, Ambonnay is one of the prettiest villages in the region.
After Verzenay, the vineyard of Ambonnay is the second largest of all the grands crus.
The majority of the vineyards are located to the north and north-west of the village commencing half a kilometre north-west of Ambonnay itself, where the land rises to about 20 metres.
Most of the vines are planted at a height of between 120 and 180 metres, although a few plots can be found at 200 to 220 metres in the northern part of the vineyard, bordering the vines of Bouzy.
The vines of Ambonnay are, in fact, a physical extension of those of Bouzy, but there is a subtle distinction in the aspect of these vineyards and, consequently, a difference in the character of the wines they produce.
Unlike the south-facing vines of Bouzy, the vineyards of Ambonnay are essentially south-east and east-facing.
The wines of Ambonnay have a certain edge and show fine definition.
Like those of neighbouring Bouzy, they possess qualities somewhere between the solid, full-bodied and strongly perfumed Verzenay and the smooth, exceptionally aromatic Aÿ but their great strength and vinosity edges them closer to the former than the latter.
Considerably lesser wines, however, are made from an isolated plot of vines around the south-western edge of Ambonnay — obviously these vines cannot be compared to those situated north of the village.
OPPOSITE Distribution of the grands and premiers crus
Ambonnay has long been famous for its production of still red wines.
Since the early eighteenth century the red wines of Ambonnay have ranked alongside those of the now more famous Bouzy.
Avize
‘Belles cottes, pas de chemise’ sums up Avize in parler Champenois , perhaps because, according to local tradition, the young women of this village would lie naked upon the slopes of Mont-Arme (now, Mont-Aimé) on the early morning of 1 March every year, to catch the first rays of sun upon their glistening bodies.
Sadly, this pagan custom, called ‘Salut au Soleil du 1er Mars’, is now no more than legend.
The east-facing slopes of Avize, at a height of between 110 and 210 metres, are planted entirely with Chardonnay grapes.
The vines surround the village on all sides, but those grown on the highest slopes, on either side of the D10 to the west of Ambonnay, are by far the most successful; on the plain, either side of the D9, the vineyards are noticeably inferior.
At their very best the vineyards of Avize yield classic Chardonnay wines which have no superiors.
Opinions vary, however, when comparing the qualities of Avize wines with those of its neighbouring grand cru Cramant.
Some say that the Avize Chardonnay has more  finesse, but I find that while Avize may have more clarity of flavour, Cramant and, for that matter, le Mesnil-sur-Oger have finer qualities of bouquet.
Aÿ or Aÿ-Champagne

The vineyards of Aÿ stretch out behind the village, up fairly steep slopes to a height of about 700 metres on the Mutigny side.
These vines overlook a small north-south running valley, on the other side of which a 170-metre high spur of vines drops down to the northwestern edge of the village.
Beyond this spur the vineyards continue for another 2 kilometres towards Dizy.
But it is in the complex configuration of slopes, dips and valleys immediately behind the village that the greatest vines of Aÿ are found.
In this miniature valley extending up towards the Bois de Charlefontaine, the slopes provide a unique micro-climate which, together with the protection of the village itself, shields the vines from the major winds and traps the sun.
In the centre of the south-west facing slopes of this favoured valley lies the famous ‘Côte aux Enfants’, a single-site vineyard possessing exceptional qualities.
Although it is possible to sample a pure Côte aux Enfants red wine made by Bollinger and matured in small oak casks, the production is tiny and availability correspondingly restricted.
Half-way along the 2 kilometres of vineyards towards Dizy, a crumpling of the contours twists the ground into a full, frontal, southern exposure.
One of the most reputed single-site vineyards of this area is ‘Le Leon’, named after Pope Leo the Magnificent, who drew supplies from here in the first half of the nineteenth century.
Henry Vizetelly remarks (A History of Champagne , 1887) that the soil of Aÿ ‘lends a flavour of peaches’, but as he also records that an anonymous document, entitled ‘Mémoire sur la Manière de cultiver la Vigne et de fair le Vin en Champagne’, dated 1718, reveals that the secret of Dom Pérignon was to add four or five stoned peaches to a piece of wine, the source of such an exotic flavour must be questioned.
While it is unlikely that Dom Pérignon himself employed such methods, it is more than probable that others did.
Monsieur Boudin of Perrier Jouet told me that in ‘the old days’ the Pinot Noir of Aÿ once had a gout de terroir which, I am glad to say, has since been ‘lost’.
Aÿ Champagnes have great finesse and style, a good alcoholic potential and a strength which is belied by a delicacy of bouquet and a smoothness of flavour.
Beaumont-sur-Vesle
The two parcels of vines belonging to Beaumont-sur-Vesle are located on a small patch of flat ground, west of the road leading out of the village towards Verzenay and, a kilometre further on, adjoining the edge of some of the poorest vineyards of Verzenay.
Although it holds grand cru status Beaumont-sur-Vesle can in no way be described as a great growth.
Even in 1824, André Jullien rated the  ‘light and agreeable but weak wines’ of Beaumont-sur-Vesle no more than a fifth growth in his five-tier ranking of Champagne.
Its wines were once upon a time combined in the vat with those of Verzenay and it is from the reputation of that great village that Beaumont-sur-Vesle has wrested its misplaced status.
Bouzy
The great amphitheatre of vines which rises up from the village of Bouzy represents one of the most famous vineyards in the world.
Yet not all of the vines which sweep north — from Mont Écouve in the west up to the edge of the Bois des Dames, and trailing south down the ridge towards the village — produce top grade Bouzy wines.
Roughly speaking, the quality is determined by location in the vineyard, which can be divided into bands: the most northerly band, elevated at a height of between 180 and 220 metres, comprises some of the finest grand cru slopes in all Champagne and represents about a third of Bouzy's hectarage; below this is a wide strip situated at a height of between 160 and 180 metres which, in my estimation, should hold the rank of a top premier cru; the lowest band, at about 170 metres, runs around the flat northern edge of the village and produces vines of a markedly inferior quality.
The characteristics afforded to Champagne by the inclusion of Bouzy wines in a cuvée are those of great weight and extract, richness of flavour, powerful Pinot bouquet and a high alcoholic content.
Pure Bouzy Champagnes, though profuse in number, are consistently high in quality and often improve over a period of eight to ten years in bottle.
Its red wines have all the qualities of colour and body found in the northern Montagne around Mailly, Verzenay and Verzy, but with an added degree of delicacy.
Chouilly
Since 1985 the white grapes of this village have been elevated to grand cru status, but, while its black grapes have increased from 90% to 95% échelle, they maintain the rank of premier cru.
While there are a few vines on the flat ground just south of the village, the vast majority are found on the slopes of the Butte de Saran, the northern extremity of the Côte des Blancs, and on the eastern slopes of Mont Bernon, edging the suburbs of Épernay.
Those on the Butte de Saran are on north-east and south-east-facing slopes, the best of which are between 100 and 120 metres in height.
Some particularly fine plots can be found around the southern side of the butt on south-east-facing slopes, which rise to a height of 220 metres.
But this strip of superior vines is very thin, just a hundred metres in parts, as the communal boundary of Cramant hives off most of the vineyards.
The lower vines around the village of Chouilly and those on the eastern slopes of Mont Bernon, towards Épernay, are relatively inferior.
Cramant
The vineyards of Cramant lie close to Moët & Chandon's splendid Château de Saran.
Indeed, the thin strip of steep-sloping east to south-east-facing vines, situated on the north side of the D9 to D10 cut, are some of the best in Cramant.
The communal borderline between Chouilly and Cramant slices through the middle of these slopes, the higher vines belonging to Chouilly.
The south side of the cut dips down into a beautiful hollow of vines, all but the lowest locations being ideally situated.
To the northeast of the dip, the eastern ridge of the Butte de Saran provides a few slopes of almost full southern exposure.
On the east side of the village, however, only those slopes leading up to the Bois d'Avize are comparable.
Cramant, Avize, le Mesnil-sur-Oger and Oger are close rivals for the production of the best Chardonnay.
Avize and Oger have great distinction, but there is something spectacular about the Chardonnay perfume from grapes grown in Cramant and le Mesnil-sur-Oger — it is a pure essence of the Chardonnay aroma, and apparently restricted to these two villages.
Louvois
Strictly speaking, Louvois should not be considered a grand cru village.
With only 38 hectares, its few vineyards are merely an extension of Bouzy's, growing over the ridge of the Bois des Dames and down the slopes of forested valley in which Louvois is situated.
Mailly-Champagne
The vineyards of Mailly-Champagne are situated at the northern end of the village on fairly flat ground where they fare exceptionally well.
A thermal blanket of warm air protects the vines in the winter months and hastens maturity through the summer.
Exceptional vines are also found east of the village and south of the D26 huddled around sharply contoured ground which gives north, northwest and south-west-facing aspects.
A small patch of vines also exists right at the top of the village where the ground rises steeply to more than 220 metres.
The red wines of Mailly have a long-standing reputation, and are often ranked, for their qualities of finesse and bouquet, alongside the famous, well-coloured wines of Verzenay and Verzy.
Pure Mailly wines can be purchased from the local co-opérative (on the left as you enter the village on the D26 from Rilly) which is one of the best co-ops in Champagne.
Mailly is principally known for its Pinot Noir vines, but there are also now 22 hectares of Chardonnay, which since 1972, have been accorded grand cru status.
le Mesnil-sur-Oger
Situated halfway between Avize and Vertus, le Mesnil-sur-Oger regularly produces some of the finest Chardonnay Champagnes.
For forty years this village suffered the injustice of a 99% échelle de cru.
While lesser villages grabbed a few per cent here and there, le Mesnil-sur-Oger was denied that one vital per cent required for full grand cru status.
The slopes which produce these prized vines are generally east-facing, but in a few specific cases they are exposed in northern and southern directions.
The vines grow at an altitude of between 140 and 240 metres, although those growing between 160 and 220 metres are the most successful.
The lower slopes, which descend at a lesser incline to a height of 110 metres, also produce fine wines, although not quite the same exalted standard as the rest of this village.
It has long been acknowledged that the Chardonnay in le Mesnil-sur-Oger is a special clone of exceptional quality and character.
It produces wine of great finesse and penetrating perfume which can dominate an entire cuvée even when its presence might only be a small proportion of the whole.
The uniqueness of these localised vines was first recognised at the beginning of the century by Eugène-Aimé Salon, the founder of Champagne Salon; more recently, in the early 1970s, the house of Krug purchased the entire single-site, wall-enclosed vineyard of ‘Clos du Mesnil’, which is situated inside the village itself.
Oger
Oger is a small hamlet, its few houses set well back from the D10 towards the Forêt d'Oger, and barely noticeable from the road.
Since the reclassification in the échelle des crus this village has risen to 100%, giving it full grand cru status.
Its vineyards are situated on the same east-facing slopes as those of the superb grands crus of Avize and le Mesnil-sur-Oger, and its wines are comparable in quality.
Pure Chardonnay Champagnes from the best vineyards of Oger have great finesse and all the true aromatic characteristics of the Chardonnay grape.
Oiry
The vineyards of Oiry are located well away from the village on the lower slopes of the Butte de Saran at a level of between 100 and 120 metres.
In the main, they are an extension of the vineyards of Cramant, with a few hectares encroaching into the communal borders of Chouilly and Avize on either side.
Of the various aspects here, there are some with excellent south and south-east exposures and the vines here produce unquestionably fine wines.
Since 1985 the échelle de cru of this village has risen to 100%.
Although there are some good sites, they are limited and, without doubt, the vineyards of Oiry are generally less favourably positioned than those of Chouilly which, unjustifiably, had a lower échelle until they both qualified for grand cru status.
Puisieulx
Puisieulx is the smallest of the grand cru villages and certainly does not merit its exalted status.
It owes its position to the fame of Sillery which, equally overrated, owes its reputation to the vines of Verzeray.
On my first visit to the village I was unable to find any of its vines and when I asked several people from the larger Champagne houses, few had even heard of its vineyards, let alone of their elevated status.
The vines are in fact situated on a hint of a mound just west of the town, growing at an altitude of between 100 and 105 metres which must be a classic example of frost-prone cultivation.
Sillery
Hardly a true grand cru, Sillery gained its prominence from the slopes of Verzenay which were part of the estate of the famous Brularts.
The Brularts, who held the rank of Marquis of Sillery and Marquis of Puisieulx, were a winemaking family whose reputation goes back to the sixteenth century.
Roger Brulart, the fourth Marquis of Sillery, was a member of the Ordre des Coteaux, a group of aristocrats intent on glamorising the wines and food of Champagne.
He succeeded in glamorising his own wines extraordinarily well, but the reputation of Sillery did not attain its zenith until the eighteenth century when, under the Maréchale d'Éstrées, the only child of Louis-Philogène, the sixth Marquis, the estate had accumulated a vast holding of vineyards.
It was from these vines, which stretched into Verzenay, Mailly and Verzy, that the wines of Sillery were made.
The vineyards of Sillery are indeed an extension of the lower slopes of Verzenay, where they stretch out along the flatter, frost-prone ground on the plain beneath the Montagne de Reims, taking a good kilometre and a half to rise a mere twenty metres or so.
Within days of the first autumn frosts a large brown patch of vines can be seen growing out from this area.
In spring the effect is less noticeable, but potentially more dangerous.
At the little crossroads two kilometres north of Mailly, if you look to your extreme left you will see the lower edge of some vineyards one and-a-half kilometres away.
These are the lowest-quality vines of Verzenay, a relatively small percentage of the grand cru's 403 hectares.
But the long and very flat strip of vines immediately to your left, which extend back to the A4 motorway, are inferior to Verzenay's poorest vines; these are the vineyards of Sillery.
Tours-sur-Marne
The vineyards of Tours-sur-Marne are an extension of the lower and middle slopes of Bouzy and lie some distance north of the village.
The best of the west and south-facing slopes are far superior to either Puisieulx or Sillery, but they nevertheless merit a modest premier and not grand cru status.
Verzenay
The Moulin à Verzenay
Verzenay is the largest of the grands crus and is the best growth on the northern slopes of the Montagne de Reims.
Situated on the turn of the Montagne before it bends around its eastern extremity into Verzy, Villers-Marmery and Trépail — the vineyards of Verzenay have either north or east-facing aspects and are planted up to a height of 220 and, in a few places, 240 metres.
Verzenay is reputed to produce the blackest grapes in the region and its red wines are famed for their richness of flavour and strongly scented aromas.
The Chardonnay grape grows less well on these north-facing slopes and, though less in evidence, has recently, perhaps over-generously, been accorded full grand cru status (1972).
Verzy
The vineyards of Verzy lie adjacent to those of Verzenay on the eastern edge of the northern slopes of the Montagne de Reims.
Most of the vines are east-facing and located to the north of the village, with the best sites found at heights between 140 and 220 metres.
Verzy has an unusual viticultural history for a growth of the Montagne; in the late eighteenth century its vineyards were almost entirely planted with white grapes.
Exactly why is unclear as the origins of these vineyards go back to the days of the Knights Templars.
It was once thought that the Chardonnay vine was brought to Champagne from Cyprus by knights returning from the Crusades, which might have provided some sort of answer, but this theory has since been discredited.
Perhaps it is sufficient to say that prior to cutting back parts of the Forêt de la Montagne, the slopes of Verzy were not dissimilar topographically to those of the Côte des Blancs.
When Verzy was practically a white grape village (now almost eighty per cent Pinot Noir), the exception was the vineyards near St Basle, which is above the village bordering the famous Faux de Verzy.
Today Verzy produces excellent, full-bodied wines, rich in fruit and of distinct style which more than deserve their recent elevation to grand cru status.
The premier cru villages
Avenay
The complexly contoured east and south-facing vineyards in the Val d'Or produce excellent wines, far superior to the 93% grading of Avenay, and significantly better than the wines of its grand cru neighbours, Tours-sur-Marne and Louvois.
Some of the north-facing slopes are less favoured and, while most of the vines are found at a height of between 140 and 180 metres, a few to the east and north of the village grow above 200 metres.
Bergères-les-Vertus
The vineyards of Bergères-les-Vertus are largely an extension of the lower slopes of Vertus reaching down to the southern tip of the Côte des Blancs.
Growing usually at a height of between I –0 to I 60 metres the vineyards curve round from an eastern to south-eastern aspect, and climb on to higher ground towards the edge of the Bois de Cormont.
A smaller patch of lesser quality vines extends southwards on to the north-east-facing slopes of Mont Aimé.
The wines of Bergères-les-Vertus are firm and fruity, with good extract and fine balance and well deserving of greater recognition.
Bezannes
From no specific mention in the échelle this growth acquired premier cru status in 1985.
Billy-le-Grand
The vineyards of this village are physically, though not communally, a continuation of the higher slopes of Vaudemanges; they are separated from the main belt of the Montagne on a lower eastern extremity.
Some of the vines are planted up to 180 metres, but most are grown at an altitude of between 140 and 160 metres on full south-facing slopes.
The vines from these slopes produce wine of an extremely dependable quality.
Bisseuil
The vineyards of Bisseuil are set some distance back from the village and grow at a height of about 160 metres on the south-east-facing slopes of Mont Aigu, which forms the eastern side of the Val d'Or in which Avenay is located.
Chamery
The village achieved its premier cru status in 1985 when it was upgraded from 88% to 90%.
Champillon
The panoramic view over Épernay and the Marne valley from the top of Champillon's 250-metre-high vineyards is one of the most impressive in Champagne.
At the top of the shell-shaped vineyard is a full, frontal, south-facing aspect which descends on to south-east and south-west-facing slopes, to a level of 120 metres on the lowest slopes.
The vineyards comprise less than 70 hectares, but nearly all produce wine of a superb quality which would seem to justify an upgrading of their 93% status.
The best wines of Champillon have good extract and lend a certain edge to the cuvée .
Chigny-les-Roses
The delightfully named village of Chigny-les-Roses is situated south of Reims, on the northern slopes of the Montagne, a few kilometres west of the grand cru villages of Mailly-Champagne and Verzenay.
Its vines are planted on north and north-east-facing slopes at an altitude of between 130 and 180 metres.
Anyone who has drunk one of the bottles of Fred Leroux 1920 at Le Vigneron in Reims (in the days when it was an unpretentious little bistro, not the big, brash restaurant it is now) will know that some wines of Chigny are capable of maturing for great periods of time.
Tasted in 1980, the Fred Leroux 1920 still had a vigorous mousse , even if the palate was well into the ‘cheesy’ stage of old age.
The wines of this village often show great varietal character, good vinosity and fine balance.
Coligny
Although this village is situated on the plains south-west of Bergères-les-Vertus, its vineyards can be found on the lower slopes of the southern tip of the Côte des Blancs and Mount Aimé.
Classification of Coligny's white grapes jumped from 85% to 90% in 1985, assuming premier cru status.
Cuis
If one considers the Butte de Saran as separate  from the headland of the Côte des Blancs, then the vineyards of Cuis can be seen as the northernmost edge of the Côte.
Its vineyards, which have grown both black and white grapes for well over a hundred years, form a horseshoe around the Montagne d'Avize, starting with south-west-facing slopes south-west of the village, bending into a bank of north-facing vines at the back of the village and curving round into north-east-facing slopes close to the village of Cramant.
Most of the vines are planted at a height of between 160 and 200 metres and provide wines of excellent, if differing, character.
A small patch of vines on flat ground to the north of the village are less well exposed.
Cumières
Overlooked by the Bois de St-Marc and the upper slopes of Hautvillers to the north, the vineyards of Cumières stretch out along south and south-east-facing slopes immediately above the village.
Planted at an altitude of between 100 and 200 metres, the higher situated vines are less prone to the dangers of frost and provide well-structured, fruity wines.
Dizy
As you leave Épernay for Reims, the vineyards of Dizy are those marvellous south-west-facing slopes which you wind your way through while climbing the steep ascent on to the Montagne plateau.
The vines grow at a height of between 100 and 200 metres and produce dependable wines of a style somewhere between the well structured, fruity Hautvillers and Cumières and the classic but cavalier Aÿ.
Écueil
Écueil's vineyards are largely east-facing, growing at an altitude of between 180 and 220 metres, and overlooked by the Pâtis d'Écueil on the Petite Montagne.
Écueil provides strong wines which can be useful in blending a cuvée .
Some interesting pink Champagnes are made in this village which was once known for its long lived red wines.
Étréchy
Étréchy is the smallest of the premiers crus, its two tiny patches of vines situated north-west of the village, on gentle south and south-west-facing slopes, at an elevation of between 170 and 180 metres.
As far as I am aware, no pure Étréchy Champagnes are made and it is of little importance in terms of blending.
Grauves
Grauves has some well-sheltered vineyards which face each other on opposite slopes of a small valley beneath the Bois d'Avize at the northern end of the Côte des Blancs.
The best wines are made from the highest vines northwest of Grauves, which grow up to a height of 220 metres, and from those in an east-facing gulley, south-west of the village.
These wines are exceptionally big and fleshy for the Côte des Blancs, an area more noted for style than strength.
Individual sites like les Roualles, a vineyard belonging to Bollinger, have reputations for producing full-bodied, fruity wines comparable to those from the Montagne de Reims.
Hautvillers
The vineyards of Hautvillers lie in four distinct zones: one below the village, one above l'Écluse, one between Hautvillers and Champillon, and one above Cumières.
The differing quality aspects of these zones make it impossible to specify a particular style of wine for Hautvillers.
The vines immediately below the village, facing Dizy, have an elevation of between 100 and 180 metres, and lie on east and south-facing slopes which become increasingly steep as the village approaches.
Below these, immediately above the village of l'Écluse, in the hollow either side of the D386, the vines are mostly grown at below 100 metres, and the wines from here had a considerable reputation in the past.
Above this group is a third zone situated in a cleavage between the vineyards of Champillon and the village of Hautvillers.
Here the vines are mostly grown at a height of between 140 and 180 metres on south-east and south-west-facing slopes although some climb steeply from the outskirts of Hautvillers and rise to a height of around 250 metres.
The fourth zone of Hautvillers vineyards are really an extension of those of Cumière but they rise higher, to an elevation of between 180 and 220 metres, and their aspect changes slightly, affording more south-facing slopes.
The reputation of Hautvillers has, understandably, grown from the legend of Dom Pérignon; at that time, although very few hectares of the abbey's vineyards were actually located within the commune of Hautvillers, some of its finest wines were made from the group of lower-lying vineyards above l'Écluse.
Today, it is difficult to define a particular Hautvillers style: all have a good fruit content, and although some are perhaps lacking in definition, the finest attain great distinction, balancing high extract with a delicacy of flavour.
Jouy-les-Reims
Superbly sited south-facing slopes adjacent to Villedommange which deservedly earned a vital extra per cent in 1985, climbing from 89% to 90% and thus premier cru status.
Ludes
The vineyards of Ludes are sandwiched between those of Chigny-les-Roses and the grand cru of Mailly-Champagne on the northern slopes of the Montagne de Reims.
On either side of the village the vines are exposed on north-facing slopes, ranging between 140 and 200 metres in height.
If you approach the village from the north, however, along the D9 or D33, you see that at the northern edge of the village, the vineyards bank up on both sides to form a hollow where the vines dip down to 120 metres, giving east and west-facing exposures on either side.
Ludes wines are welcomed for their use in blending of cuvées , they have the body and vinosity of a true Montagne wine, but I have yet to be convinced that a single growth Ludes can be a complete wine on its own.
Mareuil-sur-Aÿ
The village of Mareuil-sur-Aÿ is situated beside the Marne canal, just east of Aÿ-Champagne and south of Avenay: few of its vines are located near the village itself, except for its best vineyard, a remarkable spur called the Clos des Goisses.
Its very steep, fully south-facing slope can hardly be missed as one  approaches the village from Tours-sur-Marne.
Behind this superb spur the vines of Clos des Goisses extend for a further 8 hectares on north-east-facing slopes and rise at a lesser incline from 100 to 138 metres, after which the land flattens out towards Avenay.
Most of Mareuil's vineyards are set a little distance from the village on south-east-facing slopes immediately beneath Mutigny.
Almost adjacent to the vineyards of Aÿ, these vines have long had a reputation for producing wines of similar quality and character to the famous grand cru.
They are planted at a height of between 100 and 190 metres.
Below these slopes, between the D201 and the D9, there are more vineyards planted on flatter ground which provide wines of a much inferior quality to the rest of Mareuil.
In the nineteenth century, according to André Jullien in his Topography of all known vineyards (1824), Mareuil wines were no different from those of Aÿ ‘and pass, in commerce, as Vins d'Aÿ ’, hence the village's name Mareuil-sur-Aÿ, the wines being sold on the back of the wines of Aÿ.
Today, the wines produced from the slopes below Mutigny and on the spur of the Clos des Goisses are of the highest grand cru quality.
The former have all the dash and flair of the neighbouring wines of Aÿ, while those of the Clos des Goisses, which belong exclusively to the house of Philipponnat, are high in alcohol, somewhat richer and possess great longevity.
les Mesneux
The vineyards of les Mesneux are relatively unimportant and hardly merit premier cru status.
They are situated on a slight south-east incline amidst surrounding flat lands.
Montbré
Situated on a plain beneath Rilly-la-Montagne the vineyards of Montbré are not of true premier cru quality.
Mutigny
Unfortunately, the best vines grown on the south-facing slopes beneath Mutigny come within the communal borders of Mareuil-sur-Aÿ.
Mutigny's considerably smaller hectarage is located largely on the upper slopes of Avenay, while a few of its vineyards grow on slopes high above Mareuil.
The relatively small production of Mutigny is, however, of good premier cru quality.
Pargny-les-Reims
Elevated from 89% to 90% in 1985.
Pierry
Pierry, once a separate village, is now a continuation of the southern suburbs of Épernay.
Its vineyards, all south-east and east-facing, are located behind Pierry on a steep slope leading up to the Forêt d'Épernay.
This slope climbs as abruptly as the southern slopes of the Montagne de Reims, starting at 100 metres and rising quickly to 200 metres.
Pierry derives its name from a stratum of flint in the subsoil which reputedly gives its wine a marked flinty taste.
In the nineteenth century the wines of Pierry were considered on a par with the best wines of Aÿ.
Today it is definitely a premier cru, and if one of the more classic varieties of Pinot Noir or Chardonnay could be exploited to the full on this favourable slope, its 90% classification would certainly be upgraded.
Rilly-la-Montagne
Rilly-la-Montagne is the first significant growth, in terms of quality and quantity, to be encountered on the D26, as one winds one's way eastwards from the N51 through the northern slopes of the Montagne de Reims.
Most of the vines have a slightly east to north-facing aspect, although those near Montbré are found on a gentle east-facing ridge.
The best vines are those closest to the village growing at a height of between 140 and 200 metres.
Rilly  produces wines which are appreciably lighter in style than those of neighbouring villages and has an unusually high proportion of Chardonnay for the Montagne de Reims.
Sacy
The village is surrounded by vines, but it is those behind Sacy on steeply climbing, northeast-facing slopes leading up to the Bois de la Fosse which are the most favourably located.
Lacking somewhat in definition, the wines of Sacy are, however, solid and dependable and, with those of neighbouring Villedommange, rank as the best wines of the Petite Montagne.
Taissy
Like the overrated grand cru growths of Puisieulx and Sillery close by, the vineyards of Taissy are located on the plain north of the Montagne de Reims.
Its best vines are located some distance from the village on the gentle southern slopes of Mont Ferré, on the eastern edge of a small hamlet called Varsovie.
These are mainly south-east-facing and are at an elevation of between 130 and 155 metres.
At one time, Taissy had a reputation for red wines comparable to that of Hautvillers.
Its best wines today are probably as good as Puisieulx and Sillery — possibly better.
Tauxières
The vines found on the south and south-east-facing slopes above Tauxières and Mutry are at an altitude of between 140 and 180 metres.
Across the little Livre valley the vines grown on the east and south-east-facing slopes of Mont Écouvé, at a height of between 150 and 170 metres, are an extension to those of Bouzy just over the hill.
The wines produced by these vines are lighter than those of Bouzy, but are of good quality and can be very attractive in a blend.
Trépail
Trépail is just 3 kilometres north of the grand cru villages, Bouzy and Ambonnay, on the southeastern extremity of the Montagne de Reims.
The best vines are located south of the village, growing high up at between 160 and 220 metres on south and south-east-facing slopes.
Below these slopes, north of the village and on various plots scattered throughout the commune, the vines are not as well sited, but they provide wines outshining other premiers crus.
In the nineteenth century black and white grape varieties were cultivated in adjacent square plots at the aptly named Château Marqueterie in Pierry.
This picture shows two young girls collecting mixed bunches of black and white grapes with the château in the background
Trois-Puits
Low-grade vines, situated on flat ground — probably the most boring village in Champagne.
Vaudemanges
Vaudemanges is just 2 kilometres south of Billy-le-Grand.
Its vineyards, bordered by the Marne à l'Aisne canal to the east, are grown on fully south-facing slopes on the lower, eastern extremity of the Montagne de Reims.
The elevation of these vineyards is between 120 and 140 metres, those higher up merging with the vineyards of Billy-le-Grand.
The wines produced here have good structure, balance and fruit and are of dependable quality.
Carrying the blessed new wine from the church at Vertus during the St Vincent day celebrations on 23 January
Vertus
Vertus, at the southern end of the Côte des Blancs, is the largest of the grands and premiers crus.
Most of its vines face east, although some of the slopes north of the village have southeast, south and even south-west exposures; virtually all are superbly positioned.
The prime locations are found at a height of between 140 and 220 metres, below which, and north of the village, the vines are grown on flatter ground.
Most of Vertus's hectarage is taken up with Chardonnay vines, but, interestingly, the 85 hectares of Pinot Noir are descended from pre-phylloxera vines brought from the famous Burgundy village of Beaune.
The reputation of Vertus's richly perfumed still red wines goes back to the fourteenth century; in the seventeenth century these wines were favoured by William of Orange.
Vertus produces fruitier Champagnes than those of its northern neighbours on the Côte and, although the Chardonnay does not achieve the remarkable perfume and definition of les Mesnil or Cramant, the wines are of very high quality and well deserve upgrading.
Villedommange
The village of Villedommange is surrounded on all sides by vineyards which are a continuation northwards of the slopes of Écueil and Sacy.
The elevation of these vines ranges between 115 and 240 metres, those over 160 metres being steeper and more favourably positioned.
Although Villedommange is of the same échelle as its neighbouring premiers crus, its highest vineyards, which do not adjoin a dense mass of forest and are thus free from the ill-effects of transpiration, produce grapes of a superior quality.
These are full-bodied, richly flavoured wines which, with the wines of Sacy, are the best of the Petite Montagne.
Villeneuve-Renneville
Although the village of Villeneuve-Renneville is located on the plains beneath the Côte des Blancs, its vineyards are set back, and occupy the lower slopes of le Mesnil-sur-Oger.
They are south-east-facing and are at a height of 110 metres.
The wines from this village are modestly good but do not merit top premier cru status — despite the elevation of the échelle of this village in 1985 from 93% to 95%.
Villers-Allerand
The vineyards of Villers-Allerand lie on either side of the main Épernay to Reims road as it descends from the Montagne on to the plain.
They are grown on north, north-east and northwest-facing slopes at an altitude of 150 to 200 metres.
The best-situated vines are found east of the village on a slope which is a continuation of the vineyards of Rilly-la-Montagne, but are not of exceptional quality.
Villers-Marmery
The vineyards of Villers-Marmery are well placed on the eastern slopes of the Montagne de Reims, between those of Verzy to the north and Trépail to the south.
They are planted at a height of between 120 and 190 metres on east and south-east-facing slopes.
This village produces strong wines of good varietal character well deserving premier cru status.
Villers-aux-Noeuds
Not specifically mentioned in the échelle des crus prior to 1985
Voipreux
Although Voipreux seems to have jumped from nowhere to a 95% premier cru, it does possess some choice sites nestled between Vertus and Villeneuve-Renneville on the lower east-facing slopes of the Côte des Blancs.
The Varieties of Vine and their Cultivation
Come, thou monarch of the vine,
Plumpy Bacchus with pink eyne!
In thy fats our cares be drown'd,
With thy grapes our hairs be crown'd.
Cup us till the world go round,
Cup us till the world go round!
William Shakespeare, Antony and Cleopatra, II, 7
THERE ARE THREE CLASSIC GRAPE VARIETIES which give Champagne its superlative flavour: Chardonnay, Pinot Noir and Pinot Meunier.
Approximately 45% of all grand and premier cru vineyards are planted with Chardonnay, 36% with Pinot Noir and 19% with Pinot Meunier.
Taking the Champagne region as a whole, it can be seen that Pinot Meunier assumes the greatest general importance, covering 36.5% (47% in 1982) of the total viticultural hectarage, followed by Pinot Noir with 35.8% (2.8% in 1982) and Chardonnay with 27.7% (24% in 1982).
If the relative proportions of these grape varieties are compared on a département basis, an indication of the quality and character of these large areas can be discerned.
Chardonnay: Marne 37.2%, Aube and Haut Marne 7.7%, Aisne and Seine-et-Marne 5.3% Pinot Noir: Marne 25.2%, Aube and Haut Marne 80%, Aisne and Seine-et-Marne 11.2% Pinot Meunier: Marne 37.6%, Aube and Haut Marne 12.3%, Aisne and Seine-et-Marne 83.5%.
Other varieties are grown too: Pinot Blanc Vrai, Arbanne, Petit Meslier and even Gamay.
These lesser varieties are not widely planted, nor do they contribute significantly to the quality and reputation of Champagne as we know it today, but they exist and do possess a certain curiosity value and are therefore dealt with in this chapter..
Note Although most Champagnes are a blend of all three classic grapes, their individual varietal characters are described to give readers an idea of how each may affect the style of a cuvée 
Chardonnay
Chardonnay is the noble grape from which some of the world's finest dry white wines are produced, notably those from Burgundy.
Famous names of grands crus like Corton-Charlemagne or le Montrachet conjure up mouth-watering images of bright golden wines, lusciously rich and complex in flavour.
The colder climate of the Marne, however, and the prise de mousse combine to create a much leaner animal in the sparkling wine of Champagne.
In Champagne, the Chardonnay is a strong growing variety which buds early, making it  susceptible to spring frosts, but which also ripens in good time for so northerly a wine.
It is particularly resistant to low winter temperatures and has some immunity against downy mildew, although it is somewhat sensitive to botrytis (rot) and to powdery mildew.
Chardonnay vines can be recognised by the dull, yellow-brown colour of the canes which have a noticeable bloom and darker nodes (the point where buds will emerge); their slightly bullate (bubbly) leaves, the edges of which have a tendency to curl upwards (some varieties curl downwards or not at all); and the compact clusters of small, round, yellow-amber grapes.
Chardonnay wines are notably lighter in body than those made from Pinot Noir, with a naturally higher acidity and a finer bouquet.
In the early stages of maturity the fruit of a pure Chardonnay Champagne (ie, a blanc de blancs) can appear to be understated and cut by a certain ‘steely’ character, the deceiving taste of undeveloped and unharmonious extract.
Chardonnay is, however, potentially the longest lived of all Champagne's grape varieties and a good blanc de blancs left to mature will achieve an incomparable intensity of flavour.
From a hard and virtually tasteless youth, the fruit of a Chardonnay Champagne develops a zippy, zingy, almost citrusy tang of concentration, yet retains the delicacy and finesse for which the highest quality blancs de blancs are renowned.
Opinions differ as to when this wine should be drunk.
Many drinkers enjoy the freshness and vitality of a young Chardonnay Champagne, while others prefer some maturity.
If the reader has been disappointed by one, then he should try the other.
Ancient and contemporary synonyms
Pinot Noir
The Pinot Noir is another Burgundian grape, famous for that region's delicious, velvety red wines.
Still red wines in Champagne are rare, however, and hardly ever exciting.
The principal use of this variety is to provide the backbone essential to Champagne blends.
A delicate plant, the Pinot Noir is difficult to nurture through the freezing cold winters of Champagne.
It is susceptible to botrytis and, with an earlier bud-break than Chardonnay, is prone to spring frosts.
Nevertheless, it is an early maturing variety well suited to the long ripening period of a northern wine region.
Field trials have for many years been concerned with finding a clone less susceptible to frost and this was initially seen as a way of upgrading some of the frost-prone vineyards of the Marne Valley which are traditionally planted with the hardier Pinot Meunier.
Clonal selection now concerns  all three of Champagne's major varieties and the current emphasis is to ensure that each village has the clones best suited to its own terroir .
Pinot Noir can be recognised by the pale pink colour and greyish bloom of the young canes, the nodes of which are revealed by their contrasting dark-brown colour: the thick, extremely bullate, dark green leaves; and compact clusters of tough-skinned, heavily bloomed, blue-black, ovoid (egg-shaped) grapes.
Fermented from the clear, uncoloured juice of the black grape, Pinot Noir Champagnes have a deeper hue of gold than blanc de blancs Champagnes (which can sometimes be almost water-white).
Compared to the Chardonnay it has a more obvious fruit character and in its youth possesses a greater depth of flavour and bouquet.
The most important role of the Pinot Noir is to provide much of the body, flesh and grip of a Champagne cuvée especially in the middle term of maturity.
There should be a certain lusciousness about the style imparted to a blend by top quality Pinot Noir grapes, although this can be marred by an earthy taste if the vines are grown in a less than favourable site.
Ancient and contemporary synonyms
Pinot Meunier
The Pinot Meunier is a variant of the Pinot Noir, dating back to the sixteenth century.
There has been a radical reappraisal of the Pinot Meunier in the last ten years and growers and houses alike are nowadays more willing to admit the commercial worth of this grape, a variety which was once conspicuous by its absence from various famous firms' promotional pamphlets.
It is similar in many ways to its more aristocratic relative, but the characteristics of its wines are less well defined.
Only in Champagne has this grape proved so successful.
It is more prolific and easier to grow than the Pinot Noir and, with a later bud-break, is less prone to frost, hence its extensive cultivation in the Marne Valley.
Like all Champagne varieties, it too has the advantage of ripening early, although this is often accompanied by a sensitivity to powdery mildew and to botrytis.
Pinot Meunier vines are easily recognised in the vineyard by their leaves which have deep sinuses, accentuated lobes and white undersides, hence Meunier or ‘Miller’ suggesting a brushing over with white miller's flour.
Its new growth canes are a well defined brownish-red with a natural bloom and indistinct nodes and the grapes are small, round, thick-skinned, blue-black in colour and loosely clustered.
The Pinot Meunier produces honest, fruity wines which are attractive and easy to drink.
These wines do lack, however, the depth, elegance and persistence of the Pinot Noir and its characteristics tend to peak early and fall away quickly.
Champagnes made with a high proportion of Pinot Meunier sometimes have an earthy tone of fruit and when the grapes have come from less favourable sites, there can be a distinctly sweet aroma which reminds         one of a confectioner's shop.
But for relatively inexpensive, early drinking, Champagnes, the judicious addition of good quality Pinot Meunier to a cuvée is  indispensable and provides an immediate appeal to both nose and palate.
Avize (above ), one of the most famous crus of the Côte des Blancs, shrouded in autumn mist.
Virtually all vines, not just in Champagne but across the world, have to be grafted on to American rootstocks (below) to avoid phylloxera.
A few phylloxera-free areas, like this small patch outside Bouzy (right) which belongs to Bollinger, do exist, however.
The vines beyond Bollinger's signboard have to be grafted and are, those before it do not and are not
Ancient and contemporary synonyms
Other varieties
There are three other varieties authorised for the production of Champagne — the Pinot Blanc Vrai, the Arbanne and the Petit Meslier-but their hectarage is scattered and found in minute quantities only.
The presence of the Pinot Blanc Vrai is almost negligible, while the Arbanne and Petit Meslier are found almost exclusively in the less favoured regions in the Aube.
Production is declining for all three grapes and the vineyards are gradually being replanted with one of the three classic varieties.
Pinot Blanc Vrai
At one time the Pinot Blanc and the Chardonnay, which used to be erroneously called the Pinot Chardonnay, were considered to be one and the same, which is why there is usually evidence of its existence wherever the Chardonnay is traditionally cultivated.
Many growers, not only in Champagne but throughout France, still innocently cultivate Pinot Blanc Vrai believing it to be Chardonnay, although anyone with doubts need only look at the leaves on the vine.
Both varieties bear leaves of the same basic shape, but whereas the leaves on the Chardonnay are concave, turning upwards at the edges allowing the underside to obscure the upper surface, the leaves on the Pinot Blanc are not.
Furthermore, the leaves on the Pinot Blanc are far less bullate, that is to say not so bubbly between the leaf's veins.
When using leaves to help identify a vine, the grower must take care to select samples from the mature foliage occurring beyond the sixth node from the base of a shoot coming from the previous year's wood.
The vines must not be suffering from any disease, nor should the leaves be those which have been distorted by herbicides.
Pinot Blanc wines in Champagne have more body than the Chardonnay and a greater alcoholic potential, but they lack finesse and usually remain neutral or possess a slightly earthy taste.
Reterrage or épandage , the laying of new earth or manure (TOP LEFT), takes place between December and February every year.
A vigneron pruning vines (BOTTOM LEFT); the off-cuts are burned as he goes
Arbanne
This variety gained considerable local repute in the nineteenth century, when 100% Arbanne Champagne was produced in Bar-sur-Aube.
Very few Arbanne vines exist today, maybe one for every nine or ten Petit Meslier.
A white variety, this grape ripens early and its wines mature well.
It has a very pleasant, extremely distinctive aroma which experienced vignerons in the Aube claim can be detected in a cuvée , despite the fact that its presence can only be, at the very most, a few percent of the overall blend.
The very aromatic nature of the Arbanne suggests it might well be an ancient variant of  the Chardonnay Blanc Musque or, possibly, the Muscadelle of Bordeaux, both of which ripen early enough to survive in the southern extremities of Champagne.
Other aromatic varieties are either too delicate to cultivate in Champagne or too late ripening to bear fruit.
Petit Meslier
Some sources suggest that as much as 4.5% of the Aube was planted with this variety as recently as ten or I 5 years ago.
Now greatly reduced, but still common compared to the Arbanne, the Petit Meslier is confined, for the most part, to the Aube département , except for a very small amount cultivated in Fleury-la-Rivière, west of Épernay.
It is a white variety which is difficult to ripen, hence the yield is small and its contribution to a cuvée is to increase the acidity and reduce the alcohol content.
This provides the reason why it was once extensively cultivated in the Aube, where its more southerly location and lack of limestone subsoil sometimes renders wines lacking the desirably high degree of acidity required for classic Champagnes.
In big years, Aube wines may also possess too much alcohol to allow for a second fermentation and effect the correct balance.
The function of the Petit Meslier has thus been similar to that of the Petit Verdot in Bordeaux.
The grapes produced are very small, round and dark yellow in colour.
If vinified separately the Petit Meslier would make a thin wine, with an agreeably fruity nose, but an unpalatable extremely tart flavour.
Gamay
The Gamay is not one of the authorised varieties for Champagne, but it has been cultivated in the region for centuries and, at the last count in 1976, there were 38 hectares.
It is estimated that there are still about 20 hectares in production, mostly in the Aube and in Vertus on the Côte des Blancs.
The vine is unimportant, but how and why its cultivation still persists in Champagne must be fascinating to anyone who has ever been intrigued by the curiously eclectic attitude to rules and regulations often displayed by the French.
The Gamay was rightly considered inferior for the production of Champagne when AOC laws were introduced in 1927 and its cultivation was restricted, but a generous transitory period of 18 years was allowed for growers heavily dependent on the vine, because the authorities recognised the financial burden of replanting with the authorised varieties.
At the time, the year of expiry would hardly have seemed significant, but when it arrived, Champagne was still recovering from four years of German occupation.
It was 1949 before the authorities got around to this trivial matter and their solution was to slap another seven years on the original 18.
Fair enough in the circumstances, but since the extended expiry date in 1952, several growers have received individual concessions and, although the overall aim has been to gradually reduce the Gamay, the fact that at least 20 hectares exist, some 60 years after the law intent on banning the grape was first introduced, surely indicates that a certain laisser-faire attitude has been taken by successive administrations.
Who are these people still growing Gamay in Champagne and why do they want to  continue?
According to the regulations currently in force a grower would have to satisfy the following conditions in order to cultivate the Gamay today:
i
Only Aube growers qualify.
ii
The Gamay vines must have been planted prior to 1948.
iii
The proprietor of the vines in 1948 had to be at least 60 years of age in 1952.
iv
If the proprietor was between the ages of 50 and 60 in 1952, at least 50% of his vineyard must be planted with authorised varieties.
v
These conditions are only transferable to the grower's wife.
Why some growers, who must be at least 93 years of age by now(or 83 provided half their vineyard contains authorised varieties), wish to continue with very old, low-yielding and inferior-quality Gamay vines, God only knows.
If the regulations are being enforced, and there is no reason to believe they are not, then bearing in mind that most growers own less than one hectare of vines, there still must be quite a few of these stubborn old vignerons around.
Cloning
Experiments to find vine clones best suited to the solumological and climatical conditions of Champagne have been continuing for more than twenty years.
The first objective was to develop a Pinot Noir clone which could resist the frosts in the Marne valley and thus enable vineyards in this predominantly Pinot Meunier area to be replanted with a more noble variety.
Over the last two decades, however, the commercial demands of the Champagne trade have tended to favour the more prolific yields and early maturing advantages of the Pinot Meunier which is increasingly being recognised as a classic variety.
Hence, the emphasis on selection today is more to identify specific clones of Pinot Noir, Pinot Meunier and Chardonnay which are best suited to each individual village.
Rootstock varieties
Since the advent of phylloxera, when it became necessary to graft all European vines on to American rootstock, literally hundreds of rootstock varieties have been developed for virtually every permutation of vinestock and growing conditions.
The major factors to be taken into consideration when selecting a rootstock variety are: its suitability to the vinestock on which it is to be grafted; its suitability to the geographical location and to climate; solumological effects; and the effect upon the quality and character of the fruit produced.
Selection of suitable rootstocks in Champagne are greatly influenced by the solumological factor.
A soil with a high active lime content can induce chlorosis or ‘green sickness’.
In the Marne valley the active lime content, which is not directly proportional to the total lime content, is high — up to 43% in the calcareous topsoil and as much as 53% in the pure chalk subsoil  stratas — but the average active lime content is considerably lower.
Since the three most effective phylloxera-resistant species are the Vitis Berlandieri , the Vitis Rupestris and the Vitis Riparia , most rootstock crosses and hybrids (crosses between  different species) are derived from these.
Of the twenty-eight varieties of rootstock permitted in the cultivation of Champagne's vineyards, the most significant ones are: the 41 B Millardet et Grasset , which has a fair resistance to phylloxera and an excellent active lime resistance (up to 40%); the Selection Oppenheim No. 4 or So 4 , which has very good phylloxera resistance and reasonable active lime resistance (up to 18%); and the 3309 Couderc , which has excellent resistance to phylloxera and fair resistance to active lime (up to 11%).
Of these, the 4I B Millardet and the So 4 both promote an early ripening of grapes, while the So 4 must be seen as the most effective in terms of drought resistance, suitability to the humid conditions of Champagne and increased yields.
Three further rootstock varieties cultivated in Champagne are: the 1103 Paulsen which has an 18% active lime resistance; the 333 École de Montpellier , with more than 40% active lime resistance and satisfactory resistance to phylloxera; and the 161–49 Couderc , which has 25% active lime resistance and excellent resistance to phylloxera.
Field trials in Champagne have also involved the 99 Richter , the 110 Richter , and the 5BB Selection Kober , but as yet, these are not seen as major competitors to the established rootstock varieties.
Grafting
The difference in technique between all styles of grafting is simply the shape in which both the rootstocks and the vinestocks are cut, the prime purpose being to present the largest possible growing surface between the two canes.
It is crucial that the growth of the rootstock should be in advance of the vinestock, or the scion will begin leaf before the union is complete and all such grafts will die from lack of water and nourishment.
For the union to be successful the grafted vine forms a protective callus around the wound while the two plants seek compatibility.
No vines may be brought into production for Champagne until they have attained their ‘third leaf’, that is to say, when they are three years old.
So vignerons purchasing bench grafted vinestock will save one year of productivity from their vineyard, a substantial proportion of their income.
Many vignerons, however, will wait until the fourth or fifth year to avoid over-straining the young vines, which in turn will ensure a longer and more productive life.
As with so many economies, the choice is between the short and the long term.
There are two basic methods of grafting the rootstock on to the desired scion (vinestock): bench grafting and field grafting.
Bench grafting
Cuttings of both rootstocks and scion are taken in autumn and stored until mid or late winter.
They are then cut by one of the several methods to effect a good join.
At this stage the rootstock will be about ten inches in length and the scion somewhere between one and three inches depending on the specific method employed.
After being grafted, the joints are dipped into paraffin wax for protection.
In modern viticultural establishments the grafts  will spend some time in hot-room callusing boxes to develop a protective skin or  callus over the grafting wound before  they are planted into the nursery beds, and finally into the vineyard the following season.
Examples of bench grafting styles are: Jupiter; Omega; Bench Cleft; Saw-type or Hengl; Log-whip; and Short-whip.
Field grafting
This is when the rootstock is simply planted into the vineyard in the autumn and, in the following March, the scion is grafted on to those vines which have taken.
Cleft grafting on the spot is the primary example of field grafting and is widely used in California where varieties of vines cultivated change rapidly with fashion: a grower simply cuts off the whole of his existing variety at rootstock level and clefts on the new desired variety.
Other styles employed, which are modifications of cleft grafting, are: Aerial; Cadillac, Mayorquine, and field budding.
These can all be applied to existing vines but without removing any of the top foliage, the advantage being that if the new scion fails to take, the vine still lives and further attempts can be made.
The life of the vine
It is believed that some vines can live as long as five hundred years although such a plant would yield a negligible crop of grapes.
Before the advent of phylloxera classic wine producing vines lived an average productive life of around fifty years, although a hundred years was not uncommon.
Since the introduction of American rootstocks, however, the impaired circulatory effect upon the sap inflicted by the grafting wound reduces a vine's potential age to about thirty-five years, the most productive of which are those between ten and twenty-five years.
The reason why it is more productive in these middle years is simple.
A vine has one aim in life: to reproduce itself.
Growth by suckering is merely an extension of its own life; it achieves reproduction by producing seeds which are encased in the edible fruit so fondly admired by birds.
To shorten the odds on reproducing itself it must produce a significant crop of attractive fruit, but it cannot do this without the framework on which to hang and parade its wares.
To evolve this framework it requires energy from its roots.
Thus while it is young, the vine's efforts are directed towards extending its root system, after which it concentrates on forming the structure of branches which will bear its flowers and fruit.
As the vine matures, so more and more energy is used in the production of its fruit.
With age the strain to produce fruit gradually erodes the vine's life-force with the result that fewer and fewer grapes are produced.
Vine control
Left to itself, however, a vine (grafted or ungrafted) would concentrate all its energies into sending out suckers, which would in turn push down roots to start the cycle all over again.
Within two or three years, the majority of a grafted vine's network would be dependent not upon the grafted roots, but upon the regenerated root system of the producing vine and as such would be at the mercy of phylloxera.
Ironically, that part of the vine still receiving its principal nourishment from the grafted rootstock would send out its own shoots and, unchecked by any sort of pruning, these would produce hybrid fruit of an unplanned nature.
Before phylloxera, it had not been necessary to prune and train, although vine training systems were widely practised — after phylloxera it became essential.
Thus the first reason for pruning and training vines is to avoid phylloxera and prevent reversion.
In addition to this, pruning and training are vital functions in the cultivation of the vine to help maintain the purity of its fruiting stock.
As well as sustaining the health and vigour of the plant, they can control the quantity and quality of its fruit and direct its size, shape and height to positive effect.
Pruning cuts out damaged and diseased branches, thus averting the spread of decay, while at the same time rechannelling the vital sap back into the productive parts of the plant.
It can also control both the quantity and quality of fruit by preventing the overproduction of new, sappy growth at the expense of the fruit, and by halting the production of too many fruit buds at the expense of new, healthy growth which will result in poorer fruit and gradually weaken the vine.
In order to understand why certain pruning practices are adopted by various vine-training systems, it helps to know what happens when the shoots are cut.
Except when the vine is dormant, sap rises to the top of every shoot and the uppermost bud of a shortened stem is the one that will burst into growth first.
Removal of wood above a growth bud or shoot diverts energy into that bud or shoot.
The harder the pruning the stronger the response, therefore the more growth required in one direction the more severe the pruning of that part of the vine should be.
It should be remembered, however, that pruning deprives the vine of some of its food manufactured through the leaves: this should be replaced by feeding the roots or the plant will weaken.
Pruning will also delay the flowering while new shoots grow — a very important point in northern wine regions like Champagne.
Precocious growth of the vine in late winter or early spring could well render the vital flowering vulnerable to the severest of spring frosts.
Reducing the amount of fruiting buds lowers the quantity, but raises the quality of the grapes produced.
Horizontal or diagonal branches produce more flowering shoots, and therefore more fruit, than vertical ones.
The manner in which a vine is trained will guide the size, shape and height of the plant towards reaping maximum benefits from the local conditions of aspect and climate.
Vines can be lifted high off the ground to avoid frost; dropped as low as possible to benefit from heat reflected by stony ground at night; generously spaced along the rows to attract the sun and avoid humidity; or intensively cultivated into a canopy of foliage to avoid too much sun and encourage humidity in dry areas.
Systems of vine training
Four systems of vine training are allowed in Champagne: Chablis, Cordon, Guyot and Vallée de la Marne.
The Guyot is a ‘cane pruning’ system, the other three being ‘spur pruning’.
Cane pruning is where no permanent branch exists, all canes being cut back each year to provide a vine consisting of entirely new growth.
This gives a good spread of fruit over a large area and the annual production is easier to control because the number of fruiting buds can be increased or decreased.
Spur pruning is where there is no annual replacement of the main branch, thus good thick wood is formed providing a solid framework and a stable yield.
The use of the four authorised systems is regulated by both grape variety and échelle de cru:
Generally speaking, the Chablis system is used for Chardonnay vines planted in the Côte des Blancs, the Cordon system for Pinot Noir vines in the Montagne de Reims and the Vallée de la Marne method for Pinot Meunier vines grown in the Marne valley.
Chablis
The Chablis system was developed in the Chablis district in the nineteenth century.
At least 90% of all Chardonnay vines in Champagne are trained by this method.
A maximum of four shoots per branch is allowed.
For the Chardonnay, however, to which it is best suited, four shoots require five buds, as the first bud on this vine is always  infertile.
Either three, four or five permanent branches may be cultivated, each being grown at yearly intervals.
Effectively this means that a three-year-old vine (the minimum age for AOC Champagne) will have three branches, a four-year-old four branches and so forth, unless the vigneron for some reason decides not to cultivate as many as he is entitled to.
The distance between each vine in the same row determines the eventual life of the main branches: every time one reaches the neighbouring plant it will be removed and a new one cultivated.
In Fig. 3 the oldest branch (c) will soon have to be cut right back to the vine stump and it can be seen that the vigneron tending this vine has already decided to cultivate another branch (b) in preparation.
At the same time a third branch (a) is allowed to develop but cut back until required.
Should a main  branch be broken off for some reason (by vineyard machinery, for example), it is permissible to bring out a shoot half-way along the next branch to fill the gap.
Cordon
Sometimes referred to as the Cordon de Royat system, this is primarily recommended for the Pinot Noir.
Only one main branch is permitted, along which shoots above branch level are spaced at a minimum of 15 centimetre intervals.
Each shoot may have two buds (three for Chardonnay, the first being infertile).
An end shoot is also allowed which is itself an extension of the main branch; along this shoot may be four buds (five for Chardonnay or Pinot Noir).
In Fig. 4 (a) has been brought out in readiness but cut back until required.
In Fig. 5 shoot (a) has been allowed to grow and is being trained to eventually replace the main branch (b), while another replacement shoot (c) has again been encouraged but cut back.
Fig. 6 illustrates how the system may be adapted to replace a missing vine.
The most graphic impression of Cordon-trained vines can be seen in the late winter months, as one travels from Louvois on the D34.
Take the first turning left for Bouzy and look at the formation of vines on your right as you approach the village.
The vines look like columns of gnarled old men in perfect formation; they are all face on, bent almost double, as if with one arm dug into the pit of the back and the other seeking the support of a stick.
Guyot
This system is not allowed in vineyards of superior classification but is recommended for all authorised vine varieties in lesser growths.
In contrast with the other three systems, the Guyot is a cane pruning system.
Its main branch (or branches if the Guyot double is used) is not permanent.
The quickest comparison is to liken it to the replacement branches mentioned above, shoot (a) in Fig. 5, for example.
In Guyot simple a single, annually renewable branch is allowed with ten productive buds, whereas for Guyot double two annually renewable branches are permitted with eight buds each.
Fig. 7 shows how in both versions of the system shoots (a) will replace the main branches (b) in the following year.
Vallée de la Marne
The Vallée de la Marne system is restricted to the Pinot Meunier vine only or to vineyards of 89% échelle or lower.
There are four variants of this system, all of which have different shoot requirements.
In Fig. 8 I have illustrated the basic version which permits six buds on the main permanent branch and nine on the secondary branch.
When the main branch (c) reaches the next plant it is replaced by the secondary branch (b) and the reserve shoot (a) will become the next secondary branch.
Density of growth
The space between vines in the same row and the distance between individual rows is strictly controlled: between vines the space ranges from 0.9 metres (minimum) to 1.5 metres (maximum); between rows it is 1.5 metres (maximum).
The important factor for the vigneron in deciding the spread of his vines is that the ‘sum of spread’, that is, the distance between each vine added to the distance between each row, does not exceed 2.5 metres, thus the minimum number of vines planted per hectare is 6,666.
A few examples should explain the meaning of ‘sum of spread’:
In the above table all except the asterisked example would be legitimate planting spreads.
Here although both distances, 1.5 metres between the rows and 1.5 metres between the vines, are within the maximum lengths allowed, the ‘sum of spread’ is 0.5 metres over.
Pre-phylloxera vines
Phylloxera infests all wine-producing regions of France, and most of those throughout Europe.
A few areas in the world are phylloxera-free and the vines there are sometimes ungrafted.
Extraordinarily, there are also some phylloxera-free patches existing in infested regions.
This is usually explained by the presence of sand, a soil type not liked by phylloxera, but, curiously, there are also some wall-enclosed vineyards which shelter phylloxera-free, ungrafted vines.
Bollinger own just such a patch of phylloxera-free vines in Aÿ; whereas its high walls might well repel a small army, it remains a mystery why the little bug has not simply walked in under the gate.
But if Bollinger's phylloxera-free vines in Aÿ are a puzzle, then their patch on the edge of Bouzy is even more astounding.
Driving from Louvois to Bouzy, and taking the left turn into the village itself, one cannot miss the corner section of vines proudly signposted as ‘Bollinger's Vieilles Vignes’.
This small site is simply a three-sided plot which extends down to the road, its largest border merging into a vast hectarage of vines which have to be grafted in order to survive the threat of phylloxera.
Where the vines are ungrafted they are normally cultivated en foule , following the system of vine training which was universal in Champagne during the nineteenth century.
As the name suggests,en foule is a rather crowded method of training the vine.
Left to itself a vine would carpet the land in every direction, albeit making haphazard progress.
Initially the vineyard is planted in one corner or at one end, in a very compact fashion, with about six vines per square metre.
Within two or three years these vines are ready for provignage or layering.
In the late autumn or early winter one or two two-year-old shoots from each ‘mother’ vine are buried six to eight inches deep, leaving the one-year-old shoots for production the following year.
Suckers from the buried two-year-old shoots develop roots and within two years a ‘new’ vine is bearing fruit.
There are two variations of this system:Provignage à l'avance where progress forward is by one shoot per vine: and Provignage à l'ecart , a form of deflected layering where two or more canes progress forward.
When a vine is five years old it is rested for a while before the practice of  provignage is resumed, after which the layering process may continue for upwards of fifty years.
Although a vineyard thus cultivated always appears to contain vines of no more than three years of age, they do of course all issue from their parent plants, thus a ‘pre-phylloxera’ vine nowadays will be either three or eighty years old, depending upon how it is viewed.
From time to time the ‘mothers’ need renewing and the simple answer is to turn the nearest two-year-old shoot in full circle and bury it next to the tiring parent.
In April each of the canes seen protruding starkly from the ground in February is cut back to the second bud and stakes are planted for their support.
In May or June they are secured to the top of the stakes in a bush-like fashion similar to the Goblet system practised in Beaujolais.
By the time of harvest there may be as many as four or five fruiting branches.
Excessive foliage may be cut back when the stakes are removed in late autumn.
This leaves the vine curled in a heap, a condition in which it will remain until the January or February pruning when all but the one-year-old growth is either cut away or buried for advancing into new vines.
And so the cycle begins again.
When en foule vineyards are uprooted, this is done in reverse order, starting with the oldest, the mother vine, and working down to the youngest.
If the vineyard is still fertile a new mother vine will be created by bending back one or two of its two-year-old vines before grubbing up commences.
Should the soil be in need of replenishment all the vines are grubbed up and the land left to fallow for a few years before new vinestock are planted and the entire cycle begins again.
A vineyard planted en foule will have something like 25,000 vines per hectare, compared with between 7,000 and 8,000 under post-phylloxera systems such as Cordon.
Of course each individual vine yields much less, but the overall production per hectare is significantly higher and it lives up to three times as long, in productive terms, as a grafted vine.
Vine prior to the January–February pruning, showing the extent of root
Triple provignage to replace the parent stock
Production levels
In 1935 the maximum production for Champagne was set at 50 hectolitres per hectare which could be annually modified by a special commission up or down to suit the specific conditions of the harvest.
As the maximum extraction of grape juice or must was also set  at one litre of juice per one and a half kilograms of grapes, this production limit could also be expressed as 7,500 kilograms per hectare.
Initially the reasoning behind this law seemed sensible for a region like Champagne, which is set in a viticultural twilight zone where the size of harvest fluctuates from year to year.
But it very soon became clear that any mention of a maximum was unnecessary and, with hindsight, it can be seen as a future source of embarrassment.
If the commission, which since its inception has been the CIVC's ComCon (Commission Consultative), required a yardstick on which to base their annual increase or decrease of production limits, then it would have been more rational at the time to term the figure, whether or not it was actually 50 hectolitres per hectare, an average for the region.
It was thus inevitable that whenever the official limit was declared higher than the 50 hectolitre/7,500 kilogram mark, Champagne's critics would declare that it was over-producing and its reputation would be tarnished.
With the advance of viticultural techniques the volume of grapes produced in Champagne naturally tended to rise and, always provided that they did not over-produce — a responsibility of ComCon which must be ratified by the non-partisan decree of the minister of agriculture — the quality of the fruit yielded also rose.
Since 1940 the average yield, which should in theory have been lower than the official limit but in practice was not always so, has steadily increased:
By 1970 the official limit, not for the first time, was set at no less than 12,000 kilograms, a fair bit up on the I935 maximum of 7,500 kilograms, while the average yield topped I3,800 kilograms per hectare and, after setting the official limit at I3,000 kilograms in 1973, a law was passed the following year placing an absolute ceiling of 13,000 kilograms per hectare on all AOC Champagne vineyards, beyond which the so-called maximum could not be stretched.
The average for the 1970s was 9,200 kilograms per hectare, but in 1982 it rose to as much as 14,080 kilograms and in 1983 an even higher figure of 15,012.
Looking coldly at the figures and at the Plafond Limité de Classement (PLC) of 13,000 kilograms per hectare, it would seem that most of Champagne's production in those two years should have been sent off to the distillery.
This did not happen however.
It has to be understood that the enormous 1982 crop was a welcome relief after the miserly vintages of 1978, 1980 and 1981.
Champagne's prayers had been answered, the only problem was how to legally recognise what was, technically, an illegally oversized crop.
What happened first was that the CIVC told the growers to harvest an extra 10% over the official 13,000 kilograms limit for that year, but to store it separately until the situation clarified.
Later it transpired that the INAO (Institut National des Appellations d'Origine des vins et  eaux -de-vie) would accept this 10% as a stock régulateur , a reserve without appellation to be kept for possible classification should any future shortfall  require it.
This was not without precedent in France; Bordeaux, for example, operates a similar system.
This reserve may be replaced annually, keeping the stock régulateur as fresh as possible, but it cannot be increased unless and until the INAO grant another blocage of excess production.
In 1983 another massive crop occurred — this was again met with joy, although the Champenois would certainly have been dismayed had 1984 turned out to be the third consecutive bumper year.
This time a yield of 15,200 kilograms per hectare was authorised, but instead of the regulation 100 litres of juice per 150 kilograms of grapes, a unique declaration of 100 litres per 160 kilograms was enforced.
It was pointed out that this ensured the highest quality from such a large harvest and that the overall permitted yield of 95 hectolitres per hectare was in fact lower than the 95.3 hectolitres per hectare granted in 1982.
Of course this ignores the fact that 8.6 hectolitres of the 1982 crop was not Champagne, but an unclassified reserve.
It also ignores the fact that the PLC of 13,000 kilograms represents just 86.66 hectolitres per hectare.
These were the right decisions, I believe, but had they adopted an average yardstick in 1935, rather than a maximum, and kept the yardstick in line with actual average production figures, the necessary steps taken would have appeared less dramatic.
In 1935 the French were free to arrange their own wine laws, but they are now subject to EEC regulations and I doubt that Champagne, despite its unique viticultural situation, would be allowed to dispense with a maximum yield in favour of an average production yardstick.
I would be far happier seeing 15,000 kilograms of grapes in a fine, ripe and healthy year yielding 86.66 hectolitres of juice, than 13,000 kilograms stretched to supply the same volume of juice, leaving 2,000 kilograms of grapes of the same quality to rot on the vine.
In the final analysis, however, if the AOC laws are applied effectively, all Champagnes must be passed by laboratory analysis and an organoleptic test (blind tasting) which should assure its future quality and reputation, whatever figures are found in the regulation books.
Enemies and disorders of the vine
With the advent of numerous chemical sprays to combat various disorders and pests, the greatest hazard facing the vine in Champagne today is frost.
Many other dangers exist and the disorders which result can be just as harmful to the vine, but the risk of their occurrence is less and the vigneron's ability to contain the damage they cause is much greater.
The full range of vine disorders fall within six categories: viral, parasitic, cryptogamic, pests, mineral imbalance (discussed in the following chapter) and climatic.
Viral
Virus infections seldom kill, but they do tend to affect vigour, reduce the crop, delay ripening and generally impair the plant's efficiency, although not all virus infections are necessarily harmful to the vine.
The two most common virus infections display very obvious visual symptoms known as ‘fan-leaf’ and ‘leaf-roll’; other virus infections may be  less conspicuous and difficult to detect, yet may still have undesirable effects.
The Chardonnay is particularly prone to ‘fan-leaf’ or court-noué , as it is also known.
Some viruses, including court-noué , are spread by microscopic worm-shaped organisms called nematodes, of which there are two basic types — root-knot and root-lesion — and many different species, all of which, in addition to infecting the vine, can inflict damage to the roots which can be confused with phylloxera.
So 4 and 99 Richter rootstock varieties are recommended for nematode-infested soils.
Fumigation of vineyards with Telone has improved conditions, but no control measure has yet eradicated nematodes on a field scale.
Thermosensitive processes (the sensitivity of court-noué to heat treatment has been known since 1921) together with clonal selection are the primary methods of producing so-called ‘virus-free’ vinestocks.
However, as new viruses are being discovered all the time, no vine can be regarded as truly virus-free.
Parasites
Without question the most feared of all vine parasites is Phylloxera vastatrix .
Derived from the Greek words phyllon (leaf) and xeros (dry), the phylloxera lives only on the vine and cannot survive on any other host.
Phylloxera occurs on the leaves and on the roots: the leaf form termed Phylloxera vastatrix gallicola , and the root form Phylloxera vastatrix radicicola .
There are, however, four distinct stages in the development of phylloxera, all of which belong to the same Phylloxera vastatrix life-cycle: the sexual, the leaf, the root and the winged form.
The sexual form originates from eggs laid by the winged form on the under surface of young leaves.
The sexual form has no digestive system and, after the male and female sexual forms have mated, the female lays just one winter egg in the dead bark of the vine's trunk.
Both male and female of the sexual form die after mating.
From the winter egg an insect called the leaf form hatches out and begins to suck the lower surface of its birthplace, a young leaf, causing the formation of a hollow gall.
In this gall the leaf form lays a number of eggs by parthenogenesis (self-propagation) which, usually in the autumn, hatch as root forms.
Like the leaf form (only smaller), the root form is a wingless insect.
It crawls down the vine and enters the soil, whereupon it reaches and punctures the roots for nourishment.
In sucking out its nourishment the root form infects its lacerations of the root with a poisonous secretion which prevents the vine from healing itself.
The root form has the ability to reproduce itself by parthenogenesis several times throughout the year for a few years without passing into another form.
Eggs laid by the root form which hatch in the late autumn, turn into larvae which hibernate in the roots, not emerging until the spring temperatures rise above 10°C the following year, when they attain maturity.
Many of these mature offspring of the root form work their way to the surface and those which are winged fly off in search of new vines.
These are the winged forms which lay the eggs which hatch into the sexual form, and the cycle is complete.
The more complex the life-cycle, the easier it should be to interrupt it and thus eradicate the parasite, but each link in the phylloxera chain appears to be capable of regenerating a modified cycle.
In the mid-west United States, for example, where phylloxera originated, none of the above-ground forms occur, yet the cycle still thrives.
There are only three ways of controlling phylloxera: by grafting on to phylloxera-resistant rootstocks, the accepted method; by planting into ‘phylloxera-proof’ soil of at least 85% sand content; or by submersion (flooding the vines) for a period of sixty days in slightly permeable soils and ninety days in very permeable soils, sufficient to kill phylloxera but hardly practical for a working vineyard, especially when there is every likelihood that the parasite will return.
The sight of silken threads woven over the vine's flowers or fruit will indicate the presence of certain types of grape moths, possibly cochylis or eudemis .
These moths lay their eggs, usually on the buds, in spring and summer.
Depending when the eggs hatch, the larvae will feed on the tender vine shoots, the flowers or the fruit.
Other parasitic insects which may attack the vine are pyralis (the larvae of the meal-moth which feeds on young shoots and leaves);altise (a beetle which feeds on the leaves);phyptus vitis (a microscopic mite which attacks leaves, flowers and grapes, rendering a condition known as erinosis , first recognised by red leaf blisters which gradually turn yellow) and cochenilles (various bugs which feed on the sap, weakening the vine).
All the parasitic insects which may attack the vine in Champagne, with the exception of phylloxera, can be kept under control with numerous proprietary brands of insecticide, if treated early enough.
Cryptogamic
Cryptogamic or fungoid diseases are encouraged by a combination of humidity and heat and the vigneron has a choice of proprietary brands of spray which can prevent or cure these conditions.
Downy mildew, also known as ‘false mildew’,Plasmopara viticola or peronospora , is the most dangerous of all, mostly attacking the green parts of a vine, but also the flowers or clusters of grapes.
In the autumn this fungus develops its winter spores, which are dark brown in colour, round, and 25–30 microns in diameter.
Via infected leaves these winter spores enter the soil where they can remain alive for several years.
The control of downy mildew is preventative, not curative, therefore the vigneron must commence spraying as early as possible prior to the flowering if the first infection is to be prevented.
If the primary infection is not prevented, as many as three or four further outbreaks may occur throughout the growing season and the disease may assume epidemic proportions.
Powdery mildew, also known as ‘true mildew’,Uncinula necator or oidium is first recognised by a white powdery deposit on the shoots, upper surfaces of the leaves and on young berries (it seldom attacks ripe grapes).
Vines under stress from drought are vulnerable and, unlike most forms of cryptogamic disease, powdery mildew can be rife in dry conditions.
It is best controlled by dusting the green parts of the vine, especially when it is hot, with finely powdered sulphur.
In Champagne the Pinot Noir is the variety least affected by powdery mildew.
Grey rot, also known as pourriture grise, is a common danger in Champagne's humid climate;brown rot , or pourriture brune , also occurs but less frequently.
At the first sign of rot the vigneron removes some of the outer foliage, exposing the vine to the drying effect of direct sunlight and improved aeration, and sprays with copper sulphate.
Pests
Birds can be a considerable problem in Champagne as the grapes begin to ripen.
Great swarms of starlings and thrushes raid the vineyards by day, pecking at large numbers of grapes but eating few and causing more damage indirectly by rot than by anything else.
Anyone who has made the mistake of parking at harvest-time under the trees which line the Place Drouet d'Erlon in Reims, will realise that most of Champagne's bird life return each night to this one street to rest and make room for the following day's gorging of grapes.
Climatic
Frost is the biggest killer as far as the size of crops harvested in Champagne is concerned.
A spring frost at the time of flowering can cause imperfect fertilisation resulting in millerandage , the formation of tiny hard berries which will not swell or ripen.
An autumn frost kills off the leaves, preventing any chance of further ripening.
It may also swell the juice within the grapes to bursting point, ruining the fruit for winemaking unless harvested and transported to the press while still frozen, which would hardly be practicable for any significant area of vines affected by frost.
The traditional method of reducing frost damage is to use paraffin burners called chaufferettes .
These can be seen dotted about the vineyards, either lit manually by the vigneron when the temperature drops to freezing setting off noisy alarms in the middle of the night, or fed by an automatic system which fires the burners by thermostatic control.
More use today is being made of the aspersion method, a system of dissipating the freezing effect of frost by spraying the vines with water.
As a vine will generally withstand a temperature as low as -5°C water-spraying systems are set up to come into operation as soon as the temperature drops to 1°C.
The frost freezes the water, not the vine, and a protective cocoon is formed, within which even the tenderest shoots remain safe.
But the spraying must continue for as long as the temperature remains at freezing point or below, as the energy of the frost must be spent on forming more and more ice outwards.
If the spraying should stop, as can happen with blockages or burst pipes, the freezing effect travels inwards and the damage may be greater than if no precautions had been taken.
Whereas if the weather is bad (frosts) the vine might be affected by millerandage , if it is too good it can suffer from coulure .
The symptoms of millerandage and coulure are often confused with each other, but they are not related.
Good flowering is dependent on temperature, the ideal being between 20 and 25°C but if growing conditions are too favourable when the flowering takes place, essential nutrients rush up to the tips, not to the clusters, wood growth takes precedence and the barely formed seeds dry up and fall to the ground.
Hail storms frequently ravage localised areas of vines in Champagne, as do, occasionally, tornadoes.
Although it is not beyond the ingenuity of the vigneron to protect his vineyards from such isolated hazards, in fact little can be done which would be economically viable.
Work in the Vineyard
Once I was in a graveyard beside a vineyard when, on the other side of a high wall, I heard a succession of grunts interrupted by endless repetitions of ‘Bad horse, Poulette, ready for the sausage machine’.
On peering through a hole in the wall I saw that Poulette was a strapping Ardennaise, performing her duties admirably, but that her poor master was having to press so hard to keep the plough in the soil that the entire weight of his body was being taken by his arms and he was advancing across the vineyards behind Poulette with his feet off the ground.
Patrick Forbes,Champagne , I967
November
The viticultural new year starts in November when the longer shoots of the vine are cut away, conserving the plant's energy for the cold winter months ahead.
It also allows the vigneron easier access to the vineyard and to the vine, enabling him to carry out his next operation, the scattering of fertiliser pellets.
Without cutting back the vines, too many of these pellets would be wasted, wedged in the vines' dead or dying foliage.
By now the autumnal coloured leaves will begin to drop from the vine to reveal a skeleton of canes.
Inside the vine the sap begins to withdraw to the roots.
The effort of yielding a good crop of grapes expends a great amount of the vine's energy and its roots will be active over the winter months searching out fresh supplies for the next year's growth.
By scattering the fertiliser pellets over his vineyard the vigneron is helping to restore the vine's balance of resources.
The foundation of each pellet is the so-called ‘golden tripod’, which includes the three basic requirements of all plant life: potassium, phosphorus and nitrogen.
Potassium, usually in the form of sulphate of potash, improves the vine's metabolism, assisting the movement of food within the plant and enriching the sap.
This should lead to a better quality of grape in the following season.
Phosphorus, usually in the form of superphosphate of lime, directly encourages root development and, because it is essential for respiration and photosynthesis, indirectly promotes an earlier véraison or ripening of the grapes.
Nitrogen, usually in the form of nitrates, encourages leaf growth and will be stored by the plant until the following spring.
A late-autumn, early-winter fertiliser pellet will have a higher phosphorus content, those applied in the spring will contain more nitrogen, while those in the summer, more  potassium.
In addition to the basic ‘golden tripod’, the pellets also contain certain essential trace elements.
Most trace elements are found in the numerous soils exploited for commercial cultivation, but the amounts which are  available to the plant vary for several reasons.
The minerals may simply be absent or present in negligible amounts, either naturally, through exhaustion by previous crops, or  leached out by climatic conditions.
The pH level of a soil — the extremes of acidity or alkalinity — can actually prevent access to minerals which may be there in significant quantities: a high lime content, for example, denies or restricts a plant's access to iron and manganese.
The proportion of these trace elements in the fertiliser pellets will vary significantly from one wine region to another, but they normally include one or more of the following: iron, indispensable for photosynthesis (plants lacking sufficient iron salts suffer from chlorosis); magnesium, the only mineral constituent of the chlorophyll molecule (lack of magnesium also causes chlorosis); and copper, zinc and boron, which are important for the overall metabolism of the vine.
Immediately after fertilising operations have ceased, banking-up is performed by ploughing an angled blade between each row of vines.
This buries the pellets near to the roots and forms a protective mound of earth over the grafting wound which, although fully taken, will always be sensitive.
It also allows frost to permeate the soil, aiding the infiltration of rain and essential for breaking up the clods into manageable sizes.
December to February
Between the months of December and January a solitary woman can often be seen progressing through the vineyards removing the twists of wire which had been used the previous spring to attach the vines to the guide wires.
At the same time she will cut away any straggly shoots or twigs, generally tidying up the vines as she goes along.
By this stage the sap in the vine will have withdrawn into the roots.
Above the ground the vine looks dormant, but below the roots are going through their most active period of the year.
They dig deep in search of mineral deposits to replenish those expended in the last year of growth.
The deeper they go, the more secure the vine will be in times of flood and the more able it will be to obtain moisture in times of drought.
At this time of the year the vigneron bolsters the fertility of the topsoil by the application of manure, utilising the trench created by the banking-up operation.
The use of either cendres-noires or organic manure is generally preferred today, but in the past the most popular fertiliser has been the boues de ville , quite literally, town refuse.
Cendres-noires , the ‘black gold’ of the Montagne de Reims, is a Sparnacian deposit comprised almost entirely of rich black lignite, a friable carbonaceous substance which is half-way between peat and coal.
The Montagne is dotted with small lignite mines, many deserted, which have traditionally supplied the Champagne grower.
It is especially prized because carbon, its major component, is by far the most important of all plant nutrients.
These deposits also contain various other mineral trace elements.
Organic manure might be animal or vegetable derived although both are difficult to obtain in quantity in a modern society.
The most common organic manure these days is the spent marc , the residue of skins, pips and stalks amassed after the pressing process, which can be seen in purple-black piles by the roadside from November onwards.
Boues de ville was described by Patrick Forbes in I967 as:
neither more nor less than the contents of Parisian dustbins.
Each Autumn consignments arrive in the winefield by rail in sealed tanks, transport during the summer being forbidden on account of the stink.
In theory, each consignment has been finely ground to remove danger from broken glass…
(Champagne , p. 255)
By the end of the 1970s, however, Champagne had no need to transport the boues de ville from Paris since the city of Reims was able to provide its own.
Whether Parisian or Reims produced the great mounds of town refuse which one can see piled up on the roadside are a dusty grey colour interspersed with flecks of pale blue; the stench they give out, far outweighing that of the spent piles of marc , cannot be missed.
There is a marked difference in colour between the dusty grey-brown of these mounds and the bright, light blue colour they spread over the vineyards.
This is because the ‘goodness’ of the boues rots away into the soil leaving the bulk of non-bio-degradable material remaining which is largely blue plastic.
According to Alain Collery of Champagne Collery in Aÿ, there has been concern about the cadmium content in the soil from batteries which are also minced up along with other refuse in the boues de ville .
In fact the Champenois are now moving away from the use of boues in favour of cendres-noires , but apparently this is not due to concern over the cadmium problem, it is because the boues is now more expensive than mining lignite deposits, due to the high price being paid by refuse-fuelled energy plants.
March to April
As the sap begins to climb into the vine, dormant buds start shooting: this is the signal to prune.
But this poses a dilemma for the vigneron because the vine, once pruned, is at its most vulnerable to frost, while to wait for the danger of frost to subside would be to waste the vine's limited and precious energy: the decision of when to prune can prove an expensive one.
The first indication of how large or small the yield might be is when the first leaves and tendrils begin to appear, followed by embryo bunches of grapes.
But it should be remembered that this is merely an early indication growth.
Pruning begins in earnest in mid-March, cutting back to the number of shoots and fruiting buds stipulated by the various systems of vine cultivation.
General vineyard maintenance of wires, stakes and machinery also takes place and, at the same time, the vines are secured to their training frames.
In April the protective mound of soil safeguarding the grafting wound is ploughed back, burying the manure applied in the winter and levelling off the ground between the rows of vines.
May to July
Spraying commences in May and continues right up until the harvest, although the number of times the vines are sprayed and the types of spray used will depend on the local conditions of pests and disease.
The spraying operations are carried out by hand, tractor and helicopter.
Spraying the vines by tractor
Beginning in June, the old sterile growth is picked off and hoeing starts in earnest.
It is customary for workers to go collectively through the vines eradicating excess foliage, which improves the circulation of air around the vine and also reduces the risk of fungi developing.
Care has to be taken not to remove too many leaves as it is the effect of sunlight upon the leaves immediately above the fruit which will ripen the grapes and not the sun directly on the fruit itself.
The grapes begin to form, after natural pollination, during the months of June and July.
Ripening, or the véraison , commences in August and continues throughout September.
August to October
Spraying, hoeing and thinning continue throughout the ripening months between August and October.
Harvest usually takes place in mid-October, although in extreme cases it has commenced as early as August and as late as November.
After the vintage, when the leaves begin to turn, the operation to cut away any long shoots begins again and the cycle is complete.
The Presshouse
…usually powerful presses of modern invention, worked by a large flywheel requiring four sturdy men to turn it, are employed.
Henry Vizetelly, A History of Champagne , 1882.
The pressing operation
MOST LARGE PRODUCERS have their own presshouses conveniently situated in the vineyards, otherwise growers take their grapes to co-operative presshouses or perhaps make private arrangements with other producers.
The presshouse is only utilised one month in twelve, but when it is in operation, it is manned twenty-four hours a day.
The staff, dressed in the French labourer's ubiquitous blue overalls, work in non-stop shifts to process the harvest as it comes in.
During the pressing operation, the first juice to emerge from a grape is called the cuvée and it comes from the central zone of pulp.
This part of the grape's flesh produces the richest juice in terms of sugar, acids and trace elements, and goes to make the highest quality Champagnes.
After the central portion from the grape is exhausted, the flesh nearest to the pips and to the skin is pressed, that is, the pulp which is both inside and outside the richer central zone.
These outer and inner zones yield the taille , a juice which becomes increasingly weaker in acidity and sugar, although some minerals may be in greater abundance.
As more and more juice flows through the pith of skins, pips and stalks it gradually becomes discoloured; even white grapes at this stage yield a relatively dark and murky juice.
According to the Code du Vin (a publication codifying the regulations of the INAO), one marc of 4,000 kilograms will yield 2,266 litres of juice, or must, as it is sometimes called.
Still adhering to the old fashioned measurement by piece (a cask which in Champagne contains 205 litres), the 2,666 litres of must, as it comes through the pressing operation, is separated into three portions in order of quality: the cuvée , which amounts to the first ten pieces (2,050 litres); the premiere taille , which includes the next two pieces (410 litres); and the deuxième taille , or the last piece (205 litres).
The traditional thirteen   pièces in fact add up to one litre short of the mathematically equated 2,666 litres but this appears to have been overlooked.
If pressing continues beyond the 2,666 litres limit the final dregs of the juice obtained, known as the rebêche , may not be used for the production of Champagne, Coteaux Champenois (the still wines of Champagne) or, indeed, any other officially classified wine.
Tannin increases as the pressing continues, particularly during the rebêche stage when the constituents of the stalks and pips progressively dominate the flow of juice.
Unlike still red wines, sparkling Champagne does not benefit from a detectable tannin content, although a little tannin will be added prior to the last racking to activate the fining agent.
It is therefore interesting to compare the increase of undesirable tannin with the decrease in desirable active acidity:
It is a long-established fallacy that both the cuvée and the taille are officially divided into three: the first, second and third cuvées and the first, second and third tailles .
When Patrick Forbes proffered such divisions in his excellent work Champagne it had no bearing on the regulations.
He was merely quoting his old textbook from the Ecole de Viticulture et d'Oenologie at Avize which examines the practices of Champagne in the 1940s; no doubt, the breakdown of cuvée and taille merely indicated the number of press operations it took, in less sophisticated times, to squeeze out these two parts of extraction.
Subsequent writers, however, have copied Patrick Forbes's work without checking for themselves, and the misleading myth has evolved in which the first thousand litres of the cuvée is believed to be officially designated the premiere cuvée .
From this false premiss, it is easy to see how the public might wrongly think that Moët & Chandon's Premiere Cuvée Champagne is made entirely from the first thousand litres of the cuvée .
Patrick Forbes is the first to point out that this is not so and that the title is just a brand name, but the confusion still persists.
In the years when no rain occurs between the last spraying of the vine and the harvest, the first sixty-five litres of the cuvée will often be tapped off and added to the taille .
The reasoning behind this is that the first 65 litres will contain any contaminates which might be present on the grape skins, but readers should not be alarmed because the wines must pass an analytical examination before being sold.
In typical Gallic fashion, the Champenois are just being extra careful.
Presses
Two types of presses are used, the horizontal press and the traditional Champagne press.
At present, horizontal presses of between 2,000 and 8,000 kilograms are allowed, but trials with larger machines have been in progress for several years.
Moët & Chandon, for example, is operating a 12,000-kilogram press on an experimental basis in conjunction with the CIVC.
There are two principal kinds of horizontal press: the hydraulic press (the simplest of all), usually a Vaselin model, which has two flat metal plates at either end that push together, squashing the grapes in between and issuing the juice from a duct in the inner cylindrical sleeve; and the pneumatic press, of which the Willmes is the most common.
The lateral membrane and the central membrane are two variations of the pneumatic press, the principle being the same for both: the membrane is a long and large taste-free rubber balloon which inflates when the press is full, gently crushing the grapes against the inside of the horizontal cylinder which has channels and ducts.
The lateral membrane takes up the entire length of one side of the chamber, pushing the grapes against the other side.
The central membrane is threaded lengthways through the centre of the cylinder and also blows up like a balloon when the chamber is filled with grapes, only the pressure outwards is even, gently crushing the fruit in all directions.
The CIVC particularly recommends pneumatic presses for their speed and careful method of extraction.
The traditional, vertical Champagne press, based on the concepts employed by Dom Pérignon, is still considered by many to be the best means of pressing grapes for the sparkling wine of Champagne.
Known as the pressoir coquart , it is by far the most common machine in Champagne presshouses; in other areas the hydraulic and pneumatic horizontal presses are more commonly used.
However, since power sources have changed significantly since Dom Pérignon's day, there are no longer many of the giant, hand-operated, wheel-type presses.
Each press, which may be round or square, takes a marc of 4,000 kilograms.
The bottom half, known as the maie , is made from oak and has a series of ducts around the inside rim at the base, through which the juice runs out.
Its lid, or mouton , is also made of oak and consists of two semi-circular or rectangular flaps which fold down to make a horizontal plate that presses the grapes inside the maie .
Obtaining the cuvée
The cuvée is the highest quality juice and many Champagnes are made entirely from this first pressing.
In between each pressing required to extract the cuvée (or the first 2,050 litres) an operation called retroussage , meaning ‘to turn up’ or ‘to tuck up’, is carried out.
During retroussage the mouton is raised, exposing the squashed mass of grapes which are then scooped into a pile in the centre of the maie using blunt wooden shovels called pelles .
Obtaining the taille
The term taille means ‘cut’ and that is precisely what is done to the marc in the maie after the cuvée has been extracted.
At this stage the marc is like a solid cake which needs an instrument called a bêche plate to sever the mass into chunks which can then be forked into the centre of the maie .
This enables greater pressure to be applied to the already compressed cake of grapes, skins, pips etc.
The juice from this residue, called the taille , is the poorest in terms of quality which may be used for Champagne.
Even so, the taille can sometimes be surprisingly good, especially in favourable years, and would in those Champagnes which utilise it, represent but a small proportion of the overall blend of a wine.
Because the taille does not reflect the same quality appeal as the cuvée , it is common practice for many houses to declare they never use vins de taille in their Champagnes, preferring to sell on any they may have.
Some might admit that they use the best vins de taille in their demi-sec Champagnes where the extra sugar content is likely to mask any defects which may appear, but every house naturally declares that all inferior vins de taille are sold.
This leads to the inevitable question ‘Where does it all go to?’ and the simple answer is that most of it goes to several firms specialising in BOB (Buyer's Own Brand: ie, supermarket brands etc.)
Champagnes.
These BOB specialists are, however, quite often the principal firms involved in an internal trade route rarely discussed in polite company in Champagne.
Some of the Champagne houses which make a point of declaring they never use vins de taille in their own products have purchased ready-made Champagnes from the very houses to which they sold their vins de taille in the first place.
Much of this secretive internal trading is conducted at sur lattes stage, when the wines have undergone secondary fermentation, thus Champagnes which have been blended and rendered sparkling by one firm end up being sold under the label of another.
These Champagnes probably contain a significant proportion of vins de taille despite declarations to the opposite by the purchasing houses which end up selling them.
But what is more dishonest is the simple fact that the wines are not what they purport to be.
Champagne houses owe their success to brand image, they play on their reputation and they earn this from the quality, consistency and style of the Champagne they produce.
It might make sense to the financial director faced with a demand which far outweighs supply; after all, this recycling of other houses' wines is perfectly legal, but it is at the same time deliberately hoodwinking the public.
There is tremendous customer loyalty involved in the fortunes of Champagne, but this loyalty can only survive if it has a two-way traffic.
This loophole should be closed.
Obtaining the rebêche
The rebêche is the unclassified juice pressed after the first and second taille have been extracted.
It is so-called because the bêche plate must be reused to cut up the even denser marc .
The chunks of marc are often transferred at this stage to a séchoir- a smaller, deeper, vertical press — or to a horizontal press to be squeezed out.
Producing the juice to make vin de rebêche is optional if pressing grapes for Champagne, but for some reason not even the CIVC could answer, obligatory by law if pressing grapes for Coteaux Champenois.
It is neither a desirable nor a necessary product.
Traditionally it was used for ptisannes , a very bitter, still wine recommended by physicians as a laxative and diuretic.
Today the rebêche is only used for distillation (into either prestation vinique — alcohol for oath-taking, or eaux-de-vie — grape brandies) and table wine (if the natural alcoholic content is 6% or more, unlikely for vin de rebêche ) or ‘wine not fit for human consumption’(but presumably fit for distillation into industrial spirits) if less than 6% natural alcoholic content.
Since the Common Market annually produces such vast quantities of wine fit for nothing better than compulsory distillation, it is puzzling why the authorities still require producers of Coteaux Champenois to churn out as much as one or two pieces of this liquid for every marc pressed.
Débourbage
Débourbage , or cleansing, of the must can take place at either the presshouse or the winery and is, in its simplest form, merely a resting of the must to enable the particles of skin and other impurities to settle on the bottom of the vat.
If a Champagne house buys its requirements in the form of must (as opposed to grapes),débourbage might well take place at both the presshouse and the winery.
Lowering the must in temperature to 5°C encourages débourbage and the result is superior and quicker.
In nearly all cases the must will be dosed with sulphur dioxide, which will encourage this settling process as well as act as an aseptic agent and as an antioxidant.
If bentonite, a fining agent, is added at this stage, it improves protein stability and reduces the risk of spoilage from the sedimented waste.