

The Masai and their Masters
‘Do you love me, Master?
No?’
‘Dearly, my delicate Ariel.’
This book would not be complete without a glance at a place where, more than any other, the ideals of colonial administration and administrative reality appeared to exist in harmony together — those rolling grasslands of the Great Rift Valley, on either side of the border between Kenya and Tanganyika, where lived the people who more than any other fascinated the Europeans who came to East Africa: the Masai.
If there was a paradise in the Colonial Service, it was here, it was here, it was here.
After 1914 no further large-scale attempts were made in Kenya to take land away from the Masai, and their administrators settled down relatively undisturbed to pursue the arts of government.
No one expected the pastoral Masai to go out to work en masse as agricultural labourers for the Europeans, and so their officers were spared the necessity of acting as labour recruiters — in itself enough to lighten the heart of any administrative officer in Kenya.
In Tanganyika there were few settlers in the country, no evident injuries had been done, and the Masai, with their conspicuous but unbelligerent attachment to their traditional way of life, were perceived from the start simply as a rather interesting problem in administration.
The League of Nations mandate under which Britain held Tanganyika after 1920 decreed that native interests should come first.
The only question with the Masai seemed to be how best to translate benevolent intentions into administrative actuality.
There was a widespread belief in colonial East Africa that men posted to Masailand succumbed to a disease called ‘Masai-itis’, an emotional obsession with the Masai which destroyed their desire to  rule.
Certainly there was the occasional spectacular apostasy from civilized values, as in the case of Jack Driberg, a Kenya Masai official who went native and then proceeded to a distinguished career as a lecturer in anthropology at Cambridge; but on the whole the records, in so far as they can be relied on in such matters do not support this view.
It was not unknown for men to become peculiar, or even on occasion completely to lose their reason, in the vast spaces of Masailand, but there is no evidence that this was more likely to happen there than in other lonely postings.
Nor does it seem to be the case that the notorious reluctance of the Masai to accommodate themselves to the modern world was to any significant extent the result of administrative protection from it.
Social scientists who have considered the phenomenon have all agreed that there are more important reasons for it than the attitudes of administrators.
The Kenya administration in particular included a number of vigorous reformers, most prominent among them R.W. Hemsted and C.E.V. Buxton — both completely wrapped up in the Masai and both determined to bring them, under British supervision, into the twentieth century.
Such reformers usually saw themselves as making it possible for the Masai to survive as a race: getting obsessed with the Masai was not inherently a passive occupation.
What was it exactly that made Masailand such a pleasant place for members of the British Colonial Service to be?
First, and most simply, though it was not at all uncommon for administrators to feel exasperated by Masai obduracy, or disapproving of certain aspects of the Masai way of life (such as collective fornication throughout the years of early manhood), it was rare indeed for one in close contact with them to conceive a personal dislike for them.
‘All Europeans who deal with the Masai inevitably, after a short period, appreciate that the Masai have certain characteristics which we, the British, deeply applaud’, wrote the District Commissioner in charge of Narok in 1955.
He did not enumerate them, but it is not hard to reconstruct them from the records of over half a century of Masai administration.
Most administrators agreed with D. Storrs-Fox that the Masai were ‘more intelligent than, and of a type superior to, the other native tribes around them’.
They were also admired for their military prowess, it being widely assumed that before the arrival of the British the Masai had been paramount among the tribes of East Africa; they were ‘aristocrats and formerly conquered east central Africa’.
‘The British have always been prepared to give a measure of recognition to the imperial qualities of other races, especially when these races have been absorbed into their own dominions; for obvious reasons of self-esteem, conquerors especially enjoy the  subjection of those who were formerly paramount.
The courage of the Masai was also extolled, indeed was legendary among the British.
A Masai who acquitted himself well in hand-to-hand fighting in Burma during the Second World War was allowed to keep the samurai sword he captured: ‘Please do not take this sword away from this soldier’, the man's commanding officer wrote on the wound tag around his neck, ‘He is a Masai.’
The Masai furthermore had the looks which went with reckless courage and a consciousness of superior worth.
Their athletic form and delicate features, reminiscent of classical heroes, were much admired.
The British, of course, have not been alone in this; there is something in human nature which responds worshipfully to the sheer splendour of the Masai physical presence.
The stoicism with which the Masai endured the harsh circumstances of their lives made a deep impression on the British, and the opportunity to share that hard life and thus to display to some extent their own possession of this admirable quality was part of Masailand's attraction for many Englishmen.
An officer who was not himself thus inclined complained that his predecessor (and friend) had ‘considered that the man in charge of the northern area of Masailand should place himself in an atmosphere of utter discomfort; in short should become a wild man of the west and suffer privations of all kinds.
If he did not follow this code then he was not a Bwana Shauri of the Masai tribe.’
Under these circumstances it was not surprising that Masailand developed a tradition of preternaturally forceful District Officers — men as tough and independent as the Masai themselves.
In Masailand, cut off from all civilized amenities, and, if he conscientiously followed the herds instead of trying to rule the country from his office, beyond the reach even of the telegraph, a DO could enjoy as much autonomy as he liked.
Perhaps the most admirable characteristics of the Masai in the eyes of the men whose job it was to administer them were their honesty, directness, and highly developed sense of justice.
They had an ‘Eric, or Little by Little schoolboy sense of honour’ and were ‘completely straight’.
Administrative reports abound with comments on the infrequency of corruption in Masai Native Councils and the amazing way in which Masai cattle thieves, once apprehended, would confess their guilt of their own free will and proudly take their medicine.
It is recorded that a Masai once killed a cattle robber and then came into the district office to report the murder.
Last, but definitely not least, the Masai were much esteemed by the British for their beautiful manners, especially the dignified  courtesy which marked their behaviour towards Europeans.
Joseph Thomson, the first European to explore Masailand, noted that ‘they indulged in none of the obtrusive, vulgar inquisitiveness or aggressive impertinence which makes the traveller's life a burden to him among other native tribes’.
He and his party were ‘not a bit inconvenienced by crowding or annoyed by rude remarks’.
Fifty years later an administrative officer found the Masai to be perfect hosts: ‘they do respect your privacy; men of other tribes rather fuss round you, always sure there is something they have omitted to do as hosts, thus making a nuisance of themselves — but the Masai leave you alone’.
English people, relying as they do on the creation of an invisible but supposedly recognizable barrier of reserve to ensure personal privacy in public places, have always been particularly appreciative of this form of tact.
The Masai's famous ‘aloofness’ contributed substantially to Englishmen's enjoyment of their company.
But the social tact of the Masai was most impressively demonstrated by the fact that they rarely asked for anything.
They were never importunate, never servile; they never tried to lure Europeans into the kind of patron-client relationship which is often assumed to be vital to the functioning of the colonial psyche but which many Englishmen in fact found more annoying than gratifying.
‘People in England say we slave-drive the Africans’, a white Kenyan once told the journalist Richard West, ‘but, my God, it's the other way round.
You come back dog-tired in the evening, and they start coming up to you: somebody's stolen my wife, somebody's raped my daughter, my eyes hurt, I want a new pair of trousers…’
There was no danger of this with the Masai, who preferred to solve their problems in their own way, without the assistance of Europeans.
Throughout the colonial period they made little use of the judicial system set up by the British and made few requests of their administrators.
‘They are a people who ask for little but who are enormously and genuinely grateful for any help’, wrote one official who  witnessed a terrible drought in Masailand in the early 1960s: ‘They live a hard life uncomplainingly.’
The personal qualities of the Masai made them not only attractive to the British but ‘attractive…to administer’.
Their officers might experience at times a tension between enjoyment of these qualities and impatience at their collective uncooperativeness, but few of them seem to have become so downhearted that they ceased to enjoy their work.
The Masai, so strikingly undegraded by their encounter with imperial authority, possessed the great virtue of allowing Englishmen to exercise that authority without regret.
After thirty  years of British rule, observed the distinguished scholar-administrator Henry Fosbrooke, they displayed none of the distressing symptoms of that ‘soul erosion’, defined by him as a ‘deterioration in obedience to existing moral standards, a falling off in observance of organized religion, a lack of purpose in life’, which seemed so often to be the result of British efforts to bring civilization to the African.
When a Masai owned up to cattle raiding and invited punishment he did so in a spirit, not of insolent defiance, but of self-respect.
One could assume no harm was done.
Because their demands were nil, the Masai could be approached in a way which came close to the Colonial Service's proclaimed ideal of disinterested benevolence.
It seemed easier to do right by a people who wanted nothing than by peoples who clamoured for what you were not at all sure you wanted to give them.
But before good government could actually begin, government in the most basic sense had to be recognizably established.
The Masai were elusive, even when constantly told they had nothing to fear, and consequently the British administration found itself engaged for fifty years in a ceaseless struggle to impose on them some measure of control.
Almost everything done by the administration in Masailand had as one of its objects greater control over the Masai.
Even when that object was not consciously in view most proposals for Masai development tended in practice towards that end, their essential ingredient being some measure designed to move the Masai away from the semi-nomadism they had immemorially practised towards a way of living which would make it easier for administrators to keep a benevolent eye on them.
At the top of the list of reasons for developing communal ranches in Tanganyika Masailand given in the 1955 Annual Report was ‘Closer control of the Masai’.
And the Kenya Masai Annual Report for 1927 contains a summary of policy which nicely illustrates the extent to which economic development and administrative control were associated in the official mind.
Policy, the report said, was to include ‘the improvement of the water supplies of the province in order to conserve the pasture, make more grazing available in dry seasons and thus make possible for the tribe a more settled and less migratory life’.
The association of water conservation measures with improved administrative control was apparent from the earliest days of Masai administration, and though it became fashionable in later years to talk about ‘anchoring’ the Masai for development purposes, administrative convenience was always a powerful interest: ‘the Masai have, in my view, two outstanding needs’, wrote the Provincial Commissioner of the Northern Province of Tanganyika in 1950 —‘water and discipline’.
A less drastic measure often proposed for improving administrative surveillance of the Masai was the institution of regular cattle auctions.
As Henry Fosbrooke of the Tanganyika administration pointed out, these would serve the dual purpose of providing an outlet for excess Masai stock and an opportunity for the transaction of administrative business; courts, for instance, could be held at cattle auctions.
Kenya administrators also discovered the ‘importance and usefulness of [cattle]sales as a meeting place for the transaction of official business’, but except in wartime, when the army needed meat, veterinary quarantines imposed in response to pressure from representatives of the European livestock industry meant that such sales were not a prominent feature of life in Kenya Masai District.
The first British administrator of Tanganyika Masailand was Colonel E.D. Browne, who had been Assistant District Commissioner at Laikipia at the time of the second Masai move in 1911–13, and who came down to Tanganyika convinced that the Kenya Masai had had a rotten deal and determined to see that the Tanganyika Masai got a better one.
It was said of him that he would have given the Masai Africa had he been able.
Nevertheless, it was his firm conviction that the Masai needed ‘all the administrative control we can give them’, and the many waterworks he constructed were designed in part to curtail their wanderings.
His goal was to make the reserve habitable throughout the year and thus deprive the Masai of any excuse for straying beyond his jurisdiction.
During his long administration, little else was attempted.
He had a poor opinion of the utility of book-learning to the Masai, and it was no doubt in part due to his influence that nothing was done in Tanganyika to bring education to them till the 1930s, whereas the first government school was opened in Kenya Masailand in 1921.
There was always an air of mystery about Browne, and he departed in 1926 amid hints of unsavouriness.
He held court during his years of office in Arusha, known to the Europeans as ‘Masai’ Browne and to the Africans, on account of his toping habits, as ‘Bilauri’(Swahili for glass) Browne.
His successor, H.C.
(also ‘Masai’) Murrells complained that Browne depended on force of personality alone to administer the Masai rather than, as was proper, ‘custom, procedure and authority…supported by ‘personality’.
He was right; Browne was a proto-DO of purest frontier type to whom rules and procedures and administrative directives were so much dustbin fodder.
He got away with being what many others could only secretly aspire to be.
Browne administered the Tanganyika Masai through Swahili-speaking Masai agents whom he brought down from Kenya and  deployed in ineffable ways.
He responded unenthusiastically to directives issuing from Sir Donald Cameron after 1924 that some system should be found for governing the Masai through their legitimate traditional authorities.
But he did rather cynically produce a proposal that the laibon (or chief religious authority) of the Tanganyika Masai, and his ‘chosen men’, the laigwenak, should be constituted a Masai Native Authority.
Browne knew the Masai well and understood how alien such a proposal was to their consensual system of politics, but nevertheless this was the beginning of a long and unavailing effort by the British to set up the laibon as chief of the Tanganyika Masai, until at last in 1933 the current occupant asked to be relieved of his office.
When H.C.
Murrells came to power after the departure of Browne in 1927 he attempted to devise a system of administration more in keeping with the realities of Masai political life.
Like Browne, he knew that the real locus of power in the tribe was the informal councils of elders, and he proposed that government sanction be given to their authority.
But in his innocence — and Murrells was, administratively speaking, an innocent — he had forgotten that the first prerequisite of British control was to identify the men who would function as British agents, so that they could, in the event of unsatisfactory performance, be replaced.
The Provincial Commissioner, Philip Mitchell, then near the beginning of the career which was to culminate in the governorships of Uganda and Kenya, complimented Murrells on his anthropological acumen — and advised him that the local councils of elders should ‘consist where possible of one man, with three or more advisers, rather than a Committee because of the notorious weakness of Committees as executive instruments’.
Mitchell then forwarded to Cameron in Dar es Salaam a quite unrecognizable version of the Murrells scheme which was nothing more than a vastly elaborated edition of the existing system of administration through the laibon and laigwenak.
Cameron, impressed but evidently rather baffled, minuted that he approved of the proposals and found them ‘entirely in accord with what we wanted and what I thought was being practised’.
Reorganization followed reorganization in Masailand with indifferent results.
‘We all ‘reorganize’ the Masai when we first meet them’, observed Mitchell in 1933, ‘but they continue to function as they please.’
He knew what he was talking about: he too had put in a stint as a junior officer in the reserve in the early 1920s.
Masai on the government payroll contentedly drew their salaries and accepted whatever titles were bestowed upon them, but either did nothing or interpreted their duty to be that of spokesmen for their  compatriots labouring under some inconvenience inflicted on them by the government.
Though incapable of grasping the subtleties of indirect administration, Murrells was not wanting in the ambition to control.
There survives a report by him of a meeting of the Masai Tribal Council — an invention of the British — at which he addressed those present in a most autocratic manner, to the point of publicly reprimanding the laibon for neglecting his duties.
The Masai were given ‘a full and complete lecture’ on the subject of forest fires, another on their ‘apathetic attitude’towards water conservation, and yet another on overstocking.
Missionaries were brought in to address the meeting on the advantages of a mission education.
Murrells concluded by announcing the appointment of three new headmen chosen by himself and asking if there were any complaints.
On this occasion there were none.
Murrells' great dream, to which he dedicated himself entirely, was to turn the Masai into a productive peasantry.
To this end, he spent much of his time personally constructing dams and pipelines.
His idea was that, as the Masai acquired more and more permanent waters, they would at first acquire more and more cattle; indeed, the prospect of doing so would be the incentive required to get them to pay for the water in the first place.
But once a group of Masai had a permanent water supply, paid for by themselves, they would develop a sense of ownership and settle down.
Then, being prevented from moving into other grazing areas by groups which had developed similar ideas of ownership, and realizing that there were limits to the carrying capacity of the land, they would sell off surplus cattle until they arrived at a perfect balance between the land and the stock residing upon it.
And then — then they would take up the hoe and become farmers.
Thus water conservation was the solution to ‘the Masai problem’, which was nomadism.
Like Browne before him, Murrells conducted his business mainly through Masai agents; he liked to refer cryptically in his reports to mysterious private sources of information.
His superiors had complete confidence in his ability to control single-handedly 22,000 square miles of territory with virtually no roads and no telephones.
When the laibon Parit died in mysterious circumstances in 1928, the Provincial Commissioner cabled Dar es Salaam that disturbances could be expected ‘but Murrells will keep situation under control’.
Margery Perham wrote of Murrells and the Masai in 1930 that he was ‘reputed to be the only man they trust’.
Murrells spent ten years in the reserve, kept there for the last few years against his will because Mitchell considered him indispensable.
In 1933 he suffered a complete ‘moral and mental  collapse’ and departed the Colonial Service.
No one was ever left in Masailand for so long again.
The enthusiasm felt by British officials for Masai development, of course, far transcended the mere desire for control, urgent as this was.
Control was merely the essential prerequisite to constructive administration.
But few of their efforts in the field of development were blessed with success, and this contributed to the erroneous impression that nothing was attempted.
One or two of Murrells' water conservation projects were spectacularly successful, but most were failures and in the end proved an embarrassment to the administration-particularly as the method of financing he selected was an unlucky one.
In the name of self-help, the Masai were asked to pay for the waterworks by selling cattle.
The cost was calculated in terms of the current price of slaughter stock, and so many head were then requested.
Unfortunately, the price of cattle fell from £5 a head to £1 a head shortly after this arrangement was made, and the Masai found  themselves being asked to pay more and more for what seemed to them to be less and less — for some of the waterworks had already begun to fail.
Debt-collection became one of the administration's chief activities, until the balance was taken over by the Native Treasury in 1935, and finally discharged in 1944.
Most of the development schemes undertaken by the British in Masailand — and there were many — met a similar fate.
Time and again, efforts to demonstrate a superior way of doing things backfired because some crucial element in the situation had been overlooked.
Prestige was repeatedly laid on the line and lost.
In 1939 the Tanganyika Forestry Department conducted an ‘experiment in controlled burning against the wind’ in the presence of the laibon and a large number of Masai, the object being to create a fire-break at the edge of the Roinye forest: disaster was ‘only narrowly averted’when the fire got out of control.
There were no more experiments.
In 1956–7 a mass inoculation campaign in Loliondo division against bovine pleuro-pneumonia went seriously awry and thousands of cattle died.
The provision of permanent waters led everywhere to overgrazing and consequent soil erosion, and veterinary quarantine regulations which interfered with the free movement of cattle both within and into and out of the reserves almost certainly contributed to the spread of tsetse fly which occurred during the colonial period.
The biggest fiasco was the most ambitious scheme of all, the Masai Development Plan of the 1950s.
This ill-omened project appears to have been undertaken as a sort of consolation to the  Tanganyika Masai after they suffered a series of land losses, to European settlers and to other tribes, in the late 1940s, when the Tanganyika government came under pressure to contribute to world food production.
The idea was to clear large areas of tsetse-infested bush and then set up ranching schemes around permanent waters.
At first, everyone concerned exuded optimism.
But two years later the earth-moving equipment to build the dams had still to arrive, and the bush-clearing programme, optimistically assigned to the Masai moran (men of the warrior age-group), had made no progress at all.
A mechanical bush-clearing company was called in, but it soon became apparent that machines could not accomplish all that was required, and labourers from other tribes were set to work.
They barely made a dent in the vast area they were supposed to cover.
The rains failed for two years in succession and the fodder crops planted in the demonstration ranch never materialized.
Land was set aside for another ranch, and this was promptly invaded by vast herds of plains game when rain finally fell and grass grew.
By 1956 the Development Plan funds were almost exhausted — the government had contributed £200,000 — and the District Commissioner reported that the emphasis had now shifted to attempts ‘to achieve some measure of political, social and economic development among the Masai themselves’.
Almost equally ambitious development projects were going on in Kenya at about the same time.
All of them failed, from the disastrous Purko Sheep Ranch, where the sheep died because the ranch was at too high an altitude, to the four big grazing schemes which went under in the drought of the early 1960s, when people from outside the schemes, under pressure of need, came in to graze on the permanent waters and massive erosion occurred.
Was it surprising that the Masai preferred to stick to their own way of doing things?
They generally co-operated with the administration to the extent of providing money for the latest schemes; participation, of course, was another matter.
A principal object of policy in Kenya Masailand was to break the military organization of the Masai.
Many settlers found the presence of this armed and organized people on their doorstep unnerving — Delamere, who treated them with a lordly tolerance, conspicuously did not — and so, conscious of the injustice which had been done, did the administration.
The Masai moran customarily spent ten to fifteen years of warriorhood living communally, apart from their families and under the supervision of specially designated elders, in warrior villages, or manyattas, at the end of which time they married and settled down.
The obvious course for policy to pursue was to abolish  these manyattas, unleashing in the process the latent energy of the moran for constructive purposes.
Under the energetic Hemsted, orders were issued forbidding the building of manyattas and the carrying of spears, and the graduation ceremonies for the current age-set of warriors were hurried through.
The result was a warrior rising in 1922, when the members of the Laitetti manyatta refused to disperse.
After killing a number of traders and native policemen, and an elder who had counselled prudence, they took to the hills, where a detachment of the King's African Rifles surprised them and drove them out, with about twenty casualties.
‘Enforced labour’, wrote Hemsted, commenting upon the episode, ‘is the only antidote, and among such a race as the Masai is indispensable to progress.’
He did not doubt their ‘capacity for culture’; it was their ‘environment’ which was ‘fatal’.
Forced labour was indeed the form taken by the administration's next major effort to deal with what had become known as the moran problem.
The warriors of Narok District were put to work in 1935 building a road, the work to count in lieu of payment of taxes.
At first all seemed to go well, and photographs were taken for inclusion in the annual report of cheerful and industrious moran wielding their instruments of labour.
But they struck just outside Narok township and attacked the District Commissioner, Major Buxton.
He ordered his men to fire, and two moran were killed.
The officer in charge of the Masai Extra-Territorial District, as the reserve was now called, recommended further efforts to abolish the manyatta system, whose demise had been frequently, but prematurely, announced since 1922.
Moran policy began to change with the arrival of E.H.
Windley in Kajiado District in the late 1930s.
Fortified with a degree in anthropology from Cambridge, Windley perceived that the significance of the manyattas was not only military but educational.
In the manyattas the moran were instructed in the nature of tribal institutions and in appropriate behaviour by their guardian elders, the Ol Piron, and learned the debating skills fundamental to the Masai system of politics; they chose their leaders, or rather, leaders emerged in the democratic fellowship of manyatta life; and they learned personal discipline in observance of the prohibitions traditionally placed on moran.
The manyattas, Windley saw, formed ‘a useful training ground for the Moran to attain cohesion, corporate spirit and in competition with each other to ‘Rub corners off’ and maintain a degree of their virility'.
They served in fact ‘certain functions of a public school in this respect’.
The correct policy with respect to them was thus not to abolish them but to subject them to constructive supervision.
The same idea occurred to Henry Fosbrooke in Tanganyika at about the same time.
He recognized that the manyattas were ‘an indigenous school’, an integral part of the process whereby a Masai became distinctively a Masai, and recommended that their character-building qualities be respected and adapted.
But curiously enough, such articulate recognition of the educational significance of the manyattas was exceptional, though administrators often behaved and wrote in ways which hinted at an implicit acknowledgement of the similarity between what went on in a Masai manyatta and what went on in the English boarding schools they had themselves attended.
H.C.
Baxter, who was stationed in Tanganyika Masailand in the early 1930s, was fond of using public school metaphors to describe the activities of the moran.
References to cattle-raiding as the favourite sport of the moran, in a tone only slightly less indulgent than that which might be used for inter-house cricket matches, were very common.
And administrators who remembered the way their own adolescent energies and rivalries had been worked off in school sports tried unsuccessfully, but with remarkable persistence, to introduce football into the manyattas, believing that they were providing the moran with an attractive alternative to stock-raiding Major Clarence Buxton did not stop at football but — like an enterprising housemaster introducing an Outward Bound programme — organized lion hunts for his moran.
The Masai never accepted football as the moral equivalent of war.
Their administrators had too readily supposed that the pleasure of kicking a ball across a stretch of grass was an acceptable substitute for the real danger and excitement of a raid.
But the fact that they had supposed this at all suggests some appreciation of cattle-raiding's implicit purpose.
These men could at least enter imaginatively into the spirit of a male institution such as the manyatta: there was something familiar about it all, even if they were not quite sure what, and this familiarity contributed to the ease they felt in the company of the Masai.
Their preoccupation with the military significance of the manyattas kept them, however, from consciously appreciating the extent to which it was there that the Masai received the training responsible for those characteristics which ‘we, the British, deeply applaud.
Having grasped the educational import of the manyattas, Windley cast around for ways in which they might be adapted for administrative purposes.
He was of the opinion that the Masai possessed ‘a faculty for reasoned intelligence, a pride and a susceptibility to leadership and ideas which made them amenable to sympathetic handling’.
But in 1938 he could only suggest that the manyattas be brought as far as possible under administrative control  and the moran ‘encouraged in any activities to maintain their manliness such as sports, road work, or their lion-hunting with spears’.
It was only in 1946 that he came up with a practical scheme for using the manyattas for higher purposes.
He proposed a ‘Moran training camp’ which would ‘supplement the indigenous system with more direct educative purpose, introducing some of our ideas on personal training and discipline to ensure bringing the young men of the tribe to hand under our guidance in the early stages of their Moranhood’.
The camp programme was outlined by Windley in some detail.
The day would begin with gymnastic exercises before breakfast, the moran being organized in sections, each with a leader chosen by themselves.
After breakfast they would
work for two or three hours on the School of Animal Husbandry bush clearing or fencing.
In the afternoon they should have a lecture and alternative football with sports practice.
A cinema show or film strip could be shown once a week.
Wrestling matches should be held and possibly boxing tried.
At the end of each course sports with prizes should be held and a bullock given as a prize to the best drill squad and all round ‘Sirit’[company]whose instructor might also be rewarded.
Two ‘Il Piron’ elders should be chosen as full time retainers to assist in the supervision of the course and the handling of the Moran, giving lectures on Tribal custom.
Toxophily might be introduced and possibly elementary reading and writing later on.
Any resemblance to the programme later pursued in the Mau Mau rehabilitation camps was not coincidental.
Windley rose to be Chief Native Commissioner of Kenya in the mid-1950s and was one of the moving spirits of re-education.
Windley intended that the first camp should be started just before the next batch of moran formed their manyattas, so that those who passed through it would then be an influence for good on their fellows.
A European officer would be in charge, assisted by three African NCOs, one of whom, it was hoped, would be Shartuyan ole Rendeo, the man who had won the Japanese sword.
Windley was anxious to avoid any misunderstanding as to the purpose of the camp; the main things, he emphasized, were to be flexible and ‘to treat the Moran with the greatest good humour and avoid any suspicion of it being a labour camp.
The iron hand in the velvet glove is really the key to handling them.’
The Moran training camp never materialized in quite the form Windley envisaged, the Masai, as usual with administrative projects, declining to extend their co-operation beyond token financial  contributions.
A number of attempts were made to introduce such courses in the next few years, but as experiments in applied anthropology they were all failures.
There were, after all, rather obvious problems of legitimacy involved.
If the Masai had an educational system of their own which was functioning well according to their own criteria, there was no reason for them to view with favour the introduction into it, by people whose hegemony they accepted but did not welcome, of alien elements.
In 1948, after a spate of stock-raiding, an officer was appointed with special responsibility for the moran — a Mr Holford-Walker.
Policy was now to allow the moran to form manyattas ‘and then to exercise control over them, and to use up their surplus energy in making them work’, the theory being that if the moran were in manyattas, at least the administration knew where they were.
In spite of Holford-Walker's best efforts, the moran evaded his supervision.
They built manyattas, but were not to be found in them; they were Potemkin manyattas, the real ones flourishing in inaccessible places.
The attempt to bring the moran system under administrative control was deemed a failure, and policy in Kenya shifted once again in the direction of abolition.
When independence came in 1963, the moran were there to greet it with their manyattas intact.
Clearly, a sympathetic interest in the Masai was not at all incompatible with the itch to administer, improve, and even, selectively, to destroy.
How was it, then, that Masailand acquired its reputation for corrupting those sent to rule over it?
Though the archival evidence shows that if the Masai did not change it was not for want of trying on the part of the administration, it was convenient in some quarters to suppose that it was.
There were two groups in East Africa who had a direct interest in discrediting Masai administration and suggesting that officials were ‘soft’ on the Masai: these were, most importantly, the white settlers who wanted Masai land for farming, and enthusiasts for wildlife conservation who wanted the Masai driven out of areas where their interests were believed to conflict with those of game.
District Officers in Masailand regularly defended the Masai against attempts to alienate their land, and in the process acquired a reputation for tender-heartedness.
In the eyes of those who believed that the Masai were decorative but unproductive idlers sitting on land that could be put to better use, the unco-operative attitude of district officials was mere romantic obstructionism, proof positive that they had been bewitched by the Masai.
But there is evidence to suggest that this was not the case — that it was in fact the district  officials who were reasonable men, and not their critics among the settlers and the faunophiles.
In Kenya, though there was relatively little pressure for further alienation of Masai land after the second Masai move, what pressure there was was resisted by the administration, and R.W. Hemsted tried repeatedly to retrieve for the Masai the land alienated to Powys Cobb, which contained streams of crucial importance to Masai stock.
In Tanganyika, however, the Masai enjoyed what many Europeans considered to be an absurdly privileged position and envious eyes were cast on Masai District.
F.J. Anderson, a settler with a farm at Rasha Rasha, was the spokesman for those who felt that Masai District was wasted on the Masai.
In a Legislative Council meeting in 1937 he accused the government of pampering the Masai and condoning such ‘vile practices’ as ‘the repeated rape of immature girls’in manyattas.
Nothing was said on this occasion about his interest in Masai land, though he appears to have discussed the subject privately with F.C.
Hallier, the Provincial Commissioner of the Northern Province, in October 1937.
In 1942, after a long preamble once again accusing the government of ‘favouritism’ towards the Masai, he asked in the Legislative Council if a thousand square miles of Masailand could be set aside for ‘settlement of fighting services personnel, when their job of destroying our foul enemies, who would make slaves of the Masai, is completed’.
The request was refused on the grounds that the Masai needed the land — a response which must have confirmed Anderson's dim view of the administration.
It seemed to him and other settlers whose views he represented in the Leg.
Co. that Masai-loving administrators were allowing these useless people to tie up many thousands of acres of valuable agricultural land.
To the administrators concerned with the welfare of the Masai, however, it seemed that they had a very good case for keeping the enormous area which had been assigned to them.
Notwithstanding their impulse to improve, most officials came to recognize, after a year or two in Masailand, that on the whole the Masai made remarkably efficient use of the land.
It became apparent to them that the Masai did not wander haphazardly about, ignorantly destroying grazing and oblivious to the control of cattle disease, but had an indigenous system of pasture management and far more understanding of the nature of cattle disease than settlers, and even the Veterinary Department, supposed.
The archives contain some extremely impressive examples of recognition by administrators of the fundamental rationality of Masai pastoralism, at a time when pastoralism was generally considered to be merely a primitive prelude to the development of agriculture, and pastoralists obsolete  relics of an earlier phase of human history.
By the time they left Masailand, most administrators would have agreed with what J.C.
Clarke said of the Masai in his annual report for 1950: ‘Their advocate’, he wrote, ‘is Nature.’
Once it was understood that the Masai used a system of rotational grazing, and that the uncertain climate of Masailand demanded flexibility from them in their movements, it was evident that, far from having too much land, they probably had too little.
Their administrators then proceeded to act in accordance with what they took to be the finest traditions of their service and stood up for them.
This meant that the District Officers' opposition to the proposals of wildlife conservationists who wanted Masai land was just as uncompromising as their opposition to settlers; and, then as now, the appearance of indifference to the interests of picturesque and harmless animals brought down odium on the heads of those presumed guilty of it.
Murrells opposed the creation of a national park in the Ngorongoro crater, and put on record his desire to ‘protest most emphatically against the theory that where the interests of game and the Masai clash the Masai must go’.
Later administrators simply argued, correctly, that the Masai did no harm to game.
Though the exact nature of the symbiosis between pastoralists and plains game has only recently become understood, administrators in close contact with the Masai could see that somehow the two did co-exist, and they took exception to the idea that in order for game to thrive the Masai would have to be removed.
For their pains, they were written off as sentimental adulators of the noble savage.
There could be no better evidence that this was not the case than the careers of Murrells and of S.W. Fraser-Smith, who was District Commissioner of the Tanganyika Masai from 1952 to 1955.
Fraser-Smith was a vigorous defender of the tribe's right to live in the Serengeti national park, but deplored the moran system and worked hard in the face of what he repeatedly referred to as their ‘stultifying conservatism’ to make the Masai appreciate the benefits of modern ranching.
Where administrators might justly be accused of partiality in land questions, however, was in cases involving the relations of the Masai with other tribes.
They quite failed to understand, for instance, that the Masai lived, and had always lived, in close interdependence with their agricultural neighbours, who were trading partners and sources of wives and cereals, as need arose.
It was common in Kenya for Masai to allow Kikuyu to cultivate a patch of ground within their grazing circuit in return for services rendered; but administrators seeing this practice and not realizing its customary nature tried repeatedly to get rid of the Kikuyu and leave the Masai in  undisputed possession of what they supposed to be their sole territory.
In doing so they helped to create resentments against the Masai in the minds of those who came to power in the post-colonial state.
Administrators also reacted with less than a becoming degree of sympathy to the problems of neighbouring agricultural peoples whose population was outstripping their resources in land.
From time to time the Tanganyika government proposed excision of parts of Masailand for the use of other tribes, and Masai District Officers could be relied on to oppose these proposals.
But it is difficult to know whether their defence of the Masai in such cases should be attributed to the peculiarly seductive qualities of this people, or to the well-documented tendency of District Officers throughout British Africa to become closely identified, in a paternal and proprietary way, with the interests of ‘their’ tribe.
Whatever might have been the prosaic reason for his initial posting to Masai District, an officer who stayed long enough and had a sufficiently striking personality could expect to become locally famous not only for his love of the Masai but also for the love they bore for him.
Men like Murrells and Browne, and Major Clarence Buxton in Kenya, were celebrated as much for the influence they supposedly wielded over the Masai as for their partiality for them-'Murrells will keep situation under control'.
Even so unsentimental a man as Sir Donald Cameron was completely in awe of the Browne legend.
He gave it as his opinion in 1926, shortly before Browne's inglorious departure, that the current state of affairs in Masai District represented ‘indirect administration in its purest form’, and thought this happy circumstance could mostly be credited to Browne, whom the Masai ‘greatly respect and honour’.
Side by side with the suspicion that Masailand somehow emasculated its administrators, there grew up in East Africa a conviction that the proud Masai could be successfully handled only by the finest type of Englishman, whose qualities of honesty and good judgement they instinctively recognized and respected.
The assumption became that the men who were assigned to Masai District were ‘picked men’, exemplars of the finest ideals of the Colonial Service.
‘The Masai, quicker than any race in Africa’, wrote an American admirer of the Colonial Service, ‘will spot a second-rater.
And have no use for him.’
After watching a baraza conducted by two Masai administrators in Kenya, this observer (Negley Farson) wrote:
I could not imagine a German, Italian or even a Frenchman being so patient in such a discussion.
The British administrators were patient because they knew that the whole of the Masai respect for them lay in
the fact that their judgments — to a fighting race — must come as from honest and intelligent men.
In 1935, after the Murrells débâcle and the dawning realization that very little which could be described as administration had gone on in Masai District, the Tanganyika government did in fact begin to give some serious thought to the type of man which should be sent there.
The recommendations finally made were of a highly practical nature, but they established a tradition of careful selection which was easily glamorized in both the public and the official mind.
The requisites were that
the Masai officers should be of exceptional physique, preferably unmarried (though this has disadvantages) but, if married, then without children; that their wives shd. be happy in solitary surroundings, and that they (the men) should, if possible, be able to pick up Masai and shd. have leanings towards the study of native customs.
They must also be willing to go and have their heart in their job.
Frequent leave was recommended ‘in order to regain sanity of outlook after long periods of loneliness’, and it was later added that: ‘Intellectual geniuses are not required, nor anyone with ‘nerves’ or who is likely to become ‘Masai-astic’…i.e. regard themselves as specialists'.
A background in anthropology was, however, thought desirable.
Settlers, too, when they got the opportunity, liked to bask in what they supposed to be the approbation of the Masai.
It was believed in Kenya that when a Masai came to work for you it was a kind of accolade.
‘Members of this tribe were by no means ready to work for any European who asked them to’, wrote Elspeth Huxley; ‘They were very particular and only entered the service of men whom they liked.’
And no one in the administration ever — such is the unfairness of life — quite achieved the renown achieved by Lord Delamere as a great white father to the Masai.
Delamere told Margery Perham in 1929 that he ‘would take land from the Masai tomorrow for farms.
I would take it from any nomads.
They don't use it.
They can't keep it from those who do.’
But he spent his evenings with his Masai shepherds and considered himself, in certain respects, a spokesman for the tribe.
He defended the Masai's right not to go to school, and opposed their forcible recruitment into the King's African Rifles during the First World War.
When the moran of the Purko section rose in 1918, in protest against recruitment, all operations against them were suspended while  Delamere, at his own request, was allowed to go into the reserve and negotiate with the rebels.
He arrived at Narok ‘with the intention of using his influence to bring the Moran to reason’, and left several weeks later with a promise that the recruits would be forthcoming.
‘Government’, Denys Finch Hatton wrote to his friend Kermit Roosevelt,'…panicked and sent for Delamere who seems to have gone down there with a boy and a cook and settled the whole thing.’
But no recruits ever appeared.
The Masai promised Delamere everything and delivered nothing.
The foregoing should help to explain why the British so persistently entertained the improbable notion that the Masai were ‘loyal’: the wish was father to the thought.
The Masai, wrote the District Commissioner of Narok in 1955, reciprocate the friendship of ‘all races who show  themselves to be worthy, in Masai eyes, of this friendship’.
The belief that the Masai were loyal followed from the belief that the Masai and the British were capable of appreciating each other 's qualities.
It followed, too, from the assumptions that the British made about the Masai's conservatism, it appearing self-evident to them that because the Masai were so conspicuously uninterested in Western civilization they were in all respects content with the status quo ; so closely were Westernization and agitation linked in the administrative mind.
As Westernizing tribes like the Kikuyu became more and more politically active, it was only natural to look to the Masai, who showed no interest in either taxation or representation, as a potential ‘counterpoise to the agitator class’.
‘The Masai rank as a backward tribe in Kenya’, wrote the ever-optimistic Windley,
but I have been led in my experience to believe that they possess a natural intelligence and character which if properly guided and consistently handled should lead them to play a useful part in the synthesis of tribal life in Kenya…as a factor for stability in political development…
H.A.
Fosbrooke even believed that it might be possible to educate them without danger to the state.
The really bright ones would become genuine leaders, and the drop-outs, who notoriously contributed to agitation in other tribes, would be ‘sucked into the vortex of conservatism’ and be indistinguishable from their uneducated fellows.
Grumble as they might about the Masai's unbudging attachment to their traditional ways, many administrators, particularly in the later years, came to see that it had its advantages.
One Kenya Masai official, believing that there was ‘a case for the preservation of this people in a fairly pure state as a set  off against more politically minded peoples’, asked for a doctor to be stationed at Kajiado for this purpose.
The fate of this officer is instructive.
He was speared to death six years later by a Masai whose favourite bullock he insisted on requisitioning for a government destocking programme.
The administration was always discomposed by evidence of Masai unfaithfulness, reacting to it with pained surprise if not outright disbelief.
When the Masai resident in Sanya Chini, stimulated by the activities of the Arusha-Moshi Lands Commission, formed a branch of the Tanganyika African Association in 1946, their DO expressed extreme scepticism about their being really interested:'…
I cannot believe that the Masai, as I know them, would have applied for membership of an association of which they must be completely ignorant'.
A few years later, when Masai rights of occupancy in the Serengeti were at issue, some influential Masai resident in the national park joined the Meru Citizens' Union.
The DO at that time assured his superiors that these Masai were highly unrepresentative: the ‘Masai tribe as a whole will have nothing to do with political agitators’.
When a Masai killed a European farmer in the Sanya corridor — from which the Masai had been evicted — in 1955, it was the shame and distress of all the other Masai which were emphasized by the administration.
But the reddest faces of all blossomed during the Mau Mau Emergency.
From the beginning of the Emergency, Nairobi was abuzz with rumours that the government had a secret weapon — the Masai, who, given the chance, would be delighted to take care of the Kikuyu.
The only problem was how to set them loose in a manner not too blatantly contravening all the rules of civilized warfare.
In the reserve the Masai were ‘anxiously watched for signs which would indicate that they had decided to come out actively on our side’.
Nothing happened.
In January 1953 Holford-Walker, the former Moran Officer, arrived in Kajiado with orders to muster a Masai force for anti-terrorist operations in the Aberdares.
In due course, ninety moran marched off to the mountains, embodying, unbeknown to them, the proudest traditions of the British Colonial Service.
They were back within a fortnight.
What happened is not clear, but it seems the moran displayed a certain lack of enthusiasm: ‘in the conditions prevailing one week saw the limit of their usefulness’, was the cryptic summary of the Kajiado DO.
No more was heard for a while about how the Masai were straining to get at the Kikuyu.
Later on in the Emergency, after insurgents stuck for supplies began stealing Masai cattle, the Masai were persuaded to take a more active role.
‘Fighting manyattas’ were formed at the request of the administration in 1955, and a ‘renaissance of the Masai fighting  spirit of old’was detected.
Some stolen stock was allowed to be recovered by the traditional method — not, it can be imagined, without amusement on the part of the Masai, who had spent forty years resisting the government's efforts to abolish that fighting spirit which was now deemed so commendable.
But by then the military phase of the Emergency was nearly over, and apart from the odd border patrol, the Masai were given no further opportunity to distinguish themselves in battle.
The failure of the Masai to ‘come out’ on the side of right was embarrassing enough, but that was not the worst of it.
Evidence that oathing was going on in the reserve was at first dismissed with the claim that the Masai involved were ‘half-and-halfs’, that is, the offspring of a Masai father and a Kikuyu mother: the loyalty of the ‘pure Masai’ was thought to be beyond question.
But by 1954 it was confidentially estimated by the Narok administration that at least 85 per cent of the Masai living on the Mau, Melili and the plains had taken the Mau Mau oath.
This staggering figure could not easily be explained away.
Nevertheless, it was necessary to attempt do so: the alternative was to confess that the administration had failed where it most wanted to succeed.
With the approach to independence, when the game at last was clearly lost, administrators began to permit themselves a certain degree of cynicism about the loyalty of the Masai.
They watched with detachment, and even with satisfaction, as the Masai began at the eleventh hour to organize themselves to resist what they feared would be the encroachment of agricultural peoples on their land, not as traditional appendages of the Masai way of life, but as conquerors armed with all the power of the modern state.
This was what came, the DOs told the Masai, of ignoring their advice.
Failing to be loved, they settled, like disappointed parents, for being right.
In most of Africa and Asia the British could justify their presence in terms of the white man's burden: there was work to do, and justice to be done.
In Masailand neither of these considerations very obviously applied.
It was never really clear, in any practical sense, just what burden the white man was supposed to take up.
The Masai were perfectly adapted to their physical environment.
They needed no advice in that quarter.
They had also created for themselves a moral environment to which few Englishmen found they could take serious exception.
There were no great inequalities of wealth or power, no privileged class whose evil propensities the British felt bound to extinguish.
Justice was dispensed mildly, equitably, and democratically: there was no equivalent of the prison-cages of Malaya which fuelled Hugh Clifford's supply of righteous  indignation.
Paradoxically, it was in this administrative vacuum that many members of the Colonial Service felt they had come into their own.
This surely suggests the extreme importance in the imperial mind of certain forms of display.
Though it is mistaken to suppose that the British made no effort to leave the Masai better than they found them, it is clear that their potential emergence from the colonial period much as they had entered it was something their administrators could in the end accept with equanimity.
The essential function of the Masai was to provide the perfect opportunity for the British to display what they believed to be their finest characteristics as a ruling race: the ability to understand and to gain the respect of proud traditional peoples, the self-discipline to treat them with courtesy, and the moral authority to guide and control them without resort to brute force.
In the Masai the British believed they had found an audience capable of appreciating their own greatness of soul.
The almost complete lack of response, one way or the other, from the Masai, only seems to have encouraged these fantasies, because it provided an environment in which fantasy was rarely tested against reality.
When reality did begin to break in, as it inevitably did towards the end, the British were unprepared for it.
In superfluity, it now became apparent, they had found satisfaction.
The Meaning of Indirect Rule
We can now address ourselves to that much discussed but much misunderstood phenomenon of British.imperial thinking in the early decades of the twentieth century, the glorification of ‘Indirect Rule’ and its elevation into an official doctrine of imperial administration.
Indirect Rule was not, as was claimed at the time, just a pragmatic response to circumstances, or a way of breaking the natives in gently to the rigours of civilized living.
Still less was it — as it was later perceived to have been — a symptom of a fatal weakening of imperial nerve.
It was the culmination of that mystique of rule which had first flowered in the Punjab under John and Henry Lawrence fifty years before, and whose objective basis in reality was now almost universally taken for granted.
Ruling indirectly was of course nothing new for the British.
Malaya, the princely states of India, Fiji, Natal, the Gambia, had all experienced some form of indirect administration.
In expanding their empire, the British had habitually sought out local agents through whom to impose their authority, and though these arrangements often broke down after the initial period of contact, sometimes they did not.
Nor was Britain the only colonial power to incorporate existing native rulers into a system of colonial administration.
The Dutch did so in the East Indies, and all the European nations in Africa made use of chiefs to some extent.
The British liked to think their system was different from the others, but it is not easy, in examining the literature, to discover exactly where in practice the difference lay.
We can only conclude that it was chiefly in the enthusiasm with which the British talked about it all.
It was in the years between the First and Second World Wars that this enthusiasm was at its height.
The faithful elucidated the mysteries of Indirect Rule with the theological rapture of early Christians disclosing to themselves the nature of the Trinity.
Critics  raised their voices with the consciousness of challenging a ruling orthodoxy.
All sorts and conditions of native societies were declared to be suitable candidates for it, even when they possessed, to Western eyes, no discernible political organization at all, and so no evident agency through which indirection might be achieved.
Such societies were scoured for individuals to whom some shreds of legitimate authority appeared to cling, with sometimes comic, sometimes tragic, results.
Like getting wrapped up in the Masai, getting wrapped up in Indirect Rule was not inherently a passive occupation; it seems in retrospect extraordinary that something to which so much energy was in fact devoted should ever have been perceived as a sign of imperial decrepitude.
Indirect Rule with capital letters was born in Northern Nigeria in the first decade of the twentieth century, as a result of Sir Frederick Lugard's compulsion to justify and elaborate in writing his decision to administer the newly conquered Fulani emirates by installing a British Resident at each of the emirate courts.
Blessed for a military man with unusual fluency with the pen, Lugard brought to this task a literary energy and a crusading passion which seem to have mesmerized those who heard him into believing that a discovery of the first importance in the field of imperial administration had just been made.
Before his appointment to the governorship of Nigeria, Lugard had achieved a modest celebrity as the hero of various military adventures on the imperial frontier, usually of a highly individual and insubordinate kind; by the time he left Nigeria in 1919 his fame as both a practitioner and a theorist of imperialism was assured.
His Political Memoranda , written for the instruction of his Residents in the period 1902 to 1905 and published in 1906, were revered as the canonical texts of Indirect Rule, and his administrative record, as Hugh Clifford discovered upon succeeding him as governor of Nigeria, was regarded as beyond criticism.
The persuasiveness of Lugard's arguments owed something to his extraordinary personal reputation, which happened to conform to that of the finest imperial type.
Uninterested in material things, and conspicuously more at home in jungles than in drawing rooms, he possessed a sweet distinction of bearing which impressed itself on all who met him.
One of his Residents reported that in his presence he felt himself become transparent, every aspect of his character laid bare to Lugard's innocent penetration.
Like Gordon and Henry Lawrence before him, Lugard was revered as a soldier-saint; like them there was a glory about his head which cast its light on all he did.
Yet nothing could be more surprising than that Sir Frederick Lugard should have been the father of Indirect Rule, a system of administration supposedly distinguished by the judicious delegation of authority.
The delegation of authority, as Lugard's admiring but scrupulous biographer, Margery Perham, admits, was quite foreign to his nature.
So obsessed was he with the details of administration that he saw nothing inappropriate, while Governor-General of Nigeria, in personally composing a memorandum on the issue of chamber pots to second-class administrative officers: he was, he said, against it.
He never developed a proper Secretariat for the Nigerian government and confided in no one but his devoted brother, whom he appointed his Political Secretary.
He was a passionate tourer, always in motion, descending on his Residents with floods of instructions which resumed their unceasing flow as soon as he returned to headquarters; and long before Northern Nigeria was brought under effective British occupation, he was composing his Political Memoranda , which in addition to his reflections on the subject of Indirect Rule contained instructions to his officers of a comprehensiveness simply beyond satire.
At a period when Residents had no clerks and were lucky if they possessed a typewriter, Lugard was listing some thirty different sets of records which either had to be kept or sent in, dealing with every conceivable aspect of a fully developed civil administration from postal matters to canoe registration.
This was not a man who was capable of being serious about the devolution of power, and we must seek the reasons for his adoption and promotion of Indirect Rule elsewhere.
Lugard in fact created in Northern Nigeria a type of Residential system which was unprecedentedly (for the British) explicit in its assumption of administrative authority in native affairs.
The word Resident normally implied, at least officially, a preponderance of diplomatic over administrative duties, but it was clear from the beginning that a Lugardian Resident was expected to take on a large number of purely administrative tasks.
In Nigeria, it was the Resident's task, not the emir's, to assess the people for taxes and to see that the tax was collected.
It was the Resident, not the emir, who controlled the police and the army.
The emir was not permitted to legislate, to appropriate land for public or commercial purposes, to exercise any control over aliens in his territory, or to appoint or depose his subordinate chiefs.
His court of justice, while technically independent and free to operate on traditional lines, was in fact under the close supervision of the Resident, who exercised powers in respect of such courts as to ‘enable him’, in Lugard's words, ‘to entirely control their actions, and, in fact, to use them as auxiliary courts’.
It is not obvious, in reviewing this system, exactly where  the element of indirection came in, except in so far as the Residents were instructed to maintain at all costs the ‘prestige’ of the emir.
Lugard also laid down an elaborate protocol for dealing with the emirs and chiefs, who were to be treated by British officers with the precise degree of courtesy — and no more — which their rank deserved.
A first-class chief was to be offered a carpet, rather than a rug, to sit on, and the Resident was to rise both to receive him and to dismiss him.
He was not to be summoned at short notice or dropped in on, but was to be treated as one would a man whose time was as valuable as one's own.
Lugard prided himself on the consideration with which he treated the emirs on his own visits to their courts.
‘I am very pleased with my visit to Kano’, he wrote to its emir, ‘and I am glad to have seen you again, for I regard you as my personal friend, in whom I place entire confidence and trust.’
Forwarding a copy of this letter to his wife, he added that ‘I quite squirm at the thought lest some successor to me in the near future should treat these chiefs in a different manner from my own’.
But, he went.
on, it was equally if not more dreadful to him to think that this successor might treat the emirs ‘as superiors — as Royalties’, thereby incurring ‘their astonished contempt that the King's representative — the conquering dynasty — should so behave’.
Lugard's sense of the rights of conquest was pronounced, and his belief in Indirect Rule implied no weakening of it.
On his entry into Sokoto in 1903 to accept the surrender of the sultan and his chiefs, he addressed them as follows:
Now these are the words which I, the High Commissioner, have to say for the future.
The Fulani in old times under Dan Fodio conquered this country.
They took the right to rule over it, to levy taxes, to depose kings and to create kings.
They in turn have by defeat lost their rule which has come into the hands of the British.
All these things which I have said the Fulani by conquest took the right to do now pass to the British…
There was nothing equivocal about that; nor was there about the oath of allegiance the emirs were required to take, which recognized the undisputed sovereignty in all matters, saving that of religion, of the British government.
There were a number of episodes of armed resistance to British authority during the early years of occupation, and they were dealt with in a fashion amply sufficient to deter.
Why, then, did Lugard choose to impose his authority in Nigeria through a facade of native institutions, and not in some other fashion?
His reasons for adopting Indirect Rule were never, in fact, made very explicit, though it appears that scarcity of administrative  manpower, usually considered the determining factor, was not of major importance.
In his The Dual Mandate in British Tropical Africa (1922) he referred obscurely to considerations of ‘policy’ as well as of economy which had guided his thinking.
He seems to have decided long before assuming responsibility for the government of Northern Nigeria that in general some form of indirect administration was ‘in accordance with the spirit of British colonial rule’, which was benevolent and not ‘arbitrary and despotic’.
He went out to Nigeria in 1900 with his mind already made up to employ such a system, once he had conquered the country.
His predisposition was reinforced by further acquaintance with the Fulani, whose ‘regeneration’ he decided it was worth attempting.
He was also aware of the military advantages of creating a nucleus of support for the British among the country's ruling class.
But none of these explains the tireless persistence with which he both articulated and sought to reconcile the contradictory aspects of his thinking.
The interesting fact was that Lugard united in his person, in an exceptionally dramatic and compulsive fashion, the two opposing but eternally co-existing currents of British imperial thought: the desire to be powerful, and the desire to be good.
It is here that we shall find the explanation for the lively inconsistency of his thinking, masked though it was by the illusion of sweet reason he seemed able to create at will.
Both Lugard's parents were missionaries in India, but his father came from a family of soldiers and himself possessed military rank as a chaplain in the Madras establishment of the East India Company.
The young Lugard, born in the year after the Mutiny, was brought up, like Henry Lawrence whom he came so much to resemble, in an atmosphere which combined sincere evangelical piety with unquestioning respect for the achievements of the British army and an habitual acceptance of the necessity of command.
Though Lugard later lost the simple faith of his childhood, he never lost the evangelical habit of spiritual self-scrutiny which had been so pronounced in him as a boy that his mother at one time feared that ‘possibly (though now in perfect health) our Father may be about to remove him to the heavenly garner’.
On the morning of his sixth birthday, she wrote,
he was found to be crying silently in his bed…
Miss Liley [the governess]hearing his quiet sobs went to him.
He told her he had been thinking of the text he had just learnt, ‘Prepare to meet thy God,’ and perhaps he might die tonight, and he did not know if he was ready, if his sins were all forgiven…
He told me that…there were 5 sins he could remember to-day,
besides a great many sins that he knew he had done that he could not remember.
The 5 sins were such things as letting his Bible fall by accident, jumping about for a few minutes on the sabbath, forgetting that it was Sunday, and hesitating to lend his sister a book which she asked him for.'
Without disparaging the spiritual discipline practised in the Lugard home, it seems fair to say that young Freddy, who even then possessed a lively truculence, studied too assiduously to be good.
As a man, Lugard combined a passionate love of command with an equally passionate desire not to be judged unkindly for it.
He was constantly reassuring himself that actions taken in the heat of the moment, and in response to his deepest impulses, possessed a visibly moral quality.
‘I love this turgid life of command’, he wrote to his wife,
when I can feel that the sole responsibility rests on me for everything, whether it be a small crisis like this [the Munshi rising], with the necessary action taken to preserve life, and to re-establish prestige or whether it be, as my day's task has been, to confirm the hanging of criminals or the penal servitude, or the petty punishments of others, watching jealously that the executive officer does not inflict punishments which are unfair, or that the legal adviser does not hamper true justice by technical objections.
And he could write after a visit to Kano, with a degree of self-deception which reminds one of Sir Frederick Weld, that, though a mere two years before ‘Kano was armed to fight us…
Today I drank tea alone and unarmed with the Emir as his honoured friend, and I know he is really glad to see me…’
What had made this miracle possible, in Lugard's view, was Indirect Rule, which, through its generosity of spirit towards the conquered, had transformed militant antagonism into grateful appreciation.
Lugard was later to develop a more elaborate reconciliation of the moral with the amoral aspects of imperialism in The Dual Mandate in British Tropical Africa , written after he was removed from the daily turmoil of administration and in retirement in England.
With its simple thesis that ‘the tropics are the heritage of mankind’, to be developed for the benefit of all, including their inhabitants, and its emphasis on the excellence of the British record in these respects and the desirability of prolonging it, the book had an immensely  affirmative influence.
Reading it, the British discovered that they had been speaking the imperial equivalent of prose all their lives.
In The Dual Mandate past dominion was justified, present dominion was celebrated, and future dominion looked forward to with serenity.
Whatever Indirect Rule meant to Lugard, it never meant the end of the British empire.
Nor did it mean such a thing to any of the other administrators prominently associated with it.
Charles Temple, Richmond Palmer, Donald Cameron, Philip Mitchell — none of these were men who showed anything less than enthusiasm for the task of imperial government, and all of them were men of dominant personality and exceptional strength of will.
African independence, when they thought of it at all, seemed an eventuality so far into the future as to possess no relevance to their working lives.
The spirit at work in Northern Nigeria was in every respect far closer to that at work in the Punjab in the 1850s than in the United Nations in the 1950s.
For what Lugard unintentionally and ironically created through Indirect Rule was an outstanding opportunity for subordinate officials to claim an immense — and to him unwelcome — autonomy within the system.
Despite his best efforts to concentrate power effectively within his own hands, the emphasis on local authority implicit in a system purporting to operate through the traditional rulers of a primitive country, which possessed nothing approaching a unitary state co-extensive with its official boundaries, inevitably meant that power would drain away from the centre towards the local administrator, who alone could claim the special knowledge of local conditions, and opportunity for intimate supervision, on which Indirect Rule implicitly depended.
The importance attached to maintaining the ‘prestige’ of the emirs soon translated in practice into the importance of maintaining the autonomy of the Residents, and subsequent governors of Nigeria found almost without exception that Lugard had created an administrative monster which it was beyond their power to control.
In the early 1900s the initiative was with those lower down in the governing hierarchy than Lugard, and being the men they were, they took it.
It was during the inter-regnum of 1907 to 1912, when Lugard was occupied as governor of Hong Kong before returning in triumph to be Governor-General of a united Nigeria, that the Northern Residents seized their opportunity to move collectively into a position of virtually unassailable independence from the central government.
Two rather weak governors, who regarded Lugard's Residents with some of the reverence they felt for Lugard himself, were ruthlessly overawed and changes introduced — such as the  creation of native treasuries — by which the Residents acquired over their little ships of state an ever more complete control.
It did not take long upon his return from Hong Kong for Lugard's sensitive nose to detect an atmosphere of insubordination in Northern Nigeria.
A year after his arrival he was complaining to his wife of ‘a disloyalty and a swollen-headedness which had spoiled N.N. Every Resident, including the best, writes at large on the policy we must pursue…
The Governor is left out.’
On his tours he felt excluded from direct contact with the emirs and, worse, not particularly welcome in the Residencies.
The worst offender in this was Charles Temple, who was senior Northern Resident at the time of Lugard's return.
When Lugard arrived in October 1912 on a state visit to Zungeru, Temple not only failed to vacate his headquarters for Lugard's use, as Lugardian protocol apparently demanded, but left the Governor-General to remain on his official train and bake in the African sun.
It was an unhappy start to what proved to be a contentious relationship, with Lugard wanting to turn the clock back to the days of his undisputed pre-eminence, and Temple, whose sense of his own consequence was equally developed, treating him as primus (barely)inter pares .
Temple disagreed with Lugard over almost everything, but above all over the degree of authority to be exercised from the centre.
His scheme for the amalgamation of Nigeria, which Lugard had been sent out to accomplish, differed completely from the one proposed by Lugard: Lugard's scheme envisaged a strong governor, Temple's a weak one, with the responsibility for local affairs placed firmly in the hands of the Residents.
From this struggle Lugard emerged the official victor.
His scheme was the one adopted.
But in practice he found himself able to control the Residents only by appointing men he deemed to be sufficiently compliant, an expedient to which he resorted when Temple retired prematurely from the service in 1917.
Less aggravating in manner than Temple, Richmond Palmer, the Resident at Katsina, stood higher in gubernatorial favour.
But his career, especially after 1925, when the weak and ailing Sir Graeme Thomson succeeded Hugh Clifford in the governorship, also classically expressed the Residential impulse towards autonomy.
Under Clifford, Palmer bided his time, keeping to himself his misgivings about the governor's achievements in centralization, and exerting himself openly only to oppose Clifford's proposal that lawyers should be allowed to plead in the provincial courts, thereby unacceptably diluting what had been under Lugard the Resident's almost unrestricted jurisdiction over them.
No doubt Palmer's restraint was related to the very high and advantageous esteem in which Clifford held him — high enough to appoint him, over the head  of a more experienced officer, to the Lieutenant-Governorship of the Northern Provinces.
An accomplished traveller, linguist, and student of natives ways, unmasker (in 1924) of a Mahdist plot to eject the British from Northern Nigeria, Palmer was in every way Clifford's idea of what a colonial administrator ought to be.
Once Clifford had departed Palmer set to work to wring from the central government a series of concessions which, had he succeeded in obtaining them all, would have converted Northern Nigeria into a separate state.
His persistent returns to the fray helped to drive Thomson to an early grave-though not before he had succeeded in getting Palmer promoted out of Nigeria.
Palmer's opening move was to oppose the introduction of a General Tax Ordinance for Nigeria, and, with the support of the Residents, to propose a return to the 1906 Native Revenue Ordinance, which stated that the tax paid in the Northern Provinces was levied by the native authorities with the approval but not at the direction of the governor.
He succeeded in wearing down Thomson on this point, but the proposal was eventually rejected by the Colonial Office, with lengthy quotations from Lugard employed to prove its case that the emirs had lost the sovereign right to taxation when defeated on the field of battle.
Unrepentant, Palmer shifted his ground to an attack on the format of the Annual Estimates of Nigeria, which he developed into a campaign for the complete decentralization of the Treasury Department.
On this he was narrowly over-ruled.
One of his more successful campaigns, fought intermittently throughout his Lieutenant-Governorship, was to keep technical officers from the medical, educational, agricultural and public works departments of the central government from enjoying any independent access to the native administrations.
In his view, it was the Resident, and the Resident alone, whose task it was to guide the emir along the path of material progress — if such indeed were deemed to be desired.
Palmer's views were shared by the other Northern Residents who, early in his career as Lieutenant-Governor, were organized by him into an effective pressure group known as the Conference of Residents.
The Conference's working assumption was that all incursions from Lagos were to be resisted; the reason invariably given was that only the Residents had enough knowledge and experience of the mysteries of Indirect Rule to be entrusted with its execution.
It is a tribute to the awe in which Indirect Rule was held in the 1920s that their pretensions were taken seriously: few deliberative bodies in history can have had a higher regard for themselves as repositories of political wisdom than did the Conference of Residents.
So seriously indeed did the Residents take themselves that they  were unwilling at first even to allow the stationing of subordinate European officers in the districts.
There were District Officers, and there were Assistant District Officers, but they were stationed at regional headquarters where they functioned, not as independent administrators, but as assistants to the Resident: as late as 1921 the Resident at Kano declined to accept the posting of political officers to permanent stations in the districts.
When District Officers were eventually allowed into the field they were watched like hawks by their senior officers for signs — an indication, it was said, of inaptitude or inexperience — of running things too directly, and promotions were made or denied on the extent to which they seemed, in the words of the Resident, Adamawa, to be ‘imbued with the true spirit of Indirect Rule’.
It is significant that one of the first major published attacks on Indirect Rule was written by a Northern Nigeria DO, Walter Crocker, whose animus against the system clearly arose not from disagreement with its basic principles but from the fact that DOs were allowed so little responsibility within it.
‘There is a strong case’, he boldly suggested,
for eliminating Residents, and a case for eliminating Lieutenant-Governors.
There is an overwhelming case for giving the D.O., the most important unit in the whole machine, more responsibility, and for saving him from dancing attendance on Residents who notoriously dodge responsibility.
It was, and remained, his contention that the pure Lugardian principles of Indirect Rule had been perverted by ‘mediocre careerists’ in the Northern Residencies after the great man left.
Indirect Rule, then, with its implicit exaltation of the man-on-the-spot over the man in the central office, set the seal of legitimacy on the centrifugal tendencies long at work in the British Colonial Service, and provided them with a rational institutional expression independent of the existence of a frontier.
It became, eventually, the cult of the DO writ large, but with delaying actions at each step of the way by men who thought that power should be concentrated at the level in the system they themselves happened to occupy.
In Northern Nigeria power did remain in the hands of the Residents, because they possessed historical claims to legitimacy as the standard-bearers of Indirect Rule — a point always emphasized by Palmer in his dealings with junior officers — and because they were linked with the top men in a congeries of feudal autocracies.
In other places in which Indirect Rule was attempted, and where no large centralized states existed, such as Tanganyika, the DO enjoyed an undisputed reign.
Both Northern Nigeria and the Punjab were colonies of conquest, untainted by trade or missions, in which the purely administrative outlook could and did bloom unchecked.
Both housed defeated, but martial, races who made dominion enjoyable.
Both, through a happy combination of theory and circumstances, were places in which enormous responsibilities were entrusted to a handful of inexperienced young men, who proved themselves on the job.
And both, as a result of all of the above, provided unparalleled opportunities for the British to convince themselves and show the world — it was remarkable how often Indirect Rulers reported on the esteem in which their system was held by other nations — that they naturally did certain things very, very well.
The distinguished critic of imperialism, E.D. Morel, wrote after a visit to Nigeria in 1910 that the administration of the North was a ‘tour de force ’ and revealed that, ‘with all her faults, Britain does still breed sons worthy of the highest traditions of the race’.
‘When one sees’, he wrote,
this man managing, almost single-handed, a country as large as Scotland; when one sees that man, living in a leaky mud hut, holding, by the sway of his personality, the balance even between fiercely antagonistic races, in a land which would cover half a dozen of the large English counties; when one sees the marvels accomplished by tact, passionate interest and self-control, with utterly inadequate means, in continuous personal discomfort, short-handed, on poor pay, out here in Northern Nigeria — then one feels that permanent evil cannot ultimately evolve from so much admirable work accomplished, and that the end must be good.
These are words which could have been written of the Punjab in its heyday.
And, as had been so memorably the case with the Punjab, the proof of the pudding was found to be in the eating.
The Punjab had stood firm in 1857; the emirs of Northern Nigeria, it was noted with pride, stood firm in 1914, when the British were forced by the outbreak of war with Germany to denude the area of troops.
There were explicit reminiscences of the Punjab, and all it meant in imperial song and story, in the minds of Northern Nigeria's creators as they were creating.
Lugard, in his Political Memoranda , employed the words of Henry Lawrence to impress upon his officers the importance of constant travel among the people, and like him selected his administrators from among the military, believing that their training had taught them, as no other could, the proper exercise of responsibility.
Charles Temple almost certainly came to Northern Nigeria with the idea of another Punjab in mind: his  father, the distinguished Indian administrator Sir Richard Temple, had been in his youth one of John Lawrence's hard-riding young men, and it was he who wrote in 1901 asking for his son ‘to become one of the recruits which Lugard is raising for Nigeria.
He might have to sacrifice somewhat of pay for this end but he would not mind that owing to the chance of rising in the Imperial Service.’
The old hand could recognize the coming man.
Yet though there were resemblances between Northern Nigeria and the Punjab, there were also differences.
Indirect Rule had far more ideological content than the Punjab creed: it was found necessary ceaselessly to draw attention — perhaps because it was a principle coming to be so explicitly disputed by those to whom it was applied — to the long and careful weaning required for the native to shed his primitive mode of thinking and adopt successfully the ways of the modern world.
And the men of Northern Nigeria, conscious of themselves as the most refined products of a now self-consciously imperial civilization, were distinctly more inclined than their predecessors in the Punjab to ruminate on what they regarded, rather surprisingly in the circumstances, as the subtleties of their craft.
Choosing to overlook the actual blatancy of British power and concentrate instead upon its supposed attenuation, they produced the definitive celebration of the attempt to govern, not through the threat or application of physical force, but through the power of personal influence alone.
The beauty of Indirect Rule was that it created an administrative situation in which personal influence was, in theory at any rate, the administrator's only resource.
Because the structure of native authority was supposedly maintained intact, the Resident — supposedly — had to depend for whatever results he achieved on the sway he was able to exercise over his emir.
His success could thus be explicitly attributed to that capacity for influence which British administrators had always claimed to possess, but had not normally had the opportunity of conclusively demonstrating.
And conversely, in the exalté atmosphere of Northern Nigeria, a Resident who admitted defeat at the hands of his emir was deemed to be guilty of two unpardonable sins: he disgraced by his ineptitude the good name of the British Colonial Service; and he brought the whole principle of local administrative autonomy into disrepute.
For an officer in Northern Nigeria to complain that his emir refused to take his advice was to put his career at the gravest possible risk; he could expect in due course to be moved to ‘easier work’— in other words, to administrative oblivion.
It was not unknown in Nigeria for emirs to be removed from office by the British, but only when they committed crimes which brought discredit upon the administration, never for mere recalcitrance.
In that case it was the administrator who was removed.
The extreme difficulty of ruling indirectly was pointed out repeatedly by its more successful practitioners, often in terms whose very weightiness implied the triumph of virtù .
Richmond Palmer was a tireless extemporizer upon this theme.
And for a really considered exposition of it we can turn to Charles Temple's Native Races and their Rulers (1918), a remarkable work which, though it bears the unmistakable stamp of a mind operating obsessively in isolation, pursuing ideas by their internal logic rather than by the rules of external evidence, can yet be assumed to possess a representative character.
A severe critic has acknowledged Temple to be ‘both influential and typical among that important body, the Northern Residents’.
The duties of a Resident, Temple asseverated, were such as to give ‘opportunities for the exertion of any degree of administrative capacity, tact, and industry’, and, amplifying: ‘It may readily be supposed that this keeping in touch with the people without impairing the authority of the Emir and consequently of the whole native administration, is no easy task, and one on which any amount of administrative tact and ability can be exerted.’
Much more appears in the same vein; but Temple is at his most eloquent in describing the qualifications of the successful Resident.
A Resident, he writes, must possess
an inborn sympathy and liking for the native and his affairs…
Next after this by far the most important qualification, more important far than special industry or special facility in acquiring native languages for example, is a sense of proportion.
To recognise where a reform is urgently required and must be effected at any cost, or where it may be postponed, or where it may be counted on to effect itself without outside influence, and, perhaps most important of all, to be able to recognise the fact that certain reforms would be beneficial could they be effected but that it is not possible to effect them at all; to be able to arrive at a right decision on such points as these is what is chiefly required of a Resident.
He must be able to decide rightly whether a native chiefs first offence should be punished, or whether patience should be exercised until he has offended ten, nay twenty times — either course may be the right one, it depends entirely on circumstances.
He must be able to judge not only when and how, but where his weight should be applied…
Such being the principal work which the Resident is called upon to perform under the system of Indirect Rule, it will be seen that he can receive little help from outside sources…
So subtle are often the
bases on which he arrives at a decision that he may sometimes find considerable difficulty in making a good case on paper for some action he may have taken, even though he feels, and subsequent events may prove, that action to have been perfectly correct.
In my humble opinion, he should not be called upon for such justification.
Such was the magnificent ineffability of the Resident, who functioned, if we are to judge by this account, in an atmosphere better described as one of brilliant improvization than of the sober pragmatism for which Indirect Rule was supposedly renowned.
If this was pragmatism, it was of a positively mystical kind.
Reading Native Races and their Rulers , one becomes aware of the extent to which Indirect Rule, as it came to be practised by Temple and presumably his fellow Residents, implied a special and refined kind of experience of power.
Temple was sincere in his desire to preserve native society from too sudden change: he enjoyed its idiosyncrasies, respected its vitality, and greatly loved it as an unkempt garden in which the product of a more ordered civilization might find repose.
But the principal argument he produced in favour of ruling indirectly was not that Indirect Rule provided the perfect instrument of intelligent conservation, but that it created the possibility of exercising over the native a far greater degree of control than could be achieved if he were ruled directly.
‘The white man’, Temple observed, ‘can ‘boss about’ the native, there is no doubt about that, but…the control thus exerted is very superficial.’
If he aspired to something deeper, he must use deeper methods — methods which, alas, could not be applied in bulk.
‘A European’, Temple wrote, ‘cannot exert a personal influence on the characters of more than one hundred to two hundred natives’; but if he concentrated on ‘guiding and controlling the native leaders’, then his influence would be ‘magnified by a natural process a thousand fold’ and the result would be that: ‘The power thus exerted is infinitely greater in scope than any power or influence which it can be hoped that he will exert under the…system of Direct Rule.’
In time, Temple believed, the successful Resident would come to take ‘the place of public opinion as a controlling force over the Emir's actions’.
How far Temple's aspirations coincided with reality may be judged by these observations committed to paper in 1962 by a man who had been his native clerk: ‘To speak the gospel truth’, this man recalled, ‘Mr Temple was very harsh towards the native chiefs…really, he did not spare the rod as far as efficient administration was concerned;…he was bad-tempered…
He was strict to the letter, he was very pushful…
’ How unwelcome an epitaph that would have been.
So developed did the cult of personality in Northern Nigeria  become that even in dealing with rude and warlike pagans it was bad form to stoop to securing their acquiescence in the will of the government by resort to force.
A.C.G. Hastings was reprimanded by High Commissioner Girouard for using military means to effect the subjugation of the cannibal Tula tribe; to redeem himself he volunteered to subdue the equally unruly Awok without firing a shot, and did so — by reminding them of the fate of the Tulas and giving them two hours to surrender their weapons.
He spent the interval in full view of the enemy, drinking tea.
Looking back on it years later, what struck him most was ‘the colossal cheek of it all’.
Hastings' previous dealings with the Tula tribe would seem rather to diminish the role played by force of personality in this affair, but the traveller and eccentric socialist R.B. Cunninghame Graham, who contributed an introduction to Hastings' book, did not for that reason forbear to indicate that force of personality was precisely what it showed.
Cunninghame Graham was, however, correct in observing that the expedition against the Awok ‘really called for greater nerve than that against the Tulas, which ended in a fight’; and this, as Hastings himself seemed to recognize in recalling first and foremost his ‘colossal cheek’, was surely the point of it all.
Force had been not merely avoided, but transcended.
It will have been noted that, not content with imposing upon themselves the task of ruling through the tendering of advice, which might have been thought difficult enough, the British took upon themselves in Northern Nigeria the even more difficult task of ruling without actually appearing to rule at all— an undertaking whose very absurdity only emphasizes its interest.
The essence of Indirect Rule, wrote a Lieutenant-Governor of Southern Nigeria, was ‘authority combined with self-effacement’.
‘The Political Officer,’ wrote Clifford, ‘should be the Whisper behind the Throne, but never for an instant the Throne itself.’
The true measure of the Resident's success, wrote Temple, producing as usual the quintessential exposition,
will be the respect and regard with which the populace hold their own Chiefs and Elders, and not him, combined with general good relations between the private individuals which compose the clan, and the general prosperity of the unit…where the policy of the government is to rule indirectly the political officer must be satisfied with the knowledge, locked securely in his breast, that he is very important to the native population although they are not aware of it.
A number of explanations suggest themselves for this strange  impulse towards self-effacement in men who loved power, besides the official one that it served to maintain the standing of the native authorities in the eyes of the people.
The first is that by positioning himself conspicuously behind a veil, the Resident could leave the population in a state of desirable uncertainty about the degree of influence he actually exercised over their emir: his advice was not seen to be taken, but neither was it seen to be rejected.
This was perhaps what was in Temple's mind when he wrote that ‘whereas in communities governed by native institutions the white man,qua white man, is regarded with great respect, in those districts where the native administrations have been swept away he is regarded as a person of no very great significance’.
Another possible explanation for the embrace of self-effacement is that it created the opportunity for exercising power without accepting responsibility.
The less that was known about the political officer's activities, the less was understood about his responsibility for events.
Blame was difficult to attach to a person who existed in a state of splendid inscrutability.
But again, too evident delight in surmounting a difficulty which was after all self-imposed suggests that the Resident's obscuration of the nature of his influence was primarily not a form of reticence or uncertainty, but of display.
By diminishing the outward evidence of his authority almost to the point of invisibility, he demonstrated to the people and perhaps more importantly to himself that he could perform his duties not only without resort to force but without any discernible support at all: like Hugh Clifford's Sir Philip Hanbury-Erskine choosing to deal with rebellion not as a governor but as ‘a man’, he was effacing not himself but his institutional context.
The Northern Nigerian Resident's belief in his own self-effacement can usefully be seen in a more general context of fascination with the secret exercise of power.
Secrecy sets the imagination free to create unrestrained and guiltless fantasies of consequence in the world, and it was one of the achievements of the men of Northern Nigeria to create a practical milieu in which such fantasies might be enjoyed.
But it was not only in Northern Nigeria that the charms of obscurity were known and appreciated; in the late imperial world the passion for secrecy was widespread, and that of the practitioners of Indirect Rule was only one manifestation of it.
Cecil Rhodes, whom no one thought of as retiring and who expected to be remembered for a thousand years, chose, it will be remembered, as his instrument to achieve the infinite expansion of the British empire a secret society.
In Egypt, Lords Cromer and Milner, enthroned in marble halls and surrounded by British soldiers, thought of themselves as playing, with the utmost  discretion, an exceptionally difficult lone hand; they delighted in the formal restrictions placed on British power, though everyone in Egypt knew them to be of no practical consequence.
Cromer cherished the thought that he ‘remained more or less hidden [and]pulled the strings’, and proclaimed his contempt for publicity; yet it was he of whom the fellahin sang as they laboured at their immemorial tasks.
To take an even more famous imperial hero, perhaps the most famous of all, it could be said of T.E.
Lawrence that his whole life was a testimony to the fascination of the secret power of the will.
In the desert, as his wartime despatches show, he was entranced by the conviction that he was controlling the Arabs without their even realizing it; in his self-imposed obscurity after the war he busied himself secretly, though not too secretly, with pulling strings.
His prescription for success in the desert —‘Wave a Sherif in front of you like a banner and hide your own mind and person’— could be taken as a motto for Indirect Rule.
‘If you succeed’, he went on, ‘you will have hundreds of miles of country and thousands of men under your orders, and for this it is worth bartering the outward show.’
Nor was he the only imperialist of his day of whom it might have been said, as one of his biographers said of him, that he had ‘a genius for backing into the limelight’.
It was a curious conceit of imperial memoirists of the time to claim that their labours were unknown to and unappreciated by the British public.
Their works were besprinkled with unsolicited testimonials, often from foreigners, and tributes to the splendid work of their brother officers.
Another who was passionately fond of self-effacement was Sir George Goldie, the man who ruled Nigeria in the days of the Niger Company, and whom some credited with being the original progenitor of Indirect Rule.
He went to exceedingly great lengths to keep his name out of the public eye, but, as with Lawrence, an extreme desire for secrecy and public contempt for ambition were accompanied by a morbid fascination with the power of the will.
He wrote to his biographer that as a young men he
acquired a settled gloom that nothing could shake…
I sat down on the sea shore, placing a large black pebble beside me…[whilst pretending that]by touching the pebble [I could]wipe out…all…life on earth…so that[it]had never existed.
I sat for hours staring at the sea.
After a long time…
I touched the pebble…
[Then]I started my work in Africa.
This same man wrote that he ‘could not remember having ever felt, during my 52 years of life, the slightest symptoms of that curious  disease — ambition — which craves for leadership, honour, money, or notoriety’.
When he refused a peerage the reason he gave was that he preferred to think his country owed him something.
These ambiguous types found their way into fiction.
Kipling (Kim , 1901) and John Buchan (Greenmantle , 1916) popularized the idea of the imperial hero as secret agent,Greenmantle uncannily prefiguring the supposed exploits of T.E.
Lawrence in Arabia.
Buchan's A Lodge in the Wilderness (1906) was a more explicit reflection of the imperial ethos of the day, written after a youthful spell on the periphery of Milner's ‘kindergarten’ in South Africa.
In it a group of senior imperialists, led by a figure modelled on Rhodes, meets in secret conclave in a hunting lodge in Africa to arrange the destiny of the world.
This love of secrecy may have been a reaction to the rapid expansion of Britain's formal power towards the end of the nineteenth century, an attempt to preserve the spirit of the frontier and deny what had become the unexciting obviousness of British dominion.
Even more than the exaltation of influence, the love of secrecy was concerned with the exercise of power which had its source not in the collective past but in the force of the individual will.
It was Promethean in spirit, and its meaning was the very opposite of restraint.
We must now return to the principal official argument for Indirect Rule and look at it more closely.
The aims of Indirect Rule, Lugard said, were to develop what was best in native institutions and thereby ‘to inculcate respect for authority, self-respect, and fair treatment of the lower classes, the weak and the ignorant’.
‘If you do not respect your race’, said Philip Mitchell in a speech extolling Indirect Rule in Uganda, ‘you cannot really respect yourself.’
Indirect Rulers ranked self-respect above all the other blessings they could bestow, wealth, health, and the conveniences of modern life paling by comparison, if they were not actually to be regarded as injurious.
Probably the main reason why Indirect Rule acquired instant support from the British Government was that this was an assumption deeply rooted in the mental outlook of the English upper classes, who liked their inferiors to be able to think well of themselves.
Temple could write with perfect confidence in his audience that though he would not ‘strain the reader's capacity by asking him to imagine a native Governor of a Colony or Protectorate’ or even a native Colonial Secretary of Nigeria — a proposal which ‘does not come within the bounds of practical politics’— he counted it an advantage of Indirect Rule that under it ‘the native can and does fill not only positions of great  responsibility but the highest positions, positions which place him on the social scale on an equality with the King's representative himself’.
Obviously, self-respect was not the same as disrespect.
It went without saying that the truly self-respecting native was the one who understood the indecency of aspiring beyond his station.
Thus, though Lugard could not avoid committing himself, in principle, to providing a Western education (that notorious producer of disrespect) to Africans who desired it, he hoped that a system could be devised which would render them ‘efficient, loyal, reliable and contented — a race of self-respecting native gentlemen’.
There were peoples in the empire — the Masai, pre-eminently, were one, and the Bedouin Arabs were shortly to be another — who seemed instinctively to possess the right combination of self-respect and pragmatic acceptance of the facts of British power.
If the right kind of Masai could be persuaded to act as government headmen, C.E.V. Buxton said, ‘the ideal of indirect rule could be achieved’.
The inhabitants of Northern Nigeria, however, though coming close to this standard, had with few exceptions to be cured of a certain lack of forthrightness.
Thus the element of moral instruction entered Indirect Rule as it was practised in the Nigerian emirates-though in a system so deliberately obfuscatory it was not easy to see how such instruction could be provided.
Fortunately, the answer lay close at hand, in that sense of the redeeming power of personal example which had for so long been part of the mental furniture of the British middle classes.
‘Our supreme contribution to Africa…is not so much what we do as what we are’, wrote Walter Crocker.
In this spirit, A.C.G. Hastings wrote with pride of the transformation experienced by his cook during ten years of association with him: ‘He spoke quite freely at the end.
He had his little peccadilloes, the quaint and rather Machiavellian ways to gain his little ends, but he knew me and I knew him, and in essentials he made good.’
And when Lugard came to look back on what had been accomplished in the early years of British administration he singled out the improved character of the native rulers, which he attributed to ‘the unceasing efforts and devoted ability of the British staff, who have by precept and example made them what they are today’.
The inconsistency of demanding frankness and openness from the African while practising a form of government depending largely on influence wielded behind closed doors seems not to have troubled the British; they assumed that it was precisely their own qualities of straightforwardness and transparent honesty which would effect the required transformation in the African character.
As was usual with the rulers of the British empire, moral display  served a dual purpose, being intended not only to improve native character but also to stimulate native loyalty.
It was always Lugard's assumption that his reception by the emir of Kano as his ‘honoured friend’ owed as much to the emir's respect for his qualities of character as to gratitude for the restoration of his own eminence.
‘The white man's prestige must stand high’, wrote Lugard in The Dual Mandate ,
when a few score are responsible for the control and guidance of millions.
His courage must be undoubted, his word and pledge absolutely inviolate, his sincerity transparent.
There is no room for ‘mean whites’ in tropical Africa…
They lower the prestige by which alone the white races can hope to govern and to guide.
By requiring its practitioners to possess the moral prestige necessary to guide, Indirect Rule seemed to ensure that they also possessed the means whereby, in the absence of any overwhelming display of physical superiority, they could govern.
And lest there be any misunderstanding as to the intensity of the attachment Lugard had in mind, it may be noted that his thinking revealed itself quite clearly on the subject of loyalty when he wrote of military matters and the secret of command.
Here he abandoned the lofty word ‘prestige’ and wrote simply of the ‘blind devotion’the successful leader might enjoy.
There was something corrupt about the extent to which the British in Northern Nigeria cared about the loyalty of their subjects, and the lengths to which they went to cultivate what could in the end only be an illusion of mutual respect.
In Masailand such thoughts could be entertained without abandoning the imperial obligation to attempt improvement; there DO-hood was constantly being born anew, the same irresistible force meeting the same immovable object.
But in Northern Nigeria the emotional satisfactions which could be experienced almost incidentally in Masailand could only be experienced at a price, that of being too careful to avoid offence.
In spite of all the powers with which he was armed, and routinely used for routine ends, it is clear that the Northern Nigerian Resident too often failed to use them for good: being, rather than doing, good came to define the limits of his aspirations.
This is why Hugh Clifford, who was as committed as anyone to indirection, could come to Northern Nigeria in 1921 and be appalled by the state of administrative dereliction which he found there.
Indirect Rule dramatized, sanctified, and institutionalized the belief that backward races should and could be ruled by force of character  rather than by force of arms.
It was therefore not surprising that at the time Indirect Rule was rising to ideological prominence an emphasis on recruiting the right people should develop in the Colonial Service.
For the Colonial Service, this was something entirely new.
The Indian Civil Service and the Sudan Political Service each practised its own system of careful selection, but up to and including the First World War recruitment to the Colonial Service — or rather the assemblage of small local services which made it up — was on a highly casual basis.
Candidates either wrote to the Colonial Office or to an influential relative, or, not infrequently, walked in off the street.
Callers from the street were dealt with by a doorkeeper who either encouraged or discouraged them, depending on how they looked, and entered his impressions in an official diary: ‘not quite a gentleman…— but would do well for Gold Coast’ was a typical entry of 1899.
Selection procedures in general were rough and ready, perhaps because selection was scarcely the mot juste: oversupply of suitable candidates was not a problem for the Colonial Service until the 1930s, when years of misleading propaganda about difficulty of entry, combined with economic depression, had done their work.
Though delighting to read in Blackwood's of the exploits of imperial heroes, the educated British public showed little personal inclination for service in the assorted white men's graves which made up the tropical dependencies.
All this was to change with the advent of Sir Ralph Furse, who from 1919 to 1948 was in sole charge of recruitment for the Colonial Service.
His achievement was twofold: the unification of the Service in the 1930s, and the eradication from the public mind of any lingering notion of it as a refuge for down-and-outs and ne'er-do-wells.
Furse set out to create a Service which would be ‘a corps d'elite to which…the best type of man…will feel it an honour to belong’, and in time and according to his lights, he brought practice into line with theory and made good the boast that those whom England sent out to govern the colonial empire were her finest sons.
Furse had no personal experience of imperial administration, and until he began the series of journeys associated with his work of recruitment, had seen nothing of the empire apart from a brief visit to Ceylon.
Drifting into the Colonial Office because deafness prevented him from taking up a career in the regular army, he brought with him a romantic conception of empire stimulated in the first instance by Kitchener's Omdurman campaign and encouraged with appropriate reading matter by his father.
This he proceeded to apply directly to the process of recruitment.
His achievement  was thus in a real sense an imaginative one, and so much was he the right man in the right place at the right time that his procedures and opinions were never seriously gainsaid.
Taking his cue from the Sudan Service and rejecting the written examination, Furse's method of selection was the interview, to which he attached a great mystique.
No Northern Nigerian Resident was ever more concerned with the ineffability of the art of judgement than was Furse, who was proud to think of the process by which he reached his decision as one of the ‘arcana imperii ’.
Asked on one occasion if he would define by what methods he judged a candidate, he replied that it was ‘difficult to say.
But if I had to choose a hunter for work in a particular type of country I should have a pretty good idea which would be the best animal to pick, though I might not be able to tell you how I went about it.’
Once Furse had perfected his system, no one entered the administrative service — or even the technical services, for he believed the requirements of character to apply just as much to them — without being interviewed by him or one of his small group of assistants.
But long before this stage was reached an elaborate, though subterranean, process of screening had gone on.
Furse eschewed advertisement — guaranteed, in his opinion, to attract ‘a mass of rubbish’— and concentrated on methods which were ‘mole-like: quiet, persistent, and indirect’.
He and his staff relied on ‘personal contacts in the most fruitful quarters’ and ‘visited, or wrote personally to, a host of individuals who could instruct and influence the young; university tutors, deans of medical schools, schoolmasters, and so on’.
It was all a little like Rhodes' secret society, which was to have ‘members placed at our universities and our schools [to]watch the English youth passing through their hands’, and may conceivably have been influenced by it.
There was a ‘secret list’ of useful persons who could be relied on to keep an eye open for promising young men.
It is said to have included John Buchan.
Furse spread his net wide, but it did not sink deep.
His devotion to the ancient universities and the public schools which supplied them — he himself was at Eton and Oxford — was absolute.
He wanted the best for his new model Colonial Service, and he was in no doubt as to where he would find it.
One of his first undertakings was to transfer the Tropical African Services Course from the Imperial Institute in South Kensington, ‘which is not frequented by other students of a kind to make good Administrative officers’, to Oxford and Cambridge, where ‘it would, I am sure, spread interest in our services among other undergraduates of the type we want’; and the great triumph of his career as a bureaucrat was to persuade the Warren Fisher committee, set up in 1927 to examine methods of  recruitment into the Colonial Service, that it was unnecessary to look further afield for men ‘who possess the qualities of mind, character and personality which make for success in the leadership of native…races’.
What these qualities were Furse was never so vulgar or incautious as to define.
But some idea of the general type he was looking for can be gleaned from his memoirs.
From these it is clear that he identified completely with the men in the outposts, believing as they did that if all was well in the boma the empire could be left to take care of itself.
The vision which entranced him was therefore that of the ideal District Officer, as conceived by the District Officer himself — permanently on tour, manfully resistant to bureaucratic interference from headquarters, and ‘winning the trust and loyalty of [his]charges by [his]integrity, fairness, firmness, and likableness’.
This was the type of man he was looking for and, by his own account, not infrequently found.
If the empire was going to be run on character, Furse was confident he could supply it.
Furse concentrated on the public schools because he believed, like almost everyone else, that they provided an appropriate training in character for future rulers of native races.
The time has come to take a closer look at that assumption.
There is now a considerable literature on the public schools, none of which unfortunately comes to grips with what seems, with respect to the subject of this book, to be perhaps the central issue: the fact that for a hundred years, from the middle of the nineteenth century to the middle of the twentieth, the British governing classes were educated in an atmosphere which combined the toleration of a merciless brutality with perpetual exhortations to be good.
Before Arnold, the public schools were bearpits.
After Arnold, they were still bearpits, but with the bears required to put in compulsory attendance at chapel.
It is a tribute to the formative power of the experience that by and large the contradiction was internalized.
There were very few cynical Englishmen running the empire, or, for that matter, running the country.
Arnold was an evangelical pur sang .
His concern for the souls of the rich was equalled only by his fear of the impatience of the poor; he lived in daily fear of revolution.
When he found himself in charge of a famous school he seized his opportunity and set to work to instil in the offspring of the ruling classes the personally desirable and politically vital sense of sin.
This is no exaggeration: though primarily a moralist, Arnold was almost equally a political reformer, and he thought of himself as performing a service to the state.
Through him the notion of the responsible use of power by a divinely  ordained ruling class was introduced directly into the educational system, and boys were exposed systematically and en masse to an idea which only a few of them could have been counted on to pick up informally at home.
The very circumstance, however, which made the public schools a perfect vehicle for propaganda — their isolation, through the boarding system, from the outside world and the idiosyncratic influence of families — ensured that Dr Arnold, in his crusade for the personal salvation of his charges, could enjoy no more than a limited success.
There were never enough masters to control the unruly mobs of boys, and the enlistment of prefects to the cause of authority was at best an ambiguous achievement: they were boys, too.
As Arnold himself so clearly saw, ‘a society formed exclusively of boys, that is of elements each separately weak and imperfect, becomes more than an aggregate of their several defects; the amount of evil in the mass is greater than the sum of evil in the individuals’.
Societies of boys were what the public schools essentially remained, with the masters forming no more than a thin crust of adult authority.
The result was apparent in even so cheerful and admiring a representation of public school life as Tom Brown's School Days , set in the supposedly reformed Rugby attended by the author.
The weak are bullied by the strong, the little by the big, the pious by the irreligious.
Strong drink is consumed, fags are roasted, and there is no end of fighting.
That reform should extend to the abolition of fighting was not even conceivable to the author.
Fighting, he says, is ‘the real, highest, honestest business of every son of man’ and he advises ‘those young persons whose stomachs are not strong, or who think a good set-to with the weapons which God has given to us all, an uncivilized, unchristian, or ungentlemanly affair, just skip this chapter at once, for it won't be to their taste’.
Virtually all the accounts we have suggest that the public schools, in spite of Arnold's efforts, continued to exist in something not far removed from a Hobbesian state of nature — or rather, just far enough removed to allow for the development of tribal ritual.
The number of taboos which might unknowingly be broken was terrifying.
Some children spent their entire schooldays in unrelieved misery.
But matters were so arranged that for most the outlook was not completely bleak; almost everyone could arrive eventually at a state of relative freedom from intimidation and enjoy a measure of authority over others.
And when this happy moment arrived, it was crowned with legitimacy, because like many tribal societies the public school was a gerontocracy-an important fact obscured more often than not in the literature by concentration on the oligarchic  aspect of the power exercised by favoured groups of senior boys: prefects, athletes, bloods, in slightly differing proportions according to the slightly differing character of the individual schools, but all essentially distinguished by seniority.
To think otherwise would be to succumb to the glamour and particularity with which seniority was invested by the boys themselves; the critical fact was that, in the fullness of time, little boys who were beaten by big ones might reasonably expect to do the beating themselves.
The schools were aware of the importance of the gerontocratic process and called it ‘learning to command and obey’.
But this overlooks what was surely an equally important result of the experience.
This was to keep alive, in boys whose privileged background might have encouraged complacent acceptance rather than active pursuit of power, a keen appreciation of what it was like to have it, and what it was like to be without it.
The schools claimed to toughen boys, and they did.
By making it possible for a vivid and urgent desire for power to exist alongside a consciousness of being the legitimate and predestined possessor of it, they kept the edge on the governing classes.
This was one factor influencing the way in which the teachings of Arnold and his successors were actually apprehended.
When boys were given legitimate authority to exercise at last, so eagerly was it anticipated that they were prone to feel it intensely deserved.
Thus a consciousness of proved quality rather than a habit of self-questioning, as Arnold had no doubt intended, was often the result of a public school education.
‘Confidence’, indeed, has been such a marked characteristic of the public school boy that many boys have been sent to public schools mainly to acquire it.
Two other factors seem to have played a part in bringing about a subtle transformation of the Arnoldian message.
One was the simple fact that it was directed at and mediated through adolescent boys, whose conception of the significance of their own behaviour is notably dramatic.
Thus the evangelical cult of conduct, with its emphasis on the sober virtues, was transformed in the public schools into the much more flamboyant cult of ‘manliness’(note the gerontocratic associations of the word), a notion very little different, in its emphasis on courage and strength, from ancient aristocratic ideals of honour, which were thereby incidentally preserved.
The other was the equally simple fact that boys in public schools were chronically deprived of the normal sources of affection.
Expelled from the comfort of home usually at the tender age of eight, they were compelled until they left school (or, in some cases, university) to associate almost exclusively with other boys, whose behaviour towards them was unpredictable.
Arnold himself deplored  the unnatural disruption of the affections in sending a boy away to school.
He planned to send his sons to day schools, but weakened at the last.
To what extent boys were conscious of the loss of love — in its practical and immediate manifestation — is impossible to say: mechanisms of denial come quickly into operation to deal with such enormities.
But what is evident is that they often sought affection from the only source which under the circumstances was available — other boys.
Friendships developed of a very intense type, sometimes, inevitably, with an explicitly sexual aspect which seems, in spite of the awful fulminations of headmasters, to have produced remarkably little in the way of enduring guilt or sexual abnormality in adult life: it was the emotional intensity of the experience which was remembered, suggesting how deep a displaced need it in fact fulfilled.
It thus came about that, during the process of a boy's adjustment to public school, two very powerful and not very compatible needs — the need for power and the need for love — were grossly stimulated, in an environment where their satisfaction could not easily be assigned to the usual separate compartments of life.
In seeking to satisfy one need, a boy might  hopelessly compromise his chances of satisfying the other.
If he held his own with other boys in the struggle for power he could hardly help behaving in ways which were unlikely to be lovable — a fact which assumed a definite importance when the only hope of affection came from those same boys.
Clearly, not everyone's reaction to the situation was the same.
Some boys simply gave up the struggle for power, or scarcely attempted it.
Of these a few came to see in friendship the whole meaning of life: Goldsworthy Lowes Dickinson and E.M.
Forster were to exemplify this type in English letters.
Other boys allowed the need for power to take them over and became bullies; and presumably there were other routes to survival.
But there was one orthodox route, supplied by the school itself.
This was to learn to exercise power ‘responsibly’.
In this way power and love might both be enjoyed, as we see them being enjoyed by the heroes of a thousand school stories.
The prefects and captains of the First Eleven, exercising terrific authority for the good of the school, are rewarded, not just with acquiescence but with — blind devotion.
By the end of the nineteenth century there was an almost perfect fit between the moral indoctrination pursued by the school and what was perhaps the most obvious way in which an individual boy might try to resolve the conflicting demands which the experience of school made on him.
Almost perfect, but not quite: the emotional freighting which it acquired in transmission deprived the Arnoldian message of any remaining austerity.
It was good form alone, rooted in ideas of  honour, which preserved the appearance of enlightened indifference to the affections of the mob.
Public school fiction, avidly written and avidly read, displayed the reality.
The avowed purpose of the public schools was to produce leaders, and if we are to understand by leaders rulers capable of extracting the voluntary compliance of the ruled, we must concede that they produced them.
Whether the capacity for leadership extended beyond the special circumstances of school is another question.
The fact that it was assumed to do so had its own importance.
The school, indeed, produced an over-supply of leaders.
Some of them were absorbed by the empire, where they constructed an administrative system remarkable for the degree of local autonomy exercised within it, and where they pursued, amid uncomprehending but generally unresisting natives, dreams of winning the trust and loyalty of their charges by their integrity, fairness, firmness, and likableness.
In time, and under the influence of Sir Donald Cameron, a man of obscure origin and exceptional ability who had known the delights neither of DO-hood nor of public school, Indirect Rule began to acquire a less exotic coloration and a less inward-looking character than it had had in its glorious beginnings in Northern Nigeria.
During his controversial governorships of Tanganyika (1925–31) and Nigeria (1931–5), Cameron developed a system of Indirect Rule — or indirect administration, as he preferred to call it — based wherever possible on local native councils supervised openly but supposedly tactfully by British administrators.
In Northern Nigeria, he succeeded in detaching the judicial system and the technical departments from the grip of the administrative service, whose claims to omnipotence and omnicompetence were thereby permanently reduced from the heights to which they had risen a decade before.
Professional anthropologists, for whom Lugard and the Northern Residents had had no use, were encouraged to study and to recommend.
The whole enterprise of Indirect Rule became more organized, more standardized — the native administrations of Tanganyika, a country of considerable ethnic diversity, were by the end of Cameron's governorship more or less uniform in structure — and more active in intention.
Moral authority Cameron did not disregard or despise, but he was more concerned with its educative than with its binding power.
The political education of the African, qua African, was his first concern, and in his hands Indirect Rule became more genuinely the instrument of regeneration it was supposed to be.
But his enthusiasm for system led him too easily to assume that a native administration duly gazetted was a native  administration actually functioning as a responsible organ of local government, and this set a limit to his achievements in reform.
Though technically shorn of some of his powers, the DO remained substantially in control.
Indirect Rule, then, had several ‘meanings’, not all of them logically compatible with each other, but there was one thing about it which was entirely clear: the conception of government underlying it was a highly charismatic one.
At a time when forces were inexorably at work in Britain itself to produce the bureaucratic form of government we know today, there flourished in the empire a governing ethos which, with its emphasis on character rather than training in its practitioners, its primitive notions of justice, its exaltation of the autonomous agent unhindered by outside control, its demand for loving awe from the governed, was unmistakably the product of an earlier age.
The persistence of this primitive conception of the nature of authority, in circumstances which rendered it plausible, was not without its consequences for the future of the empire.
The End of Empire
When Charles Temple, impelled by his love of logical discourse, asked himself what might be the ultimate evolution of the system of Indirect Rule, he replied that, by allowing ‘natural conditions to exert their influence in a manner modified to meet the requirements of the native group’, Indirect rule would ‘in due course of time’, render that group ‘robust enough to stand by itself’.
At first blush this seems, though more cautiously stated, not too different from Macaulay's grand vision of a free and regenerated India, launched into the civilized world by the patient efforts of generations of Englishmen.
But there was a fundamental difference between Macaulay's views and those of Temple.
Macaulay faced unblinking the prospect that, as a result of his policies, India might be absolutely, if only eventually, free.
Temple denied that the policy he advocated posed any significant threat to the integrity of the British empire.
Looking at the long sweep of the historical past, Temple had seen that ‘Historical analogies lead us to one conclusion only’— that subject races invariably at some point regain their liberty.
But, he asked himself:
Have we any reason to suppose that yet another solution of the problem is to be found, and that we can introduce a precedent so that the native subject races may remain in existence, unfused with ours, and yet in subjection?
If the term subjection be used in its extreme sense I do not for a moment believe that any such solution exists.
But if the term be used to designate those relations…existing between the masses and the leaders, the relations which exist between a more competent man and a less competent, by virtue of which the more competent can control the actions of the less competent for the
advantage of both, then I think that a solution can be found, and that a return to normality in the case of the conquered sufficient to render existence bearable, honourable, and even enjoyable, can be secured.
It depends, however,…entirely on the attitude which we as conquerors adopt towards the conquered, whether we stop the free circulation in the body politic by our institutions or so organise the dependent races as to leave open opportunities for a proper exercise of the social ambitious instinct [defined previously as the desire to exercise power over others for their own good]on the part of the individual native leaders so endowed.
These cogitations are worth quoting in full, as they so accurately reflect, albeit in a more lucid form than that usually encountered, the thinking of those who in the next few decades were to give away the empire in the belief that they were acting to preserve it.
It will be argued in this chapter that their prideful belief in the capacity to influence, so vividly expressed and so evidently vindicated in Indirect Rule, led the British on to fatal experiment in more and more attenuated forms of imperial control.
This is not meant to suggest, of course, that the dismantling of the British empire can be comprehensively explained by the role of ‘character’ in the formation of imperial policy: a chapter on the end of empire in a book called Empire and the English Character must include a disclaimer to that effect.
Historians will be occupied for a long time to come in determining the exact balance and interaction of forces — including, to mention only the more obvious, the economic disaster of the Second World War, the rise of America, and the development of nationalism — which contributed to Britain's imperial demise.
This chapter confines itself to the intangibles.
Nor is it intended to overlook the existence in the councils of state and elsewhere of men to whom any loosening of the reins was wholly repugnant.
Of these Churchill was only the most famous.
Such men found themselves, however, fighting what became all too clearly a rearguard action.
The emphasis in what follows will be on those who moved the matter forward to its ultimate, if unforeseen, conclusion.
Our story begins in India, where in 1885 what was arguably the only significant nationalist organization with which the British ever had to contend, the Indian National Congress, was founded by — an Englishman.
No doubt if A.O. Hume had never founded the Congress it would have come into existence in some other fashion.
But found it he did, and the Congress's early visibility and successes owed something to  his organizing talents and access to parliamentary and public opinion at home.
Hume acted in the belief that he was diverting potentially revolutionary energies into channels which would secure the permanence of British rule.
A retired administrator who as a young man had single-handedly turned the tide of mutiny in his district in the North-West Provinces, he believed that since those Homeric days British administration had become dangerously out of touch with the people.
And indeed, even discounting the role so evidently played by nostalgia in Hume's thinking, it was true that the administration of India, beginning with the viceroyalty of John Lawrence, had become steadily more centralized and more detached.
The grain of truth in the myth of the British administrator dispensing justice impervious to the affection of the natives is to be found in this period of the history of British India, of which James Fitzjames Stephen is perhaps the representative figure, when a maturing bureaucracy was moving away from a personal to an institutional sense of fairness.
Hume's solution to what he had decided was the problem was the re-introduction, in a form suitable for a more politically evolved society, of the binding power of personal contact.
This, rather than a Macaulayish enthusiasm for the export of parliamentary institutions, was the motive for his advocacy, through Congress, of political reform: British authority was to be given a human face by allowing qualified Indians some share in the running of the country.
Congress was founded with the blessing of the then viceroy, Lord Dufferin, an unpassionate liberal who saw it as a useful forum for articulate Indian opinion.
But Dufferin soon began to feel annoyed with the Congress habit of asking for changes which, however modest, only the government in its wisdom could think of introducing.
Pronouncing Congress to be ‘a microscopic minority’, he began to give thought to ways of preventing this minority from poisoning the minds of the majority, especially those of the vast array of native collaborators — the patwaris and the chowkidars , the stationmasters and the clerks — on which British rule so visibly depended; and before long attendance by government employees at meetings of Congress or any other political organization was made illegal.
Thus began the pattern of alternating concession and repression which marked the Indian path to independence, the British constantly frustrated by their inability to rise permanently above the use of force, the nationalists, with the notable exception of Gandhi, seeing only the adroit employment of the carrot and the stick.
The high-water mark of bureaucratic efficiency in British administration arrived during the viceroyalty of Lord Curzon, from  1899 to 1905.
By his very vigour, which left few corners of Indian life uninspected or untouched, Curzon produced disquiet; and by his partition of Bengal, pushed through on its administrative merits with Olympian — the word always comes up with respect to Curzon — disregard for risk, he spectacularly increased the political consciousness of the Bengali middle classes.
The result was a passing phase of terrorism and the permanent invigoration of Congress.
The British government's response came in 1909: the Morley-Minto reforms, named after the Secretary of State and the viceroy of the day.
These conceded Indian representation on an elective basis in both the central and provincial councils of government, while maintaining intact the principle of the irresponsible executive.
Morley denied that they were intended as a prelude to parliamentary government.
He appears to have thought of himself, like Hume, as rescuing imperial authority from the life-threatening grip of an insensitive bureaucracy.
The Russian revolution of 1905 was much in his mind.
The ensuing entente between the government and political India lasted until the First World War.
Then, as the war dragged on, and British demands for economic and other kinds of sacrifice — over a million Indians saw military service in Europe and the Middle East — became insupportable, unrest made its appearance again.
Positive action was then required.
In August 1917 the new Secretary of State for India, Edwin Montagu, announced that the policy of H.M.
Government was the ‘progressive realisation of responsible government in India as an integral part of the Empire’.
This could only mean that, in time, India would attain a status equal to that of the white dominions.
Though the import of the announcement was obvious to Indians, it seems not to have been obvious to the British government, which avoided making any explicit statement on dominion status for India for another twelve years.
The 1917 announcement was wrung out of a reluctant and distracted Cabinet by Edwin Montagu, who saw himself at the time as the architect of a new India — an India of ‘great self-governing Dominions and Provinces…organised and coordinated with the great Principalities…, federated by one central Government’.
Montagu's notion of ‘self-government’ was not in fact as radical as it might appear.
In 1912 he believed that the ‘principles of self-government’ had already ‘been applied in their most extreme form’in Canada and South Africa — a date at which neither of these countries had acquired any formal control over their external relations.
Montagu's stated intention was to ‘hold India’ not by main force but ‘by just institutions, and more and more as time goes on by the  consent of the governed’.
The 1917 announcement and the reforms of 1919 known as the Montagu-Chelmsford reforms (Chelmsford being the viceroy), which introduced the principle of ministerial responsibility into provincial government, were seen as means to this end.
‘Self-government’ was thus conceived not as the inevitable prelude to letting India go, as it appeared at the time and has appeared since to eyes less clouded than Montagu's by belief in the possibility of voluntary servitude, but as the natural means of keeping it.
Montagu welcomed dissent in India as a sign of blossoming political maturity, and distinguished confidently between legitimate and illegitimate unrest — the latter being that which had for its object ‘Home Rule’, the former that which aspired to political responsibility to the degree the British saw fit to give it.
It was to the former that he believed himself to be responding.
When Curzon taxed him with setting in motion ‘a revolution…which will probably lead by stages of increasing speed to the ultimate disruption of the empire’, Montagu replied, aghast: ‘Surely you did not mean this!’
But he had his moments of self-doubt.
A month after the momentous declaration had been made he was asking himself: ‘How far can we go in this direction safely?…
Is there any country in the world that has attempted a half-way house in this, or a quarter-way house?…
Can you have a form of government administered by an alien agency partly responsible to the people of the country itself?’
To these questions he had no answer, and he resolutely put them aside.
In the Montagu declaration we see the first official glimmer of an idea which exercised a vast and perversely inspirational influence on the process of imperial disintegration: the idea of the multiracial Commonwealth.
It is not easy, admittedly, at this point in time, when the Commonwealth seems so obviously a fig-leaf for imperial decline, to credit the extravagant hopes that once were entertained of it as the foundation of everlasting British dominion — influence, as it were, eternally made flesh.
Yet the Commonwealth was after all invented at a time when the British were more than ever enamoured of their capacity for effecting the bloodless obedience of subject peoples.
The atmosphere reflected in early writings on the subject is unmistakably one of eager, and on the whole, confident experimentation in new forms of political association, in a world in which no absolute diminution of British power appears to be anticipated.
The term Commonwealth referred, of course, originally to a white Commonwealth, in which sense we first find it employed by Lord Rosebery in 1884.
‘Does this fact of your being a nation’, he inquired  of an Australian audience, ‘imply separation from the Empire?
God forbid!
There is no need for any nation, however great, leaving the Empire, because the Empire is a commonwealth of nations.’
Around the turn of the century, the term began to gain currency among people who wished to acknowledge the increasing political and economic maturity of the colonies of white settlement.
One can hardly put it stronger than that, because a certain imprecision appears to have been attached to the word from the beginning.
It seems, however, always to have been associated by those who employed it with the idea that Britain's historic policy towards its dependencies had been to lead them along the path towards self-government — a belief which had for its principal inspiration the history of Canada since the Durham report.
The most consistent feature of the Commonwealth idea, at all stages of its development, was the principle of consent.
In the minds of those who gave positive thought to it, the Commonwealth was to be an organization to which no one who was unwilling need apply, and in which those who had joined were to reach their decisions on the basis of consensus: the goal to be pursued was an uncoerced acknowledgement of Britain as the senior partner in a world-wide enterprise; the position to be sought was the supremely equivocal but potentially supreme satisfying one of primus inter pares .
When Burma declined to become a member in 1948 — a decision which came as a most unpleasant surprise — comfort was taken in the thought that the voluntary nature of the Commonwealth was thereby confirmed.
There seems to be no sense in which the idea of the Commonwealth can be said to have developed from Indirect Rule, but the similarity of the language employed, and the fact that enthusiasts for one were usually enthusiasts for the other, would appear to suggest that the two ideas sprang from the same rich soil, composted over the years of imperial fact and imperial fancy.
When Charles Temple asked himself what form the finally evolved connection between the conquering races and the conquered, now existing in partially evolved form as Indirect Rule, and based on ‘the relations which exist between a more competent man and a less competent’, might take, he answered that he saw no reason
why in due course, if proper use is made of native institutions, those races which are now subject should not take their places in the ranks of that group of allied nations, as they may I think rightly be called, which forms the [self-governing]British Empire…
I see no reason whatsoever, to take the more organised Filane Emirates and Yoruba chieftainates as examples, why some of the more advanced communities should not enjoy many of the advantages of self-government
today, and why powers equal to those wielded in respect to the management of internal and domestic affairs by the Self-Governing Colonies could not, if the policy of Indirect Rule should be consistently and intelligently applied, be granted to such units within one or two generations.
In the case of those groups which are less advanced today the process will take longer, but that is all the difference.'
To the general public, understandably, it was not always clear whether the creation of a Commonwealth involved a grand gesture of renunciation on Britain's part, or a grand gesture of affirmation on the part of those who took up the option.
The inevitable criticism that it was the former was met firmly with the contention that it was the latter, but it had to be admitted that no one could really be sure, and that to embark on such a venture an act of faith was indubitably required.
It was thus a boon to the cause that one of its earliest recruits was T.E.
Lawrence, who, besides representing to many of his admirers in political circles the very quintessence of those qualities on which the successful transformation of empire into Commonwealth would depend, was an imperial hero to the British public.
Had he not, as everyone knew, single-handedly raised and led an Arab army against the Turks?
Had he not, through the magnetic influence he was able to exert even over those of his own race, personally seen to it at the Peace Conference that these Arabs were not sent unrewarded away?
And had he not, with the utmost delicacy, nurtured in them the impression that they and not he were in control of events?
For Lawrence to give his imprimatur to the idea of the Commonwealth seemed sufficient rebuttal to anyone rude enough to associate it with a loss of imperial virility.
In 1919 Lawrence had already written to, of all people, Curzon, confiding that his ‘own ambition’ was that the Arabs ‘should be our first brown dominion and not our last brown colony’.
Arabs, he added, ‘react against you if you try to drive them…but you can lead them without force anywhere, if nominally arm in arm’.
In 1920 he was active in writing articles for the press, expounding his version of the ‘new Imperialism’ and airing his views on the rebellion against the British in Mesopotamia.
Of the new imperialism he wrote, in the best Indirect Rule manner, that it involved
an active side of imposing responsibility on the local peoples…
We can only teach them how by forcing them to try, while we stand by and give advice.
This is not for us less honourable than administration: indeed it is more exacting for it is simple to give orders, but
difficult to persuade another to take advice, and it is the more difficult which is most pleasant doing…'
Of the rebellion in Mesopotamia he wrote that it could be dealt with by raising two divisions of volunteer local troops, reducing the British administrative staff and setting up an Arab government under the indirect control of a British officer.
Such a government, Lawrence asserted, ‘would be child's play for a decent man to run, so long as he ran it like Cromer's Egypt, not like the Egypt of the Protectorate.
Cromer dominated Egypt, not because England gave him force, or because Egypt loved us, but because he was so good a man.’
He told Lewis Namier that the rebellion was due to British administrators becoming accustomed during the war to having troops to do their will.
Only when we learned to rule again without soldiers, he said, would we be safe.
No better summary could have been provided of what the  Commonwealth idea was about.
The Commonwealth became to politicians and men of affairs what Indirect Rule was to the DO — a chance to display those qualities which justified them in the possession of an empire, and thereby ensure its perpetuation.
And it is no accident that once the initiative in this matter had passed, so to speak, to the higher command, the gradual obscuration of the authority of the District Officer ensued.
As Whitehall began to treat directly with nationalists, doling out to them bits of ‘responsibility’ as DOs were wont to do with their native authorities, the mystique of the boma began to wither away: in the DO's apotheosis lay paradoxically the seeds of his decline.
The story of the last decades of the British empire is thus the story not only of the attenuation of imperial control, but of the centralization of imperial authority.
Lawrence's views on brown dominions owed something to his intimacy with Lionel Curtis, the indefatigable imperial publicist who was the first person to think seriously about the idea of a multiracial Commonwealth.
Of no mean magnetism himself — Lawrence thought highly enough of him to make him the recipient of some of his most excruciating introspections — Curtis was the inspirational force of that curious organization, the Round Table, in whose journal of the same name Lawrence published his article on the new imperialism in the Middle East.
We are still some way from forming a just estimate of the influence exercised by Curtis and his friends of the Round Table on the imperial policy of the British government.
One obstacle has been the obsessive discretion of their methods of operation, so appropriately reflecting the imperial mystique which inspired them; another has been a certain scholarly reluctance to welcome the suggestion that this informal study group composed of intellectuals and men of affairs, who almost never held elective office, and who indeed generally despised it, exercised any significant influence at all.
Much remains to be learned of their activities, but what is certain is that they had converts in high places — notably Edward Wood (of whom more anon), Leo Amery, and Lord Hailey of African Survey fame and immense Colonial Office influence — and that through their publication of a journal widely respected for its seriousness they kept before the eyes of the political establishment the idea of a new kind of empire.
The group had its first incarnation in South Africa as Lord Milner's ‘kindergarten’, the circle of clever young men, products mainly of New College and All Souls, that Milner gathered around him to assist in the reconstruction and unification of South Africa after the Boer War.
They included Curtis, Philip Kerr (later Lord Lothian), Geoffrey Dawson, and R.H: Brand.
John Buchan was a peripheral member of the group.
Upon their return to England after South African unification in 1910 the kindergarten tackled the next item on what seems to have been an implicit agenda — the unification of the British empire.
Under Milner's patronage, they founded for this purpose the Round Table movement, with branches in each of the dominions and a journal published in London.
By imperial unification they meant at this time a federal union of Britain and the white dominions, a scheme differing little in its essentials from other schemes of imperial union which had occupied the minds of the British political classes from time to time during the latter part of the nineteenth century.
But the kindergarten's fervour for imperial federation declined during the First World War, when the strength of dominion nationalism became apparent, and they moved towards more informal notions of imperial co-operation.
Curtis, meanwhile, as the result of his meditations on how a federated empire might collectively discharge its duty to the backward races under British rule, had begun to reach the conclusion that the answer was to train them for eventual self-government.
‘The task of preparing for freedom the races which cannot as yet govern themselves’, he wrote, ‘is the supreme duty of those who can.
It is the spiritual end for which the Commonwealth exists, and material order is nothing except as a means to it.’
The practical corollary of this, tirelessly expounded in the Round Table in the post-war years, was that the safest place for brown races, for now and the foreseeable future, was within the British empire, where their interests could be looked after and their development, at an appropriately gradual pace, ensured.
Behind all this was discernible the dim outlines of an even grander vision — a vision of an Anglo-Saxon world state, in which Britain, the white dominions and America (realigned with Britain after what Curtis referred to as the ‘schism’ of 1775) would in concert undertake to ensure the peace and prosperity of the world: Curtis was not called ‘The Prophet’for nothing.
There was indeed a wild ambition about the Round Tablers' schemes and dreams which belied the unvarying reasonableness of their prose.
We get a glimpse of it when Curtis argues, in support of his view that America should have Near Eastern mandates, that this would place her advantageously for the regeneration of post-revolutionary Russia; as ‘steward of the Near East’, she could ‘extend to the blind giant the neighbourly hand of a friendship which is open to no suspicion’.
Like their mentor Lord Milner, the Round Tablers were ‘British race patriots’ dedicated to the maintenance, through the empire, of the world-wide ascendancy of the Anglo-Saxons.
History was an inspiration, not a lesson, to them.
The Round Tablers, then, hardly saw themselves as being in the business of imperial decline.
On the contrary, they saw the empire as the basis of Britain's claim to world power status, and their commitment to exporting self-government — which they wrote about as if it were merely the current expression of the British administrative genius — was secondary to this.
In their South African days the kindergarten showed little interest in the uplift of native races.
India naturally came into focus as a field for Round Table action some time before the other dependencies.
By 1915 it had become one of the obsessions by which Curtis was possessed serially in the course of his long and active career, and, of all his many projects, the political evolution of India was the one where he could most truly claim to have made a direct contribution to events.
He was not, it appears, in any way responsible for the Montagu declaration — though he anticipated its thinking-but came on the scene shortly afterwards as one of the chief architects of the Montagu-Chelmsford reforms.
These were of immense consequence in giving elected Indian officials their first real taste of power, and in encouraging them to ask for more — much more, needless to say, than Curtis had either foreseen or intended.
Notwithstanding the growing power of the Congress movement, he entertained high expectations of the new policy in fostering the seeds of devotion to the empire in the Indian people, believing in the face of all the evidence that the reforms would create conditions whereby ‘one day the greater love of the greater Commonwealth will be found to have come without observation’.
Curtis' optimism about this, unlike Montagu's, never wavered.
He was by temperament a true believer, who mistook the process of arriving at his own convictions for the unveiling of the eternal verities.
On the eve of his first visit to India Curtis confided to an associate that the great task which lay ahead was ‘to renovate the soul of the Indian people’.
He spoke with the fervour of discovery, unaware it seems that he was by this date, imperially speaking, reinventing the wheel.
He was the kind of man who absorbed ideas unconsciously, made them his own, and pushed them to new limits.
In this case he was carrying the task of soul renovation up to an altogether dizzier level of risk and aspiration than had hitherto been attempted.
Whole peoples were now to be regenerated, not by the patient labours of obscure administrators toiling at their life's work in obscure places, but by the brilliant schemes of brilliant people flitting about the corridors of power.
Curtis' incipiently multiracial ideas seemed at first rather startling to some other members of the Round.
Table — his Project of a Commonwealth (1915) created dissension in the ranks-but they soon prevailed, and the Round Table brought into currency a new term, the Commonwealth of Nations, which proved popular because it so gracefully combined the idea of imperial unity with that of national autonomy.
By the 1920s it was enjoying a wide circulation.
Its curiously reassuring suggestiveness helped to prepare British hearts and minds for the possibility of formal, though not final, separation from their subject peoples.
Gandhi has described in Satyagraha in South Africa how in the course of the struggle against the Black Act of 1907, which required every Indian over the age of eight in the Transvaal to register and be finger-printed, he developed his doctrine of satyagraha or ‘truth-force’ and its practical application in civil disobedience.
The man responsible for introducing the fateful legislation was none other than Lionel Curtis.
Curtis was at that time Assistant Colonial Secretary of the Transvaal and he was not motivated in what he did by any particular animus towards Indians.
He was as usual training his sights exclusively on the goal currently in view, in this case the unification of South Africa, the kindergarten campaign for which seemed at that moment to require a concession to Afrikaner racial prejudice.
In making it Curtis helped to unleash a force which before long would profoundly challenge the British claim to dominion in India.
It is important to try to be clear about what exactly this force was and the nature of the challenge that it posed to British rule in India — for there was a profound difference between Gandhi's perception of  these things and that of the British.
To Gandhi,satyagraha was a moral force which, by inspiring in the opponent a process of rational empathy with the suffering of the satyagrahi , brought him voluntarily to accept the rightness of the satyagrahi's point of view.
He thus saw his campaigns of non-violent non-co-operation as a challenge to British confidence in the rightness of their position in India.
Indeed, the belief has now passed into the folklore that it was Gandhi's success in appealing to the British conscience, also known as British decency, that led to India's achievement of independence in 1947.
This is a belief, however, for which the principal evidence is that this was Gandhi's stated intention.
In acknowledgement of British decency, it must be said that Gandhi possessed the supreme advantage in his campaigns of knowing that, so long as he confined his activities to non-violent protest, he was not risking death at the hands of the authorities.
Quite possibly another administration than a British one, less morally aspiring and less legally punctilious, would have arranged for him a quiet accident, or a fatal incarceration.
Yet it is remarkable, on the other hand, how morally unmoved the British hierarchy in India seems to have been at the time by civil disobedience: if British officials found it morally painful to see Indians breaking the law and suffering for it, by and large they succeeded in keeping the fact to themselves.
Gandhi indeed could count on the British conscience for his personal safety, but he could never count on it for political concessions — and it is clear that at some level he understood this.
Otherwise (the point is surely an obvious one) he would have limited himself to verbal argument.
The technique of civil disobedience was applied precisely because decency was so evidently not enough, or, looking at it another way, because there was so evidently not enough decency.
The challenge which Gandhi posed to the British, as they perceived it at the time, was not to their consciences but to their authority.
The force he unleashed was that of insubordination.
Depending, as Dufferin had so clearly perceived, for their ability to govern on the collaboration of a vast class of petty native fonctionnaires , and the political apathy of an even vaster class of ignorant peasants, they could in no way afford to see these people aroused to insubordination, even of an ostensibly peaceful kind.
And there was in practice a very thin line between peaceful protest and the other variety.
The passions aroused in civil disobedience usually expressed themselves before they were spent in acts of more conventional rebellion.
When the situation seemed to warrant it, or the moment seemed opportune, these were dealt with briskly by the forces of law and  order: there was little sign of any paralysis of will in this respect on the part of the British in India.
Though they were as a rule sparing in the use of force, this was for reasons which seem not to have included sympathy with civil disobedience.
The men who ruled India were aware that what they referred to as their prestige would in the end by compromised by too obvious a reliance on resort to arms.
They also knew that the support of Indian ‘moderates’, that is, those Indians who were willing to be persuaded of the Raj's essential righteousness of intent, would be lost if they became too blatantly repressive.
And they had to concern themselves with the possibility of igniting even greater disturbances which could not be contained by the forces at hand.
There was, however, a sense in which Gandhi did pose a personal challenge to the British, as distinct from the institutional challenge of organized mass disobedience for which he was responsible.
In his manifest ascendancy over millions of Indians, he challenged their monopoly of the force of personality.
It was in meeting him on this ground that the British came closest to responding to him as a worthy adversary.
Gandhi, as everyone knows, was a most unusual politician.
He held no office, had no possessions, and came and went from the political arena at times of his own choosing.
Although on occasion he functioned as leader of the Congress movement, the ascendancy he achieved over it was purely personal, and he could make it seem as though he played with it at will.
Like the British he preferred to exercise power without visible institutional support.
But he did in actuality what the British could now do in India only in fantasy.
He truly possessed the charismatic authority to which they, in their too evidently institutional collectivity, could do little more than aspire.
He thus became, not just an enemy, but that infinitely more disturbing thing, what they could not but acknowledge to be a rival for the allegiance of the people of India.
Gandhi's most brilliant demonstrations of this fact were achieved through his practice of fasting for the attainment of some political object.
As almost everyone except himself perfectly understood, these fasts were a ruthless exploitation of the power of his own sanctity.
Gandhi only began to undertake serious fasts — that is, fasts where there was a danger to his life, as opposed to brief fasts for purposes of spiritual discipline or penance — after he had established a reputation for sanctity and a large following based to some extent on that reputation.
His first fast unto death occurred in 1918, in support of the Ahmedabad textile workers' strike, and was employed against the mill-owning family, who were devoted to him.
Gandhi seems to have felt some flicker of remorse about his treatment of the  Sarabhai family; at any rate, without confessing error, he preoccupied himself with working out rules for what might be termed the just fast.
But such was the genuine power of his personality that his persistent contention that these fasts were undertaken with the object of assisting his opponents to accept his point of view on its merits always received respectful attention, even as it became more and more evident, with the passage of time, that their success depended in actuality on the personal capital he had built up: he was too special, too revered, and eventually too important in the political consciousness of the Indian masses, to be allowed to die.
It is curious indeed to see in how many ways Gandhi's conception of power seems a mirror image to that of the British, even if, as in the case of fasting, he sometimes employed techniques of Hindu origin to obtain his ends.
Like the British he was fascinated by the thought of obedience willingly given; hence his belief that satyagraha worked because it changed the opponent's mind about the issue at stake.
Like them, too, in their less earthbound moments, he enjoyed the proud embracing of risk.
In South Africa, during the agitation against finger-printing, he stunned his supporters by declaring that they must trust Smuts.
‘A Satyagrahi’, he said, ‘bids good-by to fear.’
In this instance, his hopes were first disappointed and then fulfilled.
Smuts was a good choice of opponent.
His ultimate conversion, after long and courteous discussions which added cubits to Gandhi's stature, provided a timely justification of the latter's claim to leadership.
These traits in Gandhi were no accident: he was profoundly a creature of the Anglo-Indian interaction, and a worthy adversary was indeed just what he aspired to be.
His years in England as a student of law involved him in an earnest effort of adaptation, and it is clear from his own account that he absorbed through his reading and his acquaintance a sense of British moral aspiration, for which he acquired a genuine respect.
By what unconscious intelligence he also acquired an understanding of British moral pride, and how to set up his own against it, remains a mystery.
Though susceptible to influence, Gandhi was an original.
Like Indian nationalists and reformers of an earlier generation, he was deeply concerned, in a way which plainly suggests the working of British influence on his mind, as it had worked on theirs, with the regeneration of India.
He believed as Lionel Curtis did that Indians' souls had to be renovated before they were fit to govern: he deeply shocked the American journalist William Shirer by announcing that ‘Self-government…is inconceivable and unattainable without the removal of untouchability, as it also is without Hindu-Moslem unity…we shall be unfit to gain independence so long as we keep in  bondage a fifth of the population of Hindustan.’
This was a very different type of nationalism from that which had produced the United States of America, and one which it is not easy to explain, as has sometimes been attempted, in terms of Gandhi's attachment to traditional Hindu notions of self-purification.
The connection of moral purity with the right to govern was, in the world Gandhi happened to inhabit, a very English one.
The long years he spent absorbed in working for the abolition of untouchability and for the reconciliation of Muslim and Hindu, and in innumerable projects of village uplift, testified not only to his genuine goodness but also to the strength of his desire to make India, in the eyes of its alien rulers as well as his own, worthy to be free.
The boldness of Gandhi's political tactics obscured to a large extent the modesty of his political aspirations, which were very much in line with what moderates, taking their cue from the British, had long set their sights upon: self-government within the empire.
For one of the unlikeliest converts to the Commonwealth idea was Gandhi himself.
He embraced the moral grandeur of it with enthusiasm, and to his dying day aspired to nothing more than Indian membership of the British empire as an equal partner, regarding independence in isolation as a perhaps politically expedient but regrettable alternative.
His quarrel with the British was not about whether dominion status was an adequate offer, but over whether they were sincere in making it, and it was only when he concluded, in 1919, that they were not, that he launched mass non-co-operation to get it.
This was the man, it should always be remembered, who joined the British army and worked as a stretcher bearer in the Zulu rebellion of 1906, giving as his reason that ‘the British empire existed for the welfare of the world’.
It was not until 1915 that Gandhi returned to India from South Africa.
By then his triumphs there had given him something of the aura of the awaited one: his following was already in place; he needed only to organize it.
His actions during the war were characteristic.
On the one hand, he performed his first Indian act of civil disobedience in support of the oppressed indigo workers of Champaran; on the other hand, he urged Indians to support the British war effort, even engaging in active recruiting in 1918.
To the incredulous peasants he explained that ‘There can be no partnership between the brave and the effeminate.
We are regarded as a cowardly people.
If we want to become free from that reproach, we must learn the use of arms.’
Presumably he had in mind — nothing else would have been reconcilable with his profession of non-violence — not so much killing as bravely standing up to be killed, but the position was one he felt  constrained to apologize for later.
It may be that he was influenced in his thinking yet again by the British, whose officer class cultivated the honourable wound, and whose subalterns had lately contributed in altogether disproportionate numbers to the casualties suffered by the British army in France.
Gandhi never fully appreciated how deep, widespread and determined was British resistance to his message of repentance and renunciation, and in what subtle ways this resistance might express itself.
He failed always to understand that there was a large area of common ground in British public opinion on India which consisted in the belief that, with a few adjustments, British rule could be made, and remain, acceptable to Indians for ever, and that differences of opinion were to a considerable extent about how this was to be done.
We may take, for example, two apparently very different books written by Englishmen serving in India in the 1920s — one by an evident diehard, one by an evident progressive — and see that they meet, in fact, upon this common ground.
The first book,The Lost Dominion (1924), by a former ICS officer, Bennet Kennedy, is a powerfully reasoned defence of the  pax Britannica  and administrative autocracy, and might be described as an unusually uninhibited expression of the ICS point of view.
The ICS, as a body, had never been much taken with political reform, sensing correctly that it set in motion a process whereby they could expect only to be replaced, and both reason and sentiment told them that this would never do.
As a good ICS man, Kennedy placed the blame for the crisis in India squarely on the service's political masters.
He was scathing about the notion that Indians might be pacified by political concession, observing of the Montagu-Chelmsford reforms that: ‘If the Indians are capable of providing the directorate, they must surely be capable of providing the agents’.
The idea that a free India would remain loyal to the British empire filled him with brilliant scorn.
He wrote tolerantly — no doubt to irritate the tender-minded — of ‘administrative massacres’.
The other book was Must England Lose India?(1930) by Lt. Col. Arthur Osburn, a retired Indian army doctor and member of the Labour party, who hoped one day to see a ‘United States of India’ dwelling ‘contented within the orbit of the British Commonwealth’, a hope which Kennedy regarded as absurd.
Osburn's points were that his fellow Englishmen in India, whose heartless behaviour towards Indians he described in some detail, failed to ‘realize that the British Empire depends for its existence on obtaining the consent and the friendly co-operation of the races governed’, and that the demand for independence ‘need never have arisen but for the arrogance and want of tact of a large percentage of  Englishmen who, in one capacity or another, are resident in India’.
Yet his views and Kennedy's were not so dissimilar as they seemed.
Osburn saw hope for the future in Englishmen mending their ways.
Kennedy saw it in what he termed a policy of ‘constructive repression’— which upon examination turns out to consist mainly in restoring the autonomy of the local official, who will be set free from bureaucratic control to go once again among the people, exercising ‘sympathy (in its true and not its debauched sense)’, conducting his business in the vernacular, abandoning that ‘cold aloofness’ which is ‘a vice in a ruler’, and seeing that the Crown's Indian subjects are well-governed, harmless, and content.
Kennedy could have endorsed without difficulty Osburn's remarks that ‘We shall not beat the Indian by Indianizing our own sense of decency and justice’ and that ‘The only real cure for sedition is a just, tolerant and sympathetic rule’.
Shortly after the end of the war an incident occurred which was of critical importance in the development of Gandhi's relations with the British — the massacre at Amritsar.
In Amritsar on 13 April 1919 General Dyer broke up a prohibited meeting by firing into the crowd — sustained firing which resulted in 379 people being killed.
The iron hand had burst from the velvet glove in unmistakable fashion, and what was more, it was grasped in a congratulatory handshake by large numbers of Englishmen, both in India and in Britain itself.
Dyer was eventually censured by a committee of inquiry, but substantial sums were raised for him by public subscription and he was adulated in the press, the House of Commons, and — especially — the House of Lords.
The governor of the Punjab praised his initiative.
He remained consistently unrepentant, explaining to the investigating committee that his intent had been to produce ‘a sufficient moral effect from a military point of view, not only on those who were present, but more specially throughout the Punjab’.
He had acted in accordance with the Punjab creed, but with too much enthusiasm and a few decades too late.
These events eventually made plain to Gandhi the existence in both official and unofficial circles of a section of British public opinion which he could not hope to convert, though he came most reluctantly to an acknowledgement of this fact.
In spite of Amritsar, he announced himself willing to co-operate with the Montagu-Chelmsford reforms which were unveiled at the end of the year, and only changed his mind as the degree of Dyer's support in British public opinion was borne in upon him, and as he began to find himself isolated by the more radical elements in Congress, who had either already lost their faith in the British, or had never had any.
Obliged to seize the initiative, he announced in 1920 his first  campaign of mass non-co-operation.
British goods were to be boycotted, British courts not resorted to, and British schools not taught in.
If non-co-operation remained peaceful, Gandhi promised, self-government would be achieved within a year.
Self-government failing to arrive — how extraordinary that he should have thought it would — a campaign for the non-payment of taxes was initiated in Bardoli, near Bombay.
This was true civil disobedience rather than mere non-co-operation.
A week later a mob set fire to a town hall in Chauri Chaura in the United Provinces, killing 22 policemen.
Deeply distressed, Gandhi called off the campaign of civil disobedience.
He was then arrested and charged with sedition.
What followed next was an encounter between Gandhi and an Englishman, Judge C.N. Broomfield, which indeed deserves to be remembered in the annals of war for its courtesy, chivalry, and generous sense of occasion.
The events in Judge Broomfield's courtroom constitute the element of truth in the myth of Gandhi's successful appeal to the British conscience.
Addressing the court before sentencing, and speaking in that confiding style whose quality of extreme directness made ordinary statements seem extraordinary, Gandhi took upon himself complete responsibility for ‘the diabolical crimes of Chauri Chaura’ and other disturbances which had broken out in recent weeks.
‘I knew that I was playing with fire’, he confessed; ‘I ran the risk, and if I were set free I would still do the same.’
He did not ask for mercy; he did not plead extenuation: he was here, he said, ‘to invite and cheerfully submit to the highest penalty that can be inflicted upon me for what in law is a deliberate crime, and what appears to me to be the highest duty of a citizen’.
With a high sense not only of justice but of dramatic effect he informed the judge that the only courses open to him were ‘either to resign your post, or inflict on me the severest penalty if you believe that the system and law you are assisting to administer are good for the people’.
The young judge rose to the occasion.
Admitting that it was ‘impossible to ignore the fact’ that the defendant was ‘in a different category from any person I have ever tried or am likely to have to try’and was acknowledged to be ‘a man of high ideals and of noble and even saintly life’, he took Gandhi gravely to task for his failure to anticipate that violence would be the ‘inevitable consequence’of his acts.
Asserting, what was palpably untrue, that ‘There are probably few people in India who do not sincerely regret that you should have made it impossible for any government to leave you at liberty’, he handed down a sentence of six years' simple imprisonment, pointing out — the crowning touch-that the sentence was the same as that given to the nationalist hero Bal Gangadhar Tilak, twelve years before.
In a final  speech, Gandhi acknowledged the compliment and praised the judge's courtesy.
The scene closed with judge and prisoner bowing solemnly to one another, and the latter, after spending half an hour discoursing with his supporters in the courtroom, being led off to prison wreathed in smiles.
The British never made the mistake of trying Gandhi again.
Only twenty-two months of the sentence were served, Gandhi being released from prison when his health broke down after an operation for appendicitis.
Between 1925 and 1929 he devoted himself to his regenerative projects.
In the midst of these, in 1926, there arrived in India the man who was to take up the challenge Gandhi had thrown down to the Englishman's belief in his god-given aptitude for rule — the sixteenth viceroy, Lord Irwin.
Confident of his own mana , convinced of the legitimacy of his race's presence in India, and equipped with political opinions which met those of Gandhi in a tightly interlocking pattern, in his own way, he, too, was the awaited one.
He seems in retrospect the Mahatma's fated antagonist.
The reasons for Irwin's appointment to the viceroyalty are obscure.
He was by no means a major figure in British politics at the time, though this had not prevented his being offered in 1920, when he was a mere back-bench MP, the governor-generalship of South Africa — an offer which was withdrawn when the South Africans pressed their desire for someone more important.
Aristocratic credentials, the authorship of a biography of John Keble, and a year as Assistant Secretary in the Ministry of National Service did not, in their eyes, seem quite enough.
At the time of his appointment to the viceroyalty Irwin was putting in an unremarkable stint as Minister of Agriculture.
Yet he had somehow established a reputation in political circles as something out of the ordinary.
In 1924 he got a chapter to himself in Harold Begbie's The Conservative Mind , a best-selling effort by a popular journalist to identify a Tory tradition representing the best in English life.
‘When I say to people that Edward Wood [Irwin's name before his ennoblement on appointment to the viceroyalty]seems to me the highest kind of Englishman now in politics, many of them’, Begbie admitted, ‘look surprised and perplexed.’
‘Edward Wood?’ they question; and one can see in their eyes the effort of the memory to attach this name to some sensational event in Parliament or some haunting paragraph in the newspapers…
‘He was Minister for Education in the late Government,’ I continue.
The trouble returns.
‘Oh, was he!’ they say, and dismiss Mr Wood as a nonentity, and me as a pedant or a poseur.
But I have never had this opinion of Edward Wood challenged in the House of Commons.
Men of all parties recognise in his personality something which is admirable, something which distinguishes him from other men.
Even those who do not share his political opinions readily pay their tribute to the range of his intellect and the graciousness of his character; more remarkable still, even those whose intellectual qualities are the equal of his, but whose moral qualities have degenerated in contact with the sordid atmosphere of politics, never speak of him with an affected amusement as a religious bigot or a narrow-minded moralist; in the remarks of these latter politicians I often detect a tone of rather wistful regret, as if they were conscious in themselves of a loss for which the world they have gained has by no means compensated.
In the absence of any notable achievement, these rather ineffable qualities of character must be counted among the reasons for Irwin's despatch to India.
His political views, however, were presumably not completely irrelevant.
He had been sufficiently interested in imperial issues to drift into the Round Table orbit some time after his election to the House of Commons in 1910; and by 1916 his claims to employment were being urged on Milner at the War Office by the Round Table guru F.S. Oliver, who put him unambiguously in a class by himself, above Amery, Brand and Kerr, at the top of his list for preferment.
His claims to the viceroyalty were canvassed by another kindergartener, Geoffrey Dawson, who was now in a position of prominence as editor of The Times .
Dawson was widely credited with influencing Baldwin's decision.
The idea of empire as a voluntary association in which Britain was the respected senior member and acknowledged guiding force appealed strongly to Irwin's self-consciously Disraelian political personality.
Blessed with a constituency which returned him unopposed throughout his career in the Commons, and a tenantry which presented him at his wedding with a two-foot high gold cup, it was natural that he should suppose the keystone of the political arch to be a benevolent aristocracy.
In Parliament, he was one of the young Conservative MPs who welcomed, from a position of strength as they thought, the accession of Labour into British political life, and set about educating it in the arts of responsible participation in the polity.
Like Clifford arguing for natives on the Leg.
Co., Edward Wood pointed out that the men on the Labour benches, if a little wild at times, performed an invaluable consultative function in making the views of the masses known to the classes.
His pamphlet on modern conservatism (Conservative Beliefs , 1924) called  for an end to class warfare and dwelt on the need for reconciliation in the context of a shared reverence for British political tradition, as did, in a less philosophical vein, the book he wrote at the end of the war with his friend George Lloyd (The Great Opportunity , 1918).
These attitudes transposed easily to the Commonwealth point of view, class warfare and nationalist agitation both arousing in him the same confidently emollient response.
When he arrived in India in 1926 he told one of his private secretaries that his aim was to govern in such a way as ‘to keep a contented India in the Commonwealth twenty-five years hence’.
His conception of the aristocracy was an exalted one; so was his conception of empire.
It is rare to find in his writings any acknowledgement of the possibility that Britain's dominion overseas might have had a less than immaculate conception.
This would have compromised the claim to influence.
Towards the end of his life, assessing the course of events in India, Irwin did write that ‘Though they might not have been able to put it into words’, the British people had realized
that the choice lay between power, which had served us since the days of Clive, and influence which, if we could use it aright in the changed conditions of the twentieth century, would serve us better.
And they knew that, of the two, influence was the more securely founded and the more enduring.
Perhaps this constitutes such an acknowledgement.
Irwin's policy, then, was amity, meaning the perpetuation of government by those genetically equipped for it, in what he saw as the public interest, with public support.
In India, where continued hegemony was now the consideration paramount above all others in the minds of British politicians, a wholehearted attempt at such a policy, by one so well qualified to pursue it, must have seemed at least worth a try.
Before turning to his encounter with Gandhi, certain aspects of Irwin's character should be particularly noted.
These are his charm, his instrumental attitude towards his own goodness, and his fundamental opacity of mind — all characteristics which he shared with Gandhi to some degree.
His charm was universally acknowledged, and was of classically aristocratic type.
Of ascetic countenance (though not particularly ascetic habits), of grave and rather formal demeanour, he habitually disarmed people whenever he unbent a little and let them in, as it were, to his superior private world.
He learned to use his charm, and ‘it became’, his biographer says, ‘so strong a factor in him that it  resembled great beauty in a woman’.
Not surprisingly, he possessed a firm belief in his own judgement, being, in the words of his biographer again, ‘receptive to advice but indifferent to criticism’.
There is one rather startling recorded instance of this charm being effective at long distance.
Years after the event, an Indian revealed to Irwin's Military Secretary that he was detailed to assassinate the viceroy on a visit to Lucknow, but, seeing his delightful smile when he got off the train, changed his mind.
As for his goodness, the attempt to live a Christian life was so much a part of Irwin's public persona that the legend became current that, arriving in India on Good Friday, he ignored the official ceremonies of welcome and went straight to church.
He was brought up in an atmosphere of churchmanship, his revered father being a prominent layman who devoted his life to the reunification of the Anglican with the Roman church, and it was perhaps through him that he acquired what seems to have been an unconscious appreciation of the utility of goodness in public life; one notes in his writings a tendency to equate prayer with will.
There is a story told in his otherwise unrevealing autobiography which nicely illuminates the practical side of this pursuit of goodness.
As a young back-bencher, Irwin dreamed one night of meeting Lloyd George in a train carrying them both back from campaigning at a bye-election.
‘Your name's Wood, isn't it?’ the great man said.
I have seen you in the House, and though we haven't met, I have taken rather a fancy to you, and would like if I can to help your career.
Now, I'll tell you what I'll do.
There is nothing the House loves so much as a personal attack, involving a personal explanation.
It is the sort of thing that leaves a permanent mark for good or ill on the member concerned.
So I will make a personal attack on you the day after to-morrow, when the House will be full, and I will tell you beforehand what I'm going to say and what the right come-back is for you to score off me.
That won't do me any harm, for my position is assured; but you are just beginning your career and it will help you a great deal.
For a man without overt ambition, his memorialist in the Dictionary of National Biography was to write, Irwin rose swiftly to high office.
One might question which was the more interesting achievement — to start with nothing, as Gandhi did, and rise to power on the strength of personal reputation, or to start with everything, as Irwin did, and do the same.
Like Gandhi, Irwin possessed a simplicity of demeanour which  was deceptive.
He seemed open and easy to know, once his aloofness had been put aside, but was not.
He gave an impression of penetration, but few people were ever clear about his point of view.
His writings and speeches were miracles of ambiguity; he was congenitally even-handed.
He never said a foolish thing and usually said a wise one.
All these qualities served him well in the kind of politics he preferred to practise — those of unobtrusive influence and persuasion.
Irwin's first public act upon arriving in India was to appeal, in terms that were for him impassioned, for harmony between Muslims and Hindus.
This was a cause dear to Gandhi's heart, and he seems from the beginning to have been sympathetically intrigued by Irwin as a man.
There is little contemporary evidence that Irwin ever returned the compliment.
His correspondence shows him reacting to Gandhi with the rather detached curiosity he showed for other exotic forms of political life.
His recollections are more generous, but notably concerned with the moral impression made on Gandhi, rather than the reverse.
It is true that on one occasion, when asked if Gandhi had not been tiresome, he replied that ‘Some people found Our Lord very tiresome’; but in the context of general unsympathy it is difficult to know what to make of this very Irwinian rebuke.
Irwin's first big political initiative as viceroy was to extract from the British government permission to make a formal declaration that dominion status was the goal of British policy for India.
His reasons for this were simple.
In the short run he wished to rally moderate Indian opinion, which had been put out of countenance by its non-inclusion in the Simon Commission, set up to review the Montagu-Chelmsford reforms in 1927; in the long term he wished to save India for the Commonwealth.
His underlying thinking, however, was not simple.
He assured Lord Salisbury on his visit to England in the summer of 1929 that (according to Salisbury's notes of their conversation), though dominion status might be admitted as the ultimate goal, ‘inasmuch as it is impossible to anticipate an India which could defend itself, and as it is unthinkable that a British army could be subject to native control — an essential condition of real Dominion status — the realisation of the aspiration is not within sight’.
The difficulty of reconciling this statement with a sincere belief in India's eventual membership of the Commonwealth is apparent.
Nevertheless, Irwin appears to have reconciled the two to his own satisfaction, though the arguments to which he resorted owed more to the theological aptitude displayed in his youthful biography  of Keble than to ordinary practical intelligence.
The political feasibility of dangling before Indians a prize at which they might gaze but which they would never grasp was assured, Irwin told Salisbury, by the fact that Indians in their heart of hearts knew they would always need British administrators to guide them.
‘Whenever they are exposed to real difficulty’, he pointed out, ‘they run for the British umbrella.’
It may actually have been Gandhi who was responsible for his optimism about this.
In February 1929 Irwin had written to the Secretary of State of a conversation with Gandhi that ‘what was interesting’ was his statement that, if Indians were at liberty to order their own future, ‘we should be astonished by how much they would desire to leave in our hands through lack of self-confidence’.
In November 1929 he referred to Gandhi's statement again in a letter to the king explaining his dominion status policy.
Salisbury was much struck at this meeting by Irwin's confidence in the future.
He himself felt some doubts about the ethics of the proposal, but, ‘so great is my regard for Edward’, succeeded in suppressing them.
Irwin also canvassed with Salisbury an improved form of dyarchy, the elaborate system set up in 1921 whereby elected Indian ministers in the provincial governments were entrusted with various unexciting portfolios, while British officials remained responsible for the essentials of law, order and taxation.
In Irwin's version, all the ministries would nominally be treated alike, with no official restrictions on those which Indians might occupy, ‘but the Government [would]be instructed beforehand to take care that certain Departments — e.g., Law and Order-are properly filled’.
In the improved atmosphere created by the apparent concession to Indian desires, harmonious relations would transpire.
Dyarchy had always depended for its successful working on the exercise of tactful influence by the British governor and his officials, who had their reputations invested in preventing the resignations of their Indian colleagues; but Irwin's formulation took the controlling role allotted to influence much further.
Power was to be exercised from behind a veil, as the wilder type of Indirect Ruler aspired to do.
One begins to get a clearer idea of what Irwin imagined India's destiny to be.
The dominion status declaration was made in October 1929 and met on the Congress side by what amounted to a demand that it take immediate effect.
Irwin, of course, refused, and Gandhi, whose reaction to Irwin's initiative had at first been positive, announced that a campaign of civil disobedience would begin.
Gandhi's choice of tactic was a master stroke.
In India the production of salt was a government monopoly: he announced that he would walk the 250 miles from Ahmedabad to the sea and break the law by making salt.
Before setting off he wrote to Irwin —‘Dear Friend’, the letter began — making a last plea for negotiations.
Irwin did not reply.
Nor did he arrest him.
The long drama of Gandhi's march to Dandi, accompanied in the end by a crowd several thousand strong, and culminating in the ceremonial collection of a handful of inedible salt, was accomplished without police intervention.
Irwin was gambling on Gandhi's inspiration (referred to in a letter to an English friend as ‘his silly salt stunt’) falling flat, and was anxious to avoid pushing Indian moderates into the radical camp by dealing with Gandhi more severely than the maintenance of law and order required.
His general attitude to civil disobedience was unsympathetic: the General Strike, that affront to Disraelian social harmony, was fresh in his mind.
But there is a wisp of evidence that he considered embarking himself on a fast unto death to bring peace to India.
This seems very improbable, though it would have been consistent with his character to reject an organized challenge to the social order but to appreciate and even think of emulating and thereby vanquishing a personal one.
On 5 April Gandhi made salt.
On 7 April Irwin was writing to the Secretary of State that the Mahatma's health was poor and that his horoscope had predicted he would die that year, which would be, he said, ‘a very happy solution’.
But still he held off arresting Gandhi, though other leaders were quietly put away, and thousands of Indians were arrested after wading into the sea to collect water for salt.
It was not until 30 April, as disturbances mounted throughout India, that Irwin decided that he had no further option but to arrest Gandhi.
The arrest was made on 4 May and Gandhi was interned in Yeravda jail.
It was then that Irwin showed his steel.
The jails were filled and the press muzzled: between April and December 1930 no less than ten ordinances were issued to meet the emergency — the greatest such number that any viceroy had ever promulgated.
It was imperative now to show that the British could still govern, and Irwin confounded his critics by showing that he was the man to do it.
Then on 21 May, while Gandhi languished in jail, one of the great set pieces of the civil disobedience movement, more successful perhaps than any other in arousing world-wide sympathy with the Indian cause, took place at the Dharsana salt works.
Two thousand five hundred volunteers advanced on the salt depot in successive waves of twenty-five, defying orders to retreat and offering no resistance when the police laid about them with clubs, kicking and beating those who fell.
Irwin's response to this spectacular appeal to the viceregal conscience was one of glacial disdain.
‘Your Majesty can hardly fail to read with amusement’, he wrote to the king,
the account of the several battles for the Salt Depot at Dharsana…
A good many people suffered minor injuries in consequence; but I believe those who suffered injuries were as nothing compared to those who wished to sustain an honourable contusion or bruise, or who, to make the whole setting more dramatic, lay on the ground as if laid out for dead without any injury at all.
But of course, as your Majesty will appreciate, the whole business was propaganda and, as such, served its purpose admirably well.
Soon, however, events were to take a different turn.
With the Congress leadership in jail, the Round Table conference which met in London in November, at Irwin's initiative, to discuss constitutional advance, came to nothing, and Irwin realized that he must forego the pleasure of seeing the troublemakers in jail for the hope of constitutional development along the lines he had in mind for India.
Towards the end of January 1931 he released Gandhi and the other leaders.
He did it in style, preparing the ground by a speech to the Legislative Assembly in which he paid tribute to Gandhi's sincerity and asked him to recognize his own.
Gandhi wrote to him on 14 February and asked for an interview.
‘I would like’, he said, ‘to meet not so much the Viceroy as the man in you.’
This time the request for a meeting was granted.
Gandhi, of course, was wrong in supposing there to be any fundamental conflict in Irwin between the viceroy and the man.
Unlike Gandhi's, his was not a divided nature.
Temperament and conviction combined to make him see this moment, not as one of intriguing human possibilities, but as one offering an unofficial means to an official end.
He understood that Gandhi's challenge was not primarily to his sanctity but to his power, and once he saw on what ground he might meet his antagonist he, like Gandhi, but with more evident calculation, unhesitatingly employed that sanctity in the service of power.
He prepared himself to meet the Mahatma on the basis of ‘personal appeal and conviction’, taking to heart the advice of V.S.S. Sastri, who was acting as intermediary, that Gandhi was ‘like a woman; you have got to win him; therefore before you see him, perform all your ablutions, say all your prayers and put on your deepest spiritual robes’.
He intended also to attempt ‘some play on what everybody says is characteristic, namely, vanity of power and personality’.
Thus equipped, the viceroy met his foe.
The result, in terms of the content of the agreement which was reached, was victory: in exchange for a couple of minor concessions, Irwin got everything he wanted.
Man to man, the Englishman met the Indian and prevailed.
The terms of the agreement were as follows: that political  prisoners were to be released and the relevant ordinances withdrawn; that civil disobedience was to be stopped; that the boycott of British goods would cease, though ‘peaceful picketing’ could continue; that there would be no change in the salt laws, though people living by the sea could make some for personal consumption; and that Congress was to be represented at future sessions of the Round Table conference, the agreed agenda being federation, ‘Indian responsibility’, and ‘reservations or safeguards in the interests of India for such matters as, for instance, defence; external affairs; the position of minorities; the financial credit of India, and the discharge of obligations’.
The last point, far from being the hardest on which to reach agreement, was the easiest: it was cleared out of the way at the very beginning, Gandhi accepting Irwin's formulation without demur and apparently feeling no discomfort at disregarding what he knew to be the views of the Congress Working Committee.
His goal remained, as it had always been, partnership with Britain within the empire, and he required only to be convinced of British sincerity in working towards this goal to accept the principle of reaching it by easy stages.
Irwin convinced him.
The point on which Gandhi pressed hardest, and on which the talks nearly foundered, was that of an inquiry into the conduct of the police, which he had requested publicly just before the talks began.
Irwin eventually secured his capitulation by confessing to him that, as head of the government, with no guarantee that civil disobedience might not start again, he was unable to risk jeopardizing the morale of the police force.
Gandhi was enchanted by the viceroy's frankness, and recalled to him that Smuts had treated him with similar candour, recognizing, as he said, the justice of his claim on a certain issue, but advancing unanswerable reasons from the point of view of government why it was impossible to meet.
He could not therefore help but rise to the occasion, as he had risen to it before.
‘I succumbed’, Gandhi said later, ‘not to Lord Irwin but to the honesty in him.’
Gandhi was pleased with his agreement, but others on the Indian side were not so pleased.
Nehru wept when he saw the clause accepting safeguards.
Most of the other Congress leaders also had second thoughts about the wisdom of having allowed Gandhi to negotiate alone with the viceroy.
But they could not at this point publicly repudiate him.
The encounter of ‘the two Mahatmas’, as Sarojini Naidu described them, had caught the imagination of a large public, in India as well as England and America.
Nehru and the rest had no choice but to join in the general rejoicing.
Irwin, too, came in for some criticism from his own side, notably from Churchill, who was famously appalled by the ‘spectacle of this one-time Inner Temple lawyer, now seditious fakir, striding half-naked  up the steps of the Viceroy's palace, there to negotiate and parley on equal terms with the representative of the King-Emperor’, but generally he was showered with praise.
He congratulated himself on his success in ‘carrying Gandhi on the sentimental side’ and in persuading him ‘to come into line’.
Gandhi made no such claims: he had no basis for them.
The importance of Irwin's triumph was that it seemed both classical and prototypical — an exemplification of triumphs past and a portent of triumphs to come.
Every Resident, every bush DO, who had ever over-persuaded erring emir or recalcitrant chief, could understand and envy the nature of the viceroy's coup de théâtre .
Likewise, every enthusiast for Britain's future ascendancy in the world through the Commonwealth could take heart from the fact that a notable nationalist had been charmed into submission by a representative of the Crown.
Irwin had triumphed because, as Lawrence had said of Cromer, ‘he was so good a man’.
To those looking to the future, he had shown what could be done.
He had also, however, as Churchill perceived, conceded to Gandhi and the Congress movement a degree of recognition of their importance which in the long run could do the British no good.
Gandhi's great achievement, when all was said and done, was to get the British to pay attention to him, and he did this, first by appealing to their weakness, in threatening the loss of the collaboration on which they depended, and second by appealing to their vanity.
He challenged them in a way which in the end they were unable to resist answering on its own terms, countering charisma with charisma.
Irwin succeeded in establishing his own, but not in destroying that of Gandhi, which acquired a greater effulgence every time — eight in all — he trudged down Lutyens' great new processional way, opened with brilliant festivity just a week or so ago, carrying only a manila folder and his ever-present staff, to meet the lord of all the world that most of his fellow Indians knew.
In so adroitly ‘carrying’ Gandhi, Irwin greatly reduced his value as an ally.
To ensure his continued ascendancy over Congress, Gandhi had to radicalize himself again.
Before long, both sides were accusing each other of breaches of the agreement, and in the autumn of 1931, while Gandhi was in London for the second, inconclusive, Round Table conference, civil disobedience and political violence broke out again.
This time the Government of India responded very differently.
Lord Willingdon, formerly governor of Bombay and Madras, had replaced Irwin in April, and he was the very embodiment of the ICS point of view.
Trouble was something to be nipped in the bud; dangerous agitators people to be kept behind  bars.
Within a month of his return from London Gandhi found himself in prison, and for several years thereafter his bluffs were resolutely called.
If he fasted, he was released from jail; if he attempted civil disobedience, he was back in again.
Try as he might to gain entry, the doors of the Viceroy's House remained closed to him.
There were to be no negotiations with Willingdon.
Nevertheless, there was constitutional advance, in the form of the Government of India Act of 1935, which provided for responsible government in the provinces.
Abandoning its insistence that nothing less than complete independence would do, Congress fought the 1937 elections and took office in seven out of eleven provinces.
Gandhi dissociated himself from this development and withdrew from politics until 1939, when the outbreak of the Second World War stirred him to political action again.
In September 1939 the Congress politicians who were enjoying the fruits of office abruptly discovered the limits of their power.
Without consulting them, Lord Linlithgow, the viceroy, announced that India was at war with Germany.
This he was entitled to do, but the fact that he did it aroused Congress to the realization that Gandhi had been right when he announced upon his retirement that India was still a prison, but now the superintendent was allowing the prisoners to elect the officials who ran the jail.
A great surge of confused and ambiguous protest swept India, culminating in the Quit India movement of 1942, when Gandhi, the pacifist, provoked the people to open rebellion.
The British showed no sign of indecisiveness in dealing with this outbreak.
Fifty-seven and a half battalions of troops restored order in a month with about a thousand Indian casualties, aircraft being used on a number of occasions to machine-gun crowds from the air.
After that, India was relatively quiet for the duration of the war.
It is difficult to assess the significance of the various negotiations which went on between the British and the Indians during the early stages of the war.
Churchill was prime minister, and though he found it politic in the face of American and Labour pressure to allow negotiations about India's constitutional future to go on, at the same time he ensured that all such negotiations came to nought.
When the Cripps offer of 1942, of dominion status — with the all-important right of secession — after the war and representation on the viceroy's Executive Council during the war, looked like being accepted, he joined forces with the viceroy, Linlithgow, behind Cripps' back to persuade the Cabinet that its envoy had exceeded his authority, and the deal was off.
Nevertheless, the offer had been made, and at the end of the war, when a Labour government came to power, there was no going back on it.
To the disappointment of some of its supporters, the new Labour government proved to be by no means wedded to the idea that the British empire ought now summarily to come to an end.
Indirect Rule and the evolution of the Commonwealth idea had disarmed much left-wing criticism of the empire in the years between the wars and encouraged the development among British radicals of ‘responsible’ views on imperial subjects, which came naturally to bloom when Labour found itself at last in office.
The Cabinet contained no ungovernable enthusiasts for colonial liberation, even Cripps having abandoned his earlier anti-imperialism to become a proponent of using the colonies to close the dollar gap.
Bevin had met Lionel Curtis in 1938 and had believed ever since that the Commonwealth was the foundation of a new world order.
In combination with his ardent desire to improve the living standard of the British working man, this made for a potent brand of imperialism; few politicians took the Dual Mandate more seriously than Ernest Bevin.
Attlee, who had been a member of the Simon Commission and a non-dissenting contributor to its very gradualistic report, had always been extremely cautious in his statements on colonial issues.
In 1942 it was he, and not Churchill (who was away), who ordered the wartime internment of Nehru and Gandhi, a move he never regretted.
There was, of course, no question of denying India the freedom which had so often been promised in the irresponsibility of opposition.
For one thing, it was now plain that there was little alternative: during the war Indianization of both the ICS and the Indian army had proceeded at such a pace that more than half the ICS and more than half the officers of the Indian army were Indian, and this was not a process to which the brake could suddenly be applied.
For another thing, it was evident that, financially speaking, India was a wasting asset.
With the development of Indian tariff autonomy starting in the early 1920s — another sop to the moderates — the process had begun whereby Britain was transformed by 1942 from India's creditor into India's debtor.
This was not a situation which appealed to the neo-mercantilists in the Cabinet.
The issue of Indian freedom thus resolved itself into the problem of how to fulfill the promise of independence in such a way that Britain's position in the rest of Asia and in Africa was not weakened, but strengthened.
The solution was found in making sure that India remained in the Commonwealth.
An India in essentially the same relationship to Britain as the great white dominions which had fought by her side in the world war, voluntarily allied rather than involuntarily subjected, could only be, it was reasoned, an asset to British prestige.
Extraordinary lengths were therefore gone to to cajole and inspire  the rather bewildered Indians, once they had been promised their independence, into requesting Commonwealth membership.
The British even, at the eleventh hour, went so far as to change the rules to allow a republic, by definition owing no allegiance to the British Crown, to be a member.
But first, someone had to be found to do the cajoling and inspiring, and Attlee's eye alighted upon the martial figure of Lord Louis Mountbatten, then fresh from his victories in Burma.
Mountbatten's career had been a curious one: his reputation as a soldier was founded far less on his record as a commander in the field, which on the whole had been a disastrous one, than on his organizational abilities and his acknowledged brilliance as a leader of men.
Sailors who had had the ship shot out from under them because of Mountbatten's recklessness signed up for another tour, such were the inspirational qualities he possessed.
It was these qualities which attracted Attlee, who knew that the task he had in mind for his new viceroy would require them all.
This was no less than, politically speaking, one of the great strategic withdrawals of history.
Mountbatten was to go out to India, announce an early and definite date for British departure, hand over the administrative machine in working order to a unitary government, and secure an alliance with that government in the form of membership of the Commonwealth, preferably with a military treaty.
The daring magnitude of this conception has since been obscured by its almost routine enactment in a series of African countries in the 1960s, but it should never be forgotten that India was the test case, and that at the time success in the execution of such a plan seemed far from assured: only a year before Mountbatten's appointment the then viceroy, Lord Wavell, had been pressing on the Cabinet his ‘Breakdown Plan’, which consisted simply of the phased evacuation of the British from India without any serious attempt to ensure that a viable, much less friendly, government was installed in their place.
‘That would indeed’, Attlee told the Cabinet, ‘be an inglorious end to our long association with India’, and he set his face firmly against such a course.
Instead, he gambled on finding someone who could play the last card in the British deck — independence — and then, with nothing further to offer, keep sufficient control of the situation to extricate Britain from India with honour and possibly with glory.
The last viceroyalty was thus conceived — by, of all people, a Labour prime minister, but one, it must be remembered, who was at Haileybury — as a supreme test of British adeptness in the gentlemanly art of leadership.
When Mountbatten flew off to India, he thought of himself as he had always thought of himself, as a leader of men.
‘I want you to regard me not as the last Viceroy  winding up the British Raj’, he told Nehru, ‘but as the first to lead the way to the new India.’
Mountbatten's especial qualification in Attlee's eyes for the job of viceroy was his success in getting the Burmese nationalists to come in on the British side in the closing stages of the war; it was Attlee's firm belief in later life, as indeed it was Mountbatten's, that if Mountbatten had been left in charge in Rangoon, Burma would never have left the Commonwealth.
This demonstrated expertise in dealing with nationalists seemed to mark Mountbatten for the job, and when Attlee offered it to him he was sufficiently aware of how much he, and no other, was wanted to attach extraordinary conditions to his acceptance.
One of these was that he would go to India only ‘at the open invitation of the Indian parties’.
Attlee persuaded him that this was impractical.
Another was that he be given plenipotentiary powers.
These he seems to have been given, or as near as made no difference.
Attlee, an astute judge of men, banked on Mountbatten's ambition to provide an adequate counterweight to his proclivity for risk, and in this judgement he was proved to be correct.
Though the ascendancy he achieved over Nehru sometimes led Mountbatten to overestimate the extent to which great events lay in the hollow of his hand, he kept himself accountable to the British government throughout.
Within a month of his arrival Mountbatten had decided that the partition of India into separate Hindu and Muslim states was inevitable.
This decision may or may not have been correct, but it was understandable.
The mounting communal disorder, on a scale unprecedented during British rule, the apparent implacability of the uncharming and uncharmable Jinnah, the tacit acceptance by this stage on the part of most of the Congress leadership of the ultimate partition of the Punjab and Bengal, made the possibility of bringing into being a genuinely united independent India appear slender indeed.
But more than that, it was evident that in struggling to attain a communal harmony which was in all likelihood unattainable, Britain ran the risk of throwing away her only chance of retiring from India in good order.
It is not quite true to say that the price of Attlee's policy was partition, but it is true to say that its price was the early and firm acceptance of the inevitability of partition.
Britain had at all costs to avoid being engulfed in a war of succession between Muslims and Hindus, and the only way to do this was to hand over, while there was still time, not to one but to two successor states.
Attlee, therefore, once Mountbatten had concluded that there was no alternative and had produced his Partition Plan, acted with the utmost despatch to get it approved by the Cabinet.
It is his haste in this matter which gives colour to the  accusation that he was never seriously concerned with the unity of India.
This may be; but at the time there was a case to be made for the new policy satisfying the demands both of expediency and humanity.
No one, British or Indian, foresaw the scale of the disaster which was to ensue in August 1947.
If Mountbatten failed in one item on his agenda, however, he succeeded triumphantly in the other.
Employing with perfect ruthlessness his formidable resources of charm and persuasion, he managed to extract from all parties an affirmation of the desirability of Commonwealth membership.
In view of Nehru's repeated rejections of the idea of any further association with Britain, this was a notable achievement, and there is no doubt that Mountbatten felt that it amply compensated for his acquiescence in partition.
United or not, he believed, the recruitment of India to the Commonwealth would result in the ‘terrific world-wide enhancement of British prestige’.
He managed furthermore discreetly to put into circulation the audacious proposal that he should be the first Governor-General of the two independent states.
Nehru, having accepted Commonwealth membership, was content to pay Mountbatten the compliment; Jinnah announced that the first Governor-General of Pakistan would be himself.
In the event, Mountbatten remained as Governor-General of India, in which capacity, at the invitation of the Congress leaders, he was briefly and secretly to resume executive power in 1947 to deal with the communal violence which threatened to destroy the infant state.
Attlee was ecstatic about the idea of his viceroy staying on, perceiving it as ‘a great boost for Britain and for the Commonwealth’, a sentiment shared by the now fully evolved Commonwealth statesman — he had been perhaps the first to see the possibilities of the role — General Smuts: ‘This does not look like quitting’, he cabled to Attlee on hearing the news.
No doubt also Attlee correctly judged the effect of this development on the Tory opposition.
Churchill indeed was so overcome with the romance of it all that he briefly reconciled himself to the departure of the British from his beloved India.
The actual handing over of power in Delhi was accomplished amid scenes of tremendous enthusiasm, of which the British found  themselves , to their delight and astonishment, to some extent the objects.
Possessed for once by a spirit of happy hilarity, the Indian crowd unhitched the horses from Mountbatten's carriage and dragged it through the streets; British officers were lifted shoulder high and cheered.
For Mountbatten it was unquestionably a great personal triumph.
For Attlee it was the vindication of his policy.
For many other Englishmen it was a proof that their works in the world  had been not evil but good.
Attlee was showered with oratorical bouquets in both houses of parliament and from all parties.
But it was an Anglophile American who best took the point.
This was not, said Walter Lippmann in the Washington Post , the work of a decadent people:
This on the contrary is the work of political genius requiring the ripest wisdom and the freshest vigour, and it is done with an elegance and a style that will compel and will receive an instinctive respect throughout the civilized world.
Attlee and Mountbatten have done a service to all mankind by showing what statesmen can do not with force and money but with lucidity, resolution and sincerity.
So the British had come out of India with their egos more or less intact.
What next?
It was never, as we have seen, the Labour government's intention that the independence of India should be the prelude to a general nunc dimittis , and this disposes of the plausible notion that once India was gone the pointlessness of holding on to the rest of the dependent empire, supposedly acquired to protect the sea routes to Bombay, was immediately perceived.
So unperceiving, in fact, were the British, that no reappraisal of defence policy consequent upon the departure of India was undertaken.
On the contrary, immense efforts were made to secure a military treaty with independent India, the Chiefs of Staff having given it as their opinion that India's manpower resources and location as a staging post made a military understanding with her ‘essential from the aspect of imperial strategy’.
These were men who had just finished fighting a global war — a war which, it must be remembered, Britain had won — and global habits of mind naturally persisted.
Too much is made of the exhaustion of war.
Certain territories, it is true, were disposed of right away, but for reasons which carried no implications for the further demission of power.
Ceylon and Burma became independent in 1948, inevitable adjuncts of Indian freedom.
In the same year the British abandoned Palestine, never a welcome responsibility and lately become ungovernable, and henceforth took care of their Middle Eastern interests through a group of client states and the fortress colony of Aden.
Also in 1948, a State of Emergency was declared in Malaya, but here the British made it clear that they would stand and fight.
Malaya had no strategic value but its economic value, as a producer of tin and rubber, was great.
Like the generals, the Colonial Office had had a good war.
Civil servants in what was normally one of the sleepier Whitehall departments had enjoyed the intoxicating experience of mobilizing the empire for global conflict.
For six glorious years the conscription  of labour, the compulsory purchase of agricultural products at below market prices, the unceremonious incarceration of the agitating classes, had all been justified and justifiable.
Such habits of interference with colonial lives, once acquired, were not easily given up.
Fortunately, they meshed nicely with the neo-mercantilist enthusiasms of the Labour government.
If Britain wanted to develop the colonies, the machinery, as never before, was there.
To some extent, the wartime activism of the Colonial Office only reinforced a trend which had begun shortly before the war, when revelations of the poverty-stricken condition of Britain's tropical empire, especially the West Indies, had forced the British government to take a more visible interest in colonial welfare.
The result was the Colonial Development and Welfare Act of 1940 and the subsequent erosion of the once sacrosanct idea that the colonies must be, if nothing else, self-supporting.
It is hard to exaggerate the importance of this development, which, for reasons purely of financial accountability, involved the Colonial Office intimately in economic planning for the empire and thus helped to bring to an end the old imperial system in which colonies had puttered along as virtually independent satrapies, with the Colonial Office exercising only a watching brief.
The political initiative had also passed to the Colonial Office by the end of the war, though here again the process had begun shortly before the war, with the commissioning by the Royal Institute of International Affairs, or more precisely, its founder and moving spirit, Lionel Curtis, of a comprehensive survey of Africa.
This was conceived as potentially the Durham report of Africa, the authoritative statement of the continent's past history, present problems, and possible future lines of political and economic evolution.
It was intended, as all Curtis' 'research projects' were, to function ultimately as the basis of policy, and to produce it he selected, not one of the burgeoning African specialists in which Oxford, under his inspiration, was by then abounding, but the sexagenarian Indian civil servant, Lord Hailey.
Work on the survey had to await Hailey's retirement, but the choice nevertheless proved to have been an extremely shrewd one, justifying, if nothing else did, Curtis' lifelong faith in himself as a fisher of men.
Hailey had exactly the qualities required to make an impact at the Colonial Office, not least among them being, as Curtis astutely realized, the prestige of an immensely distinguished Indian career.
Oracular, industrious, and capable of producing as if without effort memoranda of seamless cohesion and judiciousness, Hailey was the Indian civil servant of legendary grasp and authority.
When such a man came down from Olympus and applied himself to the problems of Africa, his voice was heard.
The fruit of his labours for the RIIA was a volume of nearly 2,000 pages (An African Survey , 1938) which immediately became the basis of intensive discussion at the Colonial Office and which secured for Hailey, until 1943, an unrivalled position of influence in the Office's debate on the future of Africa, which he  himself had been instrumental in bringing into being.
By the end of the war the Colonial Office was accustomed to thinking synoptically about Africa, to weighing with unaccustomed confidence and delusive clarity the large forces at work there and the ways in which they might be accommodated within a system of administration.
One incidental result of this was that Indirect Rule, the proud and mysterious creation of innumerable men-on-the-spot, upon which it was forbidden to the uninitiated to look, was transformed after years of scrutiny by metropolitan experts into a uniform system of local government, whereby Britain hoped to bring into the orbit of her unresented influence the non-traditional elements which had made their appearance in African society.
At one level — the local level — Indirect Rule was demystified; at another level — the metropolitan level — it was invested with the mystique of haute politique .
The frame of reference for all this ferment in the official mind remained the idea of the Commonwealth, which during the war received an impetus from the need to show the Americans, in words if not in deeds, that there would be room for a British empire in the brave new post-war world, and also from the genuine idealism stimulated in some British imperialists — as it had been stimulated in the previous war — by a desire to distinguish themselves from the Germans and their imperial ambitions.
To these ends, the most extravagant claims were made.
Clement Attlee announced that the British Empire and Commonwealth, being based on Christian principles, was ‘the exact contrast to the Nazi conception of a world order’, which was the expression of the creed of Antichrist, and countless other speeches were made in the same vein.
Before the war Lionel Curtis had published an ambitious book entitled Civitas Dei (1934–7) in which he sought to prove in three volumes that the British Commonwealth was no less than the ultimate expression in the international social order of the basic principles of Christianity, or, to summarize, ‘simply the sermon on the mount translated into political terms’.
Civitas Dei dismayed many of Curtis' admirers at the time of its publication, but such ideas seemed less ridiculous under the stress of war, when the usual urge was experienced to justify the ways of man to God.
It became the common currency of speeches on the empire to advocate the extension of the principle of self-government to all within it, even unto the lowliest.
That keeper of the flame, Sir Ralph Furse, to his dying day a believer in the  administrative genius of his race, was advocating by 1942 that the territories of the coloured colonial empire be allowed ‘to grow up into nations in free association with ourselves’.
He seemed unaware that he was thereby announcing the demise of his own service, and indeed for at least some years entertained the illusion that he was not.
The question of the date of everyone's arrival at the gates of the heavenly city was, of course, crucial, and the main contribution of Hailey to the formulation of policy was to keep the question open.
Difficult as it is to summarize so majestic a body of work as that produced by Hailey in the days when he reigned supreme as the Colonial Office's oracle on Africa, it seems fair to say that the main impression to be derived from it is of his anxiety to avoid committing the British government to any course of action which might prove to be irreversible.
Like a true oracle, Hailey's pronouncements were both authoritative and ambiguous.
He firmly allied himself with the forces of change, but was careful to give due weight to the arguments for staying put, the detail in which he did this adding impressively to his reputation for grasp.
In 1939, Hailey was asked by Malcolm MacDonald, the Secretary of State for the Colonies, to write a further comprehensive report on Africa, in which recommendations on the next stage in the political development of the African colonies would be made.
This fascinating document, completed in 1941, after its aged author had once again perambulated the African continent, shows the extent to which accommodation to change and the continuation of control were considered to be compatible goals of policy.
The question was, as Hailey inimitably put it: ‘Can we be sure of the continuance of that degree of acquiescence in our rule which is a necessary condition of administrative progress?’, and the answer which he gave was a resoundingly qualified ‘Yes’.
Surveying the African scene, Hailey found no sign of the existence of organized mass opposition to British rule, an assessment with which, in fact, most students of the subject would currently agree.
But then he was also inclined — on the eve of ‘Quit India’— to believe that there was ‘perhaps some tendency in England to exaggerate the strength of the forces now opposed to the Government in British India’.
This would appear to reflect a chronic tendency to underestimate the enemy: Hailey's record in dealing with political agitation in India suggests, like that of Lord Irwin, with whom he was intimate, a pattern of masterly inactivity arising from over-confidence, followed by repression when the reality of the threat at last became apparent.
‘You will have a trying day tomorrow’, he once said to his District Magistrate while Chief  Commissioner of Delhi; ‘You will be on the alert all day and will probably have a riot.
But I have discussed all your arrangements and I approve of them.
One embarrassment at least you shall be spared.
I am going fishing.’
What Hailey did see in the way of African unrest was a number of scattered local agitations arising from problems connected with land tenure, taxation, conditions of employment, and interference with native custom.
All of these problems, falling within the sphere of legitimate unrest, could be dealt with, he believed, by intelligent and sympathetic administrators — were indeed assumed to be, though he did not explicitly say so, their bread and butter: he himself had dealt superlatively with the Punjab rent agitations of 1931.
In themselves such problems required no change in the administrative system.
However, he did not discount the possibility that larger agitations based on ‘racial consciousness’ might arise, and these he felt could only be forestalled by making appropriate changes in the structure of administration.
The obvious place to begin was by encouraging the evolution of the current native authorities into something which bore a greater resemblance to English local government.
This was not yet, however, the decisive abandonment of Indirect Rule.
Nothing drastic or even very specific was proposed.
Hailey's reservations about Indirect Rule were based purely upon the practical consideration that in its dogmatic insistence on working only through the authentic traditional leadership it excluded other, possibly more effective, methods of securing the essential ‘degree of acquiescence’ in British rule.
Adherence to tradition, Hailey wrote, in a discreet display of the higher cynicism, ‘valuable as it is, is only a means of securing acceptability of the institutions on which we place our reliance, and acceptability is the essential quality which they must possess’.
His concern was to ensure that Indirect Rule was sufficiently modernized to function as an instrument of government in an era of rapid social and economic change.
With respect to other aspects of colonial administration, his proposals were a little bolder.
Educated Africans, he saw, would only fully accept European rule if they were given some access to the central institutions of government.
He therefore proposed that they should be given increased representation in Legislative Councils and that they should be admitted to the administrative services.
There was not, however, to be any question of unofficial legislative majorities, and the inevitable requests for development of a parliamentary system must be firmly resisted.
Hailey envisaged a system of regional councils, with a nominated membership drawn from native authorities and town councils, functioning initially in a  largely consultative capacity but eventually being given legislative powers.
Such councils might, conceivably, ‘attract the interests of politically minded Africans and thus serve to diminish the demand for representation in a central Legislature by recourse to a system of electorates’.
One could only hope that they would; at any rate, they were a relatively safe form of experimentation in power sharing which, unlike a commitment to the development of parliamentary institutions, could if necessary be abandoned.
This was all very much in line with the current thinking of the more policy-minded Indirect Rulers: Margery Perham, and even Lugard, supported the formation of regional councils along these lines.
Hailey's chief preoccupations, then, were to find ways of keeping educated Africans (of whose mental capacities he took, incidentally, a dim view) from making a successful bid for power at the centre of the colonial system, and to see that there was no unconsidered rush to reform at the level of the localities.
It hardly seems accidental that the extremely imprecise and tentative nature of his proposals allowed the maximum scope for the exercise of political judgement at all levels of the administrative system.
Hailey was first and last an administrator, and he intended by his vision of the African future no disrespect to the administrator or diminution of his status.
His whole approach to African problems rested indeed on the assumption that there were large reserves of political sagacity within the imperial service, and his aim was to ensure that no situation developed which was beyond the reach of that sagacity.