

CHAPTER FIFTEEN
The village of Thorsbury was no more than a hamlet.
The only street fell steeply down towards the secondary gateway to the Manor and had about fifteen cottages on the east side of the road.
These were of a soft-hued golden sandstone topped by russet-toned pantiles.
They huddled together in twos and threes, with the pretty little church standing back about halfway down the village.
The story was that there had once been houses on each side of the road but a century or so ago, those on the west had been demolished to add to the parkland.
This strip had been laid out by the estate gardeners into what were known as Walks.
Briar roses and honeysuckle had been cunningly trained to festoon the trees, until the whole effect there was one of enchantment.
The only gateway from the Walks was directly opposite the church, so that the Lassiters rarely walked up the village itself.
The Walks were forbidden to the villagers and in the final few weeks of pregnancy, Tamar spent much of her time strolling there, in such complete seclusion that she felt cut off from civilisation.
In the peaceful rural surroundings of Thorsbury, Tamar felt truly at home.
She was only disturbed by the fact that, once the funeral was over, her mother-in-law made no attempt to leave the Manor and take up residence in the dower house.
Tamar had little chance to talk to Stephen, who seemed to be occupied on estate business from morn till night.
He was often away in the West Riding, where he now owned several woollen mills which had been the basis of his father's fortune.
When he was back at Thorsbury, he had taken to sleeping in the dressing room now that her time was almost upon her.
This meant that the couple were virtually never alone.
At dinner in the evenings, she and Stephen sat at the head and foot of the long dining table, with his mother between them, ignoring Tamar and monopolising her son's attention.
After the meal as they sat in the drawing room, Lady Lassiter did her best to make Tamar feel like an outsider by talking of people and circumstances of which Tamar knew nothing.
If Tamar tried to sit up until her mother-in-law had retired to her bed, the other woman seemed determined that husband and wife should not be alone together, and Tamar's aching back would drive her up the stairs, miserably leaving Stephen and his mother chatting by the fire.
One night, as Tempy was helping her undress, she determined to tackle Stephen the next day.
‘Wake me at half-past seven Tempy, please,’ she instructed.
When the maid woke her she sat up in bed and said, ‘Ask Sir Stephen if he can spare me a few minutes.’
Stephen entered a short time later, looking anxious.
‘There's nothing wrong is there, darling?’ he asked in a worried tone.
‘The baby isn't coming?’
‘No,’ she answered, ‘but there is something we must discuss.’
She hesitated, unsure exactly how to word what she wished to say.
‘Yes?’
He leaned forward from where he sat on the side of the bed and kissed her gently.
Noting that Tamar did not smile he was concerned.
‘You are happy at Thorsbury, aren't you, my darling?’ he asked.
‘Oh, yes.’
Tamar's enthusiasm for the place momentarily brightened up her face.
‘I love it here, Stephen.’
Again she paused, but decided to press on.
‘There's just one thing.
I cannot feel that I am truly mistress here, while your mother is in residence.
She gives the orders and the servants defer to her.
I would like to know when your mother's going to move out.’
Stephen looked uncomfortable.
‘She wants to stay here until after the baby is born,’ he told her.
Tamar's lips tightened.
She realised with a sinking heart that the longer her mother-in-law remained at the Manor, the more difficult it would be to dislodge her.
There was, however, little she could do without appearing heartless in her husband's eyes.
She settled back in her pillows and assessed him tenderly.
‘You're looking tired, Stephen, and I see so little of you now.
When will you be able to take things more easily?’
He smiled ruefully.
‘Heaven knows.
The estate and the businesses in Bradford have been allowed to run down during the last few years, while my father was not well.
It means a lot of work at present, especially as I'm unfamiliar with the running of them.
However, once our son arrives, I may have got things on an even keel and be able to take some time off.’
With this, Tamar had to be satisfied.
At least, she thought, she had made clear to Stephen the fact that she was not happy living in his mother's shadow.
Owing to her advanced pregnancy and Stephen's frequent absences on business, no efforts had been made to appoint a governess for Victoria.
Instead, the local curate, Selwyn Mathews, took over her instruction, until such time as other arrangements could be made.
He was a merry young man and yet, quite firm in his discipline, so that the child was eager to please him and her education made rapid strides.
As Tamar's time drew closer, she remembered the difficult labour of Victoria's birth and grew more and more apprehensive.
In this new life which had been thrust upon her, she felt that she must surround herself with a little group of servants whom she knew to be loyal to her.
Although Walton the head coachman still drove her mother-in-law, the few times that Tamar had driven out, she had used their coach and pair from the days at Helmsley, with Goodison to drive her.
Gertie still looked after Victoria, using the time that her charge spent in the schoolroom to attend to her clothes — washing, brushing and replacing buttons.
Tempy was a friend, as well as her maid, the one person in whom Tamar felt that she could confide.
The girl realised that her mistress was dreading her confinement and insisted that Tamar spent the afternoons lying down.
During this time of enforced idleness, she massaged Tamar's body with oil of almonds, not only to relieve her backache, but also to avoid unsightly stretchmarks on her body.
‘I know Sir Stephen's too tired to come into your room at present and anyway, you're not fit,’ she said confidingly.
‘But you want to get your figure back after the bairn's born.
You'll be as lovely as ever for him — I'll see to that.’
It was during one of these sessions, when she lay under Tempy's firm hands, that a thought occurred to Tamar.
‘What's your real name, Tempy?’ she asked.
‘It can't surely be Temptation.’
Tempy threw back her head and laughed until she had to wipe away the tears.
‘Lawks, ma'am,’ she giggled, forgetting her carefully-cultivated veneer of refinement.
‘It's Temperance.
My family was Methodists.’
Tamar laughed with her and realised that she felt less depressed about the forthcoming confinement after this little spell of humour.
As luck would have it, she had no time to build up her fears again, for her labour pains started that very night.
Stephen was away, so she had passed a near-silent dinner in the company of his mother.
The only words spoken had been to the butler and maid, who were waiting at table and when they rose, Tamar excused herself.
‘I think I'll go up, Mama,’ she said, pleading a backache which was not feigned.
By the time she reached her room, the old remembered pains were coming with great frequency.
Tempy took one look at her mistress as she clung to the door handle, her back bent under the pain, and tugged on the bell-pull.
She helped Tamar on to the bed and, as she removed her shoes, there was a tap on the door.
The maid who came was a local girl.
‘Is there a village midwife?’
Tempy demanded.
‘Her Ladyship's started in labour, though she's not due for another couple of weeks and there's no time to get the doctor and nurse from Malton, by the look of things.’
‘Aye — Mrs Walton, t' 'ead groom's wife, delivers most bairns round 'ereabouts,’ replied the girl.
‘Go and get her then, and be quick about it,’ urged Tempy.
As the girl reached the door, she caught the additional command: ‘And tell Cook to get some water on the boil.’
By the time Tempy had managed to strip Tamar and get her into her nightdress, the baby's head was in view.
‘It's going to be quick,’ Tempy cried.
‘Don't push.
Lie still and I'll run for Gertie.’
When the midwife arrived, flustered and overwhelmed to be called inside the Manor, it was all over.
Helped by  Tempy and Gertie, neither of whom had experienced a birth before, Tamar had been delivered of a boy, quickly and with no trouble.
While Mrs Walton washed the baby and dressed him in a layette far finer than she had ever imagined existed, Tempy attended to Tamar and put a fresh nightgown on her.
The midwife laid the little scrap in Tamar's arms and said, ‘'E's a lovely lad, Lady Lassiter. 'E's not big, but 'e's all the world ti grow in.’
Tamar looked down at the child, scarcely able to believe that it was all over so quickly.
What little hair he had shone with a silver sheen in the lamplight and she could see in the crumpled, brick-red face, the likeness of Stephen.
She closed her eyes briefly to say a silent prayer of thanks that, not only had Stephen received the son for whom he had so longed, but that the baby was the image of his father.
When she opened her eyes, it was to see Stephen's mother standing by the bed.
For the first time since Tamar had met her, the putty-coloured cheeks were flushed and the hands which she held out for the child were shaking.
As Tamar placed him in his grandmother's arms, tears rolled down the older woman's cheeks.
‘Another Hilary Lassiter,’ she whispered.
‘The line will not die out.’
Before Tamar could protest that she intended to call her son George, her mother-in-law looked up from the child.
‘I must thank you for this, if for nothing else,’ she said and, placing him back in Tamar's arms, turned and went from the room.
When Gertie brought Victoria to see her new brother, she leaned over the crib shaking with excitement.
‘Oh,’ she murmured.
‘He's lovely — just like a real live doll.’
With that she reached out a tentative hand and gently stroked the silver hair.
When Stephen returned the following day, the news was broken to him in the stable block by the groom who took his horse.
‘Congratulations, sir,’ the man beamed.
‘Lady Lassiter gave birth to a son last night.’
Stephen took the stairs two at a time and threw open the bedroom door to see Tamar, sitting up in the big fourposter bed, nursing their son.
Too excited at first to speak, he bent over to kiss her and then turned his attention to the  child.
‘He's wonderful,’ he gasped, as he gazed at the little face and held each tiny hand, studying the miniature nails in wonderment.
‘And you're wonderful, too,’ he added.
While she had Stephen to herself, Tamar brought up the question of the name.
‘It is the family name,’ he explained.
‘The eldest Lassiter son is always called Hilary, but why not make George his second name?’
With this Tamar had to be satisfied, but she felt mutinous.
‘I had the confinement — I should choose the name,’ she told Tempy.
The maid, however, was noncommittal, not wishing to cross her mistress and yet seeing Stephen's point of view.
Although Stephen's trips to the mills became less frequent as he appointed capable managers, the farms on the estate and the timber business still took a great deal of his life and Tamar found that time hung heavily.
Her mother-in-law's days were spent at her embroidery or visiting friends whom Tamar felt despised her as an outsider.
She scarcely knew these women and told herself that she didn't wish to.
One innovation she had brought to the village was that, unlike her predecessors, she made a point of visiting every house in the little community.
She had introduced herself on the doorstep, often been invited in and asked the tenants to let her know if they had any problems with which she could help.
Tamar had been brought up on a tenanted farm and was sensitive to the diffidence felt when an approach to the landowner was necessary.
She soon realised that Stephen's mother thought she was demeaning herself by ‘hobnobbing with the peasantry’ but Stephen was grateful for her interest and that was all that mattered to Tamar.
Soon she knew the workers by name and could tell Stephen which man's wife kept a neat house and whose was a slut.
One evening as they sat round the fire after dinner, Stephen suggested to Tamar, ‘Why don't you learn to ride?
After all, your father is a farmer so you must be used to horses.
You wouldn't be a real beginner and it would give you an interest when I'm busy.’
The more Tamar thought about the idea, the more she  liked it.
She loved the country life of the estate and could have been entirely happy were it not for Stephen's habitual absences which only seemed to emphasise the constant presence of his mother.
And now that she was free of the fear of encountering Gareth Davis on her walks, she revelled in exploring the grounds of her home.
She often dawdled along the Walks and strolled on the banks of the river, which ran past the rear of the Manor.
At this point, the river was swift: its swirling currents and dark menacing depths filled Tamar with dread for her children.
Victoria was banned from the riverside and Gertie had been instructed never to take the baby anywhere near the water.
The loss of her own younger sister Maria, who had been drowned in the Beck close to Aumery Park Farm, was ever-present at the back of Tamar's mind.
A week or two after Stephen's suggestion, he came home one day leading a pretty little mare on a halter.
Upon entering the grand hall where Tamar sat, he gave her a quick teasing smile.
‘Come and see what I've brought for you,’ was his greeting.
Tamar jumped to her feet.
‘What is it, Stephen?’ she asked excitedly.
He made no response, but just took her hand and led her towards the stable-block.
These buildings were of a later date than the Manor house, being built of brick surrounding a large quadrangle.
The ground floor consisted of stables, coach-houses, tackrooms and storehouses, while above, in addition to apartments occupied by unmarried male outdoor staff, was a room known as the Long Room.
This ran the full length of one side and was used for village functions like the Mell or Harvest Supper, and the Christmas party.
As they entered the stable-yard, Tamar gasped with pleasure and ran forward to the mare, which stood tied up to a rail.
‘Oh,’ she breathed.
‘Is she for me?’
Stephen smiled at her excitement.
‘How lovely she is,’ he thought for the thousandth time, as he looked at her fondly.
She threw her arms round the horse's neck and in return, it flicked its ears and snickered with pleasure.
It was almost pure white in colour, with mane and tail of silvery-grey.
‘I shall call her Moonbeam,’ Tamar decided.
‘Why not go to Malton tomorrow and buy a riding habit?’ her husband suggested as they walked back to the house.
Tamar took his arm and looked up at him.
‘You're so good to me, Stephen,’ she said seriously, ‘but I would change all this to have more of your company.’
He gave a deep sigh.
‘I know that, my darling and I only wish I could see more of you and the children.
However, I am getting the business matters straightened out and I hope it won't be too long before I shall have more time to spend with you.’
While they were alone and could not be overheard by those inside the house, she once more broached the subject of his mother's continued presence at the Manor.
‘I'm not the mistress here and never will be, as long as she remains,’ she insisted.
‘Be patient, Tamar,’ he pleaded.
‘It has been her home for well over thirty years and she needs some stability after losing Father.
Besides,’ he added, ‘she's devoted to little Hilary and finds great comfort in him.’
Tamar bit back the retort which sprang to her lips.
She had no wish to upset her husband, but she knew how much Stephen's mother hated her and felt that her mother-in-law was trying to usurp her place in the baby's affections.
Tamar had been dismayed to discover that it was the custom, among the upper classes, to employ a wetnurse for babies.
She not only missed the bond which breast-feeding had created between her and Victoria, but was made to feel most unwelcome when she visited the nursery.
Search as she might, Tamar could find nothing of herself in Hilary.
The child was entirely Lassiter in appearance so that, while she was pleased on Stephen's behalf, Tamar could not feel the deep love which she had for her daughter.
On her visit to Malton, she not only purchased a riding habit in deep, forest-green velvet, but ordered one to be made in a similar material of a light golden-brown colour, to match the shade of her eyes.
While she was still a novice, Stephen insisted that her daily rides should be accompanied by a groom.
Although Jonadab Oaks had never encouraged his girls to ride, as he  did his sons, they had all on several occasions had a go at riding the horses owned by their father.
Tamar found the side-saddle strange at first, but her previous experience stood her in good stead.
She rode out most afternoons and gradually built up a familiarity with most parts of the Lassiter lands.
In the July following Hilary's birth, which had taken place in February, Stephen announced at dinner, ‘I think it's about time Seth Walton retired.
He must be getting on for seventy, and we need a younger head groom.’
‘Will you promote Charlie?’ asked Tamar.
‘No.
I don't think it's a good idea to promote one of the workers.
Charlie is too much one of the lads and won't hold their respect,’ answered her husband.
‘I don't want to wait until the Malton Hiring at Martinmas.
I shall ask around and if I get no satisfaction I shall advertise.’
Tamar thought no more about this conversation and did not ask Stephen whether his quest for a new groom had been successful.
She was blissfully unaware that Stephen's choice was the very man whom she was confident she had now eluded…
A couple of weeks later Stephen was called away to Bradford, where the manager of one of his mills had disappeared with the wages of the whole workforce.
He sighed as he kissed Tamar goodbye.
‘I'll get back as soon as I can,’ he promised.
‘So much seems to be going wrong since my father's death that it's unbelievable.’
Lunch was as dreary as it always was when Stephen's presence was lacking.
His mother was her usual pale grey, silent self.
Her sole topic of conversation nowadays was the baby and she seemed to resent the fact that Tamar was his mother.
When Tamar rose from the table, she remarked, ‘I shall go out for a ride, Mama.’
Her mother-in-law raised dull eyes.
‘I would wish that your deportment on a horse could be more that of a lady and less that of a farm waggoner,’ she remarked spitefully.
Tamar bit her lip.
She had had to learn to control her fiery temper in the face of her mother-in-law's insults.
The woman was never offensive in Stephen's presence, but  Tamar knew that should she retaliate, as she was often tempted to, her conduct would immediately be reported to her husband.
She was very sensitive to the fact that Stephen had enough worries at the moment without the antipathy between his wife and mother adding to them.
‘You just wait, madam,’ Tamar thought to herself, as she turned from the room and swept up the stairs.
She was determined that her day would come.
When she reached the stable-yard, Moonbeam was saddled up and ready, tied up by the mounting block but there was no sign of Jonnie Medd, the young groom who usually accompanied her.
As her eyes scanned the yard, she caught sight of him coming out of one of the stables.
‘Come along, Jonnie — I'm ready,’ she called sharply.
The lad ran over to her, touching his cap.
‘T' new head groom's riding out with you today, m'Lady,’ he told her.
Tamar's brows drew together in a frown.
‘I didn't know Sir Stephen had set one on yet,’ she observed.
‘Yes, m'Lady. 'E started yesterday,’ answered Jonnie.
As he spoke, a figure came from one of the stables leading a horse.
Tamar glanced across curiously and as the man emerged from the shadow of the stable into the bright sunlight, her throat constricted and her heart gave a lurch.
There was no mistaking that jaunty walk and the cocky tilt of the man's head.
As the sun caught the coppery glint of the curls which clung closely to his head like a cap, the familiar Welsh lilt greeted her.
‘Good afternoon, m'Lady.
Which way are you wanting to ride, today?’ asked Gareth Davis.
Tamar took a deep breath to steady her nerves before she replied.
As he drew closer and they came face to face, she drew herself up and eyed him coldly.
‘How dare you follow me?’ she demanded icily.
He made no reply to her challenge, but his eyes were alight with devilish laughter as he unhitched her horse.
‘Shall we mount, m'Lady and go where we shall not be overheard?’ he suggested.
Tamar's eyes were cold.
‘I'll not be alone with you,’ she answered tightly.
‘Come now.’
His smile had gone as he led her horse  forward.
‘The men are going to gossip if we stand here and argue.
Mount up, and we'll talk as we ride.’
Tamar had no alternative but to do as he said, and they rode from the yard without another word.
How bitterly she regretted now that she had not revealed the episode with Davis before her marriage to Stephen.
If she had told him then, or even when the man had reappeared in her life at Helmsley she would now be on firmer ground.
As her love for Stephen had grown, she had come to see clearly that she should have been more open with him at the beginning.
She felt unable to marshal her thoughts into a semblance of logic.
She was terrified that if she poured out the tale to her husband now, he would be filled with doubts as to the extent of her previous involvement with Davis.
Instead of choosing to ride through the woodland paths which she loved so much, Tamar turned up the village street, intent on keeping to the roads.
Trotting past the houses, she was greeted with affection by those who saw her.
‘Good day, m'Lady,’ called more than one villager, so that Davis realised she had won the hearts of these people.
When they reached the road which ran across the top of the village, the groom drew level and, with a nod of his head, indicated that they should take the righthand way which led to the river bridge.
Upon reaching the bridge, he turned off the road and led the way through the trees, dismounting in a little clearing by the fast flowing water.
Tamar stood for  few moments studying the turbulent river, which seemed to reflect the turmoil of her thoughts.
Her tranquil life was threatened by the coming of a man whom she regarded as her deadly enemy.
As she stood and contemplated the deep, rushing waters, she wondered whether she had the strength to push him in and be rid of him for ever.
As though reading her thoughts, Davis gave a low laugh.
‘You have nothing to fear from me,’ he said.
Tamar whirled round.
‘Nothing to fear?’ she demanded.
‘You attacked me and tried to force yourself upon me, you wanted to blackmail me, you followed me around and spied on me in Helmsley — and you say I've nothing to fear!’
She  hurled the words at him with such violence that she paused in order to catch her breath.
Her face was ashen and her amber eyes glowed with the pent-up anger which was now released in a torrent of words.
‘For six years you have dogged me wherever I went and now you have turned up here, where I thought I had found a safe haven.’
Again she was silent for a moment or two, looking down at the carpet of tawny beech leaves, debris of the previous autumn, now shimmering in the dappled shafts of light which struggled through the tree canopy.
Coming to a decision, she raised her head and her eyes met his.
Leaning back against a tree trunk, as though to draw strength from it, she announced in a suddenly firm voice, ‘I will be rid of you.
I shall tell my husband of your attack on me at Cherry Tree Farm, and how you have pestered me all the years of my marriage.’
His smile was confident.
‘And he'll believe you, will he?’ he taunted.
‘Won't he consider it odd that you've never said a word before?’
Leaning towards her, he put a hand on each side of her face on the smooth tree bark, thus imprisoning her.
‘I shall do you no harm,’ he repeated quietly.
‘My lesson has been learned.
Once bitten twice shy, and a man only tackles a hell-cat once in his life.’
He gently stroked her cheek with his finger.
‘You will come to me, Tamar, before I come to you.’
‘Don't call me Tamar,’ she flashed.
‘I am Lady Lassiter to you, and don't you ever forget it.’
With a swift movement, she dipped beneath the encompassing arms and was free of him.
As she moved towards Moonbeam, however, he caught her arm and swung her to face him.
‘What's it to be?’ he challenged.
‘I can go from this place today, and you'll see nothing of me again, or I can stay.
If I stay, I can make you the best horsewoman in the district — one your husband will be proud of and one that the other ladies will envy when you ride to hounds.’
Tamar nibbled her bottom lip while she regarded the groom.
Despite her previous fear of him, she took Gareth Davis at his word when he said he would not try to harm her.
She recalled their encounter at Sleightholmedale, when she had almost killed him — and yet he still pursued her…
He must be a fine horseman since Stephen had chosen to employ him as head groom.
Perhaps she could use his skills for her own advantage.
The man watched her face mirror her emotions, as she turned over his proposal in her mind.
She had been dismayed to find that he must have made enquiries in Helmsley and tracked her down, but she'd become a much more confident and secure woman since the early days of her marriage.
Conscious that if she accepted his presence at Thorsbury without protest, her chance to remove him was gone, nevertheless she felt that she could now handle the man.
The simple fact that he was in her husband's employ gave her an advantage over him.
Daring herself, Tamar came to a sudden decision.
‘Yes!
I want to be a good horsewoman, if only to show my mother-in-law I can do it.’
Putting out a hand for him to shake, she added, ‘It's a bargain, but I can tell you now, that I shall never belong to anyone but my husband.’
Gareth smiled but did not speak, as he bent and clasped his hands together for her to mount her mare.
So it was that the two embarked upon a strange relationship.
Before others his attitude was deferential and circumspect but when they rode alone, he treated her with the easy familiarity of an equal.
True to his word, he schooled her in horsemanship and was a hard taskmaster.
After hours of going round and round the stable yard, he was at last satisfied with her deportment in the saddle and she, herself, felt at one with her mount.
Most days Victoria was allowed an hour from her lessons and joined Tamar, riding her own pony.
At first the child was rather afraid of Davis, whose scar shone whitely against the tan of his face.
However, his easy charm soon won her over and before long, she looked forward to her riding lesson as eagerly as her mother.
As Tamar progressed to facing easy jumps, her riding began to occupy more and more of her time and her thoughts.
Davis was scrupulous in his treatment of her and only touched her when absolutely necessary.
When she first began to have coaching in horsemanship, she was obsessed with her progress and it was her main topic of conversation whenever Stephen joined them for dinner.
Eventually, however, as the tutor became more important to her than the tuition, she found herself reluctant to mention Davis to her husband.
When the summer ripened into the long hot days of harvest, Davis sought an audience with Stephen.
As he entered the study, Stephen reflected on how fortunate he had been to obtain this man's services.
Not only was he a good judge of horseflesh, but he was capable of treating most ailments which  occurred both in the hunters and the heavy farm animals.
He was popular with the grooms and the coachmen and yet they respected him and his discipline was firm.
As a final bonus, he could pass on his expertise in the saddle and both Tamar and Victoria had made rapid progress under his guidance.
‘Yes?’ he enquired pleasantly as he looked up.
‘I thought you would wish to know, sir, that Her Ladyship is making good progress and I should like to take her further afield to tackle typical hunting country, so that she may get plenty of practice before she actually attends a meet.’
Stephen considered for a moment.
He was longing to show off his beautiful wife to the County and what better introduction than in the hunting field, as an accomplished horsewoman?
‘Yes.
She must not take any risks, Davis, but she will need the experience before riding to hounds,’ he agreed.
As Tamar rode further afield, she learned more about Gareth Davis and what she learned intrigued her.
At the age of eleven he had driven a herd of Welsh ponies up to the West Riding, for use as pit ponies in the mines.
Despite his youth he had travelled alone, sleeping in barns along the route, with which he had been familiar through previous trips in his father's company.
Having reached Yorkshire, he had decided that enough was enough.
He could see no future in the drover's life and had travelled around the north earning his living, usually with animals but often through casual farmwork.
She recognised him as a kindred spirit, with the same happy-go-lucky, questing attitude to life which she herself possessed.
Although she had moulded herself into the demure and restrained wife suitable to Stephen's position, deep down she still possessed the wild spirits which had led her into Sir William Forster's arms.
The groom smiled to himself as he recognised where Tamar's interest in him was leading.
He was playing her like an angler with a fish and knew that she would soon be netted.
He noted how frequently she made excuses for their hands to touch or for him to lift her down from her horse.
Upon each occasion the contact was only fleeting and he was careful to leave her longing for more.
As harvest time was drawing to a close and autumn would soon be upon them, Tamar admitted what she had tried to deny for the last few weeks.
Her need of Gareth Davis constantly tugged at her and would no longer be denied.
That day she dressed with extra care, choosing the brown velvet habit which set off her complexion and deepened the amber of her eyes.
Tempy watched her silently.
Although she had no suspicions of Tamar's interest in Gareth Davis, she had noticed a suppressed excitement in her mistress of late and worried as to what the cause could be.
They rode out from the stables in comparative silence, the groom a little way behind as befitted his position.
Tamar turned along the track which led away from the village and the harvest fields, choosing instead the path through the thick woods which stretched down to the river bank.
Once they were a couple of miles from the Manor, where the woods were at their most impenetrable, she reined in Moonbeam and drew to a halt in a little glade.
Turning to her companion, she held out her arms to be lifted from the saddle.
As he clasped her waist, instead of jumping down she slid her body down his, so that his arms remained holding her and she was pressed close to him.
He caught his breath as the black fringes of her lashes swept upwards and the golden eyes met his.
As his mouth descended hungrily upon hers and he swept her down among the bracken, Tamar succumbed to a passion far greater than she had ever known before.
Her husband's lovemaking was gentle and restrained compared to the fierce passion which now engulfed all her senses as she gave herself utterly and completely in an explosion of abandonment.
When he rolled away from her, she idly pulled a frond of fern and stroked it down his cheek.
He looked at her teasingly.
‘Well, Lady Lassiter?’ he smiled.
‘Very well, thank you, Davis,’ she laughed back.
CHAPTER SIXTEEN
Tamar looked forward to the end of the harvest.
During her years in Helmsley, she had missed life on the farm more than she would ever have thought possible.
Now at Thorsbury she and Victoria often rode to the fields to watch the men labouring and when it was clear that the work of leading and stacking the corn would soon be at an end, she kept the child entranced with stories of the Harvest Suppers of her youth.
Towards the end of September there was a flurry in the Manor kitchens as hams and joints of beef were cooked and huge game pies baked, along with cakes and tarts of every kind.
By the time the last load was led, dusk was falling and the scene was lit from the west by the orange glow of the sunset.
Tamar had allowed Victoria to stay up late to watch the leading in of the last load, which was a ritual joined in by all the estate workers.
When the pair of huge horses made their way past the front of the Manor, where the family stood on the steps to watch, the glow of the setting sun was almost gone and in the eerie after-glow the scene took on an almost pagan air.
Perched precariously on top of the load was the loader, holding aloft the corn-dolly for all to see.
This was the creation of an old woman in the village and was the symbol of a successful harvest.
Tradition had it that if the corn-dolly reached the following year's harvest intact, it augured well for the farm in the year to come.
If, however, it was ravaged by rats and mice, it was an ill-omen for the farm and those who laboured there.
As the waggon trundled on its way towards the buildings, the loader swaying atop the load, the workers and villagers danced and sang around it.
The Lassiters followed more circumspectly behind, reaching the stable-yard in time to see the previous year's corn-dolly being symbolically burnt.
Those watching joined hands and danced round the bonfire  amid an air of frenzied excitement.
As the flames died down and the dancers stood back for the family to precede them upstairs into the Long Room, there was a subtle change in the atmosphere.
The spontaneity of the dancers ebbed away and they seemed almost shamefaced that their behaviour had been witnessed by their employers.
While they all took their places along the tables, Tamar's thoughts went back to similar evenings at Aumery Park Farm.
Her father's stern presence had prevented such scenes of gay ebullience, but the weary harvesters had always been welcomed with heartfelt gratitude and hospitality into her mother's kitchen, where the tables groaned with an array of fare equally good as that now placed before the workers of Thorsbury.
At home, as she still thought of it, the evening had been one of shared companionship and merrymaking but here, once joined by the family, the workers were subdued, their voices muted.
Tamar occupied the seat where, for over thirty years, Stephen's mother had sat.
Although she no longer dominated the proceedings, Tamar was certain that it was the older woman's presence which dampened the workers' enthusiasm and made the meal and the dancing which followed, restrained and formal.
It was clear that the Dowager Lady Lassiter's attendance was an unwilling duty.
She showed no interest in the workers and indeed, apart from the indoor staff, knew few of them by name.
Tamar looked at her mother-in-law's haughty face as she picked at her food, exuding boredom.
‘If only she'd clear off into the dower house,’ she told herself, ‘I could really improve things here.’
The end of harvest had also come to Sleightholmedale, a couple of weeks earlier; despite Jonadab Oaks' reputation as a stern man and a strict master, the workers surged into the farmhouse kitchen, in answer to his invitation: ‘Come in, one and all.
Make yourselves at home and praise the Lord for a good bumper harvest.’
He stood by the door and called each worker by name, shaking hands with some, inquiring about relatives of others, but thanking each one for a job well done.
They had needed no second invitation.
Mistress Oaks  was well known in the district for keeping a good table and now the snowy white cloths were spread with an abundance of good things, fulfilling all their expectations.
As the throng of workers laughed and joked, tucking into the vast amount of food laid out before them, Annie's mind went back to other Mell Suppers and not for the first time, she reflected on how her family had dwindled.
Martha, her youngest, was being courted by Sam Baldwin, the youngest son of the family at Cauldron Mill; although the lad had not yet spoken to Jonadab, Annie knew it would not be long before he asked for their daughter as his bride.
Martha rarely went from the valley to where she could meet young men.
She was a sweet-natured girl of a placid disposition, and considered herself fortunate to have found a suitor.
Young Jonadab, too, was now betrothed.
He spent most of his spare time up at Skiplam, where the girl he courted was the only child of a wealthy farmer.
‘'E's got 'is feet under a good table,’ his father often chuckled.
Annie looked down the table to where her son George sat next to his wife.
She frowned to see that the seat at the other side was occupied by his sister-in-law, Sarah Butler.
‘She still follows 'im about like a shadow,’ Annie tutted.
‘Why can't she leave 'im alone?’
Although the girl's sister Christie was now engaged to be married and their Uncle Nathan in Leeds had tried to persuade Sarah to take over as his housekeeper, Sarah had dug in her heels and refused the invitation.
Annie considered that Ann Butler should step in and make up Sarah's mind for her.
‘Ruins that lass, she does,’ she thought in disgust, as she glanced across at George's mother-in-law.
George and Elizabeth had come to terms with the fact that they would always be childless.
It was a great blow to them, but Elizabeth was by now in her mid-thirties and there had been no hint of a pregnancy since her miscarriage in the early months of marriage.
She had built up a good little business in the indoor market-hall and now she and George had amassed enough in the bank to set up on a farm of their own.
Although they often discussed the possibility and even went to view farms that were advertised to  let, they loved Cherry Tree Farm and had no real wish to leave it.
When the tables had been cleared and those who could do so had entertained the rest with songs and recitations, the whole company settled down for a sing-song.
Accompanied by Bert Weald on his concertina, they sang a mixture of country songs and harvest hymns.
At last the evening drew to a close and outdoor clothes were brought down from where they had been laid on beds.
‘There'll be no need of a lantern, friends,’ called Jonadab from the open doorway.
‘It's as light as day tonight.’
Goodnights were exchanged and George set off down the lane with Elizabeth, Sarah and their mother.
Jonadab was right: the harvest moon hung in the velvety blackness of the sky like a huge orb, casting such a radiance that the cart tracks in the road shone whitely, guiding their feet with no stumbling.
The roadside foliage was touched with silver in the moon's rays, its brightness thrown into relief by the shadowy depths of the leaves behind.
Across the dale came the coughing bark of a dog-fox on the prowl and Elizabeth felt a shaft of worry for her poultry.
She knew, however, that her mother could be relied upon to have fastened up the hens before coming up to the Oaks' farm for the supper, so she settled her fears.
There was a nip in the air, and she pulled her cloak more closely round her.
‘It's chilly,’ she observed.
‘Yes.’
George glanced up at the clear sky.
‘There could be a touch of frost — sounds are carrying clearly.’
He hoped that an early frost was not the sign of a hard winter.
For some years now he had shared the sheep herding with his Uncle George: the latter had never been particularly strong and now it was obvious that he was very ill.
He had wasted away to an almost transparent frailness and was troubled by a rasping cough, which no amount of vinegar and black treacle could move.
Most of his days were spent huddled round over the fire and George knew that his parents were worried about his Uncle's condition.
‘Aah doubts but it's the galloping consumption,’ his mother had confided tearfully.
‘Aah can't see 'im lasting over t'winter.’
His Uncle's illness had placed the responsibility for all the sheep on George's shoulders.
In addition to his father's considerable herds, he had built up a sizable flock of his own and dreaded the thought of a harsh winter.
Before the start of harvest, the ewes had been returned to the high moorland pastures to fatten up and build up their strength before coming down for tupping.
If there was to be a severe winter, George hoped that he would see the warning signs early enough to anticipate it.
He had already seen to it that fodder had been stored in stone-built barns situated at strategic points on lower pastures.
Before the heaviest snowfalls he would need to read the advance signals in the weather and move the sheep down into groups round the storage points, making them more accessible for feeding and, he hoped, cutting down losses in drifts.
As the thoughts ran through his mind, he came to a conclusion.
‘None of the farm lads really understand sheep.
I wonder if Father would agree to getting a shepherd at t'Martinmas Hirings,’ he mused.
‘Handling all the sheep is certainly going to be too much for you on your own,’ answered Elizabeth.
‘You've plenty of other work as well as shepherding.’
As they turned into the yard of Cherry Tree Farm, George grinned.
‘Aye!
And handling mi father'll tek some doing an' all,’ he retorted.
Although he was chary of broaching the subject of a full-time shepherd, when he did so, he found that his father had been giving some thought to the matter.
After the disastrous moorland fire, it had taken Jonadab a few years to overcome the loss of both stock and crops.
This spring, however, he had achieved his aim of owning his own stallion.
‘General’ was of a docile temperament so that, in addition to serving Jonadab's mares, he could also be used as a draught-horse for certain farm-work.
Depending on this year's crop of foals, Jonadab was hoping to send him out on the road in the following spring.
‘Aah sh'll advertise 'im in t' Malton Messenger and if we does well, Aah might try t' Yorkshire Post next year and send 'im further afield,’ he had told his sons, adding, ‘T'stud fees is a guinea and an 'alf, wi' a florin for t'lad, so it's not ti be sneezed at.’
Now, however, General was off-colour.
Jonadab was in the depths of depression: he had kept the stallion in his stable and before going in for their midday meal, both father and sons were in consultation round the gentle grey.
’‘As 'e 'ad owt tiv eat?’
Jonadab questioned the waggoner's lad, who had been given the job of keeping an eye on the horse.
‘No, maister,’ he answered, inwardly quaking lest he should be blamed if the horse died.
He knew that his master must have paid dearly for such a magnificent beast and that he had deliberately chosen a grey stallion to breed more greys from his stock of grey shire-mares.
Jonadab had an ambition, fired with a little conceit, to have any good quality grey shirehorses in the area attributed to himself.
Upon seeing a good specimen, he wanted people to say, automatically, ‘It's a Jonadab Oaks’ breeding, is it?’
George went closer to the horse and inspected the straw underneath him.
It was very wet and strong-smelling.
‘Has he been making water a lot?’ he asked.
The lad gulped.
‘Yes.
Aah thinks so.’
George looked at the other two.
‘It could be an infection in his bladder,’ he pronounced.
Jonadab turned to the lad.
‘Go and bring some bottery leaves in from t'orchard hedge,’ he instructed.
As the boy ran from the stable, his master called after him, ‘Bring plenty!
Green, if there is any.’
Although Jonadab did not believe in the old country superstition that an elder bush planted by a house kept away witches, he was a firm believer that it deflected lightning during a storm.
Consequently there were plenty of elders, or bottery bushes as they were known locally, around the farm.
Not only did Annie make elderflower lemonade as a refreshing summer drink, but elderberry syrup was a warming and beneficial cordial in the winter.
Jonadab always relied on the leaves for treating any horse which developed an infection or chill in the bladder.
Now he could only hope that the heavy crop of elderberries, which heralded the end of summer, did not mean that all the leaves had fallen.
‘We're in luck,’ said Jonna, as Ned came panting in at the doorway with an armful of heavily-foliaged twigs.
‘Shove 'em in t'manger,’ Jonadab directed, ‘and then get off for thi dinner.’
The three men watched the animal snuffling among the elder and then, satisfied that he would nibble at the leaves, they left the stable and turned towards the house.
‘Is it possible for us to hire a shepherd at Martinmas?’
George asked his father.
He would have preferred to lead into the topic more subtly, but did not wish his Uncle to overhear the discussion.
Jonadab paused.
‘It's crossed mi mind that thoo'll not be able ti manage all t'sheep this winter wi'oot some 'elp’, he admitted.
‘Aah dissent think thi Uncle'll mek old bones, Aah'm afeard, an' we mun come ti some arrangement.’
George sighed with relief and Jonna grinned across at him.
‘Mind thoo,’ went on his father, ‘it'll not be easy ti get a good man.
A lot is leaving farming ti get more brass in t'mills in Leeds and Bradford and thereabouts.
Why they should want ti work in them smelly places when they could be out in God's good air, Aah sh'll nivver know.’
Jonna looked at his fingerends, already cracked and sore from the outdoor work, even though winter had not begun.
‘Nay, Faither, neither will I,’ he said, with a grimace at George.
As George would be the one who would work most closely with the new shepherd, he went with his father to the Hirings in Kirkbymoorside to help choose a man.
Whether they were going for a new place, or staying, the hired hands were all given the day off to attend the Hirings.
As soon as the basic tasks were finished, it was Jonadab's custom to seat himself at the parlour table with a ledger and a leather drawstring bag full of money.
This was the only day of the year that the workers were ever allowed in the family parlour.
Bert Weald was the first to enter and he put his cross to mark the receipt of his year's wages.
As each man drew his money and put his cross, Jonadab asked the same question.
‘Art thoo goin' or art thoo stoppin'?’
If the answer was ‘stoppin' ‘, the labourer would be given an extra shilling to fasten his contract for the next year, but he still had the rest of the day off to attend the merrymaking at the Hirings.
Those returning for another  year's work would be admonished by Jonadab: ‘Don't be coming back in t'small hours.
There's work ti be done in t'morn.’
If the answer was ‘gooin'’, as the master counted out the money he would answer, ‘Well goo, then!
Thoo won't find a better place.’
His expression made it clear that any man or boy unlucky enough not to find another situation need not expect any sympathy: his place would have been filled.
As he and George rode towards Kirkby, Jonadab grumbled loud and long about the money he had paid out that morning.
‘Bert Weald's on twenty pounds a year now,’ he complained.
‘And 'is 'ouse, taties and milk.’
George thought grimly, ‘That's twenty pounds more than I get, or our Jonna.’
However he knew better than to put the thought into words.
When they reached the market place, he realised that his father had been right: there were nowhere near as many workers as there had been in previous Novembers.
The little town was packed with milling crowds, but many of these were parents, come to collect their sons' wages before they either went back to work or moved on to another farm.
There was a carnival atmosphere, with stalls and sideshows to tempt the hired men and women to part with money handed over by new employers to seal the bargain.
George pushed his way through the throng, looking for the spot where the shepherds were gathered.
When he came to where the men were standing, identified by a tuft of wool in their hat-band or buttonhole, George hesitated.
He felt embarrassed at the thought of walking among the men, assessing them as though they were cattle in an auction market.
He stood by, watching as an elderly farmer and his wife went along the line, stopping before each man and commenting audibly to each other on his good and bad points.
‘This'n looks good an' strong,’ he heard the farmer's wife remark.
‘A bit shifty round t'eyes,’ came back the reply.
One man had attracted George's interest.
He reminded him of his brother Joseph, who had emigrated to Canada.
His hair had the chestnut glints of George's own and his brown eyes were steady with a touch of humour.
As the couple approached him, George could not hear what  remarks were passed but saw the dull flush of anger suffuse the shepherd's face, as the farmer picked up his wrist and spanned it, passing his hands up the man's arms to judge his muscles.
His chin rose quickly in a proud gesture and George's heart warmed to him.
As the couple passed on down the line, George quickly approached the man.
Lapsing into the vernacular, as he smiled at his choice, he said, ‘Thoo's not fastened yet, then?’
‘No, maister,’ came back the reply.
‘Well thoo is noo, then,’ answered George.
The man held out his hand, which George seized and shook vigorously.
Then fishing in his pocket, he held out a shilling which the man took.
‘Oaks.
Aumery Park Farm, Sleightholmedale,’ announced George.
‘Sixteen pounds a year and general work, when needed, in addition to shepherding.’
‘Aye, right, Mr Oaks,’ the shepherd answered.
‘My name's Bob Lamb.’
He smiled.
‘'Appen that's why Aah become a shepherd — because o' t'name, like.’
Before George could reply, his father approached.
Even now, Jonadab held himself as erect as in his youth and stood out from the crowd.
Seeing that George was talking to one of the shepherds, he came forward to join them.
‘Is this t'one thoo fancies, then?’ he inquired, looking the man up and down.
‘I've fastened him, Faither,’ said George, a touch of defiance in his voice.
Jonadab's eyebrows drew together and the blue eyes hardened.
‘Thoo's give 'im 'is shilling?’
He was annoyed that George had acted without him.
‘Where's 'e come from an' what's 'is experience?’ he demanded, reproof in his tone.
Before George could answer, however, Bob Lamb took it upon himself to reply.
His explanation that he had worked for several years for one master, until his employer had died, mollified Jonadab a little.
‘Aah served a year at mi last place,’ went on Lamb, ‘but t'food was poor and a man can't work on an empty belly.’
Jonadab confirmed that the shepherd was not one for strong drink and was beginning to think that George had possibly made a good choice, when the old farmer and his  wife came back along the line.
‘Thoo'll do,’ the man said, approaching Bob Lamb.
‘Aah'm spoke for,’ the shepherd replied with a hint of satisfaction in his voice.
As the couple turned away, the wife was grumbling that her husband had missed the chance of what they now considered to be the best prospect.
After giving Lamb directions to the farm and explaining that he would lodge at Bert Weald's cottage, Jonadab and George turned away.
‘Will it be all right if Aah goes down after Aah've had a bite t'eat, maister?’ asked Lamb.
‘Aah've a few bits and pieces ti buy, but after that there's nowt much in my line 'ere.’
Looking down at the black and white collie which crouched at his feet, he added, ‘It'll be all right, will it, ti bring my own dog?
Meg's used ti working with me, and she's well trained.’
The more the man talked, the higher he rose in Jonadab's estimation.
‘Thoo's made a good choice there, Aah thinks,’ he said grudgingly, as he and George walked across Crown Square.
‘Mind thoo,’ he added.
‘Thoo should 'ave waited for me afore fastening 'im.
Them as pays piper should call t'tune.’
‘Aye, Faither,’ George agreed, ‘but we'd 'ave lost 'im if I'd left it any longer.’
Jonadab had already hired a new third lad, or ‘thoddy’ as they were known, and there was little more for them to do in the town: neither was interested in the attractions of sideshows or stalls.
They both looked with disgust at the men who came rolling drunk from the inns and ale-houses.
‘A silly waste of 'ard-earned brass,’ Jonadab asserted and George could not help but agree.
For most of the men, it was the only day of the year when they were able to visit a town, spending their days as they did working on the isolated farms of the moors and dales.
Although they would regard it as the highlight of their year, many would make their way back with a sore head and a light pocket.
Money not spent on ale would probably be stolen or gambled away as the Hirings attracted pickpockets and professional gamblers from the big towns.
It was late afternoon but not yet dusk when father and son began their homeward ride.
The air was sharp with the  promise of frost and George once again felt the premonition of a bleak winter ahead.
‘It's a good job we managed to get a shepherd.
I only 'opes he's as good as he seems,’ he commented.
‘Thoo picked 'im and thoo 'as 'im ti work wiv,’ was his father's reply.
‘It's thoo he mun suit.’
When they reached the base of the steep drop into the valley, they spotted Bob Lamb striding out ahead of them at a brisk pace.
Over his shoulder was hung a canvas bag which contained all his worldly possessions, and close to his left heel trotted a black and white collie.
’ 'E walks like a man as means business,’Jonadab remarked.
‘There's nowt sloppy about 'im, so let's 'ope 'is work is as good as 'is stride.’
As they approached, they could hear that he was whistling merrily as he walked and, upon seeing them, he raised a hand and gave them a frank open smile.
George spent the next weeks showing Bob Lamb around the herds of sheep.
Together they rode across Hodge Beck and gathered up the flocks to look them over before the onset of winter.
Bob's dog Meg was a model of obedience and George knew that she would be as big an asset in the handling of the sheep as her master.
Bob was taken round the various barns which held the winter fodder and together he and George rode the most advantageous trails, which would get the ewes down from the heights most speedily.
George was impressed with the new man's knowledge of sheep, appreciating how quickly he spotted a sick or lame sheep and how neatly he and Meg could cut it out from the herd for attention.
In addition to his competence as a shepherd George liked him as a man.
He discovered that Bob was twenty-five, four years his junior, and realised that it was the first time since his brother Joe's marriage, when they were seventeen and twenty, that he had had a companion of roughly his own age.
He and his brother Jonna got on better now that Jonna had grown up, but George knew that his brother would always be jealous of him as the elder.
‘I'm right pleased to get Bob,’ he told Elizabeth.
‘He's a  good man and I feel easier facing this winter with him working with me.’
She smiled at his enthusiasm, relieved that he now had help with the sheep.
‘We may have a mild winter,’ she reminded him.
‘I don't know why you're so worried about the sheep.’
He stared into the fire.
‘It's just a feeling I've got, that we're in for a hard winter.
I only hope the snow doesn't come till after Christmas, though.
The later it comes, the less time it stays.’
So he continued to scan the sky for the massing of heavy clouds above the moorland, which would presage the coming of the snow.
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
Despite George's vigilance the snow, when it did come, took him unawares.
One evening in late November, he did his usual round of the buildings to check his animals before going to bed.
As he crossed the yard, he glanced round the skyline and was relieved to see no sign of cloud.
The moon had set, but the sky was clear and lit by a sprinkling of stars.
The silence of the night brought a feeling of unease; the normal rustlings of nocturnal creatures were absent and not even the hoot of an owl nor the choughing call of a pheasant disturbed the stillness.
It was as though all Nature held its breath, but George standing on the doorstep for a last look round, could see nothing amiss.
While they slept, heavy clouds swirled over the valley in massed ranks and the snow began to fall.
At first it came down almost lazily, in huge, silent flakes which soon blanketed the frozen ground.
When George awoke, a couple of hours before dawn, it was to the rattle of the window frames and the moaning of the wind round the chimney pots, denoting a rising storm.
Dressing hurriedly, he dashed outside to find that, in just a few hours, the whole world had been transformed.
Even in the farmyard, which was snugly sheltered with buildings on three sides, the snow lay deeply.
He knew that the howling wind would be whipping up the downfall into deep drifts on the exposed high moor.
‘I'll have my breakfast as soon as you can get it ready,’ he told Elizabeth.
‘You and Sarah'll have to see to all t'stock, as well as t'poultry and dairywork.
I must go up onto t'moor and get the sheep down before they get buried.’
‘Go down to your father's and fetch Bob,’ urged Elizabeth.
‘You'll manage better, two together.’
‘Nay.
It's drifted in the lane and I doubt if I'd get through.
Besides, Rob and Tess are a couple of good dogs and I know t'moors better than Bob.’
As he spoke, George was  wrapping a clean sack round each leg over his trousers and criss-crossing them with bands to fasten them, giving greater protection for his legs.
He wolfed down his breakfast and after buttoning up his overcoat, swathed a muffler round his neck, covering his mouth and nose.
Draping another washed sack over his head to form a hood, he lit a lantern and then, seizing his crook from behind the door, set off to call his dogs.
‘I should be back by dinner-time so get the stewpot on,’ he said.
‘No doubt I'll be frozen.’
‘Do be careful, love,’ said his wife, a frown on her forehead and a worried tone to her voice.
‘I'd far rather you waited until it's light, or went down for Bob.’
‘Nay, there's no knowing how long this lot's been coming down, nor how deep it is up yonder,’ protested George.
‘Anyroad, Bob'll already have set off and I may meet him up on t'tops.’
So saying he set off with Rob and Tess at his heels to head for the high moor.
The path leading to the stepping stones which forded Hodge Beck wound narrowly between high sheltering hedges.
Even so, the snow there was calf-deep, so that George needs must lift his legs at each step, making walking an effort.
Once he had safely negotiated the slippery, ice-encrusted stepping stones, he was in the lee of the rising moor so that there was some protection from the swirling snow.
Guided by a mournful bleating, he came across several groups of sheep, huddled together in the vain hope of safety.
With the help of the dogs, who leapt silently through the snow, George managed to usher them to a barn, where they massed on the sheltered side.
There he left them, knowing that they were safe, despite their plaintive cries.
He spread out some fodder for them and then turned once again for the track to the moor-top.
The higher he climbed, the fiercer the wind.
He realised that he had been foolish to risk the search alone, but there was no turning back.
By the time he reached the high moor, visibility was restricted by a swirling mass as he was exposed to the full force of the blizzard.
Half-blinded, his lashes and brows coated with a rim of snow, George was disorientated and unable to find a path which would lead him down to the shelter of the valley.
There was no barrier against  the elements and he was buffeted by the gale-force winds, which whipped across the open wastes of moorland.
The dogs crouched at his heels for shelter, moving behind like grey ghosts in the stumbling tracks made by their master.
Despite frequent pauses to listen for the doleful cries of lost sheep, the roaring wind was so loud that George was deafened to any other sounds.
Realising that he was not only wasting his time until the storm abated but also endangering his life, George turned in what he hoped was the right direction for home.
He was worried about Bob Lamb.
If the shepherd had done as George feared and set off alone in search of Jonadab's flocks, he would never find his way across the unfamiliar moors.
The squalls of driven snow had now more than a hint of frost, so that the part of George's face that was uncovered was almost numb with cold and stung beneath the bombardment of icy slivers.
If only he could come across a barn in which he could seek refuge from the full force of the gale…but visibility was limited to a few strides.
As he tried to peer through the impenetrable veil of snow, searching in vain for some landmark or the vague outline of a barn, George's foot came unexpectedly into contact with a large stone, almost buried in the snow.
He stumbled, and although he felt frantically with his crook for firm ground to steady himself and regain his balance, he pitched forward into a steep-sided dell, upon the edge of the moor.
He lay for a moment trying to recover his wind before rising again to his feet.
Once down in the snow he was overtaken by a heavy lethargy.
His eyelids drooped and his limbs no longer felt the bitter chill; they were merely numbed and heavy.
His last thought before closing his eyes and succumbing to overwhelming tiredness was, ‘I hope Elizabeth's got that stewpot on.’
Looking down at their still and silent master, the two dogs began to slink nearer until they lay down beside him, noses resting on his body.
The feeding and cleaning-out took Elizabeth and Sarah all morning.
Each in her turn looked frequently towards the moor but realised that no sign of George would be seen until he reached the yard.
The wind seemed to drive all ways at once, so that whichever way they turned, as they  struggled to and fro across the yard, and from building to building, the snow was always directly into their faces.
Before they had ventured out into the snowstorm, their mother had issued instructions: ‘Pin up your skirts before you go out into that plother.’
As the snow even in the yard was more than boot-deep, they were thankful that their skirts and petticoats were pinned well up out of the wet snow.
When they went in halfway through the morning for a warming mug of tea, Elizabeth opened the oven door and lifted the lid of the big brown earthenware stew-crock.
‘Ooh, that smells lovely, Mother,’ she smiled.
‘Will you pop some dumplings in at about twenty to twelve?
George'll want something warming when he gets back.’
‘Aye!
That'll stick to his ribs,’ rejoined her mother.
‘I could just eat some now,’ Sarah said, sniffing appreciatively.
‘I'm frozen.’
‘Well, we've quite a bit more to do before dinner-time.’
Elizabeth was uncompromising.
‘Come along — the sooner we get on with it the sooner we shall finish.’
So saying she bustled Sarah out again into the bitter cold.
It was noon before they had completed the morning's tasks, and as they came out from the buildings to go across to the house, the snow had ceased to fall.
The sky was still grey and menacing and both sisters allowed their eyes to comb the white mantled slope of the moors for some evidence of life.
There was no sign of either George or the sheep, and Elizabeth sighed as they entered the kitchen.
‘I'm afraid the dumplings will be sad, before George gets here.
Perhaps you can make another batch when we see him coming down from the moor-edge,’ she suggested to her mother.
The meal was passed in comparative silence, each woman worrying in her own way because of George's failure to return.
Elizabeth tuned over in her mind the possibilities of what could have befallen George.
She knew that her husband would take no risks and yet he should have been home by now.
What was the best thing to do, she wondered.
While acknowledging that Sarah seemed to be infatuated with George, her sister was so many years her junior that  she still thought of her as a child and dismissed her obvious affection for George as innocent admiration.
For her part, Sarah's anxiety for his safety was almost too much to bear.
She tried to mask her true feelings from her mother and sister, but her throat ached with tension and she felt desperate for some action to be taken, to try to search for him.
Although there was a break in the snowfall, the wind still blew fiercely from the north, moaning round the house and whipping up the fallen snow so that it skimmed across the fields like fine powder, piling up in deep drifts where its progress was interrupted by hedgerows.
As she sipped her tea at the conclusion of the meal, Elizabeth reached a decision.
‘He should have been here by now,’ she announced.
‘I shall take Rosie or Violet and try to get through the drifts and reach Aumery Park Farm.’
‘Why don't we go up on the moor and look for George?’ asked Sarah.
Elizabeth considered for a moment.
She, too, was extremely worried, but tried to be practical.
‘No,’ she replied at last.
‘We need to have more searchers.
If he's lost, he should be able to get home while it's no longer snowing.
If he's met with an accident, the moors are far too vast for the two of us to cover much of an area before dark.’
With this, she once more wrapped up warmly and made her way to the stable.
When she came out leading Violet by the bridle, she went over to the mounting block and climbed up on to the horse.
Then her mother, who had been watching from the kitchen window, ran to the back door.
‘Do be careful,’ she called from the step.
Elizabeth raised a hand to indicate that she had heard, and guided the powerful beast into the lane.
The drifts surely could not be more than chest-deep on the massive shire, she thought, and with a bit of luck she would get through.
Since her marriage to George she had, in some measure, grown to share the family's belief in Jonadab's powers.
She felt that if only she could reach her father-in-law and confront him with her fears for George's safety, he would somehow make everything all right.
Sarah finished the washing-up and, taking off her apron, folded it and placed it in one of the table drawers.
Her  mother sat by the fire, her knitting lying in her lap, eyes closed and spectacles slipped down her nose.
Sarah touched Ann's hand.
The older woman's eyes opened briefly and looked up at her in confusion.
‘I'm just going out for a minute, Mam, I won't be long.’
Sarah spoke in a low soothing tone, not wishing to rouse her mother fully.
‘All right, love.’
Almost before she had finished speaking, the eyelids had drooped and with a faint snore and a little wriggle, Ann Butler was once more asleep.
Sarah examined her boots.
Stuffed with newspaper, they stood in the hearth.
They were not yet dry but she had no others apart from her best ones, so she pulled them on over the warm, dry woollen stockings into which she had changed upon coming in from the buildings.
She wrapped up warmly, winding a scarf round her neck, crossing it over her chest and pinning it at the back, as her mother had done in her childhood.
Choosing a sturdy walking stick from those which stood behind the door, she quietly lifted the sneck and slipped out, so as not to waken her mother.
Looking northwards towards the end of the dale, she frowned to see the accumulation of heavy clouds above the moors.
The windbreak of pine trees which sheltered the buildings on the north side, creaked and groaned in the piercing wind; the treetops whipped to and fro in a frightening manner.
Sarah felt that their very height made them vulnerable and was afraid that the trunks would snap under the pressure.
Realising that there was more snow on the way, she clenched her teeth and set off for the moors.
Relying heavily on the stick, she clambered upwards, stopping every now and again to call, ‘George!
George!’
She wished that she had one of the dogs with her but both were with their master.
Sarah believed that Tess and Rob were so devoted to George that they would be close to him, no matter where he was.
When she reached the summit, she was into the full brunt of the gale-force wind.
Screwing up her eyes and looking round, it was with a sinking heart that she realised the enormity of her task.
The moors stretched before her as far as the eye could see, in fold after fold of snow-covered  dunes.
There was no break in the uniformity; no landmark to help pinpoint her position.
Sarah realised that if she struck inwards into the undulating tracts of snow-blanketed moorland, she would soon lose her way.
Consequently, she decided to walk northwards along the edge of the moor, safe in the knowledge that if the snow should begin to fall again before she found George, she only needed to make her way downwards and she would come across Hodge Beck, which she could follow southwards to safety.
By choosing to go northwards, she was walking directly into the driving wind but she pressed on, bent low over the walking stick to try to protect her face.
Her eyes were half-closed and her cheeks were stiff with the numbing cold of the bitter wind.
She counted every hundred paces, to give her something to cling on to and then, turning her head away from the gale, she shouted George's name, cocking her head this way and that to catch any reply.
Time ceased to have any meaning for Sarah.
She was, by now, counting aloud almost mechanically.
‘Ninety-nine, a hundred.
Stop!
Turn!
Shout!’ she intoned.
Incredibly, this time, she heard a faint bark.
Again she called out.
This time the dogs answered.
‘Rob!
Tess!’
She pursed her lips in a vain attempt to whistle, but they were too cold and dry.
Again came the bark.
Casting about for a sighting, she suddenly saw one of the dogs about a quarter of a mile away.
It appeared so unexpectedly that it seemed to leap out of the ground.
Sarah tried to run, lifting her feet high in the snow and stumbling over snow-encrusted tussocks of heather but suddenly, to her consternation, the dog disappeared.
Sarah stopped.
Peering round, she was alarmed to see no sign of life in the empty wastes.
So great was her disappointment that all life seemed to drain from her.
Suddenly weak, she dropped to her knees and began to weep.
Then, hearing a sound, she raised her head from her hands to see Rob creeping over the snow towards her, whimpering slightly.
‘Rob!’
Sarah half-whispered, rising to her feet.
‘Where's your boss?’
The dog's tail began to wag frantically and he ran round  her, barking shrilly.
Sarah ran forward, and then stopped as the ground fell away before her.
There at her feet was a shallow dell and huddled in the snow at the base of it was George, with Tess snuggled up to him, her head on his chest.
With her heart thumping so hard that her ears were deaf to any other sounds, Sarah hurled herself down into the dip.
‘Oh George, George,’ she gasped.
‘Oh, please God, don't let him be dead,’ she prayed, as she sank to her knees in the snow and raised his head.
Thankfully, she heard him groan, as she moved him.
‘Wake up!
Wake up!’ she cried, as she rubbed his icy cheeks to warm them and try to bring him round.
George stirred and reluctantly opened his eyes.
He longed to close them again in sleep, but Elizabeth was trying to keep him awake.
Seeing that he had now regained consciousness, Sarah murmured, ‘Thank God.’
With a sound that was half-laugh and half-sob, she began to rain kisses on his ashen face.
George's wits began to return and he realised that he would have soon passed from sleep to death, if Elizabeth had not found him.
‘Thank you, my love,’ he whispered, as he began to return her kisses.
For a few moments, Sarah was lost in the ecstasy of feeling George's kisses on her lips, and his arms round her.
She quickly pulled herself together, however, and rose to her feet.
‘Come along!
Get up!’ she ordered.
The insidious cold was once more creeping over George and he sank to the ground benumbed and unwilling to make an effort.
Realising that she was too slight to lift him, Sarah was desperate.
Kneeling beside him, she tried, unsuccessfully, to push him into an upright position.
By now the light was fading and as the leaden clouds massed heavily on the horizon, the first flurries blew in the wind; heralds of another blizzard to come.
All her life Sarah Butler had been protected and cosseted by older members of her family but now, faced with Nature at its most pitiless, she knew that George's life depended on her.
She must get him on to his feet and down from the high moor before the impending storm.
Looking to the north, she could already see the curtains of snow which were sweeping towards them with terrifying speed.
Lifting  her foot, she aimed a kick at George, catching him under the ribs with her boot.
‘Come on, damn you!’
She hardly knew what she was saying; only knew that she must somehow rouse him to movement.
As she raised her foot again, to aim another kick, George rolled over on to his knees and tried to rise.
‘Elizabeth, help me.’
His voice was so faint as to be almost inaudible.
Swiftly she caught him under the armpits and heaved until she managed to persuade him from the ground.
He was more himself now, shaking off the languor which the bone-chilling cold had brought.
Recognising that as movement caused him to return to his normal self, he would soon realise that it was not Elizabeth who had found him, Sarah took one last chance.
Throwing her arms round George, she held him close and gave him a passionate kiss.
As she pulled away, he studied her closely, through eyes which were still bleary.
‘Sarah?’
She was so much like Elizabeth in appearance, but he should have recognised her.
She was a younger and, nowadays, a more vibrant version of Elizabeth.
More like the Elizabeth he had married.
‘Come along.’
She took his arm and with her half-supporting him, they began to stumble towards the edge of the moor.
As the blood began once more to course through George's legs, his muscles went into spasms of cramp, so that they needed to pause every few yards.
Sarah glanced at the sky, noting how low were the heavy clouds which falling more steadily now and she was anxious to reach home before the weather closed in even more.
Elizabeth, meanwhile, had managed to get down the lane and had reached her father-in-law's farm, even though the narrow cart track was blocked in several places where the snow had drifted up against the hedge.
Violet had moved slowly and cautiously but urged on by her rider, she had breasted the drifts and safely negotiated the lane.
Elizabeth heaved a sigh of relief upon reaching Aumery Park Farm.
Her main fear had been that the mare would stumble over an unseen obstacle and they would both be pitched headlong into the snow.
Quickly, she poured out her fears to Jonadab.
He was half-annoyed and half-worried that George had gone up onto the moor in such fierce weather.
‘Aah'm thunderstruck,’ he said.
‘Aah thowt as 'ow 'e'd 'ave more sense.’
He, himself, had not allowed Bob Lamb to set out.
‘Folks is more important than animals,’ he added.
‘Sheep can always be dug out when t'weather improves.
They usually manage to survive a day or so buried in a snowdrift.
Folks aren't so lucky.’
He hurriedly mustered the farm-workers and explained the situation.
‘Aah'll not wrap up 'ow grave it is,’ he said heavily.
‘George could 'ave died already up yonder.
Finding 'im won't be easy.’
‘I'd have expected him to have more sense,’ said young Jonna tersely.
His father spun round on him.
‘A man who puts 'is stock first is acting for what 'e thinks is t'best,’ he snapped.
Turning to Elizabeth, he asked more gently, ‘Noo then, lass.
'Ow bad is t'lane?’
‘Violet has made a path, of course,’ she explained.
‘If we have another couple of the big shires, they should be able to paddle down enough of the snow for the rest to follow on foot.’
They set off down the lane, Elizabeth, Jonna and Jonadab going ahead on three heavy horses and the men and dogs following, slipping and skidding on the hard-packed snow trodden down by the shires.
Jonna looked up at the sky, now rapidly darkening.
‘This is a fool's errand,’ he observed.
‘It's going to snow again before long and we sh'll all be lost.’
His father's brows drew together and his eyes flashed with anger.
‘Is thoo willing ti abandon thi brother, then?’ he demanded.
‘As long as there's breath in mi body, we sh'll goo on searching.’
Jonna had the grace to look shamefaced, but made no reply.
When they reached Cherry Tree Farm, Jonadab led the way into the kitchen.
‘Come inside.’
He gathered them all together with a quick look round.
When they had entered the house, he said, ‘Noo then, we must 'ave a plan, and we  must all keep within shouting distance.
We want no more lost.’
Elizabeth looked round the room.
‘Where's Sarah?’ she asked her mother.
Ann Butler was unwilling to admit that she had dozed away most of the afternoon by the fire.
‘She said she was just popping out for a minute,’ she replied.
‘I expect she's looking round t'stock.’
Even as she spoke, however, the door was flung open and Sarah stumbled over the threshold, half-dragging and half-lifting George into the room.
Once safe in the haven of the kitchen, she allowed George to slip from her grasp and ran, sobbing, to her mother.
‘Oh, Mam, Mam!’ she wept.
‘I thought I'd never get home.’
Jonadab and Elizabeth bent over George, whose teeth were chattering uncontrollably and who, indeed, appeared more dead than alive.
‘Get 'im ti bed, lass.
'E must be got warm.’
Jonadab realised that the fact that George had reached home did not necessarily ensure that he would live.
‘Tobias.’
He spoke to the lad who had come from the workhouse at the same time as Lydia.
‘Make a pot a tea.’
Then to Ann Butler, ‘Missus, put some oven shelves in t'bed ti get it warmed up afore we puts 'im in.’
Jonadab Oaks was at his most impressive when organisation was needed.
Once everyone had drunk a mug of hot strong tea, he sent his own men out to feed and check the stock which was kept down at Cherry Tree Farm.
George had been gently lifted by his father and Bob Lamb and placed on the rug before the fire.
On top of the turves, which gave out a steady glow, they piled logs, until the blaze roared in the grate, filling the kitchen with life-giving heat.
As Ann Butler led Sarah towards the stairs, to help her out of her wet clothes and rub her down with dry towels, Jonadab seized her hand in both his.
‘Aah can nivver thank thi enough, lass,’ he said hoarsely.
‘Thoo saved oor George's life and we shall nivver forget this day.’
Sarah smiled but felt embarrassed, so made no reply as she followed her mother.
Elizabeth came down to say that the bed was warm, so Jonadab and his younger son helped George upstairs.
Once he was stripped and put into a clean dry  the featherbed.
Elizabeth had brought up a couple of hot bricks wrapped in pieces of blanket, which she popped into bed at each side of him.
‘Give 'im plenty of warm drinks, lass,’ instructed her father-in-law, ‘and then a good night's sleep should see 'im all right.’
Elizabeth went to kiss George, as soon as they were alone.
‘Try not to go to sleep yet, love,’ she whispered.
‘I'll bring you some hot milk and treacle.’
Down in the kitchen, Sarah sat by the fire, her feet in a bowl of mustard and hot water, her hands round a mug of tea.
The colour had come back into her cheeks and Elizabeth thought how pretty she looked.
It was obvious that Bob Lamb shared her opinion.
Although ostensibly listening to what Jonadab was saying, he could not take his eyes off Sarah.
Conscious that her feet were bare and her ankles in full view, she constantly tried to adjust her skirt to cover more of her ankles and yet keep the material out of the water.
Elizabeth studied the shepherd.
They knew nothing about him, really, although she knew that her husband was impressed by him.
He was certainly an attractive man, with bright, smiling eyes and a face which always seemed to be on the point of laughter.
It was, she considered, time Sarah was married, but she never encountered anyone suitable!
She drew the pan of milk off the fire and carrying it over to the table, quickly poured it into a pint pot into which she had already spooned a generous measure of treacle.
Giving it a brisk stir, she carried it carefully upstairs.
Setting it down on the bedside table, she stooped over George.
‘Come on, love.
Sit up and drink this,’ she urged, helping him into a sitting position.
As he let the warm soothing potion trickle down his throat, Elizabeth sat on the edge of the bed and put her arm round his shoulders.
‘Oh, love,’ she whispered!
‘I never thought to see you again.
Our Sarah saved your life.’
‘Aye!
She did an' all,’ he repeated.
‘I shall always be grateful to her.’
He thought for a moment, before going on.
He tried to choose his words carefully, but there was no  tactful way to phrase what he wanted to say.
‘She'll have to go Elizabeth.’
‘Go?
Whatever do you mean?’
She thought at first that his ordeal had been too much for him and that his mind was wandering.
‘She's just saved your life.
How can you want her to go away?’
George looked at her, steadily and firmly.
‘Your Uncle Nathan has wanted her with him in Leeds ever since Christie planned to be married.
He wants his own about him, not strangers.’
So saying, he sank back and closed his eyes.
Elizabeth felt troubled as she went back down the stairs.
George could sometimes be almost mulish!
Whatever had happened up on the moor to cause him to feel this way about Sarah, she wondered.
Jonadab was waiting for her at the stair bottom.
‘Would you like either oor Jonna or Bob Lamb ti stop 'ere and see ti t'stock until George's is on 'is feet again?’ he suggested.
‘Why, yes!
That would be a good idea,’ she smiled!
‘Perhaps it would be better if Bob stays and then he'll be nearer to the high moor if the weather clears.
The sheep will have to be gathered up and brought down as soon as possible!’
Jonadab sent the men back to Aumery Park, noting that the snow had stopped and the coming evening was bright and crisp.
‘It's too cold now for snow,’ he told Bob.
‘If it's clear tomorrow, see if thoo can gather t'sheep up and bring 'em down to t'lower slopes.
'Appen some'll be buried, but you've George's dogs as well as Meg.’
When he went out, Jonna was standing in the yard, holding Bonnie and Bluebell by their bridles.
Approaching him, Jonadab stood and faced him.
‘Thi brother's safe, thanks ti a bit of a lass.
She 'ad t'backbone ti go up on ti t'moor in a blizzard ti find 'im, while you were willing ti let 'im lie up yonder and freeze ti death.’
Jonna opened his mouth to speak but was stopped by his father's upraised hand.
‘Aah'd give mi life ti save my brother,’ he continued, ‘yet you objected ti getting wet ti save yours.’
He sighed deeply.
‘Thoo's disappointed me,’ was his final comment, as he climbed up on to Bluebell's back.
Jonna's lips tightened.
His father always favoured George, he thought angrily as they plodded up the lane.
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
The early and severe blizzards gave way to an equally rapid thaw: the dale echoed to the sound of water.
The melting snow dripped mournfully from the trees and the slope leading down from the moor was a mass of little rivulets, cascading down to run into Hodge Beck.
The stream was in full spate, rushing over its stony bed with such force as to make the way across the stepping-stones hazardous for George and Bob.
The two men combed the moors, squelching through the soggy ground until they were satisfied that all the sheep had been rounded up and brought down to the lower pastures to safety.
‘At least it's given us a breather.
If we get more bad weather later on we shan't lose many,’ George told Elizabeth.
As soon as it was possible to get out of Sleightholmedale, he wrote to Tamar to tell her that their Uncle George's condition was worsening rapidly.
He was not sure that she would come, but felt that she should be warned that the old man was close to death.
He waited for a fortnight after the heavy snowfall of late November and still nothing appeared to have been said with regard to Sarah's move to Leeds.
One night, in the privacy of their own bedroom, he decided to take up the matter again with Elizabeth.
‘Have you spoken to your mother or Sarah about her going to live at Uncle Nathan's?’ he demanded.
Elizabeth hesitated.
‘No!
To be honest, George, I wasn't quite sure that you meant it.
You were overwrought that night and after all, we do owe your life to Sarah.’
George was thoughtful for a moment.
He knew that Elizabeth and her mother regarded Sarah's feelings for him as a girlish infatuation; something to be smiled about, with tolerant affection.
What they failed to recognise was that Sarah had grown up.
She was no longer the girl she had  been when they had first come to live at Cherry Tree Farm.
She was a vibrant and passionate woman who had revealed the intensity of her love for him up on the moors.
He still loved Elizabeth deeply, as he had done ever since he was seventeen, but he had no wish to be the subject of Sarah's adoration day after day.
‘A man can only stand so much,’ he thought desperately, remembering how her kisses had awakened an answering reaction in him.
‘It's time she's wed,’ he answered his wife aloud.
‘Bob Lamb makes it obvious he's keen on her, but she treats him like muck.
She's not likely to meet anybody else down here.
Not everybody falls on their feet, like our Tamar did.’
‘She says she's not interested in men,’ rejoined Elizabeth.
‘No!
‘’ Men'’she may not be, but ‘’man'’she's certainly interested in,’he said meaningfully, tapping himself on the chest.
Elizabeth began to laugh but seeing his expression, she stopped and studied his face.
‘You mean she's throwing herself at you?
My own sister?’ she asked doubtfully.
George nodded.
‘She's making a fool, both of herself and me,’ he said.
Elizabeth could see that there was more to this than George would tell her, but she, too, came to the conclusion that Sarah must go to Leeds and that as soon as possible.
As soon as she could she had a serious talk with her mother.
‘She's no longer a child, Mother, and she's throwing herself at George.
You must be firm with her.
A few years in Leeds will broaden her horizons, even if she doesn't find a husband.
Let's face it, she's a very attractive girl and it's time she was married.’
Ann Butler pressed her lips together.
She realised that for George and Elizabeth to take such a firm line, Sarah must have made more of a nuisance of herself to George than she herself had noticed.
‘Bob Lamb has shown an interest in her,’ went on Elizabeth, ‘but she'll have none of him.’
Her mother sniffed.
‘I should think not,’ she snapped.
‘She's worth more than a shepherd.’
Elizabeth gave a sigh.
She could rely upon her mother  to be firm with Sarah, even though it would deprive her of her youngest daughter's company.
While Bob Lamb was longing for Sarah Butler to pay him some attention, he was unaware that Martha Oaks felt the same way about him.
Poor Martha's experience of suitors was limited to Sam Baldwin who, although hardworking and dependable, was not the type to turn a girl's head.
When Martha compared Sam with Bob Lamb, it was to poor Sam's detriment.
His homely features and shyness of manner contrasted sharply with Bob's attractive, open face and easy, merry demeanour.
Consequently, when Sam did screw up his courage to ask Jonadab for his permission to approach Martha with a proposal, Jonadab agreed, confident that he knew what Martha's reply would be.
When he conveyed Sam's request to her as they sat around the table at tea-time, he was bewildered by his daughter's reaction!
At first she sat in silence, stirring her tea as though to get it thoroughly stirred was of the utmost importance.
‘Well?’ demanded her father.
’ 'As t'cat got thi tongue?’
Martha made no reply.
She still kept her eyes fixed on the swirling liquid; when she did speak it was part-defiance and part-apology.
‘No.’
She said the word clearly, but still did not raise her eyes to her father's.
‘What?’
He could not believe that he was hearing right.
‘What does thoo mean — no?’
‘No means no,’ she answered.
‘I'm not going to marry Sam Baldwin.’
There was a gasp of consternation from Annie.
‘Nay, lass.
Don't be 'asty,’ she urged.
‘It's been an understood thing for a year or two.’
‘Well, it wasn't understood by me!’
Martha's face was now flushed and she looked on the verge of tears.
Annie glanced across at Jonadab.
She could see the pulse beating in his temple: a sure sign of his mounting rage.
‘Thoo's played fast and loose wiv 'im,’ he stated.
‘Thoo's walked 'ome from chapel together every Sunday for a couple o' years and now, when 'e does t'decent thing and asks me for thi 'and, thoo's refusing.’
Annie's mind cast back to the number of his children who  had defied Jonadab round this very table.
Joseph, Tamar, sometimes even George had stood up to him; and now it was Martha, his youngest.
He looked at his wife.
’ 'Ad thoo any inkling o' this?’he demanded.
‘No.’
She was as taken aback as her husband.
Like him she had taken for granted the fact that Martha would marry the miller's son.
‘What's up, love?’ she asked her daughter!
Martha made no answer.
She could not tell them that she was desperately in love with Bob Lamb.
She knew that Bob paid her no attention, but did not realise that his interest lay with Sarah Butler, down at Cherry Tree Farm.
Jonna looked up from his meal.
‘Don't be so daft,’ he advised!
‘Grab him while you've the chance.
You'll get nobody else, stuck down here.’
‘Thank you very much,’ she stormed.
‘Then I'll stay an old maid.’
So saying she ran from the kitchen and up to her bedroom, leaving those round the table confused and upset.
‘That's all we needed,’ Jonadab told his son.
‘Your tongue wags afore your mind's thought.’
Turning to his wife he instructed,’ 'Ave a word wiv 'er, Mother.
See what thoo can mek out.’
Lydia spoke now, for the first time.
Although she had lived at the farm since she was ten and was accepted as one of the family, she rarely took part in family discussions.
Now, however, she felt that she could be of some help.
‘Aah'll 'ave a word,’ she offered, having noticed the way Martha's eyes followed Bob Lamb and believing that he was the trouble.
‘Aah'm t'nearest to 'er in age.’
Looking round the table she added, ‘While we're on about weddings, Aah might as well say that Aah'm going ti marry Tobias.
That is, if thoo doesn't mind, missus,’ looking across at Annie.
‘Aah didn't know 'e'd asked thi,’ Annie answered in surprise.
’ 'E 'asn't.
In fact 'e's no great cop, but there's not much choice hereabouts, as Jonna says.
It'll mek no difference ti mi work 'ere, missus and after all, if a lass wants ti be wed, she must tek what the Good Lord offers.’
Before either her mother or Lydia had the opportunity for a quiet chat with Martha, the even tenor of life in the kitchen was disrupted the following day, by the arrival of Tamar.
Annie and Jonadab were unaware that George had written to tell Tamar of their Uncle George's condition.
It was therefore with surprise that they saw the coach draw up bearing the Lassiter coat of arms.
On the few occasions that Tamar had come down to the farm, or visited her mother and Elizabeth in the market, she had chosen Goody to drive her.
She knew she could rely on his discretion for, although she was not ashamed of her background, she considered that the fewer people who knew of it, the better.
She wanted to put no weapon into her mother-in-law's hands that could be used against her.
Now, as the coachman handed her down and she swept into the kitchen in her fur-lined velvet cloak, the difference in her life since her marriage was brought home to her as never before.
At Thorsbury Manor she never saw the inside of the kitchen yet here, it was the centre of family life.
Her mother and the kitchen were the hub around which life revolved.
‘Eh, lass, it's grand ti see thi!’
Annie exclaimed, as she embraced Tamar.
‘What brings thoo here?
There's nowt wrong, is there?,
Although Tamar responded with a laugh, she had a feeling of guilt, deep within, to think that her visits were so infrequent that her mother feared she had brought bad news.
‘Of course not,’ she said, giving her mother a hug.
‘I've come to see Uncle George.
I understand he's ill., Seating herself on one of the wooden chairs, she drew off her fine kid gloves and placed them on the table.
‘I could do with a cup of tea, Lydia,’ she smiled and when it was placed on the table before her, she wrapped both hands round it in a gesture which seemed natural, here in her mother's kitchen.
‘How is Uncle George?’ she asked, after having a deep draught of the hot liquid.
‘Aah'm afraid 'e's badly, lass,’ Annie answered sadly.’
'E's not long ti go and indeed, it'll be a blessing.
'E's a terrible racking cough.’
Tamar thought of the gentle man who had shared part of her life at Cherry Tree Farm.
His life had been spent in unquestioning subservience, first to his parents and then to his elder brother.
He had never known the love of a woman, nor children of his own.
Now he was slipping away from life as uncomplainingly as he had lived it.
Tamar sighed and placed her cup on the table.
‘I'll go up and have a word with him,’ she said.
‘I can't stay long.
It's a long journey back and it grows dark early.’
As she mounted the ladder which led from the kitchen into what was still called ‘the lads’ room', she smiled at her awkwardness.
Once she had skittled up and down these steps without a second thought.
She bent over the bed and thought at first that she was too late.
Her Uncle lay quite still, eyes closed and breathing so faintly that the bedclothes hardly stirred.
There was a lump in her throat as she gazed down on the gaunt features.
As though sensing her presence, he opened his eyes and focused them on her face.
‘Tamar?’
His voice was a whisper.
She sat on the chair by the bed and picked up his hand, stroking it gently.
‘Yes, Uncle, it's me,’ she smiled.
‘It's grand ti see thoo, lass,’ he breathed, and then after a ferocious bout of coughing, allowed his eyes to close again, as though the effort had been too great!
Tamar sat and talked quietly, telling her Uncle about her life and about Victoria, who had been only a small child when he had last seen her.
Whether or not he could hear much of what she said, she did not know, but her heart was saddened that he should be here alone in his last hours.
All those below were too busy and had not time to spare to comfort him with a few minutes' companionship.
When she returned to the kitchen, Annie was touched and surprised to see tears in Tamar's eyes.
She knew that Tamar had a core of steel and, though she loved this daughter as devotedly as the rest of her offspring, recognised that there was a degree of hardness in her!
‘Thoo's fond of 'im.’
It was part-question and part-statement.
‘Aye, Mam, I am.
Uncle George was kind to me when there were others who were not.’
Then she put into words what her brother George had thought several years before.
‘I don't suppose he's ever done anything that he's really wanted to do.
First it was Grandad Oaks who dominated his life and then it was Father.
The life he's leaving really hasn't been worth living.’
Annie looked shocked.
Unlike Tamar, her horizons were limited and in her opinion her daughter's remarks were almost blasphemous.
George Oaks had been cared for and had work provided, first by his parents and later, by his elder brother.
His life had been spent tending the land to which he'd been born and what more could any man want?
He had not had the burden of responsibility which had been placed on Jonadab's shoulders.
Before she had time to remonstrate with Tamar, the door opened and Jonadab himself strode in, followed by his two sons.
Tamar's eyes met George's and they smiled in mutual affection.
Her father never seemed to change, she thought, noting the still-upright stance and piercing blue eyes.
Her brother Jonna bore a startling likeness to their father; so much so that he looked like a younger version.
Looking again, however, she saw a subtle difference, as though her father possessed some quality which had been omitted in the forming of his youngest son.
Tamar smiled within herself to witness the effect her father's presence had on those in the kitchen.
One frowning look at the table where a pint pot of tea and a plate of scones or buns should have been awaiting his arrival, sent Martha and Lydia scurrying frantically about until his needs had been met.
He took his seat at the fireside, mug in hand, and glanced across at her.
‘This is an honour,’ he said with sarcasm.
Tamar drew a breath, determined that he would not rouse her to anger.
‘I've come to see poor old Uncle George,’ she replied quietly.
‘Aye.’
Her father was instantly contrite and abandoned his attempt to bait her.
‘Aah doubts but he's on 'is way ti’ meet 'is Maker.
It's good of thoo ti' come.’
‘There's nothing good about it,’ she replied.
‘He is my Uncle; we've shared the same house for twenty years and I wanted to be with him.
I only wish I'd known before that  he was so ill.
He could have had anything that money could buy to cure him, but I can see it's too late now.’
Jonadab's eyes flashed.
‘We wants none o' thi money!’ he exclaimed.’
'E's 'ad every comfort and t' best treatment Dr Dawson could give.’
Tamar sighed and drew on her gloves.
Would she never grow out of this knack of rubbing her father up the wrong way, she wondered, ‘I'm sorry, Father!
I didn't mean that the way it sounded,’ she apologised.
‘Please don't think I'm throwing money in your face.
Money hasn't changed me,’ she stated firmly.
‘Stephen is a farmer, just as you are!
We have the same worries and difficulties as you do here and, if there is more money involved, there are more wages to pay and more stock to buy.’
Jonadab nodded.
‘Aye, lass.
Aah see what thoo means.
'Appen Aah jumped too soon.,
Tamar looked round with affection.
‘It's been lovely to see you all, even though it's a sad errand that's brought me!’
She glanced out of the window, to see that the wintry sun was already low in the sky.
‘I really must go.
It will be dark long before I arrive home and I don't feel safe at night with only an old man like Goodison for company.’
As she fastened her cloak, she looked earnestly at George.
‘Give my love to Elizabeth.
Let us know when the funeral is.
Stephen will wish to come, too, if at all possible.’
With that she was gone and a minute or so later, they heard the crack of a whip and the sound of horses' hooves as the coach pulled away.
There was silence in the kitchen for a moment, broken only by a sigh from Martha.
‘By gum, she's got lovely clothes.’
She felt that if only she could be dressed like Tamar she would win Bob Lamb.
‘She scrapes 'er tongue,’ sneered Jonna.
‘You'd never think she was our sister.’
His mother frowned.
‘Well, she is your sister,’ she said shortly.
‘She mixes wi' a different class now, but she's still one of us.’
Although the last days of the dying year were bitterly cold, there was no more snow.
Christmas came and went, but there was no merriment for the Oaks of Sleightholmedale, where Jonadab's brother clung doggedly to life, although the rasping of his breath and his persistent cough brought sleepless nights for all in the house.
By mid January, however, Tamar received the awaited letter to say that her Uncle had died quietly in his sleep.
‘You will come with me, won't you?’ she asked Stephen.
‘Of course, darling,’ he replied.
‘I only wish we could see more of your family.’
He admired his father-in-law's farming ability and had been given some worthwhile advice whenever they had met.
‘Yes, so do I,’ she answered.
‘Even though Father always manages to rub me up the wrong way.
Anyway, they have not really the transport for a journey as far as this and in any case, they could not spare the time from work.’
She looked at Stephen lovingly!
He was so handsome and she did love him dearly, despite Gareth Davis.
By some quirk in her moral fibre, Tamar found nothing incongruous in her tempestuous affair with the groom, caring for Stephen as deeply as she did.
In her opinion, her love for her husband was not diminished at all just because another man could raise her to sexual satisfaction in a devastating fulfilment which was lacking in Stephen's love-making.
Sometimes she admitted to herself that she hated Davis, but his passion was like a drug which she was unable to resist.
‘Penny for your thoughts,’ teased Stephen, coming to put his arms round her waist.
‘I was just thinking how much I love you,’ she answered truthfully, stretching up to kiss him.
They decided that Victoria would accompany them to the funeral, but that Hilary, who was a delicate child, should not be exposed to the January chill.
There was only a handful of mourners at Gillamoor Church, as Uncle George had rarely gone out of the little dale.
The only people who really knew him were the labourers who helped out at the farm during the periods of sheep-shearing, haytime and harvest.
As many of those were itinerant, following the seasons from farm to farm and from wold, to moor, to dale, there were few to mourn the passing of the gentle, self-effacing man!
Victoria was silent throughout the service and as they stood by the side of the grave where George was laid to rest beside his parents, she noticed in amazement that most of the women cried and that even her Grandad Oaks, who often appeared fierce and of whom she was a little afraid, took out a handkerchief and surreptitiously wiped his eyes.
She had presumed that only children cried and was disturbed to see that grownups sometimes did so.
Once the funeral was over and they were back in the parlour of the cosy farmhouse, the atmosphere lightened and Victoria was passed from group to group, chattering like an enchanting little doll.
Stephen stood with Jonadab, looking out of the parlour window, watching the teams criss-crossing the fields, with ploughs behind them.
‘You're nice and sheltered here,’ he remarked.
‘Most of our land at Home Farm is on exposed hillside and is too frozen to plough at present.’
Jonadab looked out with satisfaction.
‘Aye.
They're getting on wi' it,’ he said.
‘Mi ploughmen can't be idle.
They knows as 'ow Aah can see 'em, if they stops.’
‘Yes, they do stand out well!
My fields are too far from the Manor for me to keep an eye on them.
Either I or the manager of Home Farm must ride round the fields sometimes two or three times each day to check the men!
Jonadab chuckled.
‘What thoo wants, lad, is one or two pairs o' greys.
Look and see 'ow they stands out against t'brown o' t'earth.
If a team stops even for a minute Aah can tell — and t'men knows it!’
Stephen studied the fields, where the drab clothing of the workers blended into the deep rich brown of the arable land, but where each pair of greys was clearly visible, its progress across the field assessed instantly.
He smiled in admiration at his father-in-law.
He was a wise old bird and no mistake.
‘Could I buy a couple of pairs of greys from you?’ he asked, coming to a sudden decision.
Jonadab hesitated.
‘Well, ti tell t'truth, all this year's broken foals is really spoke for.
Aah can't breed 'em fast enough ti keep up wi' demand!’
He considered for a moment.
‘T'army'll tek all Aah've got, but Aah'm not too keen for 'em ti go for cannon-fodder.’
‘I understand.’
Stephen was disappointed at what he took to be a refusal.
After a moment's reflection, however, Jonadab went on, ‘They'll never miss a couple o' pairs.
Aah can just say they must tek what Aah've got and Aah'll let thoo 'ave a couple of pair.’
Stephen opened his mouth to express his thanks but before he could get a word out, Jonadab spoke again.
‘It goes against t'grain ti do business wi' friends or relatives.
Aah've allus warned me lads against it, but Aah'll set t'record straight.
Thoo'll pay t'full price — nowt knocked off, even if thoo is wed ti' oor Tamar.’
Stephen smiled.
‘I wouldn't have it any other way,’ he said, holding out his hand to seal the bargain.
Once done, however, he gave a sudden grin.
‘There'll be a bit off for luck?’ he asked, proving that he still retained some of the guile he had picked up as a practising country lawyer.
Jonadab was nonplussed.
As he told Annie later, ‘And 'im wi' all 'is brass.’
However, he put on a smile and replied, ‘Of course.
When t'time comes we'll come ti’ some arrangement!’
The family had expected to feel strange in Stephen's company, but he put them at their ease and asked Jonadab's advice on farming matters, until they warmed to him.
As Annie said later to Martha, ‘Although 'e scrapes 'is tongue, there's nowt toffee-nosed about 'im.’
When at last Tamar and Stephen decided that they really must leave, Victoria pleaded for them to stay a little longer.
‘No.
We've a long way to go, pet, and you've had an exciting day’, Tamar said firmly.
Annie took a breath.
She had seen so little of this grandchild.
She saw the children of her other daughters Ann and Beth most market days, but encountered Victoria so rarely that each time she had altered beyond recognition.
She looked pleadingly at Tamar as she said, ‘Mebbe when t'summer comes, your Mam'll let thoo come and stop wi' us for a few days.’
‘Oh, may I, Mama?’
Victoria clapped her hands and put her head on one side, smiling so winningly that everyone laughed.
Tamar looked at her fondly.
‘Yes, I suppose so,’ she  smiled.
She tended to be over-indulgent with Victoria, partly because she could see herself in the child and partly too, in some perverse fashion, to make up for what she considered to be her own harsh upbringing under Jonadab's strict rules.
George studied his sisters.
Ann and Beth had married into farming families and had the same careworn faces and workworn hands as had his wife and mother.
Beside them, even in unrelieved black, Tamar shone out like a butterfly among moths.
It was not only the cut of her clothes and the richness of the fabric which were distinctive but she herself possessed a bloom and glow over and above her personal beauty, which were absent from all the other women who were there.
‘She's like the cat that's got the cream,’ he thought, and indeed, there was an air of self-satisfied sleekness about Tamar.
When Martha brought Tamar's cloak, her sister noted how she stroked the cloth before handing it over.
She looked at Martha with a fresh insight, noting the drabness of her clothes and the downward droop of her lips!
As she kissed Martha, Tamar spoke in a low voice.
‘Next time I come, I'll bring one or two gowns that I know will fit you.’
Martha brightened and Tamar added, ‘Nothing flashy, but not serviceable either.’
They both laughed.
Serviceable was clothes must be seen to be serviceable.
After they had gone, the others sat round the table and discussed them.
It was evident to all the family that Stephen Lassiter still loved Tamar and that she, too, was happy.
Jonna put it into words: ‘It hardly seems right.
There's us lot working and slaving from dawn till dusk for nowt, and the two who've not stuck to the straight and narrow as come off t'best.
Our Joe's got 'is own farm in t'Canadas and there's our Tamar, no better than she should be, and living like a queen.’
Jonadab's brows drew together.
No matter what Joe's and Tamar's earlier lives had been, both were respectably married now and their father had accepted them back into the fold.
‘That's enough!’ he snapped at his youngest son.
‘We're a family and thoo'd best not forget it.
We sticks  together no matter what.
Aah've not forgotten yon mornin' in t'blizzard,’ he added with a meaningful look and nod.
As Jonna rose to go and change back into his working clothes, he flushed with resentment.
‘I'm not a child, Faither,’ he remonstrated.
‘Well, don't behave like one,’ was his father's final word.
Not for the first time in the past few months, Jonadab was disturbed to recognise envy and the seeds of discord in his youngest son.
CHAPTER NINETEEN
The weather remained piercingly cold, so that whenever men or beasts had need to venture outdoors they were chilled to the bone.
The snow did not return until early in February: this time, the Oaks were well prepared.
All the sheep were on lower ground where they could be reached by men on horseback, and the womenfolk had laid in stocks of flour and yeast, so that there was no shortage of food.
This enforced isolation was an accepted part of life in the dale, coming, as it did, every two or three years.
The townsfolk of Kirkbymoorside realised that while the snow lasted, the farm-wives would be unable to reach the market with their produce so Annie and Elizabeth were secure in the knowledge that whenever they were able to get out of the valley, their customers would be waiting.
The first couple of days brought a continuous heavy blizzard.
The biting wind drove the snow before it, so that the whole dale seemed to be lost in a grey mist.
On the third morning, they arose to find that the blizzard had died down, to be followed by keen frost as the temperature plummeted.
The dale took on a crystalline magic; the sun climbed above the skyline of the moors, touching the snow-covered landscape with sparkling highlights.
The trees stooped groundward under the weight of their snow-laden branches and the humans followed their daily work, once again pitting themselves against the inexorable forces of Nature.
Both Annie and Elizabeth were disturbed to find that each morning brought fresh fox tracks circling the hen huts.
The snow gave them proof of what they always feared: the winter-hungry foxes were biding their time, ready to raid any hen-house which remained unfastened at dusk.
Ann Butler had written to Uncle Nathan in Leeds to say that when Sarah went there to act as bridesmaid to her sister Christiana, she would stay on to be his new housekeeper.
She had not yet broken the news to her youngest daughter.
Christie was to be married at Easter, but Ann planned to go over in late February to help with the wedding preparations and also, to take Sarah and see her settled in before she started her job.
At first, she had determined to tell her daughter of her decision after Christmas.
However, she was beginning to feel her age and could not face an argument until it was unavoidable.
Once they were snowbound she put the task off again and it was not until early March that the thaw began.
Realising that before another couple of days had passed, she and Sarah would be able to make the journey Kirkbymoorside and book them two inside seats on the Leeds coach.
He was only too thankful that Sarah was to be removed from his home.
Ever since she had saved him in the snowstorm, George had been uncomfortably aware of her presence.
He would look up from his newspaper after supper to find her eyes fixed on him, in a way which brought back to him the passion with which she had kissed him upon the moor.
He guiltily remembered the feel of her and felt acutely disloyal to Elizabeth…
Anyroad, he told himself, he'd be glad when she was gone.
While he was in the stable saddling up his horse, he did not realise that his mother-in-law was only now breaking the news to Sarah that she would be remaining in Leeds.
He had the horse almost ready to take out, when the stable door was thrown open and Sarah rushed in.
George looked up from tightening the girth as she banged the stable door behind her and stood, back pressed against it, glaring at him wildly.
‘You're sending me away!’
Her tone was bitter and tears streamed down her face.
George decided that he had better be diplomatic.
‘We all think it's the best thing for you, to see something of life beyond the dale.’
He spoke placatingly.
‘Now dry your eyes, Sarah, and be sensible.’
Her expressive brown eyes flashed.
‘Don't treat me as a child!’ she cried scornfully, ‘You know that I love you, and that's why I'm being packed off.’
George sighed.
‘I'm a married man — your own sister's  husband.’
He spoke firmly.
‘Don't be silly.
You only think you love me because I'm here in the same house and there's no one else.’
He studied her for a moment.
Her eyes were dark and luminous and her faintly olive skin normally carried a dusting of colour, high on her cheekbones.
At this moment, however, her face was pale and set.
‘It won't make any difference to my feelings for you,’ she insisted.
‘I've loved you ever since I was a child and I shall always love you.
No matter how many young men I meet in Leeds, I shall never marry.’
So saying, she once again burst into tears and, crossing rapidly to George, threw her arms around his neck and stretching up on her toes, began to kiss him with a fervour which shocked him.
Desperately, he unclasped her hands and pushed her away.
‘That's enough, Sarah!’
He spoke brusquely now, deciding that the time for tact was over.
‘You should be ashamed to make advances to any man — but to your own brother-in-law is too much.
Go and pack your things and leave me to go and book your seats.’
As he spoke Elizabeth entered the stable.
Seeing her sister's tearstained cheeks and George's flushed face, she had some idea of the scene which she had interrupted.
‘Oh, good!
You haven't set off yet George.
Here's a list of one or two things I'd like you to get for me while you're in Kirkby, if you don't mind,’ she said matter-of-factly, passing him the paper.
‘Right.’
George placed the list in his pocket.
Seeing Elizabeth's troubled expression, he gave her a kiss on the cheek and added, ‘I won't be long, love.’
This was not merely to reassure his wife, but to make clear to Sarah that his love for Elizabeth had never wavered.
When Elizabeth's mother and sister had gone to Leeds, Elizabeth and George had the house to themselves for the first time since the early days of their marriage.
The complete absence of tension in their home and the privacy to talk in the evenings, just to each other, drove home to them as nothing else could have done, what a strain they had been under while Sarah and Ann Butler had lived with them,
Easter came and with it Christie's marriage.
Apart from an enthusiastic note from Sarah, describing the wedding and her gown, there was no sign of Ann Butler's return.
‘She's always welcome here, as you know,’ George earnestly told his wife, ‘but it's grand to be on our own.’
He hoped that Ann Butler would stay in Leeds, but felt he could not say so to Elizabeth.
As his mother-in-law had come to know him better, she seemed to have accepted that he was the man for her daughter and even to have become quite fond of him, but he appreciated this new freedom.
Elizabeth sighed.
‘Yes it is, my love, but I wonder how long it'll last?
Mother won't be able to decide who needs her interference most, us or Sarah.’
George laughed.
Elizabeth understood, though neither would have put it into words, that her mother was a thorn in George's flesh.
The blustery winds of March dried up the land so that when April arrived, with stronger sun and balmy air, the whole countryside sprang into new growth almost overnight.
The last dull memory of winter faded and the hedges were a mass of silvery catkins of the pussy willow, while amongst them flourished cuckoo-flowers and Jack-by-the-hedge, attracting the early orange-tip butterflies.
One evening, as they worked happily together, feeding and attending to the livestock, George said, ‘I'll just take a walk along the beck before we settle down, and check those sheep I've brought down for lambing.’
Elizabeth replied, ‘And I'll just pour this milk into the skimming trays then take my apron off and come with you.
It's a pleasant evening for a stroll.
Crossing the stepping-stones, they strolled along the far side of the stream, mostly in silence, enjoying the peaceful spring evening.
Suddenly, George placed a finger to his lips and, taking Elizabeth by the arm, gently pushed her down into the grass.
She heard a shrill, penetrating whistle of a bird and trying to follow George's pointing finger, she caught a glimpse of brilliant blue-green plumage, with an orangey breast, as the bird flashed down into a deeper pool scooped out by the stream.
Before she had time even to gasp, it flew back up and disappeared into a hole above the water.
‘Was it a kingfisher?’
Elizabeth asked in a whisper.
George nodded and motioned her to silence again; although they waited for another quarter of an hour, it was a vain vigil!
The bird did not reappear.
‘I've never seen one before,’ she said excitedly, when it was clear that that was to be their only sighting.
‘I've not seen many,’ answered George.
‘It was just that I heard it call so I knew there must be one about.’
‘It's strange we should see one this evening.’
She looked up at him with a sideways, almost shy glance.
‘They're supposed to bring good luck.’
‘So I've heard,’ answered George, rolling onto his back and looking up at the sky, while he chewed a stalk of grass.
‘Well,’ Elizabeth hesitated.
‘I wasn't going to tell you yet but,’ she paused.
‘I think I'm expecting.’
George was utterly still for a moment, before rolling over on to his stomach.
‘Oh, little love!
Are you sure?’ he whispered incredulously.
She nodded.
‘Well, almost.
I haven't dared to see the doctor yet, in case it's just my age or something.
I am nearly certain, however.’
George was unable to speak for a moment or two.
He was on the verge of tears and did not wish to appear unmanly.
They knelt facing each other and to George, Elizabeth looked no older than her sister, Sarah.
Her cheeks were flushed, her eyes shining and her lips were tremulous.
‘I never thought to see this day,’ he murmured, as he rose to his feet and gently pulled her up to him.
He suddenly seized her under the armpits and swung her round and round, until she was breathless.
As he put her back on her feet, George threw back his head and shouted at the top of his voice —‘Ya — ha!
Ya — ha!’
Elizabeth gave him a push, which almost toppled him to the ground!
‘George!’
She was laughing at his antics, but anxious lest he should be heard.
‘Be quiet!
Someone'll hear and I don't want to tell anybody Just yet.
George looked round at the acre upon acre of emptiness.
‘Who's going to hear, might I ask?’ he said in a teasing voice.
‘Well, sounds can carry on a quiet evening and you don't  want your father asking why you were acting daft.
Or your Jonna,’ she added as an afterthought.
As the freshness of spring gave way to the heat of summer, it became obvious that Elizabeth was indeed pregnant.
Although she was by now in her late thirties, she recognised the same symptoms as in her previous pregnancy.
Her breasts became tender, she endured a faint queasiness in the mornings but no actual sickness and finally, her figure began to thicken and take on a matronly look.
After her miscarriage so long ago, Elizabeth met each change with apprehension, but she seemed well and in fact, bloomed in her pregnancy.
After the first few months, George was insistent that she give up the market stall.
‘We can take no risks,’ he pressed.
‘Yon big kettle you use weighs a ton and anyway, I don't want you on your feet all day.’
Elizabeth knew that George was right: she could not take chances with this pregnancy.
Both she and George had long ago given up all hope of a child.
Now the opportunity had once again been given to them, she felt that they must do nothing to jeopardise the future.
Before the next Wednesday, Elizabeth carefully made a notice to say that the tea-stall would close.
This she took with her in the trap when she left to go to the market.
As she set up her tables and put the big kettle on to boil, she made a point of taking Annie aside.
‘I'm going to have to give up standing the market, Ma,’ she announced quietly.
Annie was surprised.
She looked at her daughter-in-law curiously.
‘Why, lass, Aah thought as 'ow you enjoyed t'market,’ she said.
‘Oh, I do!
Of course I do,’ answered Elizabeth.
‘It's just…’ she hesitated, giving a little self-conscious laugh.
‘I'm expecting a baby,’ she said.
Annie was amazed.
‘Aah'm fair flabbergasted!’ she exclaimed.
After a moment's pause, she went on, ‘Art sure, lass?
It's not t'change come early, is it?’
‘No.’
Elizabeth's voice was firm.
‘Dr Dawson has confirmed it.
After all these years and after the last time, I feel I must take things easy.’
Elizabeth's customers were disappointed to read her  notice, but although several of them asked the reason, she merely smiled and was noncommittal.
After the lunch-time rush of customers, Annie and Elizabeth sat side by side with a cup of tea and a pie each.
As they munched Annie placed her free hand on Elizabeth's arm.
‘Eeh, Aah'm that glad, lass,’ she smiled.
‘Thoo must tek things easy, though, as thoo said.’
She paused for a moment and then went on, ‘Since thoo told me about t'baby, Aah've been thinking.
Aah sh'll stop coming ti stand t'market, an' all.’
Elizabeth was surprised in her turn.
‘But you love market-days, Ma!
Why don't you bring either Martha or Lydia with you for company?
It makes a change and gets you out of the house.’
‘Nay, Aah dissent think so,’ replied her mother-in-law.
‘Aah'm feeling mi age, lately.
Aah've only come this last couple o' years because we was indoors.
Aah couldn't 'ave stood it outside in all weathers.’
They sat chatting together while Elizabeth waited for trade to pick up again.
Many of the farmer's wives came in for a mug of tea and perhaps a piece of cake before they set off on the long drive for home.
They became so engrossed in their chattering, that they did not notice a customer who came up behind them.
‘Can Aah 'ave a cup o' tea an' a bun, missus?’ came a voice.
Jumping to her feet and crossing to the big teapot which was keeping warm, Elizabeth answered, ‘Yes, certainly.’
Turning, she saw her mother-in-law shaking with laughter.
‘Eeh, lass!
It's oor Tamar,’ she smiled, wiping her eyes.
Tamar laughed.
‘I haven't forgotten how the Dalesfolk talk, you see, Mam,’ she teased, as she sat down on the bench next to her mother.
‘We 'aven't seen thoo since t'funeral.’
Annie tried not to sound reproachful.
‘I'm sorry,’ Tamar answered, ‘but Hilary's delicate.
He always seems to have a sore throat and a fever, so I don't like to leave him when he's not well.
In any case, Stephen's mother uses Hilary as an excuse to stay on at the Manor and I want rid of her.’
‘Eeh, lass!
Don't say such things,’ remonstrated Annie.
The extended family was an accepted way of life in the  dales and she had shared a home with her husband's parents and brother until their deaths.
Tamar sniffed.
‘She hates me.
She always has done — and most of the servants will never accept me as long as she's there.’
She took a long drink of her tea and then continued, ‘Anyway, she'll go before long, never fear.’
Elizabeth looked at her sister-in-law.
Yes, she thought, if Tamar had set her mind on something she would never rest until it was accomplished.
After asking about various members of the family, Tamar eyed Elizabeth.
‘You're looking particularly well,’ she commented.
Elizabeth flushed with pleasure.
‘Yes.
I'm expecting a baby,’ she replied.
There was a noticeable hesitation before Tamar rose and kissed her on the cheek.
‘Oh, I'm so glad for you and George,’ she said warmly, but when Elizabeth turned away to serve a customer, Tamar looked at Annie with a worried expression.
‘She's getting on a bit for a first baby, isn't she?’ she demanded.
‘I do hope everything's all right this time.’
‘Aye, lass.
So do I,’ replied her mother.’
’ Anyroad, 'er and oor George is over t'moon, so don't put a damper on.’
She went on to tell Tamar that she and Elizabeth would not come up to Kirkbymoorside to stand the market in the future.
‘Except wi t'geese at Michaelmas and Christmas,’ she qualified.
Tamar was disappointed.
‘It's a long enough journey for me to come here to see you,’ she said.
‘The extra few miles each way will make it well nigh impossible.’
Seeing her mother's face fall, she added hastily, ‘I shall have to see what can be done.’
It seemed to Annie that no sooner had Tamar arrived in the market hall, than Goodison was by her side, suggesting that it was time they started off for home.
As Tamar rose to her feet, she suddenly exclaimed, ‘Oh!
I'd almost forgotten why I came.
I've brought some clothes for Martha.’
As her mother began to speak, Tamar broke in.
‘Don't worry — there's only a cloak, a couple of gowns and a few blouses.
There's nothing too fancy or unsuitable.’
‘Your father'll never let 'er wear 'em,’ said Annie.
‘He'll never notice.
Anyway, if he does, tell him they came from Elizabeth.
He'll let our Martha have them, if he thinks Elizabeth gave them to her.’
Seeing the look of dismay on her mother's face, Tamar continued, ‘You won't be telling a lie.
I'll give them to Elizabeth and she can pass them on to Martha.
Anyway,’ she added blithely, ‘you'll probably manage to smuggle them into the house without him seeing if you choose your time well.’
Leaving her mother-in-law in charge of the tea-stall for a few minutes, Elizabeth went back to the inn-yard with Tamar and the coachman.
Here, Goodison lifted four large mantle-boxes from the coach and stowed them, as best he could, under the seat of Elizabeth's trap.
‘However can we get them into the house without anyone seeing?’ she demanded.
‘You'll manage,’ Tamar replied airily, as she collared a boy who was crossing the yard and slipped him a penny.
‘Watch this lady's parcels until she gets back,’ she instructed.
Then with a kiss of Elizabeth's cheek, she was handed into the coach.
While Goodison mounted and took the reins from the ostler, she called, ‘Give my love to George!’ and with that was gone, leaving Annie and Elizabeth with the task of smuggling the clothes into the house without arousing Jonadab's suspicions.
When they reached Aumery Park Farm, it was to discover that they had misjudged the time of their arrival.
Jonadab and his two sons were just scraping their boots at the back door, prior to going in for a mug of tea.
After this break, they would go out again to help with the evening tasks  amongst the stock.
Once his boots were satisfactorily freed of mud, Jonadab strode into the house, leaving the rest to follow.
Annie looked at Elizabeth almost guiltily but Elizabeth just smiled and said, ‘Leave the boxes in my trap and send Martha down to our house tomorrow.
She can try them on then, so that I can do any alterations that are necessary.
After that, we'll get them back up here one at a time.
Don't worry,’ she added.
‘It'll be all right, you'll see.’
As they sat in the kitchen, Jonadab glanced across at George and remarked, ‘While we're a bit slack afore haytime  starts, Aah thought as 'ow thoo and me could deliver them two pairs of shires ti Stephen's.’
Annie saw the set of Jonna's lips and the mutinous expression which came over his face.
She sighed — the older Jonna became, the more jealous of George he seemed to grow.
Before he could protest, however, Elizabeth spoke.
‘If you're going to be away all day tomorrow, George, perhaps Martha would come down and keep me company.’
As she made the suggestion, she looked towards Annie.
‘Why, aye.
That's a good idea.’
Annie was only too glad to cope with the clothes while her husband was out of the way.
When they reached home that evening, George said, ‘After what happened to our Tamar, I don't like you being here on your own all day.
Write and ask your mother to come back.
If she doesn't, we'll go up to the Union Workhouse, next week, and get a girl.
After all, Lydia's been a big help and there must be others as good.’
‘Aye — and there must be others as bad as Tobias,’ laughed Elizabeth.
George sighed.
Tobias had been a poor choice, as Jonadab himself admitted.
Now that he was a man he was no more capable of working unsupervised than when he had first come to the farm at the age of twelve.
None of them could understand why a bright and hard-working girl like Lydia would wish to marry him.
The next morning George and his father set off for Thorsbury, each leading a pair of grey shirehorses.
As soon as she knew that her husband was out of sight, Annie called Martha.
‘Go down to Cherry Tree.
Elizabeth's got some clothes for thoo, from oor Tamar.’
Martha was so excited that she ran all the way down the lane, arriving flushed and breathless.
Elizabeth studied her afresh.
She could be pretty, she decided, if her hair were not so tightly scraped back from her face and if her eyes shone with eagerness, as they did at this moment.
Although one of the gowns sent by Tamar was quite deep brown in colour, the other was of a pretty shade of blue, which would set off Martha's eyes, which were the same deep blue as her father's.
One of the bodices, or blouses as Tamar had called them, was of a deep rose pink and, although the other two were cream and white respectively, all were exquisitely trimmed with lace, embroidery or pintucks.
As Martha tried on each garment in turn, Elizabeth could see that she was on the verge of tears.
‘Eeh, I never thought I'd ever have any clothes like this,’ she said, stroking the material of the blue dress.
‘Nonsense!’ answered Elizabeth briskly.
‘There's no reason why Tamar shouldn't keep you in clothes.
She can afford it, and they fit you a treat.
They don't need altering at all.’
She hesitated, not wishing to sow the seeds of rebellion in Martha.
‘What a pity your father is so set against accepting what he might consider to be charity from Tamar.
Anyway, we must be clever and change you gradually.’
Once they had cleared away and washed the dinner pots, she set to and washed Martha's hair.
Putting strands from each side into curl rags, she said, ‘Now sit by the fire and brush the rest dry, while I collect the eggs.’
When Martha was ready for home, she put on the pink bodice and Elizabeth dressed her hair.
Instead of dragging it back into a tight knot in the nape of her neck, she twisted it into a more becoming coil, leaving the tendrils which had been twisted in the curl rags, to curl prettily round her face.
As she stepped back to view the result, she realised that Martha was really a most attractive girl.
Determined that she should not go the same way as her sister, Jonadab Oaks had ruled Martha with a rod of iron ever since Tamar's seduction by Sir William Forster.
She had simply been given no encouragement to make the best of herself.
Now when she pirouetted before the wardrobe mirror, Martha was transformed.
Her cheeks were flushed and her eyes sparkled, while the deep rose pink of the bodice suited her to perfection.
Elizabeth had been unprepared for such a dramatic change.
What on earth would her father-in-law say, she wondered.
‘Oh, well,’ she thought.
‘It's done now — in for a penny, in for a pound.
If you meet a young man,’ she instructed, ‘bite upon your lips and give your cheeks a rub to bring up the colour.’
Martha giggled.
She was not likely to meet any young  man, she considered, but nobody had ever tutored her before on how to attract one.
Looking out of the bedroom window, Elizabeth saw Bob Lamb the shepherd walking with his dog down the track from the high moor.
‘Why don't you walk home along the beck?’ she suggested.
‘It'll be cooler and not so dusty along by the water.’
Martha waved to Elizabeth, as she ran down the side of the field of oats which lay between the farm and the beckside path.
As she passed through the gate, to walk beside the stream, Bob Lamb caught sight of her from the other bank of the beck.
‘Why, 'ello, Martha!’ he exclaimed.
Martha's cheeks became even pinker as she blushed to see him.
For his part, he was amazed at the transformation.
He had never before paid much attention to her.
She was just the boss's daughter, a rather timid and drab little thing in his estimation.
Now, he looked at her curiously, unable to decide what was different in her appearance.
With a snap of his fingers to his dog, he gingerly crossed the stream, stepping carefully across the shallowest spots until he joined her.
‘Be careful,’ she said involuntarily.
He smiled.
‘It's shallow enough.
I just didn't want to get mi boots too wet.’
Looking at the water sadly, Martha answered quietly, ‘I rarely cross it.
When I was seven, my sister Maria was drowned in it.’
Lamb was at a loss for words.
Looking at Martha, he could see that she was distressed.
Putting a hand on her arm, he said gently, ‘Would you like to sit for a while and tell me about it?’
As Martha raised her eyes to his, he felt suddenly protective towards her.
For her part, she felt that he was someone to whom she could open her heart and who would understand.
As they sat together on the grass, she looked at the tumbling waters of the beck and told him how Maria had slipped on the stepping-stones, down by the farm.
‘She knocked her head on a stone and was drowned,’ she concluded.
There was a moment's silence and then she went on, ‘I've always blamed myself.
I was scared to cross the  stepping-stones and it was turning back to encourage me that caused her to slip.’
It was out: the heavy weight of guilt, which she had never confided in anyone before, was out in the open.
Rising to his feet, Bob Lamb reached down and taking Martha by the hands, pulled her up.
Placing a hand on each of her shoulders, his steady brown eyes looked deep into her tear-filled blue ones.
‘Look at me, Martha.
Believe what I say.
You were a child of seven when this happened.’
He gave her a little shake.
‘You were not to blame,’ he said insistently.
‘You were not to blame.’
This time it was said more slowly and with powerful conviction.
Martha dissolved into tears and burst out, ‘I've never dared to tell anyone until now, but I've felt guilty ever since.’
‘Come now, Martha.
Now you've told me, it will be all right,’ he murmured.
‘We bottle things up for years until they grow out of all proportion.’
As her tears subsided, he smiled down at her.
‘Now you've got it off your chest, you can see how silly you've been, can't you?
It was just two little girls playing and one had an accident.
Nobody was to blame.’
She smiled tremulously.
‘Thank you, Bob.
I feel better about it now than I have done since the accident,’ she admitted.
As they resumed their stroll along the beckside, he stole a sideways glance at her, wondering why he had paid no attention to her before.
‘You're looking very nice today,’ he remarked.
Martha glowed.
No one had ever told her this before — not even Sam Baldwin, who wanted to marry her.
Thinking of Sam, she compared him with Bob.
She had known Sam all her life and though he was a worthy and hard-working man, she knew why she had held back from agreeing to marry him.
He was dull.
Martha had been attracted to Bob Lamb since the shepherd first came to work on the farm the previous November.
He had never appeared to notice her existence until today but now, strolling beside him in the warmth of the afternoon sun, Martha felt a heady excitement.
Looking at him shyly, she confided, ‘Sam Baldwin from t'mill wants to marry me.
Faither wants it an' all.’
Bob glanced down at her.
George had told him in private the reason for Sarah Butler being packed off to Leeds, and he had realised then that her infatuation for George was an obsession.
Her mind was closed against any other man.
As there was very little chance of her returning to the dale, except for occasional visits, Bob had succeeded, with a bit of self-discipline, in putting her out of his mind.
Now he acknowledged to himself that his admiration for Sarah had caused him to overlook young Martha's attractions.
He had a strong desire to get to know her better, and yet here she was talking of marriage!
‘Do you love him?’ he asked cautiously.
‘No!’ she answered vehemently.
‘I neither love him, nor do I want to marry him.’
Looking Bob straight in the eye, she added, ‘There was a time when I could have drifted into marrying him, but no longer.’
‘There's your answer then,’ said Bob.
‘It's better to remain a maid, than to wed the wrong man.’
As they turned from the bank to approach the farm, round the edge of the Long Meadow, he took her hand, and drew her to a standstill.
‘Let's see how things go, shall we?’ he said tentatively.
‘Oh yes, Bob,’ she replied, understanding the unspoken pledge.
In tacit agreement, they separated before reaching the farm.
Martha felt that she was walking on air and when she entered the kitchen, Annie looked up.
Noticing the flushed cheeks and sparkling eyes, she commented, ‘By 'eck thoo looks bonny.
That pink suits thoo a proper treat.
Mind thoo,’ she added, ‘Aah don't know what thi faither'll say ti such a colour.
It's not serviceable.’
Martha laughed.
She did not care what her father thought.
Bob Lamb had noticed her!
Nay — more than that.
He was interested in her and she felt on top of the world…
CHAPTER TWENTY
The whole of the vale of Pickering lay spread out before the two riders, stretching as far as the eye could see.
The fields were a chequerboard of shades, interspersed with large patches of broad-leaved woodland.
‘What a view!’
George exclaimed.
‘I can see for miles.’
‘Aye.’
Jonadab glanced at the panorama outspread before them.
‘But we aren't 'ere t'admire t'view, lad,’ he chided.
‘Keep moving, or we'll never get there.’
As they drew nearer to Thorsbury village, however, each man leading a pair of two year old shires behind his horse, Jonadab looked with approval at the fields on either side of the road.
‘These must be Stephen's,’ he commented.
‘We're approaching a bridge.
'E's got a good look on — it must be a bit o' good land.’
George smiled to himself.
It was typical of his father, he thought.
His own crops, if a good yield, were due to splendid husbandry, while any other farmer's were attributed to good land.
He made no comment, however, as his father glanced over the parapet of the bridge.
‘Aye, this is it.
There's four arches.’
As soon as they were over the bridge, a driveway cut off to the left and their way was barred by huge wrought-iron gates.
‘Get down, and ask at t'lodge,’ ordered Jonadab.
George dismounted and passed the reins to his father.
He knocked on the door of the gatehouse, which was opened by an old man.
‘Aye?’ he queried shortly.
‘We've got two pairs of horses for Sir Stephen Lassiter,’ explained George.
‘Not to t'front, thoo hasn't,’ answered the gatekeeper sourly.
‘Up yon 'ill.
Turn left at t'top and go down t'village.
When thoo gets to t'bottom, thoo'll see t'buildings and stable-yard.
That's where thoo wants ti be.’
So saying he went back inside and banged his door shut behind him.
‘We're to go down t'village, to t'stables,’ George told his father, as he retrieved the reins.
Jonadab's lips set in a straight line and his brows drew together in a frown.
‘Dids't thoo tell 'im who we are?’ he demanded.
‘Dids't thoo say we're Lady Lassiter's faither and brother?’
His voice was beginning to rise and it was obvious that his temper was on a short fuse.
George could have laughed aloud to think how, for years, their father had been ashamed of Tamar, but now he was proud to claim kinship.
He kept his own council and merely answered, ‘No, Faither.
They won't want 'em at t'front door.
We'd best go to t'stables, like he said.’
If the truth were told, Jonadab had had enough.
The journey was the longest he had ridden for several years and he was feeling his age.
It was he himself who had insisted upon a brisk pace and now all he wanted was to dismount and stretch his legs.
As they rode down the village, George noted how clean and tidy it was.
The cottages were in good repair, showing Stephen to be a caring landlord.
‘I couldn't live as close to other folk as they do,’ he remarked to his father.
Jonadab, however, made no reply.
He had just caught his first glimpse of Thorsbury Manor.
‘By 'eck!’ he ejaculated, pulling his mount to a standstill.
They stood, looking in disbelief at Tamar's home.
The sun was at its height, lighting up both the stone and the countless windows.
It was an impressive sight.
‘Yon lawn in t'front must be all on a couple o' acres,’ stated Jonadab.
It was brought home to them, for the very first time, that Tamar had never once described her abode.
Perhaps it was because her few visits to Sleightholmedale had been fleeting or was it perhaps, George wondered, because she knew how overwhelmed they would feel if they knew the truth.
‘And they said they was just farmers, like us,’ mused Jonadab, as they rode at a walk through the high arched entrance and into the stable-yard.
Here they stood for a moment, looking round.
Jonadab dismounted and trying his best not to sound too impressed, said with a nod of his head, ‘They're even got their own farrier.’
Looking in the  direction indicated, George saw a smithy, with the blacksmith and his striker hard at work.
A young stable lad led out another horse, and stood waiting for the one which the smith had almost finished shoeing.
Jonadab hailed him.
‘Now young man,’ he called, as he handed his reins to George and approached the boy.
‘Yes?’
The boy was about twelve years of age and a little impudent in his attitude.
‘We've some 'osses 'ere for Sir Stephen.
Canst thoo tell me where 'e might be?’
‘It's not 'im thoo wants,’ answered the lad.
‘It's Davis — t'ead groom.’
Jonadab was now standing over the boy.
Stooping slightly to look down at him he said, very quietly but adamantly, ‘Aah knows 'oo Aah wants ti see.
Aah'm Sir Stephen's faither-in-law, so off thoo goes and tell 'im we're 'ere.’
The boy was in a quandary.
If this stranger was who he claimed to be, he supposed he'd better do as he was told.
To leave his work, on the other hand, would earn him a clout across his ears from Davis and perhaps, even from the smith as well.
In addition, he had never been to the big house and had no idea where to go, or whom to see.
All his working life had been spent in the buildings and the stable-yard.
Jonadab was used to implicit obedience.
Raising his voice a little, so that it cracked out like a whiplash, he said tersely, ‘Off wi' thoo.’
The boy dropped the halter he was holding and set off at a run through the gateway and towards the big house.
As George bent to pick up the halter of the horse which the boy had been holding, he looked round the yard with interest, noting how his father's voice, though by no means a shout, had penetrated every corner.
The men and boys who were working around the stables looked across curiously to see the strangers.
Out of what appeared to be a tackroom emerged a man who walked with authority, stopping to have a word with one and another of the workers as he crossed towards Jonadab and George.
As he drew closer, walking with almost a swagger, George noted the way the sun glinted on a head of coppery curls.
It was not until he was practically up to them, that he turned his face directly towards them.
George's disbelief and shock must have been mirrored in his face, as he saw the scar which marred the otherwise handsome features.
It stood out whitely against the tanned skin, exactly as Tamar had described it, when telling of her attacker several years ago.
George had never forgotten.
‘What can I do for you?
I'm the head groom.’
The Welsh drawl was added proof that this was indeed the man who had attacked Tamar.
George swallowed but was unable to reply.
The groom smiled and put up his hand to stroke the scar.
‘Gave you a shock, did it?’ he asked.
‘It's been with me so long that I forget it's there, but it can be a bit off-putting to strangers.’
Jonadab glowered at George.
How could he be so offensive as to stare at the chap's disfigured face, he wondered.
George still did not answer Davis.
His thoughts were in turmoil and his open guileless face reflected the chaos in his mind.
How could this man be here?
Tamar obviously had no knowledge that the man who had attempted to rape her was working on her husband's estate.
There was no doubt whatever in George's mind that this was the same man.
Tamar's description, to him and Elizabeth, had been too vivid for him ever to confuse it.
The man's presence here was no coincidence, he decided, and Tamar must be warned.
Perhaps he was awaiting the chance of revenge for the crack on the head that had been given him…
With a start, George brought his thoughts back to the present, aware that both his father and the groom were looking at him curiously.
He forced a smile.
‘Sorry, mate,’ he said.
‘I was miles away.
I though I'd seen you somewhere before.’
The groom grinned cockily and again stroked the scar.
‘If you had, you'd hardly forget,’ he chuckled.
‘Just what I was thinking,’ George replied.
Before any more could be said, Stephen came hurrying into the cobbled yard, hand outstretched, his face beaming with pleasure.
‘How grand to see you!’ he exclaimed, shaking hands with both men.
‘So these are what you've brought me,’ he said, as he moved round the four greys admiringly.
‘Aye.’
They were the pick of Jonadab's two year olds, but he would never admit it.
‘They're noan so bad,’ was his summing up.
‘Two's geldings and two's  fillies .
In another couple o' year, if thoo wants General mi stallion ti call, just let me know.
'E's a fine specimen and good stock-getter and he's unrelated ti these two.’
When Gareth Davis had examined the greys thoroughly, running his hands over their muscles and looking at their teeth, Stephen said, ‘They're in your charge now, Davis.
Mr Oaks is a well-known breeder of greys and we're lucky to obtain some of his horses.’
As Stephen ushered his guests across the cobbled yard and into the drive which led to the house, George glanced back.
Gareth Davis stood watching them, a thoughtful look on his face.
He was intrigued and a little disturbed by George's attitude.
It was obvious that the sight of him had been a shock to Tamar's brother, but Davis was convinced that he had never encountered George before.
With a shrug, he turned away to give orders for the care of the greys, and the visitors' mounts.
Jonadab had presumed that George's silence was due to the size and luxury of his surroundings.
After the first shock he was in no way abashed by the grandeur of Stephen's estate.
Jonadab Oaks is as good as any man,’ was an oft-repeated claim, and this he truly believed.
He had held up his head in the most exalted company.
Yet when Stephen threw open the front door and led the way through the entrance hall into a lofty and elegant room, graced with pillars and dominated by an ornate white marble fireplace, even Jonadab was taken aback.
As he and George hesitated by the doorway, Tamar rose from where she was seated by the fireplace.
‘Father!
George!’ she exclaimed, as she came towards them, hands outstretched.
‘How lovely to see you here at last.’
She looked so relaxed and happy, smiling up at her husband, that George was convinced that she could have no idea that her attacker was employed by Stephen.
He wondered how he could get a word, alone, to warn her.
When they went into the dining room, Stephen's mother joined them.
‘Mother, may I present Mr Jonadab Oaks, Tamar's father, and her brother, George,’ Stephen said.
Looking at the two men he completed the introduction.
‘This is my mother.’
She held out a languid hand, which Jonadab seized and pumped up and down.
‘Aah'm pleased ti meet thoo, ma'am,’ he said.
George's eyes met Tamar's and they gave a mutual smile.
In no way was their father going to be overwhelmed by this cold withdrawn woman.
The talk at the table was mainly about horses.
Old Lady Lassiter took no part in it, pecking at her food in a listless fashion, eyes fixed on her plate.
When Tamar began to tell her father and George about the children, however, her mother-in-law brightened up and looked quite animated.
It was soon evident that she was besotted with little Hilary, and talked about him incessantly.
‘Have you any family, Mr Oaks?’ she inquired of George.
‘My wife is expecting our first baby in January,’ he replied shyly.
When the meal was over, Tamar led the way up the wide sweeping staircase to the nursery wing.
Here, Gertie cared for Hilary, and Victoria now had a governess.
She was excited to see her grandfather and uncle, running to hold up her face for a kiss.
Jonadab was taken aback, not being a man given to overt affection.
However, he bent down and kissed his little granddaughter on the cheek.
‘Look, Hilary,’ she said, leading the two year old forward by the hand.
‘This is Grandad and Uncle George.’
Jonadab watched the child who toddled towards him.
It was his first sight of his grandson and he felt a pang of anxiety as he looked down at him.
Hilary had inherited his father's almost silver hair and fair colouring, but while in the father this in no way detracted from an appearance of strength, it accentuated the child's look of frailty.
‘They're going ti 'ave a job ti rear yon lad,’ he would tell Annie upon arriving home, and this was the thought that crossed his mind now.
Victoria's black hair and vibrant colouring, combined with her vivacity, served as a sharp contrast to her brother's apparent fragility.
Jonadab looked at her fondly.
The Oaks'  blood was dominant there he thought; you couldn't beat good farming stock.
It was a pity poor little Hilary hadn't inherited more of his mother.
Anyway, he added to himself, as he looked with pity at the little boy, it was asking for trouble, giving him such a daft name.
T'lad should 'ave 'ad a good, strong 'un.
When the time came for them to go, Stephen went with them to the buildings, to see where the greys were stabled.
‘See that they are well looked after, Davis,’ he instructed.
‘They're rather special.’
‘Yes, sir.’
Davis touched his forelock and then glanced towards the Oaks, as though conscious that George's eyes were fixed on him with a disturbing intensity.
He was puzzled by George's attitude, which appeared hostile, although he could think of no reason why.
George felt anxious that he had had no opportunity to be alone with Tamar, and so there had been no chance of warning her about the groom.
He was certain that Tamar had told no one about the attack on her, apart from him and Elizabeth, so could not broach the subject in front of either his father or Stephen.
While the three of them stood by the pump in the stableyard, waiting for their horses to be brought out, George nodded his head towards Gareth Davis, who was across the other side of the yard, well out of earshot.
‘How long have you had your groom?’ he asked his brother-in-law.
‘Davis?
Since just after we came to the Manor.
Don't worry about those greys.
He's an excellent chap with horses.
I couldn't have a better head groom.
He's as good, too, at handling men as he is horses.’
George, meanwhile, made no comment, but the thought that flashed through his mind was, ‘Aye!
And manhandling women!,
Having said their goodbyes, the pair rode along the semicircular drive which passed in front of the Manor.
Not only did this save the horses the pull up the hill through the village, but it gave them the occasion for one more glimpse of Tamar and the children, who stood on the steps, waving.
As they crossed the bridge and began their long ride home, Jonadab heaved a heavy sigh.
‘Yon bairn's nobbut  puny,’ he commented.
‘Aah could wish 'e looked a bit stronger.’
With an effort, George dragged his thoughts back from Davis.
Surely Tamar must know he was there?
After all, she had learned to ride and had her own horse.
The whole problem was beyond him, he decided.
‘What?’ he asked.
‘Yon lad of our Tamar's.
Aah said as 'ow 'e's only a poor little thing.’
‘Aye.
He is an' all,’ answered George.
‘He breathes good country air and must have t'best of everything, but 'e only looks frail.’
After a little more conversation, mainly expressing amazement at the splendour of Tamar's circumstances, they urged their horses to a brisk pace and had no further chance to speak.
Upon arriving at Aumery Park Farm, when Jonadab dismounted, George remained on his horse.
‘Is thoo coming in for a cup o' tea?’ his father invited, but George shook his head.
‘Nay, I'd best be getting back.’
His father gave a rare chuckle.
‘Aah'll tell thoo what,’ he grinned, ‘yon owd woman were like death's 'ead at a feast.
A real owd crabapple she is.’
‘Aye,’ George grinned back.
‘There's no wonder our Tamar wants rid of her.
She'd put the damper on anybody.’
He swung his horse round and said over his shoulder, ‘I'll be off then, Faither.
See you tomorrow.’
Removing his hat, Jonadab stood staring after him, scratching his head in puzzlement.
What was up with George, he wondered.
He'd been a bit funny, quiet-like, ever since they'd arrived at Thorsbury Manor.
Surely he couldn't be jealous of Tamar's grand lifestyle?
Looking across the fields to the little beck, with the heronry beyond and the green sweep of the moors rising above, he drew a deep breath of satisfaction.
What more could a man want, than this…
George made his way to his own home, shoulders slumped and mind disturbed.
Now that he was away from his father, he could give full rein to his imagination as to what Gareth Davis was doing at Thorsbury.
If the groom had been there for over two years, he must have had plenty  of opportunity for revenge on Tamar, if that had been his motive.
When he rode into the yard of Cherry Tree Farm, Elizabeth was approaching the house with a pail of milk.
Seeing her husband, she set it down by the back door and came across to the stable.
While he unsaddled and fed his horse, she plied him with questions about his visit to Tamar's home.
‘What's it like?’ she asked.
George hesitated.
He could picture the house and its setting, but was lost for words.
‘It's big,’ he said at last.
‘How big?’ she prompted.
‘Well,’ he paused for some means of comparison.
‘It's bigger than t'Towers, where Sir James lives.’
Sir James Sturdy was the Oaks' landlord, having inherited the estate upon the death of his father the previous year.
Elizabeth's eyes widened.
‘It must be huge!’
George sought his memory for some of the facts given by Stephen and Tamar about their home.
He felt guilty now for not having paid more attention, but his thoughts had been on the groom.
He brightened as he recalled some of what they had been told.
‘There's fifty-two stairs to t'staircase and three hundred and sixty-five windows.’
Elizabeth digested this information.
‘Who cleans them?, she wanted to know.
‘Faither asked that an' all,’ vouchsafed George.
‘There's a chap does nowt else.
When he's finished, it's time to start again at t'beginning.’
He could see that Elizabeth was pleased by his attempts to describe it all and continued, ‘You should see t'stables, coach-houses and t'yard.
I should think there's more folks live there than there is in t'village.’
As they walked back to the house, George managed to fill out his description by giving more details of the inside of the house.
He told Elizabeth of the meal in the dining room, with the butler and maids serving on and made her giggle at his father's summing up of the Dowager Lady Lassiter.
‘A real frosty-face she has an' all,’ he added.
He sank into his Windsor chair by the fire, while Elizabeth washed the eggs.
‘It's grand to be back,’ he sighed.
‘You wouldn't swop, then?’
Elizabeth smiled.
‘That I would not,’ he retorted.
‘It's not like a home, not like this,’ looking round with satisfaction.
‘What about the little one?’
Elizabeth asked.
‘What's he like — Hilary?’
George frowned.
‘To tell you the truth, Liz, I wouldn't give a lot for their chances of rearing him,’ he said sadly.
‘Oh, George!
You can't mean it?’
She was appalled.
‘He's a poor little thing, wan and thin.
He belies his pasture, because he'll have the best that money can buy.
He just looks as if a puff of wind would blow him away,’ George finished.
Elizabeth was silent for a moment.
Her heart went out to Tamar.
She felt a twinge of guilt, knowing that she had sometimes wondered whether or not Hilary's ill-health was an excuse invented by Tamar, because her visits were so infrequent.
Now it appeared that the little boy was in reality a delicate child.
‘Did our Martha come down?’
George asked her.
Elizabeth's face lit up, as she told him of Martha's excitement over the clothes sent by Tamar.
‘Oh, you should have seen her, George!
She looked like a different person.
I washed and curled her hair and she wore a lovely pink bodice to go home in.
She looked really pretty!’
She paused for a moment and then went on.
‘Don't say anything, but I saw Bob Lamb going along the beck, so I sent her off that way, too.
She's rather keen on him, you know.’
George looked surprised.
‘Our Martha?
Well, she's wasting her time.
He's never looked twice at her.’
Elizabeth smiled.
‘He's never seen her look the way she did this afternoon.
No man could help but look at her more than twice.’
George could not imagine how a change of clothing could create such a transformation in his plain youngest sister, but passed no comment.
Now that Elizabeth had exhausted the topic of Martha, they sat for a few moments in silence, one each side of the fire with a cup of tea.
Back in his own home, it seemed incredible to George that he had actually seen Tamar's attacker at Thorsbury, and yet he was certain that the groom was the same man.
Eventually, he decided  to confide in Elizabeth.
‘You know I said I'd like you to write and ask your mother to come back,’ he began.
‘Yes — why?
Have you changed your mind?’
‘No, of course not, but you remember why I don't want you to be alone?’
‘Of course.
It's because Tamar was attacked.’
‘Well…’ he drew out the word slowly, unsure now of what to say.
It all sounded so impossible.
‘Yes?’
Elizabeth prompted.
‘I've seen that chap!
The man who tried to rape Tamar!’
Elizabeth placed her cup carefully on the hob by the fire and turned to look at George, who was leaning forward, looking at her earnestly.
‘You can't have done,’ she stated, but there was a question in her voice.
‘Besides, you've never seen him, so you don't know what he looks like.’
‘I've never forgotten Tamar's description,’ he asserted.
‘Ginger hair, tanned face and that scar, stretching from his right eye to his mouth.
Well, that very same man is Stephen's head groom.’
He sat back to watch Elizabeth's reaction.
It was eminently satisfying: she appeared to be what Jonadab would have termed ‘gob-smacked’.
‘I just can't understand what he can be doing there,’ she said at last.
Although they sat up later than their normal bedtime, neither could find any explanation.
George was insistent that Tamar must be ignorant of the man's presence.
‘There'll be men working there that she never sets eyes on,’ he declared.
‘You can't imagine how big it is and how many men Stephen employs.’
Elizabeth was silent.
She understood her husband's loyalty to his sister.
There was only a year between their ages and there had always been a close bond between them.
She recognised, however, that beneath Tamar's apparently circumspect exterior still lurked the reckless and tempestuous streak that had characterised her in her youth.
In the end, they came to the decision that whichever one of them saw Tamar first, would try to have a private word to tell her of Davis's presence, and then see how she reacted.
‘Goodness knows when that will be,’ Elizabeth sighed, ‘now that I'm not going to stand the market any more.’
‘How about writing to her?’ queried George.
‘No.
Stephen may expect to read any letters she receives,’ answered Elizabeth.
‘We'd better leave it as we've arranged.’
Having reached this rather unsatisfactory conclusion, they went up to bed.
CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE
The summer was tranquil and fairly uneventful; Jonadab Oaks felt that for once, Nature was working with him instead of against him.
Ann Butler had returned from Leeds in answer to Elizabeth's letter.
Part of her journey, from Leeds to York, had been undertaken by train and afterwards she regaled anyone who would listen with stories of the noise, smoke and speed of the train, until they were heartily sick of the whole subject.
What she never admitted was that in the beginning, she had been terrified of this new mode of travel and the first few miles had been passed with her eyes tightly closed and her lips moving in prayer.
When she had eventually plucked up her courage and looked out of the window, she had been entranced by the views from the carriage and the speed of travel.
The new relationship between Martha and Bob Lamb was blossoming.
As the summer progressed, their hesitant and tentative emotions became stronger.
Bob had helped purge Martha of the terrible guilt that had haunted her since her sister Maria's death.
Now, after years of self-doubt, she was growing in confidence and beginning to shed the tensions of her formative years.
When the women went out into the fields to help their menfolk with the haymaking, it was noted, although no one passed a comment, that Bob sought her out and sat with her at 'lowance time.
‘Doest thoo think there's owt in it?’
Annie asked Jonadab one evening at bedtime.
‘Aah'm not so sure,’ he replied, ‘but Aah reckons as 'ow there must be.
After all, 'e chooses ti sit wi' 'er, when there's all t'men for 'im ti sit and talk ti.’
As he climbed into bed he added, ‘Anyroad, time'll tell.
She could do a lot worse — 'e's a good, steady man and 'e's not given ti strong drink.’
Annie sighed.
‘Aah could never understand why she wouldn't 'ave young Sam Baldwin.
'E's keen on 'er, and she seemed ti be fond of 'im till 'e asked for 'er in wedlock.’
A thought struck Jonadab and he hesitated on the point of blowing out the candle.
‘Aah'll tell thi summat, Mother.
She were keen on Baldwin's lad, till Bob Lamb come 'ere.
That's when she went off Sam.’
Annie digested this piece of information and came to the conclusion that her husband was right.
Poor Sam had been backwards at coming forwards, she told herself.
He had missed his chance with Martha, as had his brother Will with their Beth.
‘I expect he'll get over it,’ she comforted herself sleepily.
Once the harvest was finished and the Mell Supper had been celebrated, Lydia approached Annie one morning in late September.
’ 'Ave you thought any more about Tobias and me, missus?’she inquired.
Annie smiled.
Lydia had been with them now for ten years or so and still persisted in calling her ‘missus’.
‘No, Lydia, 'Aah 'asn't,’ she said.
‘Aah wasn't sure thoo meant it.’
Lydia put her head on one side, reminding Annie of a little sparrow with her darting beady eyes.
‘It's like Aah said, missus.
There's not much chance of finding an 'usband down 'ere and Aah've no wish ti stop an old maid all me life.
Anyroad, Aah've asked 'im and e's willing.’
She looked pleadingly at her mistress.
‘That is, of course , if it's all right by thoo. 'E'll be no bother.
'E'll share my room and’ e'll spend 'is evenings in t'stable out o' t'way, like 'e does now.’
Annie looked at her curiously.
‘It doesn't seem much of a married life for thoo, Lydia,’ she observed gently.
‘It's better than nowt,’ she was assured.
‘We was in t'workhouse together and 'e'll do as 'e's told, which is more than a lot of 'usbands does.’
Annie smiled.
‘Thoo's right there and yes, of course it's all right!’
Lydia beamed.
‘We sh'll put t'banns in on Sunday, at Gillamoor.
Can your Martha be mi bridesmaid?’
With a shock it was brought home to Annie Oaks that  they were the only family Lydia and Tobias had ever known, coming to Aumery Park Farm from the Union House as they had done at the ages of ten and twelve.
‘Aah'll tell thoo what,’ she said.
‘We'll go into Kirkby next market day and Aah'll buy some stuff for t'frocks.
Thoo can choose it and Elizabeth and me'll mek 'em.’
Lydia face split into a huge grin.
‘Ooh thanks, missus!
That'll be grand!’ she exclaimed.
When the news was broken to Martha that Lydia wanted her for a bridesmaid, she was excited.
‘I'll wear that blue gown of our Tamar's,’ she decided.
‘No, love,’ Annie gently chided.
‘It's Lydia's day.
Thoo dissent want ti outshine t'bride.’
Martha agreed readily, although she was disappointed.
She had not yet worn any of the gowns sent by Tamar and was longing for Bob to see her in the blue one.
At her first appearance in the rose pink blouse, her father's eyebrows and icy glower had caused her to redden under his gaze but for once, her mother's slight head-shake had caused Jonadab to bite his tongue and he had made no comment to Martha.
When told of the forthcoming marriage between Lydia and Tobias, Jonadab expressed his amazement.
‘She's a canny little thing, as bright as a button,’ was his summing up of the maid.
‘What she can see in 'im Aah dissent rightly know.
'E's as daft as a brush, and twice as wooden as t'shaft.’
Annie sighed.
‘There comes a time Jonadab, in every woman's life, when she needs a man.
Lydia's reached that point, and there's no one else.
All our other men are either married or too young.’
‘Aye, Aah expects thoo's right,’ her husband rejoined.
‘Toby's no great catch, but she's nowt better t'angle for, really.’
When the day of the wedding dawned in October, Elizabeth came up to the farm to help Lydia and Martha to prepare for the ceremony.
She and Annie had made the gowns and, although they were of good strong material, befitting the bride's station and life-style, Lydia's chestnut-coloured material brought a touch of colour to her normally  sallow cheeks, while Martha's deep maroon set off her fair colouring.
Annie was concerned to see that Elizabeth seemed to have lost much of her sparkle.
The innate vivacity which had been one of her main attractions, seemed to have deserted her.
‘Is thoo feeling all right, love?’ she managed to ask, amid the excitement and chatter of Lydia and Martha.
Elizabeth smiled sheepishly.
‘Of course, Ma.
I've been waiting all this time for a baby, but I must admit the carrying of it is more tiring than I'd expected.’
Annie was a strong, wide-hipped woman who had carried and borne eight, with little discomfort.
‘It's because you're smaller-framed,’ was her comment.
After the ceremony Annie provided tea for the family and Tobias's workmates.
It was with satisfaction that she noted how Bob Lamb's eyes continually strayed to Martha.
As for Lydia, she was satisfied to have been the centre of attention for one day in her life.
As she removed her wedding dress and put it away, she knew that it would only ever be worn at Christmas and other times of equal importance.
On going back downstairs in her working clothes to do the washing up, she felt a quiet pride: not only had she now achieved the status of a married woman, but she had also had a proper wedding with a cake and an attendant — which was more than did most girls of her class.
Over at Thorsbury, the summer had also gone well for Stephen Lassiter.
After more than three years at the Manor, he had managed to pull round the farms and get the timber business running smoothly.
Although he was still away fairly often, visiting the mills in Leeds and Bradford which provided the bulk of his income, he was more relaxed now that he felt that he was mastering the intricacies of the various businesses which had been allowed to slip into low productivity during his father's ill-health.
During haytime and harvest, the four horses bought from his father-in-law had proved to be a boon.
They were well-broken and when grazing in the fields, came to a call, taking no catching.
Stephen was delighted with them and all his men knew that they were special to him.
Now that Hilary was three years old, Stephen had made  it clear to his own mother that the necessity for her to remain at the Manor was past.
Tamar had left the persuasion to her husband, determined that there was no way in which her mother-in-law would be able to allege that Tamar had driven her out.
She had to admit, however, both to herself and to Tempy, that she was delighted when old Lady Lassiter moved to the Dower House, taking with her not only her maid, but also one or two of the older servants.
‘Thank goodness the old battle-axe has gone,’ said Tamar.
‘I can't tell you how much more at ease I feel, without her and her cronies snooping on me.’
She did not realise how much she had changed since becoming Lady Lassiter.
Her riding ability had paved the way for her acceptance amongst the circles in which they now moved.
When they had first come to live at Thorsbury, she had felt a little piqued by Stephen's neglect of her, while realising that his obsession with work was not really of his own choosing.
In those days, too, she had been afraid of Gareth Davis, but her fear had been tinged with an awareness of his overt masculinity.
When she first felt herself swept away on the tide of desire, the risk of detection had added spice to the affair.
Now, however, she had grown tired of Davis, and her excuses to avoid being alone with him became more frequent.
Tamar would have been happy to finish the association, but Davis would not release his hold on her.
She knew that the longer the relationship lasted, the more she courted disaster.
She no longer needed the groom to accompany her when she rode out, since she was now a proficient horsewoman.
This placed obstacles in the way of their meeting with any regularity, causing Davis resentment and bringing out the ugly side of his nature.
He had threatened on more than one occasion to reveal details of their love-making to Stephen.
‘Then I'd clear off and leave you to face the music,’ he had sneered.
‘I can get work anywhere and am not tied here.’
No matter how Tamar used her wits, she could see no way out of the situation and was in a constant state of panic that he would carry out his threat.
Even as she glanced out of the bedroom window, while changing into a riding habit, Gareth Davis approached the front door leading Moonbeam and Stephen's magnificent black horse, Lightning.
‘There's one I'd like to see the last of as well.’
She said the words with such bitterness that Tempy glanced inquisitively from the window.
‘Gareth?’
Tempy was unable to fathom her mistress' desire to be rid of the groom, nor the depth of feeling behind the words.
‘Aye, Gareth.’
Tamar's tone was almost vindictive as she strode briskly from the room to join Stephen for a ride round the estate.
Her husband's brow furrowed as he noted the set of her face.
Tamar always seemed to be in a bad mood recently and he was at a loss to discover the reason.
During their ride, Stephen did his best to do so.
‘Are you worried about anything, Tamar?’ he asked.
‘Of course not!’
She put on a smile, but it was unconvincing.
‘Perhaps you're bored,’ he suggested.
Suddenly struck by an idea, he said, ‘What do you say to a week in London?
We could take the travelling coach to York and then go up by train.’
The change in Tamar was dramatic.
Her face lit up and her amber eyes danced with golden lights.
This time, her smile was one of genuine joy.
‘Oh, Stephen!
How lovely!’ she exclaimed.
‘Perhaps I have been bored, without realising it.’
Not only was she exultant at the thought of a holiday in London, but she would also have a week removed from the constant worry of Gareth Davis.
With Stephen away from the estate, she could relax in the assurance that there was no way that Davis could betray her.
The next couple of weeks were spent in a whirl of feverish activity.
In answer to Tamar's claims that she had no clothes suitable for a visit to the capital, Stephen persuaded her to wait until they arrived and then she would be able to buy something.
It was the first holiday since their short honeymoon in York so that Stephen, too, was eagerly anticipating the break from the routine of business.
‘You've worked too hard since your father died,’ Tamar told him.
‘You're in need of a bit of relaxation.’
When Stephen's mother was told of their intended trip, she immediately offered to move back to the Manor, to oversee the children.
Tamar offered up a silent prayer that Stephen would not be cajoled into agreeing to the step, but she need not have worried.
He appreciated, as much as Tamar, the freer atmosphere in the house since his mother's departure.
‘No, thank you, Mother,’ he answered firmly.
‘Gertie is quite capable of looking after Hilary and Victoria's governess is in charge of her, so there is no problem.’
While Stephen and Tamar were away, the weather remained crisp and dry.
Hobson, the manager of Home Farm, kept the men hard at work, trying to get much of the land ploughed, before the coming of winter.
On the day that his master and mistress were due back from London, he was determined to have as much as possible completed, in order to impress Stephen with the amount done during his absence.
Having despatched the first and second waggoners with their teams, he turned to Ted Barlow, the third waggoner.
‘Now, Ted.
Thoo'd better mek a start on yon ten acre field down by t'river-side.
It ought ti 'ave been done afore, really.
It's a bit on t'spongy side, so Aah wants it finished afore t'rains come.’
Ted's team were Gracie and Daisy, the two grey fillies supplied by Jonadab.
The sun had quite a lot of warmth in it and he set off, behind the back of the Manor and along the bank of the river, to the field where he was to work.
He was a cheerful lad and interspersed his whistling with conversations with his team, having grown fond of the two gentle shires.
Gracie and Daisy had already been broken to the plough while still down in Sleightholmedale and had been trained to plough together, Gracie walking in the furrow and Daisy being the land horse.
Ted peeled some sticks pulled from the hedge and used them as markers by which to guide his plough, in order to set his rigs.
Once this was done he set about his task, quite happy to be in no other company that that of the two greys.
Guiding the plough and following the team up and down  the field over the uneven ground was very hard and tiring work.
As he tramped behind the horses, he spoke to them constantly, in a caressing tone.
‘Come on there, Daisy lass’ or, ‘Gee up a bit, Gracie’.
Such phrases came in a constant stream of encouragement.
The two greys snickered in reply, blowing out their lips and twitching their ears upon hearing their names.
Ted's monologue was kept up against the background sounds of the creaking of leather upon leather and the calls of the woodland birds.
For all his enjoyment of the work and the companionship of his team the lad was not sorry when the ground covered, about half an acre, showed that it was time for his midday snack.
Unhitching his horses from the plough, he fastened Gracie to a sapling on the bank of the river, before leading Daisy down for a drink.
‘Come on, old lass,’ he urged.
‘Come and 'ave a nice drink afore Aah puts thi nose-bag on.’
His intention was to water both horses and while they had their nose-bags of oats, he would sit in the shade with his allowance and a bottle of cold tea.
Slipping the bit out of Daisy's mouth, he led her by the halter to a gap in the belt of trees which clothed the river bank.
Giving her the full length of the halter, he allowed her down to the bank, to drink her fill from the water.
‘Go on, lass,’ he murmured.
Smelling the water, Daisy needed no further encouragement and put on a spurt to hurry down to the river.
To Ted's consternation, the soil of the slope suddenly gave way and the halter shank ran through his fingers as the terrified horse slipped down towards the water.
Kicking and bucking to keep her balance, she managed to draw to a shuddering halt close to the rushing torrent about ten feet below where he was standing.
‘Thank God,’ he muttered, as he started to scramble down the last foot or two to seize the halter shank that dangled so near, and yet just out of his reach.
He too felt the spongy soil drawing him downwards.
With an effort, he heaved up first one foot and then the other and moved back onto firmer ground.
One horrified look told him that Daisy had already sunk to her pasterns.
Her eyes were rolling with terror as she began to struggle to free herself from the tenacious, sucking mud — struggles that only served to hasten the process and cause her to sink at an even greater rate.
‘Whoa!
Whoa, old girl,’ soothed Ted, when he saw that even with all his weight pulling on the halter, there was no hope of saving her that way.
Casting a look at the frightened filly, he hauled himself by tufts of grass back to the top of the caved-in bank.
From the crest, with a final ‘Whoa!’ to the horse, he ran and  seized Gracie's halter from the tree where he had tied her.
Climbing on to her back, he used the halter shank to whip her into a lumbering unaccustomed trot, as he made his way back to the stable-yard.
Upon his arrival, he was nonplussed to find the yard and buildings deserted.
‘Of course,’ he muttered.
‘It's dinnertime!’
Jumping down, he ran up the stairs into the Long Room, where all the workforce were seated over the midday meal.
‘Come quick!
Come quick!’
Ted shouted.
‘Daisy's got into some sinking mud and she's going down fast.’
Knives and forks clattered down and forms were kicked over in the uproar which followed.
Gareth Davis took a breath and shouted loudly, ‘Whoa!
Just wait.’
All eyes were fixed on him as he held up his hand.
‘The other heavy horses are all out on the land, so get to the riverside field as quick as you can, on horse or on foot.
Jack and Harry, bring some traces.
Hurry up, now.
You know what Sir Stephen'll say if we lose her.’
Under his direction, the staff made their way with all speed to where the horse was trapped.
Davis groaned as they came within sight of her.
‘She's in up to her belly,’ he exclaimed.
‘We're going to have all on to get her out.’
Quickly organising the men, he threaded a leading-rein through his belt, passing the free ends to a team of men.
‘If I shout that I'm going down, haul me out as fast as you can,’ he ordered.
‘We don't want to lose Daisy but rather her than me.’
Some of the other men had been busy, tying together ropes and halters to make a long leash.
Davis seized one end and started down the bank to where the horse was fast in the mud.
Only her head was free to move by now and this she was tossing from side to side, her eyes rolling in  panic, while her fear was further expressed in snorts and whimpers.
‘If I can pass this under her belly and get it fastened,’ he said, ‘pull with all your might, and use the horses as well.’
While he made his way swiftly but lightly across the boggy ground, giving his feet no time to be drawn down, the men higher up the bank were fastening the rest of the horses to the leash.
As he passed round the far side of Daisy, Gareth could feel the marshy ground clinging with each stride.
He trod lightly, picking his feet up swiftly at each step in order to make as little contact as possible with the soft oozing mud.
Quickly realising that it was an impossibility to tackle the rescue as he had hoped, he decided to fasten the makeshift leash to Daisy's collar.
This would enable the men on the bank to keep her head up and give more time to spend on the attempts to raise her from the quagmire.
Speaking softly to the horse, he came alongside her neck, anxious to attach the halter as quickly as possible and make his way back to firm ground.
One of the men on the bank called across to him, ‘What's it like, Gareth?’
As he began to shout his reply, he only managed the words, ‘Bloody tacky,’ when, at the sound of his raised voice close to her ear, Daisy swung her head towards him and caught him full in the chest with her nose.
The blow caught him off-balance and he teetered for what seemed an age to the watchers, before falling into the rushing water with a hoarse scream.
There was a loud crack as under the strain of the tearing current, the safety rope snapped and Davis was sucked under the surface of the swift-running river.
For a moment there was a stunned silence from his workmates and then pent-up breath was released in what seemed like a communal sigh, before the chief waggoner yelled, ‘Come on!
We might get 'im by t'bridge.’
By the next field, the river curved in almost a right-angle so that by running diagonally across, they were able to cross the road and approach a place where, at the far side of the bridge, the ground shelved gently down to the water.
Although they spread along the bank and searched the  turbulence anxiously, there was no sign of the groom, either dead or alive.
Ted had not gone with them.
He sat above Daisy, talking gently to her, as she gradually sank into the bog.
When, at last, the ground closed over her, he led Gracie back to the stables.
The tears which coursed down his cheeks were not for the head groom.
They were for the gentle grey shirehorse, whose death he blamed on himself.
When Tamar and Stephen crossed the bridge on their journey home from York, they passed the group of men, trailing up the hill towards the village.
‘They're our workers,’ said Stephen, looking from the window.
‘Stop the coach, Goodison,’ he called up to the coachman.
As the horses were pulled to a halt, he jumped out of the coach and stood in front of the band of men who were trudging up the hill.
‘What's wrong?’ he demanded.
‘What are you doing here?
Why aren't you at your work?’
The men drew to a halt, removed their hats and caps but stood regarding him in silence.
They moved their feet uncomfortably and avoided his eye, turning their caps in their hands.
None wanted to be the one to break the news.
At last, the head waggoner cleared his throat.
‘We thinks as 'ow Gareth Davis is drownded, sir,’ he stated.
‘Davis — drowned?’
Stephen was devastated.
Slowly Tamar stepped down from the coach, her face white and her eyes as dull as amber-coloured stones.
‘What did he say?’ she whispered.
The men turned their attention to her.
Now that the subject had been opened, each wanted to have his say.
‘It's Davis, m'Lady.’
’ 'E fell in t'river and was swept away, m'Lady.’
‘We can't find 'im, but it's so deep and 'as such strong currents, 'e can't 'ave 'ad a chance.’
Tamar thought for a moment that she was going to faint.
The group of men receded and their voices faded.
She swayed slightly and Stephen took her arm and helped her back to the coach.
‘I'll take Lady Lassiter home, men, and then I'll come down to the buildings.
We've had a long and tiring journey and my wife is not well.’
Tempy was in the coach together with Stephen's manservant  and had overheard the talk.
As Tamar sank back into her seat, Tempy took out a bottle of smelling salts and held them under her nose.
‘Are you all right, m'Lady?’ she asked anxiously.
‘Yes.
Yes, I'm all right,’ Tamar replied, opening her eyes and then veiling them with the black sweep of her lashes, but not before Tempy had seen the gleam of triumph in their topaz depths.
‘She can't be glad 'e's dead…’ the maid thought, but then recalled what Tamar had said about Davis before the holiday in London.
What could she have had against the groom, she wondered.
After the initial shock, Tamar's reaction was one of elation.
She had wanted some way of freeing herself from Gareth Davis and his demands and now, with no effort on her part, she was free of him for ever.
A great weight was lifted from her mind.
There was now no way in which Stephen could learn of her indiscretion.
At last, she was safe.
It did not feel unreasonable to her, that she felt no sorrow.
Deep inside, Tamar loved her husband and her dalliance had been born out of boredom.
It had not taken long for her to realise that it was not worth the risk of her position and Stephen's love.
While they were in the travelling coach, she put on an outward appearance of sadness for a loyal employee, killed in an attempt to save his master's horse.
As they approached the buildings, Stephen called out, ‘Stop here, Goodison, and I'll get out.
You can go on up to the house.’
When they reached the Manor the children who had been watching from the window ran to greet Tamar.
‘Oh, Mama!
We've missed you,’ cried Victoria, hurling herself into Tamar's arms.
‘Missed you,’ echoed Hilary, lifting up his arms to be picked up.
‘And I've missed you as well,’ she laughed, as she hugged them both.
‘Come upstairs and you can see your presents.’
‘Where's Papa?’ asked Victoria, as the door closed when the final piece of luggage had been carried in.
Tamar hesitated.
‘One of the workers has met with an  accident,’ was all she said.
The children were too excited at the thought of presents to ask any more details and the merry little group went laughing up the stairs, Tamar giving no further thought to the man who had died.
Stephen came in to change for dinner, thoughtful and brooding.
He had organised a search of both sides of the river bank until dusk had closed in, but there was no sign of a body.
He was upset that Daisy was gone, but the horse could be replaced.
It was the loss of human life that lay heavy on him.
‘Ted is not local,’ he told Tamar, ‘and knew nothing of the danger of that marsh.
I didn't know myself,’ he continued, ‘but all the villagers know to keep away.’
‘Thank goodness we've always warned the servants who have charge of the children, to keep away from the river bank.’
As Stephen talked of his intention of having the bog fenced off immediately, Tamar sat by her dressing table while Tempy brushed her hair.
Her husband went through to his own dressing-room, and Tamar leaned forward, elbows on the dressing-table and looked at her reflection.
It was only a week since, in this very room, she had wished to be rid of Gareth Davis; now he was dead.
She gave a shudder.
Had she some power unbeknown to herself, which smoothed her way through life, she wondered.
‘Are you cold, m'lady?’
Tempy asked solicitously.
‘No.’
Tamar smiled at the maid's reflection as she rose to her feet.
‘It was just somebody walking over my grave.’
The following afternoon, Davis' body was found in a tangle of branches where the willows dipped their boughs into the river, close to Paradise Farm.
This was well out of the village, although it was still part of the estate.
Here the river took a wide right-angled bend, and the farmhouse and buildings snuggled there, protected, as though in the crook of an arm.
Tamar had just gone upstairs for her needlework when Jim Fairly, the tenant of Paradise Farm, drove down the village with the body under a blanket on a flat cart.
Tempy who was by the window, remarked, ‘I see he's surfaced, then.’
Her mistress crossed to her and they stood in silence, side by side, while the rully was driven into the stable-yard.
Tempy sighed.
‘There'll be plenty of lasses hereabouts who won't be dry-eyed when they hear that he's gone.’
‘What do you mean?’ asked Tamar in astonishment.
‘T'was in more than t'colour of his hair that he was like a fox,’ the maid replied.
‘Like old Reynard, he didn't hunt at home.
He went further afield for his sport.
There's many a ginger-haired bairn in the villages round about who've lost their father this day; though they'll never know it, of course.’
Tamar went cold for a moment and then she was filled with a blinding rage.
How dared he?
She felt herself beginning to shake and grasped the back of a chair to steady herself.
She suddenly felt the need to ride, to gallop at speed, her face into the wind and her mind filled with nothing but the rhythm of her mount.
‘Get me a riding-habit out,’ she said tersely.
‘It doesn't matter which one.
I want to go out for a ride in the open air.’
As Tempy helped her into her riding clothes, Tamar fidgeted and moved about until the maid was driven to distraction.
When her mistress was dressed, Tempy handed her the riding hat which completed the outfit.
Tamar gave it a flick, which sent it swirling across the room.
‘I can't stand that on!
I've a bad headache,’ she snapped.
Raising her hands, she snatched at the hairpins which controlled her hair, releasing black curls in a cascade down her back.
‘Oh, m'Lady, no!
It's not seemly,’ cried Tempy.
‘Who cares?’
Tamar called back, as she almost ran from the room.
Upon her return, about an hour later, her mood was calm although this was belied by her appearance which Tempy described later to Gertie as ‘like a witch on a windy day’.
Her colour was heightened, her eyes bright and her hair was blown by the wind into a wild tangle.
Tamar never mentioned Gareth Davis again.
Indeed, she rarely thought of him again.
Three days later, dressed in the deepest black which suited her so well, she walked circumspectly by her husband's side to see the groom buried in the graveyard adjoining the pretty little village church.
Tamar, Lady Lassiter's life was tidy and secure once again and she determined that it would now remain so.
Her future  would be devoted to her husband and children and no more would she be tempted into any indiscretions, she vowed.
CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO
‘It must be summat in t'air,’ grunted Jonadab Oaks.
No sooner was Lydia's wedding to Tobias over, than Bob Lamb had approached him for his permission to pay court to Martha, with a view to eventual marriage.
Jonna was still courting a girl from the neighbouring farm over the moor top at Skiplam.
Maisie Brayton was the only child of a well-to-do farmer and his father viewed the forthcoming match with approval.
On alternate Sundays, it was Jonna's habit to walk across the moor, having crossed Hodge Beck by the stepping-stones, and go to tea at the Braytons' house.
This routine had been established for more than a year, so it was no surprise when one Sunday evening in early November, he announced at the supper table, ‘Me and Maisie's set a date.
We're ti be wed at Easter.’
‘Eeh, Aah'm that glad!’ his mother exclaimed.
‘She's a nice lass and she'll fit in well 'ere.
Thoo can 'ave yon front bedroom that was Gran and Grandad's.
We made it ready for our George and Elizabeth, before they moved to Cherry Tree Farm.’
Jonna hesitated and took a sip of his tea, regarding his father warily over the rim of the mug.
As he placed it slowly down on the table, he took a deep breath.
‘Well,’ he began, ‘as Maisie's the only one, and there being no son ti tek over t'farm…’
Again he paused.
‘Well?’
Jonadab could sense his son's reluctance to proceed.
‘Well, Maisie's father wants us to live up yonder, so that I can get into t'road of running t'farm.
After all, it'll be mine one day.’
It was said with defiance, but even so Jonna was taken aback by the violence of his father's reaction.
‘What ?’ he roared as he leapt to his feet.
‘Trying ti tek thoo away from thi own land, is 'e?’
Jonna flinched back and Annie sighed as she looked from  father to son.
Although so alike physically, she felt sure that Jonna would not stand up to his father's rage, as George would have done.
To everyone's amazement, however, Jonna faced his father with a courage born of desperation.
Rising slowly to his feet, he placed both hands on the table and leaned forward to face Jonadab.
Blue eyes met blue eyes; each pair as cold and piercing as the other.
‘It's not my land.
It never will be my land.
It'll pass ti George, and everything else with it.’
The words were enunciated slowly and forcefully, underlining the bitterness and envy which had always tinged Jonna's feelings towards his brother.
The veins in Jonadab's neck stood out like whipcords, as he tried to control his voice.
He knew that if he gave vent to his feelings and shouted at Jonna, it would upset Annie.
Instead, his voice came out little above a whisper, cold and threatening.’
'Ow dare thoo defy me?’
He paused, visibly shaking with anger.
‘Aah'll tek a whip ti thi, if Aah dissent get an apology.’
Jonna suddenly lost all fear of his father.
Once Jonadab had threatened physical violence, the son realised that he was more than a match for his ageing parent.
Jonadab Oaks might be as lean and sinewy as ever, with muscles as firm and trim as in his youth, but age had taken its toll and he was not the equal of his son, who now faced him so challengingly, ‘There's nowt for me ti apologise for,’ he said firmly.
‘Aah'll not be a slave ti this land, for no reward, like Uncle George was.’
Jonadab sank back in his chair, unable to believe what he was hearing.
‘Us and ours 'as worked this land for generations,’ he said heavily.
‘Hast thoo no feeling for it?’
Jonna considered.
‘No,’ he said finally.
‘You're a tenant-farmer, Faither.
It's Sir James Sturdy's land and generations afore 'im.
Us Oaks 'as paid for t'privilege o' working it and it means nowt ti me.’
He nodded his head towards the west side of the house.
‘Over yon moor is a farm that's mine for the taking.
Lock, stock and barrel.’
He emphasised the last four words.
‘Aah'll not be anybody's tenant, Faither.
Aah'll be responsible ti nobody but missen — mi own boss!
Aah'll not give that chance up.
Not for thoo — not for nobody.’
This declaration was greeted with a stunned silence.
The eyes of those in the room shifted uneasily from father to son.
Jonadab's face was white, but his eyes blazed with icy light.
His voice, when he eventually addressed his son, was cutting.
‘So now we know.’
This was yet another of his children to face him in defiance in this very kitchen.
Jonna, who, despite his father's efforts to hide the fact, had always been his favourite, had followed the road first trodden by Joseph, his eldest son and then by Tamar.
The silence in the room stretched out, unbroken except by the heavy, deliberate ticking of the long-case clock in the corner.
Annie felt that if no one spoke before long, she must get up and go out.
She could think of no words to break the agonising tension.
Before she actually rose to her feet, Jonadab spoke again.
‘Can we tek it then that thoo'll be leaving us for this land of milk and honey?’
He put the question with deceptive casualness.
Jonna's chin came up a fraction and he looked his father straight in the eye.
‘Well, yes,’ he answered.
‘Eventually.’
‘There's no eventually about it,’ came back the answer with the speed of a striking snake.
Jonadab's voice rose to a crescendo.
‘If thoo intends ti go, thoo goes today.’
The shocked silence was broken by Annie.
‘Oh, no!
Don't be 'asty, Jonadab.’
He looked at his son.
All colour had drained from Jonna's face.
‘Disloyalty is disloyalty.
Nowt can change that; and when it comes from t'family that a man 'as reared and cared for, it's far worse than from others.’
Glancing round at those in the room, he gave a weary sigh.
‘If a son of mine 'as no feeling for this land, it's better that 'e's off it.’
Annie and Martha began to cry, and Annie once again pleaded with her husband.
‘Sleep on it, Jonadab.
Don't say such things without further thought.’
‘Aah needs no further thought, wife.
Principles is principles and Aah sticks ti mine.’
It was plain for all to see that his father's ultimatum had come as a shock to Jonna.
He pulled himself together with an effort and looked at his father.
‘If that's how it's to be, then that's that,’ he said and turning away, climbed the ladder into what was still his room.
As he emptied his clothes out of the drawers, he glanced round the bedroom.
This was another thing which had caused him to feel bitter.
Even Tobias and Lydia were housed in better quarters, while he was still ‘in the lads’ room', where he had slept since leaving the cradle.
He could not make out what was being said in the kitchen below.
His mother was still sobbing and now and again he heard the low rumble of his father's voice, but no actual words.
He put his few clothes in a neat pile on the bed and then looked round for something in which to carry them.
Quickly he went down the ladder, crossed the kitchen and snatched up the top one of a pile of washed sacks from behind the kitchen door.
As he strode back towards the stairs, his mother spoke, pleadingly.
‘Son.’
He neither spoke nor looked at her.
As he disappeared once again into the bedroom, she turned to her husband.
‘Say something, Faither,’ she urged.
He shook his head with finality.
‘All Aah've got ti say 'as been said,’ was his response.
‘If 'e puts another farm above this, then 'e's better away.’
Jonna placed his clothes in the sack, slowly descended the ladder and lifted his overcoat from its peg on the back door.
As he struggled into it, he looked around.
His mother and Martha were both crying softly, while his father's unblinking gaze was fixed on the fire.
He cast his mind back to his homecoming earlier that evening.
He had been so proud and happy to be returning to his family with the news of his impending marriage, yet now he was leaving home as an outcast.
He kissed his mother and whispered, ‘Goodbye, Mam.
I'll be in touch.’
Without even a glance at his father, he walked out into the night.
Only when he had saddled and mounted Polly did he hesitate.
The evening was misty and moist, with tendrils of thicker fog swirling around in the night air.
He felt reluctant to tackle the journey back over the moors until daylight, and turned the horse instead down the lane to Cherry Tree Farm.
George and Elizabeth were on the point of going to bed  when they heard a knock on the door.
‘Whoever can it be at this time of night?’ asked Elizabeth.
When George opened the door, he was amazed to see Jonna on the step looking pale and distressed.
‘Whatever's up?’ he demanded.
‘Come in, lad.
Come in.’
Jonna slumped into a chair and poured out the events of the evening, while Elizabeth made another pot of tea.
‘Will Maisie's father set you on, in the morning?’
George questioned.
‘Oh, aye.
He's only too  anxious to 'ave me there,’ answered his brother.
‘Well, then,’ said George sensibly, ‘stay here tonight, and go across t'moor to Skiplam tomorrow.
Leave Faither to me.
I'll work on him and try to bring him round.
You'll be better working yonder, but we don't want a rift forever.
He's come round to both our Joe and our Tamar and, heaven knows, he was bitter enough against them at the start.’
The winter drew on towards Christmas with the weather remaining unseasonably mild.
The air was constantly heavy with moisture, few days being clear of the mists, which veiled the moor-tops and drifted among the valley trees in swathes, cloaking the bare branches.
For the first time in his life, Jonadab Oaks was the only man in the house.
He refused to acknowledge Tobias, whom he had always labelled as ‘stoddy’.
This was a term of denigration, the meaning of which was obscure to everyone but himself.
Left with no one with whom he could discuss the farm-work and stock when the day's toil was over, Jonadab became more and more morose, spending most evenings staring into the fire or wandering from building to building, checking his animals.
Annie and George meanwhile kept Jonna in the forefront of their conversations with Jonadab, behaving as though the rift had never occurred.
If he regretted the outbursts which had led to Jonna's departure, Jonadab showed no sign.
Rather did he wallow in a mood of self-pity, taking his son's desertion as a personal affront.
Christmas came and went, with Bob Lamb being invited to share the Oaks' family celebrations on Christmas Day, and all going down to Cherry Tree Farm on Boxing Day.
There was still no word from Jonna, though, which cast a blight over Annie's mood.
Once the holiday was over, George decided that he would ride over to Skiplam and satisfy himself that all was well with his brother.
Before he could fit in a visit, he was forestalled by Len Brayton, Maisie's father, who rode down to Aumery Park Farm one Wednesday in mid-January, after attending the market at Kirkbymoorside.
When Lydia answered the door, he removed his hat and said, ‘Would you tell Mr and Mrs Oaks that Mr Brayton of Skiplam Grange would like a word?’
Annie whipped off her apron and put it onto the table drawer, while calling out, ‘Ask the gentleman in, Lydia.’
She knew Maisie's mother from the days when she had stood the Wednesday market along with other farmers' wives, but had never met Len Brayton, the girl's father.
As he entered she was impressed by his appearance.
He was considerably younger than Jonadab, being about fifty years of age.
He was a tall, distinguished-looking man, with an erect bearing.
His hair was totally white, showing off his tanned face and humorous brown eyes.
‘Come in, Mr Brayton and sit yourself down.’
She was quite flustered to see him.
‘Slip upstairs and tell t'maister that Maisie's dad's 'ere,’ she instructed Lydia.
Jonadab was not to be hurried and methodically finished changing into his working clothes before putting in an appearance.
When he did come into the kitchen, it was to see Annie and the visitor tucking into tea and jam tarts.
‘Mr Brayton has come ti ask us ti tea next Sunday,’ Annie explained.
‘Aah've said as 'ow oor George's wife's time's nearly 'ere and Aah may be needed at t'confinement.
Anyroad, what dost thoo think?’
She deliberately placed the onus on him.
Lydia put a mug of tea in front of her master and then took herself off to the dairy, where she and Martha unashamedly listened at the door.
There was silence in the kitchen as Jonadab sat stirring his tea.
‘Thoo knows what's tekken place, Aah reckons,’ he announced at last.
‘Aye.
Things get blown up out of all proportion,’ Brayton replied.
The blue eyes which held his were glacial and unyielding.
This man had taken his son, was the way it appeared to Jonadab Oaks.
‘A son's place is on 'is family land,’ he said  unequivocably .
‘Aye, Aah couldn't agree more,’ answered the other man.
‘But if a man has no son what then?’
He glanced at them both.
‘Then his son-in-law must act as a son and care for the land that'll one day be his.’
Jonadab digested this for a moment.
Annie glanced at him for guidance, but receiving none, made no reply.
After due consideration, Jonadab reluctantly contributed, ‘Aye.
Mebbe thoo's right.’
After a pause he added, ‘We'd be very pleased ti come ti tea.
Thank Mrs Brayton for us.’
He paused for a moment and then capitulated totally.
‘Thoo and t'missus and Jonna and Maisie must come 'ere one Sunday, afore long.’
Annie uttered a silent but fervent prayer of gratitude and Len Brayton, his errand accomplished, took his leave.
Annie crossed over to her husband then and kissed him on the cheek.
‘Thanks, love,’ she whispered.
Thus was the breach healed, before the chasm between father and son grew too wide.
The two families began to exchange visits with more frequency and Jonadab and his youngest son were, on the surface at least, reconciled.
About two weeks after Len Brayton's visit to Sleightholmedale, George rode up to work at Aumery Park Farm.
‘Thoo's late,’ was his father's greeting.
‘Aye, Faither.
I've had t'poultry to see to and t'milking to do,’ he answered.
Turning to his mother he went on, ‘Mrs Butler says can you go down, Mam.
Elizabeth's labour's begun.’
At his mother's anxious look, he continued, ‘I think all's well but she'd like you there, an' all.’
While Annie put on her cloak and bonnet, Jonadab called for the pony and trap to be brought round to the door.
‘It's a blessing it's a mild winter up ti now,’ he commented.
‘It would've been a bad time for t'road between t'two farms ti be blocked wi' snow.’
Eyeing George's face and noticing the beads of perspiration on his top lip he added, ‘Aah  expects as 'ow thoo'd like ti go back down home wi' thi mother.’
‘Aye, I would an' all,’ answered George gratefully.
The gratitude was short-lived, however, when his father replied, ‘If thoo thinks Aah can spare thi, thoo's another think coming.
There's plenty ti do now Jonna's gone and besides, it's not a man's place.
Birthing is woman's work and thoo'd only be in t'road.’
Watching his mother ride down the valley towards Cherry Tree Farm, George felt a tide of resentment rising against his father.
‘He never gives an inch,’ he thought bitterly, not knowing that Jonadab was just as anxious over Elizabeth's labour as he was.
The unending toil, which ground on at the pace of the changing seasons and the constant struggle against relentless Nature would be in vain, as far as Jonadab Oaks was concerned, unless there were others of his name to follow in his footsteps and work this land to which he had devoted his life.
What concerned him more than it did George was that the child would be a boy.
Several times during the morning he found himself consulting his watch, wondering how his daughter-in-law was progressing.
Just before noon George heard his mother's pony and trap coming down the road.
He and his father had been horse-breaking in the roadside pasture and, urging the half-broken young colt to follow by jerking its leading-rein, George ran towards the gate.
As he approached, his mother drew to a halt, her face beaming.
‘It's a lad!’ she called jubilantly.
George opened the gate and stood by the trap, full of eager questions.
‘How's Elizabeth, Mam?
Are they both all right?’
‘Aye.
It were an easy labour, if it's possible for one ti be so,’ she answered.
Relief flooded through George.
Until this moment he had not been aware of his own anxiety throughout Elizabeth's pregnancy.
Jonadab had followed at a more leisurely pace, not wishing to appear too eager to hear Annie's news.
‘Is 'e a good strong lad?’ he asked his wife gruffly.
‘Aye.
'E's a good pair o' lungs,’ she smiled, ‘but 'e's not  very big.’
Annie was broad-hipped and had given birth to overweight babies with no difficulty.
Jonadab grunted.
‘Thoo can't breed cart 'osses out o' race 'osses,’ was his reply.
‘That's true enough,’ answered his wife, thinking of Elizabeth's slight figure.
‘If 'e'd been any bigger, she'd have had a bad time.’
Both his parents looked at George, whose face was a picture of delight.
‘We'll get no sense nor work out o' thoo today,’ his father remarked.
‘Give me yon 'oss and get thissen 'ome.’
George needed no second telling.
With heartfelt thanks he ran to the stable and, before his parents had gone more than a few yards, he had galloped past them towards his home.
Upon entering the kitchen, he found his mother-in-law dozing by the fire.
He studied her for a moment, noting how she had aged.
Her mouth was slightly open and the lines of her face were slack as she slumped in the rocking-chair.
Looking back at the stormy relationship of a few years ago, he realised how much she had mellowed.
Crossing the kitchen quietly, he went up the stairs and opened the bedroom door.
Elizabeth was propped up on the pillows, with the baby lying in the cradle by the bed.
George's heart went out to his wife.
Elizabeth's eyes held the key to her sparkle and now that they were closed, she looked so wan and frail that his throat constricted with fear.
Tiptoeing over to the crib, he looked down at the red wrinkled face of the sleeping child.
Try as he might, George could find nothing attractive in the frowning features and almost bald head.
As he looked up, Elizabeth sighed and her eyes opened.
Her face flooded with radiance as she saw him so that the impression of fragility was gone.
‘Isn't he lovely, George?’ she breathed.
George hesitated, unsure of what to say.
‘Should he be so red?’ he asked at last.
‘He's had a hard time getting into the world,’ Elizabeth replied.
‘You'll be amazed what a difference a day or two will make.
Pass him up to me, will you?’
Rather gingerly, George picked up the tiny bundle.
As he handed the child to his mother, the little mouth opened in a yawn and George found himself looking into a pair of slate blue eyes.
He put his finger towards one of the clenched fists and found it tightly grasped.
At the same time, a swell of pride swept over George.
This tiny scrap suddenly took on a personality.
He was a real person!
This was his son!
‘Oh, love,’ he whispered, as he sat on the side of the bed.
‘Thank God.
I never thought we'd see this day.
We've waited so long, I'd given up all hope of ever having a bairn.’
‘I know.
I know.’
She squeezed his hand as she spoke.
‘Anyway, he's here now and who's to say there won't be a little brother or sister before long?’
When the time came for the baby's baptism, Elizabeth still had not recovered her former vivacity.
She had decided to name the child Edward, after Prince Edward, and John in memory of her father.
His godparents were to be her sister Sarah, young Jonna and Bob Lamb.
Elizabeth was not altogether in favour of the last choice but as Lamb was now officially betrothed to Martha, she had given in.
It was Sarah's first visit to Sleightholmedale since she had moved to Leeds over a year before.
When George met the York coach at the King's Head in Kirkbymoorside, relations were rather strained at first.
Hardly a word was exchanged after the first greeting.
As he drove up the main street and turned out of the town at the top, Sarah looked round her with pleasure and George studied her surreptitiously as she did so.
Sarah was so much like the Elizabeth he had courted.
She was wearing brown — a colour which had always suited Elizabeth.
The rich shade of the material brought out the glow of her cheeks and her dark eyes shone and danced with pleasure to be home.
When he began the cautious descent down the almost sheer drop into the valley, Sarah clasped her hands together and leaned towards him.
‘I didn't realise how much I'd missed it,’ she said.
George swept a glance over the bare, grim-looking trees which clothed the sides of the escarpment.
‘Nay.
There's nowt attractive about it at this time of year,’ he remonstrated.
‘In the spring and summer it's lovely down here, I'll grant you.
Like paradise,’ he added reflectively.
‘But in early March it's dull and gloomy.
It'll be better in a week or two when t'catkins are out and spring flowers begin to push through.
Anyroad, there's no need to tell you this — you've lived down here long enough,’ he continued.
As he spoke, they drew level with the quarry.
This was where the stone had been hewn to build the farms of the dale.
Sarah put a hand over his, as they held the reins.
‘Pull off the road, George, just for a minute.
It's the only chance I shall have to talk to you.’
He hesitated, feeling a moment of disquiet.
She smiled.
‘It's all right, George.
I'm not intending to embarrass you,’ she assured him.
Bella was very old now and would probably be glad of a rest, George considered, so he drew the pony to a halt and walked her off the road and on to the quarry floor.
He looked expectantly at Sarah, but she sat for a few seconds before speaking.
Then she looked across at him, grave-faced, all her sparkle quenched.
‘You have no need to worry about me,’ she said, with a faint smile.
‘I've learnt my lesson.
I realise what a fool I was, throwing myself at you the way I did.’
George made a deprecating sound, but she held up her hand to silence him and then continued, ‘I'm happy enough at Uncle Nathan's, although coming back has brought it home to me how much I miss country life.
What I said when I left still holds good, George.
I do love you — I shall always do so and no matter how many eligible young men my Uncle parades before me, I shall never marry.’
George felt uncomfortable at this declaration, especially as it was made in a steady and unemotional voice, far removed from the previous frantic outburst on the day she had left the farm.
, I just want you to know that I shall never change, but I also want you to allow me to come home now and again for a few days.
I shall not act foolishly again.’
‘Of course you can come home, Sarah,’ he answered.
‘It was never intended otherwise.
We all just felt that you should have the chance of a different kind of life.’
When they arrived at Cherry Tree Farm, Sarah ran straight into the house.
She stopped short just inside the  kitchen door, startled and alarmed to see such a change in Elizabeth.
Her sister sat in the rocking-chair by the side of the range, her eyes closed and her foot rhythmically working the rocker.
She held the sleeping baby in her arms but the scene, which should have been one of contentment, was marred by her appearance.
Her hair, once so dark and lustrous, had lost its sheen and was stranded here and there with grey.
The rosy bloom of her cheeks had faded, leaving her sallow and drawn.
Her whole attitude was one of mortal weariness and she slumped in the chair as though too tired to make the attempt to rise.
Sarah's eyes went to her mother, who was standing by the table, rolling pastry.
Before either could speak, however, Elizabeth opened her eyes.
Seeing her sister, her face lit up with some of its old gaiety.
‘Oh, Sarah!
How lovely to see you,’ she cried, rising to her feet and kissing Sarah's cheek.
She placed the baby in Sarah's arms.
‘There!
What do you think of your nephew?’ she enquired.
Sarah looked down at the sleeping infant and made some suitable comment, but her mind was occupied with Elizabeth's obvious ill-health.
‘What about you? she asked.
‘Are you all right?’
Elizabeth hesitated, but smiled.
‘I'm still rather tired after the birth,’ she admitted, ‘but I'm getting stronger.’
In the privacy of their bedroom that night, Sarah expressed her dismay to her mother.
‘I've never seen anyone go downhill so quickly,’ she said.
Ann Butler sighed.
‘I know, lass,’ she replied.
‘The birth seems to have pulled her right down.
She's not young for a first baby, of course, but she's getting plenty of good food, so should soon get built up.’
‘She may be getting plenty of food, but she's putting it in a poor skin,’ retorted Sarah.
‘She's like a skeleton…’
Although George had written to Tamar to tell her of Edward's christening, he had not really expected her and Stephen to make the long journey from Thorsbury.
He was gratified, therefore, when he saw them come into the church at Gillamoor, accompanied by Victoria, and the three year old Hilary.
When they returned to Elizabeth's parlour after the service, Jonadab and Annie looked round with satisfaction to see so many of their family gathered together under one roof.
While the baby was passed round the women of the family, Annie called little Hilary to her side.
It was her first meeting with this grandchild, even though he had passed his third birthday, and she wanted to try to get to know him.
Although she usually got on well with children, she found Hilary heavy going.
Often her questions remained unanswered, with the child merely staring at her, wide-eyed.
Poor Annie was not to know that Hilary found it difficult to understand her broad moorland dialect.
His eyes swung round the room, but his mother and sister were sitting together on the sofa, playing with the baby, while his father, cup and saucer in hand, stood by the window with his uncles and the fierce-looking old man who was his grandfather.
Gazing up at the kindly, apple-cheeked face smiling down at him, Hilary suddenly made up his mind.
To Annie's delight, he climbed up on to her knee, put his thumb in his mouth and with a sigh, snuggled down and fell asleep.
For all his wealth, title and position, Stephen was still rather in awe of Tamar's father.
Jonadab had made it clear that he had done his son-in-law a favour in allowing him to jump the queue and buy four of his grey shirehorses and now Stephen had to screw up his courage and confess that one was dead.
He asked Jonadab if he could buy a replacement, explaining what had happened.
‘It also cost me the life of my head groom, Davis, who was drowned trying to rescue the horse,’ he said.
‘You'll remember him — the chap with the scar.’
‘Aye,’ replied Jonadab.’'E seemed good at his job.
'E'll be a sad loss, poor fellow.’
George glanced across at Tamar.
Stephen's remarks must have carried across the room, but his sister showed no reaction to the conversation.
Elizabeth's eyes met her husband's.
Turning to Tamar, she asked, ‘What did Stephen say, Tamar?
That your head groom had been drowned?’
Tamar's face was unruffled and serene, as she turned towards her sister-in-law.
‘Yes, poor man,’ was her reply.
‘He gave his life to try to save one of the horses which Stephen bought from Father.’
Showing no more emotion over the death of the man than that of the beast, she turned her attention once more to tickling Edward's toes.
Stephen arranged to buy a replacement for the lost horse and a further pair.
‘You were right,’ he acknowledged.
‘They stand out well and make the overseeing of the men much easier.’
He paused for a few seconds before proceeding.
‘There's one thing you can be sure of, Mr Oaks.
I shall find a different lad to look after them.’
Jonadab drained his cup and placed it on a table before answering.
‘Will thoo tek notice of an old man wi' a bit more wool on 'is back?’ he asked.
‘Surely,’ came Stephen's startled reply.
‘Show thi faith in t'lad that lost Daisy.
From what thoo's told me it was not his fault.
If thoo moves 'em from 'is care, you'll breed resentment.
Leave 'im in charge of 'em and he's your man for life.
He'll repay you with faithful service.
Stephen was quick to appreciate the sense of Jonadab's advice.
‘Thank you.
I'll do that,’ he said.
Soon afterwards, the gathering broke up and the guests took their leave.
Jonna was not slow to remind them that he and Maisie hoped to see them at their wedding, due in a few weeks' time at Easter.
He had not realised how much he would miss his family and the work of breeding and breaking the shires with George.
However, the realisation that he would eventually inherit the farm at Skiplam, when Maisie's father was too old to run it, sweetened the pill.
He was thankful, too, that Len Brayton had healed the rift between him and his father, so that he was able once more to visit the family home.
When they had all departed, George looked anxiously at Elizabeth.
During the visit, she had appeared to be her old vivacious self, laughing and joking, showing off the baby and exchanging news.
Now she was suddenly drained of all energy, as though spent by the effort.
‘Come on, lass,’ he said gently.
‘I'm off upstairs to change into my working clothes.
I'll take you up with me and put you to bed.’
‘Indeed you won't,’ she retorted with a touch of her old  spirit.
‘I shall be fine after a sit down.
It's just that there were so many people that I feel a bit tired.’
‘Sarah will see to the hens and the milking,’ he replied, with a questioning look at his sister-in-law.
‘Of course.
It'll be a pleasure to do it, after a year of city-life.
Take advantage of me while I'm here, Liz, and get some rest,’ she urged.
Still Elizabeth hesitated.
‘Go on, love.’
Her mother added her voice.
‘You've probably got a bit of cold coming on.
George's mother's going to give him a bottle of coltsfoot linctus for that cough of yours.
She's made a lot this year.’
Although Elizabeth felt reluctant, she was thankful to settle down in bed, knowing that her mother would see to Edward and that her sister would gladly take on her share of the farm-work.
She only awoke when George came to bed, bringing the baby for his last feed of the day.
While Elizabeth sat and nursed little Edward, they discussed the events of the day.
‘It all went well, love,’ George said with satisfaction.
‘I think they all enjoyed it.’
‘Yes.’
Elizabeth looked thoughtful.
‘Did you see Tamar's face when Stephen told us about the groom — Davis, was it?’
‘I didn't notice anything.’
George sounded surprised.
‘That's just it,’ Elizabeth said.
‘There was nothing to notice.
She never turned a hair.
In fact, she seemed more bothered about the horse than about him.’
She paused before continuing, ‘You are sure it was the same man?,
‘Positive!’ said George emphatically.
‘He was distinctive enough, but that scar settled it.
He was the man who attacked our Tamar.’
Although they discussed the mystery at length, it was clear that they would never reach a solution to the puzzle of the man's presence at Thorsbury and whether or not it was with Tamar's knowledge.
‘She's a dark one, is our Tamar,’ concluded George.
‘You'll know what she wants you to know and no more.
She'll see to that…’