

TODAY'S IDEAS…
TOMORROW'S GARDENS SEASONS GREETINGS Perfect plants for year-round displays SUCCEED WITH HOLLIES Berries every time with our simple guide WIN A COMPLETE SET OF ‘POWER’ TOOLS SENSATIONAL NEW SEEDS for 1993 Make a Christmas decoration for your door IDEA-PACKED PAGES OF GREAT CHRISTMAS GIFTS FOR ALL THE FAMILY
In this issue…
The potentials of a wind-swept site in the Cotswolds proved immense, p7
Hollies epitomise the festive season, p22
FROM THE EDITOR
Even in winter our gardens can be extremely beautiful places.
It is ironic that often the most severe weather conditions can produce some of the most intricate and fragile sights.
Frosted filigree leaves and crystal-coated berries are beguilingly draped with the gossamer threads of a spider's web, while seed heads and clean straw-coloured stems, surviving remnants of the summer's exuberance, glint with new life in the low winter sunlight.
Flowers and foliage still form an important part of this winter spectacle and this month we take a look at this inspiring part of the gardening calendar while taking a retrospective look at the rest of the year.
John Kelly talks about choosing the right type and sex of holly, Andrew Wilson has design ideas for the all-seasons garden, while Graham Rice looks at floral highlights in our season-by-season guide.
In a special feature, Graham also flicks through the seed catalogue from Victorian times right through to the present day and comes up with some very interesting results.
It seems that as with most things, there is nothing new under the sun.
YOUR LETTERS
MUSHROOM MEMORIES
Fond memories of my children were revived while reading Nigel Colborn's piece on horse mushrooms in the September issue.
When my children were very small we used to live on the outskirts of Richmond Park, where every day I used to take my eldest child for a walk, and it was here that I first began to collect horse mushrooms.
Although she was only just learning to speak, on spotting one she would shout ‘mushoosh, mushoosh’'much to the amusement of passers by.
Not only have the horse mushrooms acted as a great addition to our diet, but later in life they still provide us with very fond memories.
Ms Pitcher's letter wins her some Bridgedale gardening gloves and a pair of Classic professional Felco secateurs — together worth over £40
EXOTIC FOLIAGE
I hold a great enthusiasm for exotic foliage plants and have started to expand my collection.
Passiflora trifasciata is my latest addition, and its variegated leaves and  delicately fringed , pure white flowers are extremely appealing.
I would like to hear from any other readers who share my interest in exotic foliage plants and perhaps we could swap cuttings and propagating material.
I am especially interested in growing passion flowers with attractive foliage as they seem to be happy grown in reduced light conditions, therefore making excellent house plants.
‘THE HAPPY KIDS’
Proculture Plants, leading plant specialists, have introduced a new venture in support of the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children (NSPCC).
Under the logo ‘The Happy Kids’, designed by the NSPCC for a range of consumer products, Proculture Plants are offering a range of indoor and outdoor ‘Happy Kids’ plants.
For every plant purchase from Proculture's extensive range, which includes houseplants, cyclamen and perennials, they will be making a donation to the NSPCC.
The range, which is priced between 99p and £11.99, will appeal to all ages and can even be used as an incentive to introduce your young children into the garden.
Proculture's ‘Happy Kids’ range is available from leading garden centres.
GRAPEVINE
RARE EXHIBITS
The National Trust's inspirational exhibition,An English Arcadia 1600–1990,has already been seen by Londoners, but other venues in York City Art Gallery, from 21 November to 3 January and the City of Bristol Museum and Art Gallery, from 16 January to 28 February, have now been arranged 
Keen gardeners with an interest in the history and design of gardens will have an unprecedented opportunity to see original designs from 1600 to the present day for gardens and garden buildings in the National Trust's care.
Among the many leading architects and landscape gardeners, represented by drawings, engravings and watercolours, are Sir John  Vanbrugh , Lancelot ‘Capability’ Brown, Humphrey Repton and Sir Edwin Lutyens.
The handsome, lavishly illustrated catalogue costs £19.95 in hardback and £12.95 in paperback.
Profits from its sale will benefit the Stowe Landscape Gardens appeal.
GREENHOUSE SPECIALS
Come the spring, we'll all be heading for our local garden centre, eager to see what's new and get a head start.
But have you ever wondered what happens to the staff in the fallow winter months?
Proprietors need skilled, helpful staff and can't afford to rely on casual labour, but neither can they afford idle hands in slack periods.
Don Morgan, of Morgans Nursery, Bulkeley, Cheshire has indulged a life-long passion while resolving the problem, by setting his staff to work in the greenhouses — building scale models of the classic Morgan sports car.
These stylish reproductions are working pedal cars, complete with a personalised number plate, and costing from £595.
Full details from Editor: We'd very much like to hear from others who have come up with profitable solutions to this seasonal problem.
EXPO 1993
Gardening is among the activities on offer for the over 50s when the Time of your Life Expo arrives in Glasgow early next year.
Fresh from the USA, the Expo makes its UK debut in Scotland from 5–7 March 1993, which also happens to be the European Year of Older People.
Its aim is to introduce people who are 50 or over to a whole new range of activities and opportunities so they can realise and put into practice their own particular talents.
Features planned include a gardening world where you can discover just how green fingered you are.
There will also be an entertainment theatre, live music, guest celebrities and talent competitions.
There promises to be something for everyone and you never know — you may discover a hidden talent!
For further information telephone   
GARDEN FOCUS
GARDENING MY WAY!
Hot summer days take their toll on most gardens, but Noel Kingsbury discovers how Jenny and Michael Aldous have successfully created a garden of vibrant colour in the Cotswolds
English gardens traditionally look their best from spring to mid-summer and many gardeners complain that the period after June is a flowerless and difficult one.
However, entering the high wooden gates of Fiveways Cottage in early August, you are overwhelmed by a mass of colour, provided mostly by perennials.
The first impression is of pink phlox, purple loosestrife, clematis, pelargoniums, roses and day lilies.
Jenny and Michael Aldous, who garden here, have obviously hit upon the secret of colour throughout the summer.
FLOWING INFORMALITY
For six years they have transformed half an acre of bleak Cotswold cottage garden into a celebration of vibrancy.
But they have not had an easy time of it, as much of the garden was originally covered by a concrete driveway, and the soil, though fertile had a layer of ironstone at about the depth you need to plan shrubs.
Astonishingly, they both work full time, Jenny as a district nurse, Michael a doctor.
One of the first tasks for reclaiming the garden was to surround it with a leylandii hedge.
They were a little reluctant to do this, but knew that it would provide an essential rapidly growing windbreak.
Breaking up the concrete driveway came next to make way for lawns, borders and a pond.
Their garden is informal, incorporating a fluid and relaxed arrangement of borders and island beds, which they are constantly changing.
‘Half the fun of gardening is changing things around,’ said Jenny.
This, of course, is one of the great advantages of informality, as it provides the opportunity for constant alterations to the garden.
The front door is surrounded by the blue clematis ‘Perle d'Azur’ intertwined with the climbing white floribunda rose ‘Iceberg’, to provide a deliciously cool combination.
Opposite are two beds planted with dwarf conifers and winter flowering heathers.
This kind of planting can be dull in summer, so Jenny and Michael planted clematis to sprawl over from the border behind, the rich colouring of C. viticella ‘Etoile Violette’ contrasting with the dull bronze conifers.
Standing by the front door is an excellent vantage point from which to admire the main part of the garden which is certainly colourful.
Rich pinks are the main emphasis in early August, but earlier in the year blue delphiniums predominate.
Strong pink is not the easiest colour to handle, as it can clash terribly, but it always seems to be surrounded by masses of green foliage, blues and pale yellows.
Orange and bright yellow, which would look very harsh with pink, is limited to the odd splash.
There are quite a few phormiums dotted around this part of the   garden, their arching, spiky leaves becoming increasingly popular, but not all varieties are fully hardy so some are planted in pots to be moved into the greenhouse to overwinter.
Difficult colours like strong pink and bright red are softened by every shade of green (above)
Michael and Jenny Aldous with two of their family pets (top left)
A striking combination of white chrysanthemums, gold coreopsis and deep mauve asters (left)
A dazzling array of clematis, pink phlox and golden Coreopsis verticillata  welcomes visitors in summer (far left)
Delphiniums, shasta daisies and clematis are cottage garden favourites
A particularly striking combination is made up of a very dark, bronze-leaved phormium next to the pure white flowers of Physostegia virginiana ‘Alba’ which is one of the easiest of all late summer border plants, even though it seems to be out of fashion at the moment.
Between the borders in the middle of the garden a swathe of soft yellow Cotswold gravel snakes its way, making a good foreground for many of the border plants.
It looks especially good flowing around a mixed planting of cordylines in containers, the blue-leaved Hebe pinguifolia ‘Pagei’, the bronze Carex comans , pale yellow Lonicera nitida ‘Baggeson's Gold’, dark purple Berberis thunbergii ‘Atropurpurea’ and Hebe armstrongii , a compact, rounded hebe with dull gold whipcord foliage.
This is packed with just about every conceivable colour of foliage and leave shape, and most are evergreen into the bargain.
LOOKING TO THE FUTURE
Leading from this gravelled area are more flower-filled borders and a small pond.
A young Pyrus salicifolia ‘Pendula’, the silver pear, is growing up to eventually form a central feature in years to come.
Two discias,D. cordata , ‘Ruby field’ and D. stachyoïdes sprawl out over the gravel.
These invaluable low-growing pink plants have a reputation for being tender, but as these are doing so well here in this cold part of the country, they must be among the hardier varieties.
Another nearby pink sprawler is Phuopsis stylosa , which flowers a shade of vivid cerise.
It has a certain notoriety for its garlic-scented foliage, but anyone with a taste for good food  will definitely find it rather pleasant!
KEY TO ILLUSTRATION 1.
Conifers and heather beds 2.
Gravel with strategically placed pots 3.
Pond 4.
Wild garden with apple trees and spring flowers 5.
Dovecote 6.
Trellis screen 7.
Archway
Rosa ‘Ballerina’, pink sidalcea, blue catananche and begonias vie for attention
Along the hedge that backs onto the lane is a magnificently full border, where pink, mauve and white phlox jostle for attention along with the steely blue heads of Echinops ritro , while annual lavateras in pink and white run around the edges.
In June there are several species of geranium and delphiniums here, but later in the season their mounds of fresh green leaves form a soothing backdrop.
WILD GARDEN
Walking around the corner is a wilder area, which is enclosed by trellis made of stout poles and hung with a most bewildering variety of clematis.
The wine-red C. viticella ‘Kermesina’ and the small, mauve, scented C. viticella ‘Little Nell’are especially good in August.
This wild area is quite shaded by some old apple trees which were the only trees in the garden when they moved in.
Rosa ‘Dorothy Perkins’, with small, double, pink flowers has clambered over one of them to such an extent that a visitor to the garden  once asked about the ‘carnation tree’.
Clematis are allowed a free rein to climb and scramble through conifers and shrubs
The wild area is primarily a spring garden, with aconites, primroses and some robust clumps of hellebores.
Also there is a dovecote which houses the white doves that are such a feature of Fiveways Cottage.
A wonderfully romantic addition to any garden, they are also very practical as pigeon manure is particularly rich in nitrogen.
It is too strong to use neat on the garden, but makes a first-rate ‘starter’ in the essential compost heap.
Back towards the house, a wattle fence divides off the western side of the garden.
Another of the original apple trees makes it quite shady here even in the heart of summer so the planting is a subtle mix of hostas, ferns and other shade loving foliage plants.
The distinctive leaves of Begonia grandis evansiana , looking for all the world like an escaped house plant, but hardy enough to grow outside, are also grown in abundance.
GREAT FAVOURITES
Clematis are great favourites with Jenny and Michael, and a good selection will keep the garden colourful for months.
What is special here is the relaxed way they are grown, not just as climbers trained up fences and trellis, but also as scramblers, making their way enthusiastically over shrubs and tumbling over heathers to provide an added season of interest.
They are very effective like this, and need little care other than an annual prune.
Earlier in the year, the white bleeding heart Dicentra spectabilis alba , makes quite a show.
Once prized as a rarity by an elite of connoisseurs, it is now freely available through many garden centres, so we can all have a go at growing this most distinctive of shade-loving perennials.
Do remember that it is summer dormant though, and will disappear around July.
RURAL BACKGROUND
An archway covered with more Rosa ‘Dorothy Perkins’ leads you to a small back garden with another island bed as its main feature, There is yet more pink phlox and annual lavatera, along with the variegated phlox ‘Norah Leigh’, hostas, the dwarf gentian-blue Delphinium tatsienense and Geranium ‘Winscombe’, which is one of the pink varieties that seems to flower all summer long.
It is particularly pretty as the flowers deepen as they age, giving it a two-toned look.
Wattle fencing is quite a feature of this part of the garden, making an excellent rural background for climbers.
It makes a good windbreak too as it filters the wind, rather than encouraging destructive eddies.
In this garden annuals and bedding are used particularly well as they are dotted around perennials and shrubs, rather than grown together in a bedding scheme.
Petunias, annual lavateras and impatiens pop up everywhere and anywhere where there is space.
They provide much needed colour at a time when many perennials and certainly most shrubs have finished, but without appearing overwhelmingly garish.
There are also lots of containers planted with half-hardies such as pelargoniums, verbenas and fuchsias.
This garden is overwhelmingly about colour, not just safe and currently rather fashionable pastels, but bold, strong tones.
Keeping the colour going from spring to summer is not always easy, but Jenny and Michael have managed it with the density and variety of planting.
Planning a garden for all seasons is one way of balancing strong colours, as there are always green plants around to relax the eye.
If you want colour in your garden, learn a few rules and then be bold, do not be afraid to learn from your mistakes.
One of the great things about gardening is that we can constantly change.
PLANT PROFILE
Every Shade of PALE
Lighten and brighten the winter garden with choice variegated foliage, says Nigel Colborn
Variegated foliage often has more impact when used sparingly, such as with Hosta ‘Wide Brim’ and Sedum kamtschaticum ‘Variegatum’
Nothing seems to divide opinion more among gardeners than the dappled colour and golden stipples of variegated foliage.
Some abhor variegated plants, considering their colours unnatural, others collect and treasure them, growing so many different kinds together that their gardens acquire a somewhat bilious overview.
If you take a balanced view, variegated plants — apart from the odd horrendous freak — contribute enormously to a well-planted garden in lots of different ways.
In shade, they brighten things up, adding a dash of cream or yellow.
Among shrubs or in mixed borders, variegated plants help to  add interest to the rest of the display, especially where they contrast with bronze or purple foliage, or harmonise with a golden colour group.
The less common Elaeagnus x ebbingei ‘Gilt Edge’
But, of all times, it is in dead, dark winter that the best of the variegated evergreens come into their own.
That's the season when coloured hollies or laurels which may have spent most of the summer masked by the bright herbaceous flowers in the foreground, take centre stage and preside over the border.
CHOSEN SPOTS
Having said all that, the most common mistake with variegated plants is to over-use.
With leaves that are streaked with bright cream or marked in bold, gold blotches, a little goes a long way.
It is therefore far better to plant a single, carefully selected plant in the chosen spot than to build up a mishmash of clashing foliage.
The former will make a strong statement, enhancing the rest of the display, whereas the latter could result in a fussy mess in which it becomes impossible to enjoy any of the plants as individuals.
The gold variegated holly,Ilex x altaclarensis ‘Golden King’ for example, and the strongly coloured Cornus florida ‘Rainbow’are both magnificent on their own, but side by side they look awful.
GOLDEN RULES FOR VARIEGATED FOLIAGE
Use sparingly and avoid planting several varieties side by side.
Watch for reversion, removing any all-green growths immediately.
Plant soft-leaved species, susceptible to sun-scorch, in dappled shade.
Avoid varieties whose foliage is misshapen.
Examples include variegated forms of Geranium macrorrhizum and Prunus lusitanica .
Beware of plants whose flowers clash with the foliage.
Pink is more difficult to blend with variegations than blue or white.
The foliage of Cornus florida ‘Rainbow’ turns ruby-red in autumn
The handsome Symphytum ‘Goldsmith’ and trailing lobelia
Careful planning is crucial too.
The bright gold and green foliage which makes the crowning glory of the winter border has to become a backdrop for the summer garden.
A planting of rich, purple-blue monkshood or a stand of delphiniums flowering in front of the golden foliage, makes a perfect match.
It is possible to use softer colours in an arrangement but only if separated from the variegated foliage by a stronger colour, otherwise the effect can be weak.
Sometimes, the leaves of variegated plants clash with the colours of their own flowers.
The combination of purple-red flowers and cream variegated foliage of Buddleia davidii ‘Harlequin’ may not suit all tastes but least appealing of all, for me at any rate, is the purple-flowered phlox, also called ‘Harlequin’, whose leaves are generously splashed with cream, a combination which does not work for me.
BRIGHTER DAYS
Evergreen winter foliage needs to stay looking fresh right through the darkest days and some variegated plants are better at this than others.
One of the brightest is Elaeagnus x ebbingei ‘Gilt Edge’.
Unlike its more common relative,E. pungens ‘Maculata’, whose leaves take on a slightly muddy hue as they mature, ‘Gilt Edge’ stays a brilliant yellow-cream, and would make a superb contrast with the bright red stems of Cornus alba ‘Sibirica’.
Besides ‘Golden King’ there are several hollies with fine, clean colours, though few that berry successfully.
Exceptions are ‘Handsworth New Silver’, whose leaf margins are silvery-cream, contrasting well against the purple bark on the young stems, and Ilex x altaclarensis ‘Belgica Aurea’ which produces its best berries when container grown.
The most reliable standby for climbing, trailing or simply to cover the ground, has to be ivy.
Few plants come in such an interesting range of variegations, from loud ones like ‘Goldheart’ or the oddly miscoloured ‘Buttercup’, to the more restrained, marbled foliage of ‘Luzii’.
The huge leaves of Hedera colchia are dramatic enough in plain green and startling in the cream and pale green ‘Dentata Variegata’ but in the yellowish to lime-green livery of ‘Sulphur Heart’they are absolutely sumptuous.
Ring the changes using spring bulbs with evergreen holly, Ilex ‘Golden Milkmaid’
GENTLE SHADE
Summer brightness is much easier to come by both from the deciduous foliage of shrubs and from herbaceous plants.
One problem with certain variegated shrubs, especially those with soft leaves, is that they are liable to scorch in the sun.
Gentle shade is therefore preferable and a site sheltered from the early morning sun is better than one facing east.
I grow the variegated form of Philadelphus coronarius between a quince tree and a big cotoneaster.
The creamy-white leaves are so conspicuous that the flowers hardly show up at all but the fragrance is breath-taking.
Dogwoods come in several variegations, many with the added bonus of pretty winter twigs.
Cornus alba ‘Elegantissima’ is the lightest in leaf but C. alba ‘Spaethii’blends gold and green more richly.
The best way to grow these is to cut back hard each spring, to ensure a mass of young wands that will show off their winter bark.
A second advantage of this hard pruning is that the summer foliage is much larger and lusher than on plants left  to their own devices.
This pruning technique works just as well for the flowering shrubs such as philadelphus, or the tastefully variegated Weigela florida ‘Variegata’, but you cut back after flowering in early summer rather than in March.
A RICHER VARIETY 1) Acer palmatum 2) Hedera ‘Goldheart’ 3) Digitalis grandiflora 4) Tellima grandiflora 5) Hosta fortunei ‘Obscura Marginata’6) Lithodora diffusa ‘Heavenly Blue’
Variegated foliage comes in a range of shapes and colours
ELEGANT STRIPES
Among herbaceous species, the monocotyledons — plants with a sword-shaped foliage such as grasses, irises, yuccas or phormiums — are more elegant in their variegations.
The pigments are striped, accentuating the length and thinness of the foliage, rather than clouding it as in broad-leaved species.
Among the irises, few plants have more architectural value than Iris pallida ‘Argenteomarginata’.
The leaves are almost white with green stripes and are held in elegant fans.
Being a bearded iris,I. pallida needs full light and dryish, or at least free-draining soil.
In more shady surroundings, the variegated form,Iris foetidissima , is a sound alternative.
Among grasses, I cannot think of a single one that is not lovely.
The gracefully bowing form of the Japanese Hakonechloa macra ‘Aureola’ looks glorious anywhere and I also love the more subtle stripes in our native Molinia caerulea ‘Variegata’.
Another native wood melick,Melica uniflora , was given to me in its variegated form.
Though hardly a showy plant, its needle-thin blades look almost silver, especially when covered by a film of dew.
But the finest of all the variegated grasses must surely be Holcus mollis , with snow-white stripes.
Planted near deep blue flowers or purple foliage the effect is absolutely ravishing.
Sedges behave in much the same way as grasses, having their stripes neatly arranged along the leaf.
The cream-striped Carex oshimensis ‘Evergold’ can, in maturity, look untidy but if the slugs will leave it alone, the broader, creamier foliage of C. siderosticta is better for shade planting.
I grew a white impatiens near some new divisions of this plant last summer and was delighted with the result.
Then there are the hostas.
There are literally hundreds of cultivars, all of them variations of some half dozen basic colour schemes.
Apart from plain green, hosta leaves come in blue-green, gold, cream margined, white margined, cream or white splashed, or any combination of these!
CAUTIONARY NOTES
Broad-leaved variegated herbaceous plants are more variable in their desirability.
My unrivalled favourite is the comfrey Symphytum uplandicum ‘Variegatum’ which, in moist, rich soil, grows huge basal leaves, each with a broad cream margin.
The flower spikes are also cream and green and the flowers blue, but these should be cut back as soon as possible to encourage more of those huge basal leaves to develop.
The variegated figwort,Scrophularia aquatica ‘Variegata’, is also best grown for its basal foliage which, in damp soil, is stridently cream and well-sized.
A cautionary note, applicable to most variegated plants is the problem of reversion.
On a shrub or a tree, any green leave must be removed immediately.
In herbaceous species, the variegations are often unstable and bruising or damaging the plant may cause an eruption of all green foliage.
Divide variegated perennials with great care and be on the look out for reversion to maintain a variegated display of interest and contrast to the lush green foliage of summer planting.
THE PERFECT VARIETY
TREES AND SHRUBS
Acer platenoides ‘Drummondii’— drumstick outline, cream and green foliage.
Cornus mas ‘Tricolor’— yellow winter flowers and white, pink and green leaves.
Ilex aquifolium ‘Handsworth New Silver’— bears berries, has purple bark and silver leaf margins.
Pleioblastus auricomus — low-growing bamboo with lime-green, gold and emerald stripes.
Cornus alternifolia ‘Variegata ’— bright foliage.
Elaeagnus x ebbingei ‘Limelight ’— subtle green and gold evergreen foliage.
Ligustrum lucidum ‘Tricolor ’— related to common privet, but larger in leaf and flower.
HERBACEOUS
White variegated honesty — cream leaves and snow white flowers.
Comes true from seed.
Variegated apple mint — some leaves are white, others white and green.
Arabis ferdinandi-coburgii ‘Variegata ’— Tiny rosettes ensure colour in the rock garden in the coldest season.
PLANT PROFILE
Starting with…
Hollies
Christmas would not be complete without holly, but before growing your own, take John Kelly's advice to ensure you choose the right sex!
Both a male and a female holly must be planted to obtain a display of berries
Are you thinking about putting up a bit of holly this year?
A festive sprig or two round the picture rail?
You can just see it in your mind's eye, can't you?
Glossy green leaves with sharp spines, and all those bright, jolly red berries.
Well, it's all nice and traditional, but hollies aren't all like that by any means.
Several, for instance, are deciduous, and the only way to have berries at Christmas would be to emigrate to Chile.
One called Ilex macrocarpa , and I am not surprised it isn't on offer in the trade, has the biggest berries of all, but they are jet black and it loses its leaves in winter.
Of course, if you choose a male tree you can wait until Doomsday and still never see a berry.
Hollies are dioecious which means that male and female flowers are on separate plants.
‘Oh well, that's easy.’
you may say, ‘all we have to do is buy a female.
Yes, but there must be a male in the vicinity if the females are to produce berries.
Actually it is seldom a problem, as there is usually a male holly near enough for the pollinating insects to reach both, but be aware of the possibility that there isn't.
Most people who are keen on hollies soon find out that both male and female trees can be extremely attractive because of their foliage, which is often variegated and much sought after for its own sake, so buying a male isn't just a utilitarian exercise.
Next step you would think is to go to the garden centre and look for holly bushes with boy and girl names?
One of the most vigorous hollies, ‘Silver Sentinel’ is particularly striking
QUESTION OF SEX
Oh dear, no.
Life just isn't that simple.
You see, the hollies called ‘Silver Queen’ and ‘Golden Queen’are male, while ‘Golden King’is female, and these are deservedly among the most popular hollies of all.
Then there's ‘Silver Milkboy’, which was the cause of a large number of red faces when it turned out to be female!
It is now called ‘Silver Milkmaid’.
Because the common holly,Ilex aquifolium , has been around a long time and produced  many ornamental varieties, you will find quite a few with fancy botanical names.
Sometimes they sound feminine, as in ‘Myrtifolia Aurea’, but don't jump to conclusions because this particular cultivar is male.
The common holly is a source of some of the best shrubs and small trees that we can have in gardens.
Admittedly there is a lot to be said for the species itself, but it is hard not to fall for I. aquifolium ‘Bacciflava’ because the berries are a cheerful shade of yellow.
The yellow variegation found in those of dubious sexual status is bright and jolly too.
In ‘Golden Queen’ the spiny leaves are light  green, dark green and grey in the middle and have a bold edging of gold.
‘Golden Milkboy’, whose sex has never been in doubt, unlike its silver counterpart, is the opposite way round, with a central gold flare surrounded by green.
‘Silver Milkmaid’ is green edged as well, the central flare being creamy-white.
CHOICE OF LEAVES
Staying with these kinds of variegations for a moment, ‘Golden King’ is a form of the hybrid of the common holly,Ilex x altaclarensis , whose broad leaves have very few spines and a wide outer rim of yellow.
Its berries are brownish-red but usually don't appear until the tree is well and truly mature — hence, I suppose, the confusion about its gender.
The hybrids tend to have much smoother leaves.
One in particular, which eventually makes a fairly slender tree about 30′ (10m) high, has almost spineless leaves.
It is appropriately called ‘Camelliifolia’ and you can be forgiven for taking young plants as camellias.
Its berries are dark red, large and borne in fairly large clusters.
‘Lawsoniana’, whose leaves are muted yellow in the middle, is almost spineless.
It is also female, but does not produce many berries.
It tends to be grown for its foliage.
All variegated hollies tend to revert occasionally, sending out all-green shoots, which should be removed as soon as you see them.
Despite its name, ‘Silver Queen’ is male so will never bear fruit
At the opposite end of the prickliness scale are the ‘Ferox’ forms of the common holly.
Ferox means ferocious, and they certainly are; it is not just the edges of the leaves that bear spines but their entire upper surfaces.
They are very slow growing and ideal curiosities for the smaller garden — as long as you haven't any children who are likely to fall on them.
EASY-GOING SHRUBS
These little shrubs are also known as ‘hedgehog’ hollies, and probably have been for all of the 300 years they have been grown in gardens.
‘Ferox Argentea’ is quite lovely in an odd sort of way, with a silver margin and silver spines.
‘Ferox Aurea’ has gold-centred leaves.
They are also both male plants.
If you have very little space in your garden and grow most of your plants in troughs, one of the most intriguing tiny trees is Ilex crenata ‘Mariesii’.
It makes a gnarled specimen with minute, round leaves and has a good crop of black berries in winter.
I. crenata is a good alternative to dwarf box for small formal hedges.
Hollies are not difficult to grow, although I have found a tendency for them to die back badly at maturity in places with cool, wet summers.
Our native common holly is not in the least fussy about soil and grows on everything from acid loams to chalk, and species from China and the Himalayas are equally hardy and reliable.
However, American species, many of which are deciduous, tend to be lime-hating to varying degrees.
There is a far wider range of hollies available than you might have originally supposed, and some have an elegance that you wouldn't normally associate with them.
Mind you, I don't suppose you would really want to stick them in the top of the Christmas pudding either.
BUYERS GUIDE
You are quite likely to find specimens of the majority of forms of I, aquifolium and I. x altaclarensis in the garden centres and tree-and-shrub nurseries within striking distance of where you live.
Beware, however, of badly root-bound specimens, which are all too common.
For rarer and more unusual hollies the main source is: Mallet Court Nursery, Curry Mallet, Taunton, Somerset TA3 6SY is owned by an enthusiast for certain tree genera, notably acer, quercus and ilex.
There is a decidedly plantsmanlike, friendly atmosphere, and the mail order service is excellent.
The Royal Horticultural Society's Garden at Rosemoor, Great Torrington, Devon EX38 8PH is a perfect place to visit to see a magnificent garden and also for the fine and wide selection of hollies for sale, among other plants.
There is no mail order facility.
PRACTICAL GARDENER
Welcome Decorations
Christmas decorations can be found in abundance at this time of year but there is nothing more satisfying than designing and creating your own.
Here we give you ideas for foliage, fruit and various festive trimmings that you can incorporate into your Christmas wreath and an easy to follow guide on putting together your own individual design.
1 Cherry laurel and yew, almonds, walnuts and brazil nuts are just a few of the many components that can be used in your wreath.
Christmas ribbon and wax fruit can be added for colour.
Essentials are scissors, wire cutters, florists' wire and sticky tape
2 An intertwined cane wreath provides the ideal base for arranging your Christmas display.
Cut sprigs of cherry laurel and yew from their main branches ensuring you leave a long stem and securely push them into the cane ring until the circle is complete
5 Create individual stems for the nuts by threading florists' wire into the shell and carefully attach them to the wreath.
Repeat this procedure with the apples if they do not already have stems and push them into the cane
WELCOME ALL YOUR FESTIVE VISITORS THIS YEAR WITH OUR EASY TO MAKE CHRISTMAS WREATH
Join in the festivities by following Melanie Papworth's guide to making your very own Christmas wreath
3 Wrap florists' wire around the base of the pine-cones to create individual stems.
Group them in twos or threes, securing with green tape and carefully push them into the cane
4 Gather the nuts together and place them on card.
Spray unevenly with gold spray paint to create a rough, shadowed effect and leave to dry
6 Bind together a group of cinnamon sticks with Christmas ribbon and secure with a pin.
Next thread a length of florists' wire through the ribbon and attach to the wreath.
Tie a large festive bow and attach it to the wreath
Once complete, your festive wreath can be hung from any surface and will add the perfect finishing touch to your home at Christmas time
THE EVER-CHANGING GARDEN
SEASONAL CHANGES
A well-planned garden has a variety of dramatic effects which can last for more than one season.
Graham Rice looks at ideas for continuous colour and interest
Change in the garden is inevitable — but some of the ways in which it reveals itself are a great deal more interesting than others.
There is a special fascination in the way a single well-chosen plant changes as the seasons go by; from winter flowers, through unfurling spring foliage to summer green and autumn colour or fruits.
This change in a plant can be enhanced by a climber twining through it.
A border can be organised so that as the year progresses, one plant takes over as earlier ones fade.
With pots you can change the effect as often as you like.
A MULTI-SEASON CHERRY
January
In winter when its other features are less evident, the habit and branch structure of a tree becomes more important.
Here the spreading main branches show up well against the snow.
A tree with a more crowded habit, such as a crab apple would be less appealing
March
The pale pink blossoms appear first in late autumn, and then in mild spells through the winter, with a final fling in spring.
A cold spell simply halts flowering for a little while.
Branches picked in bud open indoors and, along with viburnums, make a change from holly at Christmas
Most gardens only have space for a few trees and in a small plot they are almost always in view, therefore careful choice is essential.
Some trees have only one fleeting season of interest, but the winter cherry,Prunus subhirtella ‘Autumnalis’, certainly does not fit into this category — its flowers appear intermittently from late autumn to spring and its autumn colour is also striking.
So in just one plant, there is almost year-round interest.
GENERAL CARE
The winter cherry is best planted as a specimen in a lawn as its shallow roots are rather hungry.
It may eventually become rather twiggy but thinning will improve its shape
COLOURFUL PYRACANTHA
A little careful planning goes a long way.
Here a pair of Pyracantha coccinea are placed strategically, one on either side of a cottage front door, with informal conifers as sentries on the corners of the steps.
Pyracanthas have three seasons of interest but here they are augmented by a climbing rose in a suitably harmonious shade.
Perennials like linarias bring a subdued colour to the narrow border and a yellow jasmine around the door will give a warm welcome in the colourless winter period.
June
The frothy flower heads of Pyracantha coccinea are beautiful set against the cottage stone and the slightly stronger colour of Rosa ‘Climbing Lady Hillingdon’ is a well chosen companion plant.
In addition to romantic flowers, this rose has dark foliage, purplish stems and few thorns, which make it ideal for a house front.
Although tied in, it also supports itself on the pyracantha which, in its turn, requires strong anchorage
November
The flowers and foliage of the rose have gone and it needs thoughtful pruning and tying in to prevent it whipping about in autumn.
But the pyracantha berries, again well displayed against the background of the cottage wall, will last until they are eventually devoured by blackbirds that will probably nest against the wall in spring, if protected by dense pyracantha leaves
GENERAL CARE
So much heavy, woody material needs tying in well.
A series of horizontal wires fixed to the wall 12″ (30cm) apart is the best support and both rose and pyracantha should be tied in securely and checked regularly.
SUCCESSION OF COLOUR
The one thing that pots give you above everything else is versatility.
By planting up large containers with a mixture of varieties, a succession of colours can be achieved.
Smaller pots can be planted with single specimens to flower for months, or to be concealed and moved into place as they approach their best.
Here we see the same pots just a couple of months apart.
Some contain two or more different plants to flower together or to follow on from each other.
Others have just one variety, planted up for the summer months or different flowers mixed with herbs.
It's heartening to see what a change a few weeks can bring.
Some pots can look rather sparse at first but with good compost, regular feeding and attention to watering, they soon fill out into good-sized plants.
June
Lilium regale, the best lily for pots, steals the show in June, although the newly planted white geraniums are already flowering.
Herbs and scented-leaved geraniums look a little sparse but their leaves will soon fill out
August
Tigridias are taking over from the lilies while geraniums, argyranthemums, lime-green nicotianias, eucomis and trailing blue convolvulus have filled out rapidly and blend well with the softer colours of the herbs
GENERAL CARE
Terracotta pots should be propped up on small blocks to aid drainage and prevent ants infesting the compost.
All pot-grown plants should be dead-headed regularly to prolong the display.
PLANT PORTRAIT
Nicotiana ‘Lime Green’
An absolute must for both containers and flower arranging.
They are easy to grow and flower for months, but it pays to choose your variety carefully.
‘Lime Green’ from Unwins is by far the best colour, but at 2′ (60cm) the plants are too tall for small pots.
‘Domino Lime’ is paler and only reaches 12–14″ (30–35cm).
STABILITY AND CHANGE
Just three plants can be used to make a cool and colourful corner of a border from spring through to summer.
By choosing those which last for many months as the basis and adding others which emerge, flower and then fade away, you can create stability while still incorporating change.
Pulmonarias make an impressive foundation, not only are their early flowers a welcome sight, but the foliage that follows can be outstanding — although those with the most attractive flowers are not always succeeded by the best leaves.
After flowering, their leaves expand and as long as they do not get too dry, they will stay in good condition all summer long.
Bulbs are ideal partners, as their flowers are displayed well against the pulmonarias and their dying foliage will be smothered by the expanding leaves.
March
The rich blue flowers and early speckled leaves of Pulmonaria saccharata flow out around the feet of the unusual daffodil ‘Bravoure’, with its long, pale lemon trumpet.
Both enjoy heavy soil and dappled shade and can be left undisturbed for some years before lifting, dividing and replanting
June
Both pulmonaria and daffodil flowers are over.
But the richly spotted leaves of the pulmonaria have expanded gracefully to make a dense ground cover which hides most of the remains of the daffodils.
From behind clouds of lime-green Alchemilla mollis flowers have emerged to float above the more spotted foliage
GENERAL CARE
The alchemilla will need ruthless dead-heading otherwise self-sown seedlings will smother the border.
The foliage of the pulmonaria should be cut back in winter to allow its new flowers to come through unconcealed in spring.
The pictures illustrating this series are by Andrew Lawson and many have been taken from his book Performance Plants, which costs £14.95 and is published by Francis Lincoln
REVIVAL OF THE FITTEST
Seed companies of yesteryear have just as much to offer gardeners of today.
Graham Rice looks at new introductions and some revived favourites
It was a hundred and fifty years ago that the French writer Alphonse Karr said: ‘the more things change, the more they are the same.’
And this maxim seems especially appropriate for the seed trade, in spite of it insatiable appetite for novelty.
This season quite a number of the ‘new’ introductions are revivals from the past, and I must say it is good to see them back.
And I'm also pleased to see most seed companies acknowledging that they are revivals; in the past they have often tried to pretend that these reintroductions were stunning new breakthroughs.
The seed catalogues of the last century were as different from each other as today's; some were lavish, some plain.
The 1890s saw them at their most confident, both in terms of presentation and in the range of varieties offered; the catalogues from Suttons and Webbs were especially impressive.
Of course most of today's catalogues are far more colourful, but often some of the mixtures include colours you never find when you grow them yourself or the plants turn out sparse and spindly.
Nothing has changed, of course.
In the last century engravings showed hollyhocks with huge double flowers, all open at once from the top of the stem to the ground!
Apart from the sheer elegance of the illustrations, the most striking thing about these old catalogues is the number of varieties they list.
In 1892 Suttons listed 169 different asters, they now list just 14; in 1894 Webbs listed 15 nasturtiums, Unwins now list five.
However in 1956 Unwins listed only one geranium mixture, ‘Zonale Mixed’, with instructions to sow in the autumn for flowers 12 months later, but now 22 varieties are included, along with many separate colours, most of which like the ‘Multiblooms’, can be sown in March to flower just five months later in July.
The seed itself is far superior these days with better germination, and varieties in general are more uniform in colour and height, with the shorter, self-supporting ones now becoming particularly popular.
But the greatest loss is the profusion of separate colours and unusual forms — a bedding lobelia with yellow leaves, double-flowered fibrous-rooted begonias, double wallflowers available in  ten separate colours and striped Canterbury bells — all lost.
I'm delighted to see more seed companies doing their best to bring them back while further improving the situation by applying modern techniques to ensure the seed is of the best quality.
Dating from 1892, ‘Sutton Globe’ has stood the test of time and is still offered by the company
PERFECT PETUNIAS
In the 1870s Suttons introduced the first single-coloured, double-flowered petunia; it was a delicately fringed white called ‘Lady of the Lake’ and cost just 25p a pack.
During this time the best double petunias were named varieties raised from cuttings.
One century later the latest development is the ‘Duo’ series from Unwins.
These are less fully double and there are now six separate colours available as well as a mixture and all are more resistant to bad weather conditions than any others.
At only 12″ (30cm) in size the plants are half the height of those from over 100 years ago.
IMPROVED ANTIRRHINUMS
In 1883 Suttons listed three types of antirrhinums including ‘Improved Tom Thumb’.
At 6″ (15cm) and in six different colours, it was a new innovation.
In that year they introduced their ‘New Dwarf Blotched and Striped’ mixture ‘producing flowers of many colours, but all beautifully blotched and striped.’
These disappeared and it was not until 1991 that Mr Fothergills reintroduced them as ‘Brighton Rock’.
For 1993 Mr Fothergills again lead the way in revivals with ‘Night and Day’ after spotting just one plant of this white-throated, crimson flowered variety in a four-acre field of ‘Black Prince’.
Suttons in their catalogues of the 1890s also listed a full mixture of this type.
T&M's new ‘Bright Eyes’, is yellow with a red lip, also strongly reminiscent of the flower illustrated in the Suttons' catalogue of 100 years ago.
Artistic licence was often used in the old seed catalogues!(above)
The old catalogues were particularly impressive (far left)
The flowers of Gaillardia ‘Red Plume’ from Dobies appear on dwarf, spreading plants (left)
MIXED PHLOX
At the turn of the century Phlox drummondii was far more important than it is now.
A hundred years ago Suttons listed 44 varieties, including mixtures.
They were much prized for cutting as well as for bedding, and by 1917 they were listing the immaculate white ‘Purity’, to be sown for flowering in pots at Easter.
By 1958 Unwins listed just five single colours and three mixtures and before long only mixtures were available which included fewer and fewer shades.
In recent years things have definitely improved.
The very impressive bushy ‘Palona’ from Mr Fothergills is a mix of five separate colours, while ‘Lilliput’from Unwins is an improved version with twice as many shades, although still without good blues and yellows.
Dobies' ‘Hazy Days’ is also much better than the old ‘Beauty Mixed’.
T&M have reintroduced ‘Brilliant’, a tall pink phlox suitable for cutting which they first listed in 1901.
Sutton's ‘Pastel Magic’ will flower eight weeks from sowing (above)
Although not always accurate, old seed catalogues were always beautifully illustrated (far right)
Phlox ‘Palona’ from Mr Fothergills is a mix of five separate colours (right)
NEW ADDITIONS
There are other interesting newcomers from the main mail order seed companies.
Dobies' dwarf godetia ‘Satin’ comes in a lovely range of pink and white, some with a dark blotch at the base of each petal.
At their trials I was impressed by Gaillardia ‘Red Plume’ with fully double flowers on dwarf spreading plants and the outstanding well-scented dwarf sweet pea ‘Explorer’which has already won four RHS awards.
From Mr Fothergills Seeds I'd choose  Penstemon ‘Petit Bouquet’ which doesn't produce all the colours they list but is still very impressive, flowering in many shades of pink and blue.
Their two double silene reintroductions — the white ‘Snowball’ and red ‘Triumph’also look good.
From Suttons I especially liked the oddly named Mimulus ‘Pastel Magic’ which includes some quite dark shades, and flowers in eight weeks from sowing.
‘Sensation Blush’ is a new shade available separately in their unique geraniums and just right for soft colour combinations, while Clarkia bottae ‘Pink Joy’is a lovely white-eyed hardy annual.
Phacelia ‘Lavender Lass’, a new hardy annual with large, white-eyed, lilac flowers, really stands out from T&M, as does ‘Cherry Blossom’, the pink and white form of Salvia coccinea , a lovely partner for last year's ‘Lady in Red’.
They have also added to their range of superb hand-pollinated delphiniums with the inclusion of the lavender-grey ‘Southern Debutant’.
Finally from Unwins comes a new extra dwarf rudbeckia called ‘Becky’, its bright orange-yellow flowers lasting well into September.
In addition their ‘Blue Wonder’ heliotrope has been specially bred for greatly improved germination, a bonus with any flower.
For the summer greenhouse, two torenias in separate colours, ‘Super Clown Blue and White’ and ‘Super Clown Rose and White’, also look tempting.
PRODUCTIVE GARDEN
In Victorian times head gardeners were expected to provide vegetables from New Year to Christmas.
Not only did they have to feed the family and all the guests at ‘the Big House’, but regular supplies were sent to the town house as well, then of course there were all the servants to feed.
Understandably a lot of seed was regularly bought and sown.
Many of the older varieties like Webbs' ‘Mammoth Red Tripoli’ have been  superseded by new and improved forms (left)
Peas were held in high esteem by the Victorians (below left)
Suttons' ‘Redmate’ can either be eaten as a salad onion or left to mature for mild, red bulbs (below right)
The new ‘Nimbus’ from Suttons is resistant to many of the troublesome tomato diseases (right)
Some varieties like the double silene have been reintroduced by current seed companies (below)
Unlike most catalogues today, the vegetables usually came at the front with similarly enticing but just as unbelievable pictures as we find in today's catalogues.
We still grow some of the varieties listed a hundred years ago many of which had already been improved by the 1890s, some favourites like ‘White Lisbon’ spring onions and ‘Scarlet Globe’and ‘French Breakfast’radishes were also established.
‘Senator’ peas, introduced by Webbs in 1893, are still popular, though now distributed by Suttons.
But there are still two important things to remember about these varieties from 100 years ago.
First of all, they are not exactly the same now as they were then.
A century of saving seed from the best plants has led to continuous improvements.
Secondly, just because a few old vegetables have survived so long, it doesn't mean we should try and resurrect all the others.
Most disappeared because the seed companies found a newer variety which was even better.
KNOW YOUR ONIONS
The old catalogues are full of testimonials from growers.
‘A very handsome, large heavy bulb, quite globe-shaped; and being such a firm onion it will prove a good keeper.’
These are the words of Mr R Doe, gardener to the Right Hon Lord Savile, on the introduction of a new onion by Suttons in 1892.
Later, the tradition of testimonials vanished from catalogues but a more recent description of the variety is very similar: ‘A fine long-keeping, globe-shaped variety.
A heavy cropper which ripens early.’
This description actually appeared 100 years later, for ‘Sutton Globe’ has stood the test of time and still appears in the latest catalogue.
Around the same time, Webbs introduced their ‘New Mammoth Red Tripoli’ onion specially for autumn sowing.
This has since disappeared, replaced by improved varieties.
As it happens both Dobies and Suttons are introducing new red onions for 1993: Dobies have ‘Red Delicious’ from sets and Suttons have ‘North Holland Blood Red — Redmate’.
‘Redmate’ is a dual purpose, spring-sown onion which can be picked early for salads or thinned to 3″ (8cm) for mild, red bulbs.
But this is just one development following on from the introduction of sets, autumn-planted sets and, of course, F1 hybrid onions.
All are quicker to mature, bolt less and are more uniform in shape than old varieties.
Mind you, with a hundred years of refinement and improvement behind it, you still can't afford to ignore good old ‘Sutton Globe’.
FIRM FAVOURITES
Globe artichokes are very unpredictable from seed, so Dobies have introduced young plants of ‘Camus de Bretagne’, one of the finest varieties available.
I also like the look of their new Cos lettuce, ‘Corsair’, which keeps well in the ground, has excellent disease resistance and received an Award of Merit from the RHS.
Mr Fothergills' new lettuce is certainly worth trying.
‘Bambi’ is even smaller, crisper and tastier than ‘Little Gem’.
Suttons' new lettuce, ‘Target’ is a tasty crisphead which withstands hotter weather.
Their new cold greenhouse tomato ‘Nimbus’ is resistant to a number of troublesome diseases and is much cheaper than ‘Shirley’.
The key to growing giant vegetables is starting with the right seed and T&M have teamed up with Bernard Lavery, the man who grew a 70lb pumpkin and the 16′ carrot, to offer seven of his own varieties of giant vegetables.
For those of us interested in food as well as fun, ‘Red Arrow’ sprouting broccoli is earlier and heavier cropping than other varieties.
Unwins have an intriguing first this year with ‘Creation’, the first F1 hybrid shallot to be grown from seed.
Harvested in September, it keeps till May.
There is also ‘Debby’, a butterhead lettuce resistant to most diseases and also to lettuce root aphid.
With all the new and reintroduced varieties now on the market there has never been a better time to grow from seed.
The only disappointment may come if stocks are all sold out!
Our grateful thanks to Unwins and Suttons seeds for allowing us to use their original seed catalogues.
GARDENING IN STYLE
THE FOUR SEASONS GARDEN
Every season brings its own particular delights, the trick is to coordinate them together perfectly, says Andrew Wilson
For most gardeners the passing seasons each capture the imagination anew and also provide further inspiration and pleasure.
Spring and summer offer mass production of flower and colour effects, autumn can be glorious for its sparkling dew-covered fruits and mist-softened foliage hues, and winter too brings special delight.
The all-seasons garden aims to coordinate these effects, to achieve the best possible year-round interest.
Such a garden should have some permanent structure planting, preferably evergreen, around which seasonal effects may be arranged.
Then either combine different species in a border to give a succession of seasonal variations, or plant whole borders or areas of the garden for a specific seasonal effect.
Traditionally thought of as a bleak month, plants like Hamamelis ‘Jelena’, heathers and the ghostly stems of Rubus biflorus will brighten the winter garden
Spring is the season of rebirth, new life and rejuvenation, and colour in the garden is generally muted and pale initially, with lemon-yellow, white and blue predominating.
The colour of most importance however, green, is freshest and brightest in spring.
Perfumes are delicate, strengthening together with colour and intensity as the season develops.
Daffodils, crocus and hyacinth are the blooms most associated with this time, yet even in these three species there is great variety.
Crocus and hyacinth are most useful when planted in the border where, together with muscari and scilla, they can provide dense ground coverage and a rich carpet of colour beneath.
SPRING BEAUTIES
Shrubs such as forsythia are old spring favourites but lemon-yellow catkins such as those on Corylus avellana promise the added bonus of attracting wildlife.
Later on try the great white cherry,Prunus ‘Taihaku’ or Prunus ‘Shogetsu’for dramatic displays of white flowers; ‘Amanogawa’produces pale pink flowers and its fastigiate or columnar form is useful for small gardens.
As alternatives, try the Judas tree,Cercis siliquastrum , with its rich pink, pea-like flowers or Malus ‘Lemoinei’ for deep red-pink blossom.
Plant tulips in complementary colours in the borders below, so their cupped flowers ‘float’ above lower plants.
Other notable spring trees and shrubs will include Magnolia wilsonii , which produces large, white, pendulous flowers and M. stellata with its profusion of white star-shaped flowers on a relatively small bush.
The spring garden would not be complete without rhododendrons and azaleas, with their colourful May blooms, but try to colour coordinate them as indiscriminate splashes of red, pink and yellow can be disturbing.
R. luteum is a deciduous azalea with golden-yellow flowers and good autumn colour; and it tolerates light  shade.
R. yakushimanum is a compact evergreen with pink flowers and the leaves open as silver-green, changing to a deep green with brown felting.
By May the soft greens of spring darken and the freshness of the garden gives way to headier scents and fragrances.
Rosa ‘Kiftsgate’ has a delicate and sweet scent and complements the garlands of tiny, yellow-centred white flowers.
Beware, however, as this delightful display belies a vigorous growth rate as it can spread to approximately 40′ (12m) or more.
R. primula bears large, single, yellow flowers above strongly scented fern-like foliage, particularly after a rain shower.
SUMMER WARMTH
Honeysuckle and jasmine will fill warm summer evenings with intoxicating fragrances and exotic flowers.
Summer's herbaceous perennials can quickly transform the garden scene with their vigorous growth.
Take care not to overemphasise a particular colour as the result can be visually dull.
Mix a little yellow into a blue scheme and enrich blues with purples.
Use a variety of green foliage to contrast white flowers to introduce yellow to brighten the border and try taller plants to give added height.
Other tall beauties include verbascums, digitalis, delphiniums and lupins.
As summer progresses, warmer colours come into play.
Crocosmia ‘Lucifer’ is appropriate in any garden, its scarlet flowers working well with the spikes of kniphofia, the red hot poker.
These colours work particularly well in late summer and early autumn, when sunshine becomes more golden and mellow.
Although they have their main magnificent flush in June, the spires of delphiniums can be encouraged to flower later if cut down and watered
AUTUMN HUES
Foliage and fruit enrich the autumn garden, whether glowing through mist or sparkling with dew to mark the arrival of cooler, shorter days.
Trees such as Sorbus aucuparia serve the all-seasons garden well with spring flowers, abundant autumn berries and bright foliage colours.
S. ‘Joseph Rock’ produces bright yellow berries while S. hupehensis has blue-green foliage complemented by pink fruits.
Here the garden has been divided into four, each area coming to life at a different time of the year
Almost every species of the acer family offers rich tints of golden-yellow or brilliant scarlet.
Try A. rubrum or A. saccharum for larger gardens and A. palmatum in more restricted space.
Many oaks provide intense leaf colour but for something more unusual look out for Nyssa sylvatica , the black gum;Liquidambar styraciflua , the sweet gum, or Parrotia persica , the Persian ironwood.
Gingko biloba is a deciduous conifer with beautifully shaped leaves which turn a rich shade of golden-yellow before falling.
Shrubs for autumn interest include the berry-bearing pyracantha, which also displays dense clusters of hawthorn-like blossoms in the spring.
P. ‘Orange Glow’ is popular for its bunches of orange-red berries.
These evergreen shrubs may be trained as hedges or wall shrubs.
Use them in combination with deciduous climbers such as Parthenocissus tricuspidata , the boston ivy, or Vitis coignetiae .
Both provide sensational autumn leaf colour in rich reds and purples.
As summer progresses, warmer colours provided by achillea, crocosmia and agapanthus, come into play
SEEDS AND HUES
Many species roses produce large hips at this time of year.
R. rugosa has enormous glossy red hips, surpassed only by those of R. moyesii ‘Geranium’, which are carried on graceful arching stems.
For smaller plants try Sedum ‘Autumn Joy’ with its dark red seed heads,Ceratostigma willmottianum which produces blue flowers in late autumn and Hebe ‘Autumn Joy’with deep purple-blue flowers from late summer to early winter.
The purple-blues of the Michaelmas daisy,Aster novi-belgii mirror these colours on tall, graceful stems up to 4′ (1.2m) high.
As winter approaches and the leaves fall, bark or stem colour  becomes more important.
The strength of colour that builds up through the summer and autumn gradually disappears and the winter garden is usually left with weak and delicate shades.
For me, this rest in the colour scheme at this time of year is important if only to appreciate the exuberance of the other seasons all the more.
Evergreens such as cherry laurel, yew and holly provide permanent structure and backdrops against which stronger colours may be displayed.
WINTER BALANCE
Against these dark greens set the brilliant stems of Cornus alba ‘Sibirica’, the red-barked dogwood, or Rubus cockburnianus , the ornamental blackberry with its silver arching stems.
Another indispensable winter standby, the mahonia, has dark green foliage which offsets its scented, lemon-yellow flowers, while the winter-flowering jasmine,Jasminum nudiflorum , needs a similar backdrop.
The viburnums are also useful in the winter garden, and in particular Viburnum x bodnantense , with its abundant fragrant winter flowers which will actually last well into spring.
Alternatively, try V. foetens , which has aromatic, dark green foliage and late winter flowers or V. tinus with good, dense foliage and sprays of pink tinged white or cream blooms.
Blue hyacinths and yellow tulips ensure a dense spring carpet of colour
SPRING
Narcissus ‘Mount Hood’
Characterised by a trumpet as long as the petals.
The long-lasting, mid-spring flower opens with a golden flush which becomes milk white.
These daffodils reach up to 1½′ (45cm) in height.
Flowers should be dead-headed, and the dead foliage removed in the summer.
SUMMER
Hemerocallis
‘Golden Chimes’
A must for the summer garden, producing narrow, sword-shaped leaves and bright yellow lily-like flowers, which although short lived are replaced by a profusion of waiting buds.
Available in a variety of colours, growing up to  2oe′ (75cm) and spreading to 2′ (60cm).
AUTUMN
Cotinus coggygria
This deciduous shrub is called the snake tree because of the soft pink-grey plumes of flowers produced in late summer.
Has round foliage which turns yellow or red in autumn.
Prefers full sun and will not colour well in autumn if the soil is too rich.
Reaches 17′ (5m) in height and spread.
WINTER
Prunus subhirtella ‘Autumnalis’
This delicate flowering cherry tree produces tiny white blossoms which are pink in bud, between November and March.
Prefers relatively undisturbed soil at the base and should be planted in full sun.
Grows to 26′ (8m) in height and spread.
For flowering interest plant Iris unguicularis , which seems to produce  an almost constant supply of delicately scented, lilac flowers during mid winter.
Helleborus niger , the Christmas rose, is also an essential addition, with its drooping white flowers and golden stamens.
Cyclamen planted in large drifts will complement this colour range perfectly and also provide attractive groundcover with their pink or white wing-like flowers from autumn right through to spring.
Viburnum opulus ‘Compactum’ is a particularly valuable shrub with its mass of white spring flowers and its scarlet berries with reddish leaves in autumn
One of the most beautiful winter-flowering trees is Prunus subhirtella ‘Autumnalis’, which produces a flurry of snowflake blossoms on leafless branches in winter.
Also use trees for their different colours and textures of bark.
Betula papyfifera produces peeling white bark and, in early spring, long catkins.
Acer griseum has a peeling orange red bark and the evergreen Arbutus x andrachnoides cinnamon-red.
Remember to always use simplicity in design and plant boldly in groups of two or three for a strong impact.
Take care when mixing colours, as plants which work together in terms of spring or summer flower colour may not work successfully when berries and autumn tints are produced.
For style purposes, choose your plants carefully to enjoy the fruit of your labour all year round.
PLACES TO VISIT 1.
BUSCOT PARK, Nr Faringdon, Oxfordshire Contains a spectacular walled garden, planted on the theme of the four seasons complete with representational sculptures.
There is also a splendid Harold Peto water cascade.
Open between March and September, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday only.
2.
BARNSLEY HOUSE GARDEN Barnsley, Nr Cirencester, Gloucestershire The original garden at Barnsley was laid out in 1770 and has since been replanted by Rosemary Verey.
The gardens have something of interest to offer throughout the year.
Open all year, Monday to Saturday.
3.
THE HIRSEL GROUNDS AND DUNDOCK WOOD, Coldstream, Scotland Spring flowers in abundance decorate the woodlands here, followed by rhododendrons and azaleas.
The woodland planting is also good for autumn colour.
Open all year round.
4.
KAILZEE GARDENS, Nr Peebles, Scotland Spring, summer and autumn are well represented in the gardens which have been re-created in the last 20 years.
Open to the public from March to October.
GARDEN PLANTS FOR FREE The Gardener has 5 copies of Alan and Adrian Bloom's Blooms of Bressingham Garden Plants to give away to the first five readers whose names are drawn from the postbag after 31 December 1992.
This beautifully illustrated book provides information on some of the best garden plants to grow based on the experience of these two renowned gardeners.
For your chance to win a copy send your name and address to Four Seasons Book Offer, The Gardener, Greater London House, Hampstead Road, London NW1 7QQ.
Blooms of Bressingham Garden Plants is published by Collins Leisure and costs £19,99.
Gifts galore
Whether gardening is a pastime or a passion, there are plenty of appropriate gifts available to tempt gardeners of all ages, says Anita Comerford
1 For the real gardening connoisseur, try Spear and Jackson's stainless steel spade (£58) and fork (£60)
2 The Wolf Rotomat Super 2 Electric Nylon Trimmer will provide the perfect finish for your lawn at £80
3 Grow your own amaryllis from the Unwins' gift pack range, priced at around £5.50 per pack
4 For novice gardeners — the Chelful Junior Gardener Set at £20 keeps children entertained for hours
5 Cut with comfort using these light and efficient cordless grass shears from Bosch at £40
6 Make a clean sweep of leaves this winter with the AL-KO Blower Vac for just £210
7 Record your garden successes with the RHS Diary and Rosemary Verey's Book of Days
8 Grow your own herbs in these beautiful terracotta pots from Olive Tree.
Prices start at £5
9 Classic garden windchimes from Flora and Fauna.
Available in four sizes starting at £18.80
10 Beautiful enamel watering cans with a solid brass rose from Flora and Fauna, prices start at £27
11 The Lotus Pool Kit comprises a complete package — pump, liner, ornament and fittings for just £95
12 Another gift pack idea from Unwins.
Pots of gloxinias for just £4 per bowl
13 Give children their very own Pet Pots from Vesutor, with a choice of plants for just £3.50
14 The perfect finish to any pond.
Lotus produce a range of fountain ornaments from around £45
Make a clean cut this Christmas with these secateurs, pruning saw and grafting knife.
Each has a precision blade for a perfect finish.
Clockwise: Victorinox grafting knife £7.40; Sandvik folding pruning saw £15; Felco Professional Compact 6 £29.75; Spear and Jackson 15mm anvil secateurs £16.45; p42 bypass secateurs from Sandvik at around £15
Whether you grow a garden on a windowsill or from a packet of seed, EasiGrow and Mr Fothergill's have the perfect solution.
EasiGrow's Bonsai and Herb Kits come complete with containers, compost and seed mixtures and cost around £8.
The ‘Attractions’ selection from Mr Fothergill's, at £1.99 per packet, make beautiful gardens possible no matter how small the budget
Among a wide range of beautiful glazed pots, Olive Tree also produce Strawberry or herb Planters.
Ideal for the patio or even windowsill.
The Birch Trugs from South Devon are versatile, attractive and practical.
Whether used around the garden or filled with flowers for display, prices start at £20.
Continue the gardening theme at the Christmas dinner table with Garden Crackers from Tom Smith.
Every cracker contains a packet of seed along with the more traditional contents.
A box of eight costs around £6
Capture the beauty of your garden in watercolour.
Lynne Groucutt can reproduce garden scenes from photographs — a lasting memento for friends or family.
Prices for commissions start at £48.
For more information contact
Grow your own tea with the Tea Plant from The Stroke Association.
The handsome evergreen plant which costs £2.95, will produce fragrant white flowers and by rolling and fermenting the young leaves, you can produce the aromatic Black Tea of Commerce.
The Tea Plant and other gardening gifts can be found in the association's catalogue available from CHSA Ltd, 20 Halcyon Court, Huntingdon, Cambs PE18 6DG
The best thing about Christmas is buying well thought out gifts that will give pleasure and use for many years to come.
There are so many products on the market at this time of year that the choice can be a little daunting.
Shopping at your local garden centre or leafing through the pages of catalogues can be a good place to start, whether you are buying for people who prefer to read about the possibilities of beautiful plantings or for those who actually get out there and make it happen in their own gardens.
There are also gifts to suit every pocket — a simple packet of seeds can offer a beautiful display for many seasons to come — so why not spoil gardening friends and family or even indulge yourself?
The invaluable DIY Expert from pbi (£4.50) provides a full colour guide when choosing and building features such as barbecues, containers and patios for the garden.
The RHS Diary (£9.99) and Rosemary Verey's Book of Days (£9.95) are beautifully illustrated to provide inspiration every day of the year.
The Gardens in Trust Calendar (£3.50) contains wonderful photographs of gardens in the National Trust's care and is available through their catalogue.
The Creative Gardening Calendar, which features scenes from Bressingham throughout the year, will also supply seasonal inspiration at £3.99
Decorate your doorstep with this terracotta-finish container and have cool milk all the year round.
The planter means you can conceal the cooler with bright flowers throughout the seasons.
The Milk Cooler Planter from Metro costs just £20
OUR GRATEFUL THANKS TO SYON PARK GARDEN CENTRE, ISLEWORTH, WHICH SELLS CHRISTMAS TREES, PLANTS DECORATIONS AND MANY OTHER GARDENING GIFTS
PIPPA GREENWOOD'S PROBLEM PAGE
The TV and Wisley Garden plant doctor answers all your gardening problems
GREENHOUSE BLINDS
Q Now that our greenhouse is relatively empty, we would like to fit some blinds.
Please can you suggest where we may be able to obtain some?
It is certainly a good idea to do this job now, as fitting them will be so much easier.
For aluminium louvre and venetian blinds try Technical Blinds, Old Town Lane, Woburn Town, High Wycombe, Bucks HP10 0PN.
If you prefer roller and vertical blinds, for a range of greenhouses or conservatories, contact Silent Gliss, Star Lane, Margate, Kent CT9 4EF who also supply Roman and Austrian blinds.
If you would like green woven ones with a spring and wind mechanism then try Robinsons of Winchester, Robinson House, Winnal Industrial Estate, Winchester, Hampshire SO23 8LH.
Finally, if you would prefer pleated, cream shading contact Two Wests and Elliott Ltd, Unit 4, Carrwood Road, Sheepbridge Industrial Estate, Chesterfield, Derbyshire.
CHRISTMAS GIFT
Q I have been given a poinsettia as an early Christmas present which I am determined to keep healthy.
Any handy tips for good, strong growth, please?
To maintain strong red bracts, ensure you keep your poinsettia in a well-lit spot.
This plant dislikes draughts so keep it well-protected or sheltered and do not position it near a window which is likely to be opened.
Watering can also be tricky as poinsettias do not like being too damp; pour water into its saucer or carefully into the compost, never water all over the foliage.
It is actually better to under water it — even if you wait until the leaves just start to wilt — than to get the compost too wet.
One disease to watch out for is grey mould, or Botrytis cinerea .
Pick off all affected or deteriorating leaves, and if necessary, spray with an appropriate fungicide such as Benlate.
Helleborus niger will flower for months
CHILLY HOUSE PLANTS
Q Please could you suggest some house plants for my bedroom which, at present, is not heated during the winter?
There are a number of suitable subjects, all of which should do reasonably well, even if it does get cool.
The following should of course be kept frost-free: tolmiea, fatsia, fatshedera, aspidistra, cineraria, chlorophytum, clivia, streptocarpus and the shrimp plant.
Cyclamen also prefer being sited in cooler spots and are often renowned for failing because they are kept too warm.
A well-lit position and dryish compost are keys to success with poinsettia
FIRST PLANTINGS
Q Can you suggest one or two attractive winter flowering plants to give as a birthday present to a nephew for his first garden?
If you were thinking of herbaceous plants, good ones to try are Iris unguicularis and Helleborus niger , if you were looking for a shrub, I would suggest Chimonanthus praecox , or winter sweet;Lonicera fragrantissima , one of the hammelis, perhaps H. mollis, H. intermedia or H. japonica , or Viburnum x bodnantense .
My own favourite winter tree is Prunus subhirtella ‘Autumnalis’, which comes in both white and pink forms.
Mine flowered from early winter until early spring and looked gorgeous all the time.
IVY DAMAGE
Q Can you tell me whether ivies do damage trees?
Most tree are unlikely to suffer any adverse effects if ivy climbs through them; indeed, it is a common sight on the trunks of perfectly healthy, mature trees.
However, on very young ones it can occasionally have a strangling effect.
When ivy is seen growing throughout the crown of a dying tree it has rarely been responsible for the tree's decline but has taken advantage of the crown which now lets through enough light for the ivy to grow away.
If ivy starts to grow up the trunk of a tree with attractive bark, it may be worth removing the ivy, but only to preserve the appearance of the tree, not its state of health.
There is one potential hazard associated with dense ivy growth on a living tree — it may grow so rapidly and thickly that any fungal growth may be hidden.
Generally, there is no need to worry too much about this.
Far better to remember that ivy does provide a very useful overwintering site for many small mammals and insects and also an essential nesting or roosting site for favourite garden birds.
Ivy does not generally damage trees
Netting will help prevent leaves building up in your pond
POND MAINTENANCE
We built our first pond this summer.
Can you tell us how best to maintain it as winter approaches and how to stop it freezing up
Start by clearing the pond of fallen leaves from nearby trees and shrubs.
Ideally, you should fix fine-mesh netting over the surface earlier in the year which will prevent leaves and other debris falling into the pond.
If you clear them from the surface regularly, the net will not break under the strain.
Netting should also help to deter herons which can completely wipe out your fish population especially during harsh weather when food is scarce!
You should also remove any dead or dying foliage on waterlilies and marginals.
Try to do this early so they do not fall into the water.
All foliage on leggy marginals such as marsh marigolds should also be cut back.
HARMFUL GASES
The main thing to prevent is a solid sheet of ice forming because it acts like a lid and prevents the escape of poisonous gases, given off by deteriorating pond vegetation.
Preventing foliage from getting into the water will decrease the problem but even then the gases, largely methane and hydrogen sulphide, can kill most of your pond life including the fish.
At this time of year the process of decaying old vegetation will also deplete oxygen when it may already be in short supply.
A layer of ice on the sides of a concrete pond may cause it to crack, leading to inevitable leaks.
The best solution is to buy a special low-power electric pond heater which will ensure that there is always an ice-free patch, sufficient to allow gases to escape.
It is also advisable to float something on the surface of a concrete pond to help absorb some of the pressure produced by the ice patch, an empty, sealed lemonade bottle, plastic football, large piece of cork or even a tennis ball will do the job admirably.
One last word of warning, if your pond does freeze over at any stage, don't smash the ice as the shock waves created will also kill the fish.
the best way of making a hole is to pour a pan of hot water onto the surface until it melts away the ice.
Having made a hole, you can then draw off water to leave a gap of 2.5″ (7cm) between the surface of the water and the ice to allow toxic gases to escape from the water.
DECEMBER ACTION PLAN
THE ORNAMENTAL GARDEN
BORDER PLANTS
Continue digging new borders whenever conditions are not too wet or frosty.
Try to finish tidying borders before the worst of the frosts set in.
Check that roots of wallflowers have not been loosened by wind and refirm them if necessary.
Check dahlias in store and cut away any rotten parts before dusting with fungicide.
Also keep an eye open for any aphids on chrysanthemums.
Prepare trenches for next year's exhibition or cut flower sweet peas.
Dig them 18″ (45cm) wide and fork in 3″ (8cm) of organic matter into the second spit.
Top dress lime-haters such as enkianthus with bark
Heel in bare root stock until the ground has been prepared
TREES AND SHRUBS
Clear away leaves and other debris that has collected beneath hedges.
Top dress enkianthus rhododendrons and other lime-hating shrubs with bark.
Add a solution of EnMag if growth was poor in the previous season.
Prevent snow and ice damaging upright conifers by winding twine or netting around the branches to keep them upright and in place.
Finish planting bare root trees and shrubs as soon as possible.
Heel in any bare root plants which arrive during bad weather and plant out when the ground is softer and workable.
HOUSE PLANTS
Continue to bring forced bulbs into the greenhouse as the shoots reach 1–2″ (2.5–5cm), and then into the house as the buds show among the leaves.
Be ready to stake any which show signs of flopping.
Do not buy flowering pot plants or any other house plants from pavement stalls, as icy winds may have damaged them — even if they don't show it at once.
Bring newly bought house plants home on the floor of the car and not in the boot which can be much colder.
Carefully nip off older flowers on cyclamen and African violets, leaving no stalks which can rot.
Take care when handling Primula obconica or wear a pair of cotton gloves to avoid any possible skin rash.
The leaves of Primula obconica may cause skin irritations
THE GREENHOUSE
Clear out the greenhouse and scrub down with Jeyes fluid, choosing a warm, summer day if possible.
Double glaze with bubble polythene to keep the warmth in during the coldest months.
Slugs can be a menace in the greenhouse in winter so put down a few slug pellets.
Ventilate well on sunny days but remember to close vents in the evening.
Check any greenhouse heaters every night, in case of possible faults.
Prune grape vines before the sap begins to flow again by cutting all side shoots back to one or two buds.
Wash the greenhouse thoroughly with Jeyes fluid
THE KITCHEN GARDEN
FRUIT
Cut out cankers on fruit trees, except those on peaches, plums and cherries.
Paint any very large pruning wounds with pbi Arbrex.
Make sure that all canes of raspberries, blackberries and other fruits are tied in securely to prevent breakage and chafing.
Remove old, unproductive fruit trees by cutting them down to shoulder height before using the stump as a lever to help dig out all the roots.
Do not simply saw the trunk off at soil level as this will later attract honey fungus.
Cut out diseased wood on most fruit trees
VEGETABLES
Continue winter digging, adding organic matter to a third of the plot, and lime the area designated for planting brassicas.
Check the pH levels of the soils with a test kit if you are unsure about acidity.
Lift a few leeks, parsnips and other overwintering vegetables and store them in a shed in case frost prevents you lifting them from open ground.
Re-make deep beds 4′ (1.2m) wide incorporating plenty of organic matter; never tread on them once they are dug.
Check carrots, potatoes, onions and any other vegetables in store and immediately use or discard any which show signs of rotting.
Collect bean canes and pea sticks.
Cut off the base if they have started to rot and then store in a dry place for next year.
Lift parsnips when needed
DON'T FORGET Mice can be especially damaging at this time of year.
Not only do they move into sheds in cold  weather and eat your fruits, vegetables and bulbs in store, but they eat seedlings, especially hellebores, in the frame.
Either keep an astute cat, or make sure traps are set inside drainpipes where pets and birds can't get at them.
If you prefer baits, slide them inside a drainpipe and replenish them regularly
Organic Tip Now is the time to think about turning organic in the garden.
You'll have to approach things in a new way but there are some fine books to guide you.
Two especially good ones are: Beds — labour saving, space saving, more productive gardening; and Pests — how to control them on fruit and vegetables.
Both are produced by the Henry Doubleday Research Association and are available at £5.45 each from Chase Organics, Addlestone, Surrey KT15 1HY.
according to COLBORN…
IT'S A WRAP
What skill there is in gift wrapping!
For someone who can give an object as plain and manageable as a book all the symmetry and neatness of a loosely wrapped food blender, the prospect of getting cumbersome gardening tools into a parcel terrifies me.
Clearly, if I'm to give my loved one a spade for Christmas, the answer is not to wrap it at all.
If I tried, the package would probably look as though it contained a designer gazebo for the centre of the potager, and in those circumstances, finding just a plain spade among all the Christmas paper, would be bound to disappoint!
Besides, I can also allow myself to feel smug about not wasting paper and therefore saving a piece of forest.
GREEN LOGIC
The guilt mongers are at it again!
During that soggy spell in August, when the grass still needed a weekly cut, the United States Environmental Protection Agency decreed that the motor mower was bad for mankind.
Apparently, it produces more in the way of smog-causing emissions than a car which has up to 30 times its horse power.
So every time you cut the grass — or wield a chainsaw, for that matter — you're helping to pollute the air with evil hydrocarbons and they want you to feel bad about that.
They may have a point.
Even though I've run my mower on unleaded petrol for years, I'd like to see the manufacturers design cleaner engines.
But let's get this whole issue into perspective.
On average, people drive, say 10000 miles per year.
At 40 miles to the gallon that's 250 gallons.
Now, if everyone had an average-sized lawn which they cut weekly for eight months using half a litre of petrol at each session, they would still burn less than 4 gallons a year.
And not everyone who has a lawn uses a petrol mower!
The moral?
Mow with a free conscience, ride your bike more often but leave the real culprit, the car, in the garage.
And remember, every time you breathe out, you are adding even more carbon dioxide to the atmosphere and that is also a greenhouse gas!
RESIDENT RODENTS
Wandering through Covent Garden a while ago I spotted a smartly dressed woman who seemed to be talking intently to her right shoulder.
As we drew closer, I could see that she was whispering endearments and repeatedly kissing what turned out to be a mature, sleek, brown rat.
It had knowing, piercing eyes and yellow teeth.
Well, one get all sorts in London, of course, but being country-based, I have always considered rats as Public Enemy Number One.
GARDEN VANDALS
But if you think logically, why shouldn't a rat make a good pet?
Other rodents, especially mice, gerbils, guinea pigs are loved by the million so why not the wild brown ones?
They are allegedly intelligent and their eating and living habits are surely no worse than those of our two dogs.
The problem with rodents is the damage the wild ones wreak in the garden.
Vole are vile because they dig up and eat my crocus species in spring and then hog on the ripening figs in August.
Mice munch away on aconites and love to nibble newly sown peas and beans.
As for rabbits, they are a scourge in some rural areas, eating all the young growth on choice shrubs, and in hard weather, killing them off by stripping away their bark.
SQUIRREL RAID
I can't remember who it was who said that a squirrel was nothing more than a rat with good PR but how right they were!
Once again this autumn, I lost the race with the squirrels to harvest the hazel nuts.
I checked daily, in September, until the point where they were almost ripe.
Next week end, I thought, I'll pick and store them.
But that very Saturday, I arrived at the nut tree, Tesco bag at the ready, to find the ground littered with empty shells and husks.
I'll swear those squirrels heard me name the day!
NEXT MONTH
ALL IN YOUR JANUARY ISSUE.
ON SALE 7 DECEMBER
GARDENS WITHIN GARDENS.
Visit Lanarkshire's Sue and Hector Riddell, a talented couple who have created over ten gardens within just one wind-swept site
STARS OF WINTER
Brilliant en masse and yet intricate in detail, the crocus is a star performer when there is little else in flower.
John Kelly loves them and helps you choose the best ones for your garden
TWO TIMERS
If space is at a premium it makes sense to grow plants with more than one season of interest.
Fresh from his garden, Nigel Colborn has plenty of planting ideas to help ensure that your borders continually brim over with flowers and foliage
FIRST-TIME FRUITS
There is nothing better than being able to pick a juicy apple or succulent pear straight from your own tree.
Sue Spielberg has all the expertise you need to start developing your very own fruit collection 
KEEPING OUT THE COLD
Need extra growing space or require speedy protection for tender young plants?
Then let Roy Lacey come to your aid with his tips for using cloches and cold frames
EDGES AND ENDS
The edges and corners of borders can be frustrating places to plant.
In our season-by-season guide Graham Rice takes a look at some innovative solutions
BENEATH THE BRANCHES
If you have trees or a shady nook in your garden, then follow Andrew Wilson's inspired design ideas for creating your own enchanting paradise 
VISIT SOME OF BRITAIN'S FINEST GARDENS BY JOINING US ON OUR SUPER WEEKEND BREAK EXCURSIONS
PREPARING FOR PLANTS
Planning a new border is always an exciting proposition but before you start, follow Phillippa Lambert's preparation tips to ensure that your plants get off to a flying start 
PLUS: WIN ONE OF OUR SUPER ROTARY CULTIVATORS AND MAKE LIGHT WORK OF DIGGING YOUR GARDEN