

Editorial
I had a long conversation the other day with one of the UK's major guitar distributors about how explicit we should be in reviews.
His point arose because he felt we hadn't best differentiated his guitar from the rest of the pack in our review of it.
Mind you, even he had to admit that this ‘new’ guitar was really not so new — more an instrument slotted between several others, not exactly copying any of them, but owing a good deal to several.
Part of the problem here is that, whereas in the old days Fender, Gibson, Gretsch, Guild and Rickenbacker (and of course Höfner, Burns and Framus etc.) used their own distinctive hardware, every other modern guitar has a black Floyd, the same black locking nut, black Gotoh machines and black, open-topped ‘SeyMarzio’ pickups.
So what's there left to differentiate, apart from colour and body/headstock shape?
As most mass-makers only seem capable of putting out variations on Fender and Ibanez neck and body shapes, and reproducing whatever colour's ‘hot’ this season, they're expecting a lot if they think we're going to go that crazy about them.
My friend in the business pointed out that his guitar had a slimmer neck than its big rival.
Okay, we could have measured that and given it as part of a spec listing, but because it really didn't feel any different (probably because its fingerboard width, radius and frets echoed most of the competition) that fact was rendered almost inconsequential.
Sure, companies are proud of any little achievement, like shaving a millimetre off a neck here and there, and are keen to stress these points through magazines like Guitarist , but such details are hardly ever conceived as parts of a greater whole.
The result is often not so much an individual guitar, but rather an amalgam of bits nicked from here and bobs lifted from there.
Hence our use of the Strat and the Les Paul as reviewer's benchmarks.
These guitars represent total design philosophies, not marketing exercises where a manufacturer or ad agency has tried to hoodwink us into believing the instrument really is different because its headstock is slightly more rounded than the Ibanez — or whatever other triviality they've come up with that month.
I'd be the first to admit that we don't always make the best use of our review space from the manufacturer's point of view, because we mention what we feel is important to our readers and not what the manufacturer wants us to promote, though the two will often coincide.
Our stated aim is to give the guitar playing reader a wholesome understanding of every featured instrument.
And here's where the question of spec lists raises its head.
Years ago Guitarist used to include spec lists — you know, nut width, weight, body width, that kind of thing.
However, I've played the guitar for over 25 years, I've worked as a professional guitar repairer for the top companies, and if you were to say, ‘These frets are 2.1mm high,’ it would still mean nothing to me!
Well, it would, but try imagining how 2.1mm feels under your fingers.
If, however, I read in a review, ‘These frets are slightly higher than Gibson's wide ovals,’ I'd know precisely what you were talking about.
The weight of a guitar is another thing; we could print the weight of one Les Paul Standard, but the next one could easily be 10% heavier, or lighter, so we'd have misled our readers by giving a poundage.
If a guitar is substantially heavier or lighter than you'd expect, of course we'll say so, but how many people even know the weight of their own guitars; I don't, and I bet you don't either.
The same with nut widths and scale lengths (both crucial to the feel of a guitar); if a nut is wider or narrower than the ubiquitous 42mm we'll state the fact, or if the scale length is not the almost universal 25½″ we'll mention it.
Of course there's always a ‘trainspotter’ element in any specialist field, and I guess those people would want to know every exact detail.
But my educated guess is that guitarists want to get an idea of the feel of something, receive an impression of it from another player, then go and try the thing and make their own decision.
I'd be interested to hear anyone's opinion on this subject, but do bear in mind that in any case we almost always mention construction materials, talk about frets and pickups, in addition to commenting on nut width and fingerboard radius during the course of a review.
See you next month…
WHAT'S NEW News & New Products New owners for Trace Elliot, new guitar stands from Somerset, new strings from everywhere, a new surgery for Dr Robert and how about a new mortgage for a guitar storage cabinet…?
STAND BY ME
We've all done it.
You put your guitar down for a second, and just as you turn away there's a horrible discordant ker-draanngg!, accompanied, if you're unlucky, by the even more expensive noise of your headstock suddenly leaving the band to embark on a solo career.
Three hearty hurrahs, therefore, for the inventors of the GuitaRest, the kind of ultra-neat idea that keeps you awake at night wishing that you'd thought of it.
It's pretty self-explanatory, really: a moulded plastic thingy that you wedge under the carrying handle of your combo, securing it in place with a velcro strap.
As long as your amp is high enough to support your guitar properly then GuitaRest does exactly the same job as a guitar stand — except that it's neater, lighter, takes up less space, costs less than most and also incorporates a recess to accommodate your armoury of assorted plectra.
GuitaRest is available either from your local music shop or at £9.99 plus £1.50 P&P from  
TREASURE CHEST
Never let it be said that we fail to cater for minority groups.
In this case it's a very, very minority group: all you guitarists out there prepared to sacrifice the price of an exceedingly tasty automobile on a place to store your guitar collection.
According to the makers, Rudy and Linda Dasseville (telephone 0825 765862, if you dare),this large and handsome piece of furniture is designed to hold six acoustic guitars vertically in the side compartments and twelve electrics in flightcase-sized drawers down the middle section (although there's an option of a thirty-six electrics capacity), and is finished with exotic veneers and brass hardware.
And how much is this, um, wondrous piece of artistry?
Prices start in the region of twenty thousand pounds.
The company custom-builds each cabinet to each prospective owner's preferences, and although this one features a ZZ Top logo and a pair of flame-topped Gibsons on the front, virtually any design is possible.
But you'd think they'd get the Les Paul pickups right, wouldn't you?
TRACE'N'PAPER
Alongside the news this month of two new products from Trace Elliot (the Swell Pedal, their first-ever outboard accessory, and the TA-RP, a rackmount version of their hundred-watt Trace Acoustic amplifier) comes the announcement that Trace Elliot are now part of Kaman Music Corporation.
As the largest music distributor in the USA, Kaman are already responsible for Takamine and Hamer guitars as well as Ovation, the original synthetic bowl-back guitar that Charles Kaman himself invented back in 1966 (some readers may have already spotted a close connection between Ovation and Trace Acoustic in ads featuring players like Adrian Legg and Robert Fripp).
Fortunately, all the Trace management staff are staying on, and Kaman have a history of encouraging its subsidiary companies to retain their own product identities, so we at Guitarist sincerely hope that one of Britain's brighter amp companies will be allowed the freedom to continue with the experimental stuff.
ROCK AND A HARD PLACE
Carl Perkins joined up with his old buddy George Harrison onstage during the 21st birthday of London's Hard Rock Cafe on June 15th.
Among the other celebrities who shimmied the night away were Prince, The Stranglers, Paul Young, Curt Smith, Ben Elton, Rik Mayall and Ringo's son Jason.
The Hard Rock is well known for its extensive collection of rock memorabilia.
Among the various photographs, signed albums and items of slightly soiled clothing are an impressive number of guitars, including an ex-Jimi Hendrix white Gibson SG; Duane Allman's 1954 Fender Stratocaster, serial number 0019; Bill Wyman's trademark Framus bass; a Les Paul donated by Les Paul; a special edition Strat from Hank Marvin; Duane Eddy's signature-model Guild semi-acoustic; a Gibson SG from Doors guitarist Robbie Krieger; Joe Walsh's custom-built Greco Flying V; John Entwistle's custom ‘Fenderbird’ bass; Ronnie Lane's 12-string Zemaitis resonator guitar; other Strats courtesy of George Harrison and Keith Richards and, would you believe, Jeff Beck's 1957 Fender Esquire.
The man is completely mad.
SCHOOLDAYS
The Musicians Institute in London are commencing a one year diploma course for guitarists and bass players in October this year.
The course will cover all aspects related to a serious career in the music business.
As you can imagine, they are expecting that the course is going to be a popular one and so would-be students are required to pass an audition.
This can be done either in person or, for the shrinking violets among you, by submitting a cassette of your strums and widdles to:.
STRING ‘EM HIGH
How often have you been lost for words when engaged in the ‘what sort of strings do you use’ type of conversation with a newly acquired guitar playing chum you're eager to impress?
Well, imagine the reaction if you could nonchalantly mention that your strings were made from magnetically active nickel steel with a reinforced twist at the ball end because you are such an animal when it comes to whammy-bar aerobics!
Such would be the case if you were using RotoSound's Starfire Xtra Wrap strings.
British manufacturers RotoSound tell us that these ‘hot response’ strings are available in all the popular gauges, and bass players need not fret for there is a full range of similarly enhanced bass strings, too.
Acoustic players may well be delighted to know that RotoSound have developed their 80/20 Bronze strings as an alternative to the more commonplace phosphor bronze type.
Metallurgists among you should be aware that the strings are made from 80% copper and 20% zinc to give a clear, bright response.
STRING ‘EM LOW
Richard Cocco Senior at the Palisade Music Company would like the bass playing world to know that he has developed the first 4-wrap low B bass string, as part of the R. Cocco 5-string bass set.
These hand-wound strings boast more mass and increased weight in a tighter wrap.
A fourth wrap on the low B is to ensure a match in tension with the other strings, to create a completely balanced set.
The completely balanced bass player can find out more about these strings by contacting:
BILLY GIBBONS’ NEW CONVERTIBLE
Luthier Matthew Klein is seen here demonstrating the latest in custom guitars made for ZZ Top's axegrinder, Billy Gibbons.
Dubbed The Convertible Z , the guitar changes its shape by means of a concealed metal bar.
There is a matching bass for Dusty Hill and both guitars should feature in one of the band's forthcoming videos.
The guitars were both made by Matthew at Chandler Guitars in London, amid some secrecy, and hopefully we will be bringing you the full story of their genesis soon.
STRAT OUT OF HELL
Mike Mulligan from Mega Designs sent us this picture of his cast pewter replacement guitar hardware.
We've already featured Mike's lavishly gothic volume and tone knobs in a previous issue, but now he has expanded the range to include neckplates and Strat jack sockets.
If you are keen to give your pet guitar that Beast From Dimension X look, contact Mike at  
G.I. BLUES
BBC's Greater London Radio recently staged a benefit concert at the Mean Fiddler club in London to fund two one-year scholarships at the Guitar Institute.
The event marked GLR's contribution to National Music Day and provided acoustic sets from Bob Geldof, Midge Ure and Julia Fordham, amongst others.
The scholarships will be awarded to two London-based guitarists who will undoubtedly benefit from a year's tuition at the school.
Later on, the Guitar Institute hopes to raise funding from various sources to enable talented players from all over the country to study there.
One previous winner, 14 year-old Alistair Cherry, who was awarded the Fender/Buddy Holly scholarship last year, can be seen on a BBC 2 documentary ‘The Lowdown’, which will be transmitted on August 3.
The documentary follows Alistair through his year at the Institute and shows him jamming with Albert Lee and Jerry Donahue.
For further details, contact the Guitar Institute on .
mAxe headroom
An instrument of torture in all but the most capable of hands, the bass guitar rack has been lagging behind in the preamp/power amp technology already enjoyed by guitarists the world over.
Rocktron have noted this and vaulted to the rescue by producing the rather obscurely titled Bass mAxe.
This bass preamp comes loaded with goodies, such as 4-band EQ with a variable crossover to enable bi-amping.
The mAxe also enjoys noise reduction, licensed from Hush Systems, which is guaranteed to stem the flow of unwanted hums and buzzes emanating from pickups, active or passive.
A compressor, brightness boost and variable input and output levels complete the picture for the mAxe and those of you seeking the low down lowdown, should see your local Rocktron dealer without delay (but perhaps a little chorus?).
DOCTOR ROBERT'S GUITAR SERVICES
Robbie Gladwell has opened a new guitar workshop in Sudbury, Suffolk, where he is undertaking all nature of electric and acoustic guitar repairs; plus setups for that ‘problem’ guitar, customising and custom building, etc.
The Doc is also specialising in the fitting of transducer pickups and preamps to all types of acoustic instruments.
Visits to the Doctor's ‘surgery’ are strictly by appointment.
Alternatively, instruments can be sent and returned by carrier if you live too far away to visit personally.
Robbie can be contacted at his workshop on .
There is also a 24 hour answerphone service on this line, should you wish to call after 6pm.
BIG MAC…
John McVie Few other musicians can claim to have played with as many modern blues/rock legends as Fleetwood Mac's bassist John McVie.
John unlocked his brimming memory chest in the presence of Gibson Keddie…
Although the original band name was ostensibly chosen to represent the legendary guitarist/founder's democratic intentions, ‘Peter Green's Fleetwood Mac’ didn't actually contain the ‘Mac’part in its line-up for that famous debut gig at the Windsor Jazz and Blues Festival in August, 1967…
‘That's absolutely true,’ explains John McVie, across a small table at Warner Bros' London building.
‘I thought at the time that leaving John Mayall's Bluesbreakers was a bit speculative, even though Peter, Mick (Fleetwood ) and myself had already cut a couple of tracks within the Bluesbreakers band format, one of which was called Fleetwood Mac .
So when Peter quit, taking Mick with him, he kept saying, ‘Come on, come on.’
And I kept answering ‘No, I'm safe where I am.’
‘So they had to advertise in Melody Maker for a bass player, where they found Bob Brunning, but Peter made the situation clear that the gig was there until he had ‘persuaded’ me over.
And it sounds ridiculous saying it now, but what eventually made me decide to move was when John Mayall brought horns into the BB line-up; I was so dumb that I thought, ‘If it's horns, it's not blues.’
‘Why I thought that, Christ only knows, but that's how I thought.
Then one day, during rehearsal, John turned to one of the horn players and said, ‘Okay, play freeform here…’ and I thought, ‘Freeform?
That's jazz!’
So I went across the street, phoned Peter and said, ‘Okay, if you still want me, I'll join.’
‘But we were all so stupidly purist then, which obviously changed over the next couple of years, with Peter writing material like Man Of The World and Albatross .
We took so much stick for those at the time from the diehard ‘Blues Mac’ fans.
It's funny to look back on it now and think, ‘What the hell was all that about?'’
McVie is set to re-examine exactly what that was all about, as work on a new compilation album edges towards fruition…
‘There's a definite effort not to make it another ‘Greatest Hits’ yawn.
That has been done to death by ex-managers and ex-record companies who use a list of about two dozen tracks which they write down on a sheet of paper, cut them up and put them in a hat, and whatever order they come out in that's another album.
‘But we've found tapes that we'd forgotten about, from the Warners vaults in LA and from CBS in New York.
We'll be going through the Warners vaults here, with a list of material that's never been released.
The BBC also has previously unheard material that we have access to.
There's so much good stuff that has never seen the light of day.
Plus on the anthology there will be original versions of, for instance, Stevie saying, ‘This is how Dreams goes.’
And I kid you not, she's tapping out ‘bom, bom, bom, bom…’ on the piano with her index fingers!
‘But it serves to show how things evolve.
That makes it hopefully more attractive than,’ he snores loudly, ‘Greatest Hits Volume Whatever’.
It's a four CD package and should be out for Christmas.
What's even more special about this is that Lindsey's back with us too.’
How did Buckingham's re-involvement come about?
‘The last show Fleetwood Mac did was Christine (McVie, née Perfect ) 's farewell concert.
Lindsey came on and sat in for a couple of numbers and really enjoyed being back on the boards with us lot.
I don't think he's played with a band since he left, as he's responsible for almost all the instruments on his solo album.
So when this came up it was obviously advantageous to have some new tracks for the anthology and so we approached him and asked if he would be interested.
And he said yes.’
He's a good influence on the band, very creative in a lateral way…
‘Oh yes, a genius.
But it seems to me that he needs other people to bounce off, even though he can do it all himself.
I haven't heard his album and I'm sure it will be good, but I know he thrives on bouncing ideas off other people.
‘It will also be interesting to see where he gets the time from too, because there's his solo album release, our anthology, and then in September Mick, Stevie (Nicks ), Chris, myself and Billy start a new Fleetwood Mac album, which marks the end of Christine's ‘retirement’.
She spent six months in retirement and then it was, ‘When do we start?’
‘Hopefully, we'll get back out on the road again.
So the train bumps and farts its way along the tracks.
It runs out of steam every now and again but generally gets re-fired.’
You're obviously still a P-bass user after all this time…
‘I've been round the instrument circuit from A to Z, Alembic to Zon, and I always seem to come back to the P-bass, always.
Unfortunately my original Precision got ripped off in a place called Redondo Beach.
I can tell you the serial number — maybe someone will come up with it — L12304, with a dragon on the front, crudely carved during a drunken night with Christine!
It was a ‘62, I think.
My Fender now is comfortable for me because it's the bass I started out with, and I'm used to that neck width which is like a tree trunk.
Have you ever tried to break one of those things?
You've got to drive a truck over it, and even then it bends , but doesn't break.
‘I have two or three Alembics, which are lovely guitars — great in a studio if you have the time to sit and work with hi-tech electronics.
But on stage I find it difficult to change the tone quickly — you've got NASA sitting in front of you!
Fine for some, sure, but a P-bass is very simple and it sounds bloody good.
Once you've used them, that's your yardstick for everything else.’
Talking of your first P-bass, what originally inspired you to get on to the instrument?
‘Around the time I was fourteen, which would be 1959, pretty much every street had its little band.
It was coming towards the tail-end of skiffle then, and all my mates had guitars.
No-one had a bass, so they were all playing lead and rhythm — mainly Shadows stuff.
So with me it started off by taking the top strings off and playing bass.
‘Then I got a ‘Beatle’ bass, but it was a bit too muffled in its sound.
My whole aim was to get a bass like Jet Harris, a pink Fender, but we couldn't afford it, so I did a couple of paper rounds and a milk round, my Dad chipped in and we got one on HP.
It was about ninety pounds and he went out on a limb for it, too.
So that was the start of it and I've stuck with P-basses since.
‘At the beginning of the '60s I lived in Ealing, and used to go to the Ealing Jazz Club when guys like Cyril Davis were playing.
This was about a year before I joined John Mayall and in fact the band I was in, The Crusaders, had a gig there after they opened it up for rock'n'roll.
But the guy who joined Cyril at that time, Cliff Barton, was a buddy of mine who lived opposite me, and who had turned down the gig with Mayall.
John phoned him up looking for a bass player and Cliff gave him my number.
So John called me up and that was it — thank you, Cliff.
Sad to say he OD'd about four years later…’
Who else would have been in Mayall's band at that time?
‘The original band was John, obviously, Davey Graham, a drummer from Manchester called Peter, who was an accountant during the week.
We just used to play at weekends and he'd drive down from Manchester!
And then the guitarist went from Davey to Bernie Watson, who'd previously been with Screaming Lord Sutch's band; then from Bernie to Roger Dean (yes, the one who does all that artwork on Yes albums ) and from Roger Dean to Eric, and then Eric to Greeny and then to Mick Taylor…’
But Eric came back from a working holiday and Peter was out for a little while, wasn't he?
‘Briefly, yes.
Eric was going to do a trip around the world when he left Mayall, which eventually became a trip to Greece.
I think the ideas for Cream were put together on that trip.
But Clapton came back and walked straight back into the Bluesbreakers gig, so Pete was out.
When Eric left again soon after, John went chasing after Peter again, explained his rather dire predicament, to be met with complete indifference from Peter about returning…!’
You were John Mayall's longest-serving side man, and must have seen a good few guitarists and drummers come and go…
‘Mainly drummers.
In the five years I played with Mayall, there was Hughie Flint, Aynsley Dunbar, Micky Waller, Mick Fleetwood and then Keef Hartley.
I left when Keef was still playing.’
Were you aware of the effect that Eric and Peter's contribution was having on music at that time?
‘Not really; it was a case of not seeing the wood for the trees.
But we definitely became aware of it when we started seeing graffiti saying ‘Clapton Is God’ in a lot of places — I'm sure it wasn't one guy painting it all over London.’
Eric with a spray can…?
‘Yes, I could just see him, two o'clock in the morning on the pushbike carrying a ladder and a can of spray paint!
But musically, no, we weren't aware of it.’
I remember reading an interview with Gus Dudgeon, who did the production on the Bluesbreakers ‘Beano’ album, and he said that you guys, and Eric in particular, gave him nightmares because it was so loud!
He'd almost decided to quit because the recording equipment couldn't handle the volume that Eric was playing at.
Does that ring any bells?
‘Yeah, but you can imagine the problems that Gus would have at that time, and I could see why he would react like that.
The guitar, especially, bled into everything else, which is exactly what engineers didn't want.’
Did Mayall specify exactly what he wanted from his musicians?
‘John's method of working would be: ‘Okay, this is in C,’ and unless it had abnormal changes we just went for it.
And I can't remember a time when he said, ‘Don't play that; play this.’
He'd always give you free rein.’
He's so musical that I'm sure his ability to get others to be creative must have been considerable.
‘I think that's probably John's strongest talent, to pull the extra out of you, combined with a knack for putting people together.
He's got a really good band now, too, which I saw about three months ago.
In fact, we were supposed to be doing something with Eric and John, but Eric couldn't make it, or perhaps didn't want to.
‘I think John's between record contracts, too, which I can't understand at all.
If I had a record company there are a lot of people I would be sure to sign — Albert King doesn't have a label now, for instance— and he'd be on it right away.’
It can't be denied that many players have John Mayall to thank for their career launch…
‘Yes, although I would say that Peter and Eric would have done it anyway.
John was a catalyst who gave them the exposure.
I know I'm a very lucky boy, and many thanks to John Mayall for steering me right, definitely.
I remember my first gig after joining John was at the White Hart, Acton, and I rolled up with my P-bass and my Gibson amp — a Titan was it?— a grey pyramid-shaped amp.
Anyway, I plug in, fresh out from playing Walk, Don't Run and FBI , and John said, ‘Okay, we'll do a blues in C.’ I turned scarlet and mumbled, ‘What's a blues in C?’and he said, ‘Just feel your way through it.’
And it turned out alright…’
Were the partings with John ever acrimonious?
‘I don't think there were ever any bad ones.
But I remember after having resigned, sitting in the front in the band's Commer van — there'd be the driver, the engine cover and then the passenger seat, and you had to take turns sitting on the engine cover.
I remember sitting there and Mick Taylor leaning over and saying, ‘You f***er.’
That was about the only aggro I remember…
‘Mick was very much trying to live down the pretty-boy guitarist bit and to be taken seriously as a blues player.
But he was real young, even when he joined the Stones — about nineteen or twenty.
I think he aged about ten years in one after that!
Hopefully he's interested in being in this band that we're trying to put together.
He's a good player — a hell of a nice guy, too.’
Did you have a personal favourite of all John Mayall's guitarists?
‘I'd say Greeny, definitely.
He had some material put down which, after reviewing the BBC tapes I told you about, is just amazing for that time, and for his age.
Incredible stuff.
So I'd say Peter; he had more talent in a little finger than I've got in my whole body — no exaggeration.
That's why I'm having this push with Stevie that the early BBC stuff should be heard.
There's some great playing on it generally, and some amazing guitar work that has never been heard.
‘Of course, that makes it all sadder and sicker that these things happened to Peter, and that he's doing what he's doing now.
Actually, Mick's in contact with Peter's brother, also Mick, and he's sort of taking care of himself now.
I'm not sure if he's playing, but he's definitely better than he was; he's certainly not digging graves any more.
‘Looking back, the cracks were really showing when the religious thing began to get obsessional and paranoid, and the weird hangers-on were taking him over.
What didn't help was some really impure acid he took in Munich, in ‘69.
He and Danny Kirwan were sort of‘kidnapped’ after a gig by this young Munich ‘jet set’crowd; they disappeared for three days and when they came back that was it.
And I think there is a continual reality problem with flashbacks because of that weekend.
Whatever, he was never the same person again, and seemed to care less and less about the band and the music until he announced, mid-tour in 1970, that he was leaving.
‘Peter was responsible about fulfilling his obligations regarding contracts and so on, which was about six weeks, and that was it.
I think he could see things that he wanted to do individually, maybe in the same way that Hendrix did.
He could see a path that he wanted to explore and couldn't in those surroundings.
And as I say, the acid certainly didn't help…
‘With Danny it wasn't so much the acid; he was just very highly strung anyway, coupled with his excessive drinking.
Unfortunately, he's in and out of reality now as well.
Mick and me must drive them all there.
Jeremy (Spencer ) 's with the Children still, last seen in South America: the quest for Jesus.
Very bizarre…
THE FOLLOWING PERIOD in the career of Fleetwood Mac must rank as one of the most incredible in modern musical history.
Despite an already traumatic episode resulting in the loss of their creative force and most prominent member, the Mac's troubles were far from over.
When Peter Green left, Kirwan and Spencer remained to take the mantle, neither of whom really possessed the ability or motivation to do justice to their new-found roles.
Material for the ensuing ‘Kiln House’ album was sporadic and inconsistent.
Spencer had an almost obsessional liking for Elmore James, and specialised in rock'n'roll parody (check out the live bootlegs from the Peter Green era).
Kirwan, previously the writer of such numbers as the unbelievably catchy Jigsaw Puzzle Blues , was contributing more nebulous material like Dragonfly .
John McVie's wife, ex Blue-Horizon label stalwart and Chicken Shack evacuee Christine Perfect, had joined the band full time.
A tour of America ensued.
Then, in Los Angeles, Jeremy Spencer disappeared…
‘Although we'd been unbelievably disheartened by it all with Peter,’ continues John, ‘that was how things were.
Then, after apparently sorting everything out band-wise, Jeremy suddenly disappeared and we didn't know if he'd been ‘offed’, or what, given the uncertainty of Los Angeles.
But it seemed like every few months there'd be another little trip up.
But Mick and I never questioned ourselves; we just tried to keep it all on the road.’
Although Peter returned to help you finish that tour, the early '70s must have been fraught with looking for replacements, before you crystallised the line-up with Lindsey Buckingham and Stevie Nicks…
‘We never had to scrape, which was good.
But yes, after Lindsey and Stevie joined, the whole thing got back to what it was in terms of success, but in American terms, which was obviously bigger.
But then the other stuff started happening, personal things, just like a soap opera, the same sort of chaos as it was with the Jeremy/Peter/Danny saga.
‘Although Chris and I had divorced, we still played together, standing three feet from each other, and Lindsey and Stevie were doing the same number.
Mick's wife and Bob Weston had an affair, they divorced, eventually re-married, then divorced again.
But that was what you put up with if you wanted this entity called Fleetwood Mac to continue.’
But Fleetwood Mac capitalised perfectly on the mood of the mid-seventies.
People identified with the ‘adult heartache’ lyrical content coupled with the strong melodies and your R&B rhythm section…
‘It was the right thing at the right time.
‘Rumours’ really accelerated the whole gig to very high levels, which became hard to live up to.
But then the record company comparisons started to appear with regard to new material: ‘Well, it's not as good as…’
It's a thankless task then, because despite having become the most successful band of the time, you pick up flak for the next album not working commercially.
But as soon as you start trying to design ‘Rumours 2’…
Well, it could never happen because I think we're incapable of making a plan like that.
Some albums will always be more successful than others, but there's still that ‘Rumours’ yardstick.’
There were some very, very big gigs as well…
‘Yeah, a quarter of a million people, which is not a gig any more — it's beyond a gig!
I remember choppering into the ‘US’ Festival outside of Boston.
I'd never been in a helicopter in my life; you think, ‘This is alright,’ until you get in the bloody thing!
But your ego's getting massaged and I can take that.
It wasn't satisfying in terms of sound, though, because you can't get any sound, even though you've got someone you consider to be the best guy out on the desk, but who happens to be three hundred yards away!
You play the best you can, but it's not the same.
Even coming down to seventeen thousand you can control the sound.
But that was absurd.
The whole ‘US’ thing was absurd, it was a whim.
Who was it, Steve Wozniak from Apple?
I think it was his birthday party, so he had a fling!’
When Lindsey and Stevie joined the band you were out touring on the circuit before the big-selling albums happened.
I remember reading that Stevie had said how hard she found that life, living out of the back of a van, which of course you, Chris and Mick grew up with…
‘Yes, the back of the Commer van, that was the gig.
Stevie might have tended to exaggerate, but although she had rich parents, she worked as a waitress in Los Angeles to support Lindsey, and they roughed it around a bit.
But all the ‘I couldn't handle the touring’ bit, I take with a slight pinch of salt.
I don't remember Stevie Nicks sleeping on top of a Hammond B3 in the back of the van…!’
Despite their overwhelming success, Fleetwood Mac never really shook the slightly dismissive ‘blues-band-gone-wrong’ tag, did they?
‘Not really.
But I can see why.
I've got a BBC tape where we're playing Jenny, Jenny, Jenny, Twist And Shout, Madison Blues , a couple of BB King songs and Oh Well in one recorded set, so people must have wondered, ‘Is this blues or not?’
In the current discussions with Stevie as to how much of that vintage stuff will be on the CD, if we reach a balance and I don't think there's enough, hopefully it will be on an additional CD somewhere down the line.
‘Talking about future projects, there will an inter-reactive CD-ROM which we're putting together.
Basically, it's a CD which you insert in your IBM player on an Apple Mac, and you have eighty tracks plus all the videos.
And being reactive you can pick up a track, put the mouse on it, access ‘Personnel’, click again on say, Stevie, and get the history of Stevie, pictures of Stevie, Stevie's videos by themselves — as much information as that CD will hold.
‘We're trying to package that with Sony, using our anthology as the first example of the technology.
The package comprises a CD player, our anthology and the software to run it, whereas before you needed all sorts of hardware to run videos on computer.
You just load it as you would a program, stick it on your power drive and that's it — full video capability.’
You have a new album out, and a new band —‘John McVie's Gotta Band’.
‘I originally wanted it to be ‘Gorra Band’, but nobody in the USA understood!
Fleetwood Mac, after signing the current deal with Warners, was given the opportunity to do individual projects within a certain budget.
I held my option over until my manager played me a tape of a singer called Lola Thomas.
She's got a great voice and she's a good writer.
I'm not a writer but I have done some singing, and so we met up and decided to do some songs, with a conscious effort to keep it basic-sounding, and showcase Lola's voice.
‘There aren't many solos on the album either.
Mick Taylor has a couple, as has Dave Plenn and there's a tenor solo in there, but that's about it — no bass solos anywhere!
I'm in the band, it's got my name on the cover and it's something I helped produce.
And I'm singing on one track, I think, in the background…very quietly!
‘We're trying to get on a tour with Santana this summer.
We've sent them tapes to see if there's a chance of opening for them, which would be great, because you get to do a thirty-five minute set, really powerhouse it, then watch a few of their numbers, get on the bus and go.’
There's a very blues/soul sound to it.
Did you have much to do with the arrangement?
‘From picking the material, yes — the recording of it, not so much.
The producer, Dennis Walker, who's also Robert Cray's producer, knew the places to go and the musicians to hire.
I was pretty much out of touch with LA musicians; I'm not a ‘socialite’ like Mick Fleetwood.
He's on the go every single night, which may or may not account for his upcoming divorce.’
Do you have difficulty reconciling the fact that there is immense interest in the Mac's past with what you want to do now?
‘Not any more.
I can see that the interest in the past is because it was an era of good music and change, which I don't really see now.
That might just be my age or being set in my ways, but I don't see that excitement.
It wasn't just us; you could go out any day of the week and see something fresh happening.
‘But, like it or not, we were there and involved in it, and looking back the amazing thing for me is I'm sitting here, breathing, after all that.
I'm amazed that as many people came out of it as did, because there was some abuse happened there, beyond belief really.
So, all things considered, there were surprisingly few casualties.
Fleetwood Mac just seemed to get more than our fair share…’
Jackson JCR2L Randy Rhoads Tribute Often cited as a contender for Eddie Van Halen's crown and an undisputedly original voice on his instrument, Randy Rhoads' life was cut tragically short in a flying accident.
Jackson have chosen the tenth anniversary of Randy's death to release a limited edition of his famous white sharkfin guitar…
Review by David Mead.
Randy worked in close association with Grover Jackson to produce his custom guitars and this model was in fact a forerunner of the equally famous black version, which Jackson have previously made available as a signature model.
CONSTRUCTION
Apparently, Randy wanted this guitar to be known as the Concorde' and when you take into account its overall shape and sleek appearance it does have a great deal in common with its British Airways equivalent.
The Tribute follows Randy's original design in almost every respect, featuring a maple neck-through-body construction, topped off with a bound ebony finger board and Randy's own choice of thin, Dunlop 6230 frets.
These look almost out of place on what must be considered, at least by association, a heavy rock guitar, the popular penchant, of course, being for the chunkier fret.
The fretting gives the neck a feel which resembles that of an acoustic guitar and would probably take some players a bit of time to get used to.
The frets themselves are well seated, although there are a couple of marks in the ebony where a bit of over-enthusiastic end filing is evident.
The inlays are mother-of-pearl and perhaps a trifle unusual in how they diminish in size up the neck…
Instead of doing so in an even, proportionate fashion, they appear to shrink in rather erratic steps.
However, after studying as many photographs as I could find of Randy's original, it would appear that this was the way he wanted things and I wouldn't dare criticise him for it.
In fact, one of the major drawbacks with signature models is that the buyer unwittingly inherits all of the idiosyncrasiesof the original player's design and, in a few instances, these could prove to be incompatible with his or her own style of playing.
The scale length of the Tribute checks out at a Fender-like 25½ inches.
The neck joins the body at around the 16th fret, making access to those all important top frets rather awkward, to say the least.
However, I presume that Randy had his own ideas in this area too.
The tuners are Jackson's own and feel satisfyingly smooth and efficient, with no unwanted backlash.
The tremolo is Jackson's Licensed Floyd locking system and that represents the one major departure from the Rhoads original: photo evidence reveals Randy's choice of trem to be a non-locking Fender type.
I can understand that the reasoning behind this deviation is wholly fashion-based.
There are many players out there who I'm sure would look at a non-locking system as archaic and unusable.
But this guitar is meant to be a tribute and if you are going to do the job properly, then details like this shouldn't be overlooked, whether the Floyd is better or not than the original.
I suppose this opens the debate about whether a limited edition guitar like this one, which has a projected run of only 200 units, is ever likely to be used as an everyday instrument, or whether it is destined to end up mute behind glass in a collection somewhere.
Bearing all this in mind, the addition of a non-original feature like this is a little ambiguous.
In any case, the trem unit has been sunk into the body in such a way as to maintain the low-profiling offered by a non-locking system.
By comparison, on Gibson's Flying V guitar, the bridge pickup has to sit rather high because of the effect the tune-o-matic bridge has in raising the height of the strings above the body, which I've always thought looked and felt a little clumsy.
This way round, the slimline look is nicely preserved.
The pickups on the JCR2L are by Seymour Duncan with a Duncan Distortion (SH6) in the bridge and a Jazz (SH-2) in the neck.
The controls are two volume, two tone and neither pickup is coil-tappable.
Pickup selection is via a toggle switch mounted on the upper wing', towards the neck of the guitar, which is an unusual but not wholly impractical place for it.
IN USE
Even before plugging the Tribute in I was aware that I was dealing with a class act, comparable, perhaps, to sitting in the driving seat of a Ferrari for the first time.
But I've always found the Flying V and its derivatives a devil of a job to sit down with and play.
Of course, I'm well aware that this was never the point and that posing potential is at maximum only when the guitar is strapped on and slung low.
I've played many neck-through-body instruments before and sustain has generally been very good, but here it is nothing short of remarkable.
Even when played clean, the notes ring on for longer than you would believe possible.
In fact play clean' is a thing which the bridge pickup on this guitar practically refuses to do.
There is a terrific amount of power in the Duncan Distortion and here it is being put to the best possible use.
Although the neck pickup exhibits a noticeable drop in output, quality is maintained and here the JT proves itself capable of some sweet bluespower.
Pump up the volume, as they say, and keep a straitjacket handy because the sound from this instrument is MAD!
I had a whole lotta fun playing just about every megalithic riff I could remember and the Tribute came up smiling every time.
CONCLUSION
It is always difficult to properly assess a signature model and remain 100% objective in the process.
The tendency is always to criticise what is essentially someone else's idea of 6-string perfection.
What I'm trying to say is that while I don't really like the shape and some of the other features on this guitar at all, and would certainly not choose to include them if I were designing an instrument for myself, it shouldn't matter.
What is important to note is that the collaboration between Grover Jackson and Randy Rhoads in designing this guitar was both fruitful and a complete success, because between them they produced an instrument which, in Randy's hands, has provided itself with an impressive track record.
As far as the extent of this limited edition being only 200 is concerned, my only reservations are outlined above: namely that a guitar is designed to be used and not coveted wholly as an objet d'art to be hung on the wall, which I suspect is exactly where the bulk of these models are likely to end up.
The price?
Well it's high, for sure, and probably for aficionados, pools winners and second-time mortgagees only.
But it's also fearsomely difficult to argue with, in view of the quality and exclusivity of this instrument.
METAL GURUS Hartke 1155 & 210 Bass Combos Following on from Hartke's 3500 head reviewed recently comes the new and equally powerful combo series…
Review by Gibson Keddie.
John Henry Enterprises have sent us two examples of Hartke's 350 watt combo.
One is the model 210, which utilises a ported 2x10 enclosure, the other being the 1155, a single fifteen-inch bass driver accompanied by a smaller high-frequency five-inch unit, again in a tuned and ported cabinet.
The combos are covered in distinctive black Ozite with tough plastic corners.
Of the two combos the 2x10 is the more compact, at 23″H x 20.5″W x 16″D, whereas the 1155 has a height of 27.5″.
The 1x15 is also heavier than the 2x10; both combos use a combination of sturdy ½″ and ¾″ ply in their construction, resulting in the 1155's 81 lbs against the 210's 70 lbs.
Short individual hauls only, methinks.
In my review of the 3500 head, it was mentioned that Hartke had given the amp a no-nonsense look, and I would re-iterate that opinion here.
If I were to draw up a spec list of preferred bass amp facilities, the resulting layout would probably look similar to the Hartke's: uncluttered and functional.
To briefly recap, two inputs cater for passive and active basses, and wide tonal variation is offered by separately controlled, independent preamp sections.
One of these is valve driven, for some tonal colour, while the other offers the clarity and power of solid state.
The channels are series-connected, and thus ‘blendable’.
Variable compression is offered to help control the sound at any given level, and this is augmented by a selectable ten-band graphic equaliser which governs a frequency range of 30Hz to 8KHz.
Two further tone controls offer high and low pass boost/cut ‘contouring’.
These are powerful controls, and Hartke recommend using them first in order to set up the initial sound.
This can then be modified by use of the graphic EQ system, if deemed necessary.
Master volume is the last control on the panel, alongside the power-on rocker switch and LED.
A quick look at the back panel reveals a heartening lack of gizmology.
A direct-out three-pin XLR is accompanied by two push switches for selecting pre or post EQ out, along with a ground lift to eradicate earth loops when DI'ing.
Effects loop send and return sockets operate in conjunction with an ‘FX mix’ biasing control, which lets you select how much of any external effect is fed to the amp's dry signal.
Finally, there are two 8 ohm speaker outputs, with one being used for the unit's internal driver.
As ever, the amp is fan-cooled; with the 3500 head I had expressed reservations about not being able to switch the fan off for recording, but John Henry's insisted that it really wouldn't pose a problem in either DI'd or close-miking situations.
I've said before that combos are ultimately a compromised amp/speaker setup, due primarily to the demand for portability.
At first, combos were referred to disparagingly by dedicated ‘separates’ users, but as time has gone by it has become increasingly difficult to differentiate, in performance terms, between combo and stack.
Mind you, some of this performance has been achieved at the expense of portability, such is the need for ruggedness in bass rigs.
Combos such as these Hartkes reinforce this boundary-blurring, with speaker configurations which can be selected in accordance with the player's own tastes in tone.
But on to the sounds.
On testing, the 2x10 holds a well-defined, fairly upper-mid biased sound (pretty much as you would expect) performing with commendable consistency even when hammered with the low ‘B’ of a 5-string bass (though some discretionary compression is no bad thing at such volumes).
The 1x15 possesses slightly different tonal characteristics.
In order to increase separation, Hartke have developed a special 5″ driver for use in conjunction with the 15-incher.
The use of a fifteen obviously fattens out the sound, helping to temper the natural brightness of the aluminium speakers, with the small driver accentuating the upper range.
The middle bias of the 210 gives way to that ‘bass-and-treble-no-mid’ slappy sound, which is actually a very usable general bass tone.
If I have a gripe with Hartke, it's that the reproduction is just a little too clear; missed, fluffed and dissonant notes are all too easily discernible.
Both these combos perform with an optimum 240 watts under their own 8-ohm load.
An 8-ohm extension cabinet can be added to both versions, when the total load drops to 4-ohms, unleashing the unit's full 350-watt capacity.
With regard to the fifteen inch speaker, Larry Hartke has stated that it offers no real performance advantages over Hartke's renowned tens, but has been introduced to satisfy a specific demand.
Larry adds that his optimum rig would be two 4x10s, and listening to the tens perform under an extreme load does tend to qualify his argument.
CONCLUSION
As far as these combos are concerned, no-one who makes the purchase should be disappointed.
As basses gain more strings and bassists push playing horizons further and further apart, Hartke's technology is better placed than most to take advantage of the situation, especially as they reinforce this tonal definition with their use of smaller drivers.
And with copious amounts of tone modification and sheer brute power on tap, via the active contouring filters (18dB boost at 100Hz and 10Hz) then the graphic equaliser (15dB of boost or cut with a ten-band slider ranging from 30Hz right up to 8kHz), the Hartkes are never likely to be found wanting.
This is pro-level gear for sure, at pro-level prices.
I don't think the overall sound would suit everyone.
The sheer efficiency of the drivers, especially at high volumes, can be disconcerting, and the sound is exceptionally bright.
Some facility to attenuate the horn in the 1155 might help, but in the end few would argue that these aren't distinctive, good-looking units with an individual sound and a power rating which should leave no-one wanting more.
RRP: Hartke 1155c Bass Combo £949.00 Hartke 210c Bass Combo £849.00
For more information, contact:
ONE MORE TIME There's one section of the guitar market which seems to spend its time in permanent relegation from the pages of guitar magazines…
Review by Eddie Allen.
I'm referring of course to budget acoustic and electro-acoustic instruments, which are often the starting place for the next generation of guitar hero or hobbyist, or where electric guitar players look for an inexpensive diversion into arguably more expressive sounds.
Now that bands like Extreme and Mr Big have had chart successes with songs featuring acoustic instruments the time would seem right for many players to make a first serious foray into the subtler side of rock.
Of course, top bands can usually be seen sporting up-market acoustics or electro-acoustics, and unless you've got money to burn these expensive guitars are probably not the instruments to get you started.
However, companies like Epiphone, Yamaha, Fender, Washburn and others offer ranges of cheap and not quite so cheap instruments which are well suited to the occasional strummer or picker.
And these Encore guitars from John Hornby Skewes range between £109 for the SW213 acoustic to just under £250 for the Ovation-based 7EGNS electro-acoustic.
SW213
Starting at the far left of the picture, the SW213 has the lowest price tag but, as is so often the case, it's the easiest to play, with a surprisingly low action.
However, I would suggest that this is due more to luck than judgement, having noticed that the nut has been heavily shimmed in order to raise it, compensating for string slots which are cut much too deeply.
The SW213's body has a laminated spruce top with nato back and sides.
Nato has also been used for the neck and fingerboard and while the overall appearance of the SW213 won't compete with more expensive instruments it's quite good enough for a 100 quid guitar.
It is somewhat let down by the front of the headstock, which is covered in sanding marks, but in the company it keeps here it's the exception rather than the rule.
While at this end of the neck the Grover adjustable machineheads are smooth, and although budget guitars are not exactly known for their tuning stability, this guitar is reassuringly accurate.
The strings are attached to a well-finished painted maple bridge.
It's a pity this finish quality isn't carried over to the fingerboard, an area of a budget guitar which often lets it down.
A little more time spent finishing the surface and a higher quality fretwire wouldn't contribute much more to the production cost of the instrument, but would certainly make it easier and more enjoyable to play.
SW213EB
This is the electro-acoustic version of the SW213 and retails for £20 more than the standard model.
For the extra you get a neck-mounted passive pickup, tone and volume controls and strap button input socket, but there are improvements in the quality of the finish, too.
The face of the headstock, for example, shows no sign of the rogue sanding marks of the SW213, and the nut is also correctly cut and fitted.
Again, though, the fingerboard could do with some attention.
Other than that the black paint job is nicely buffed and looks good, considering black is such a difficult colour to get right.
Acoustically, this guitar sounds slightly brighter than the cheaper SW213, which is certainly due to the condition of the strings, rather than the construction, as the materials used are common to both instruments.
Electrically, the sound has a bias towards the upper mid-range, causing the top strings to stand out rather more than the bass.
Playing the SW213EB through a guitar amp (which is probably how electros in this price bracket will be used) with the amp's mid control backed off helped improve the clarity, but as the pickup is the passive type, with six individual polepieces set into the fingerboard, it's never going to have the bite of an active, bridge-mounted transducer.
That said, it's still a warm, usable acoustic sound and while feedback is a problem at higher volumes, for general use and recording the SW213EB is a useful guitar to have around.
SW18
A very reasonable £139 buys the Encore SW18 acoustic.
And it's amazing the difference a few more pounds can make to the quality of a guitar.
The SW18 is noticeably superior in both finish and sound to the previous two models, although the laminated spruce top and nato neck, back and sides are the same.
Rosewood has been used for the fingerboard and bridge, and the machineheads are once again Grovers.
As is the norm with most modern acoustics, the truss rod is again adjusted from inside the soundhole.
The tone here is much richer and brighter, so consequently this is a more enjoyable guitar to play than the previous two, and really does sound better than its price suggests.
I put this down to the use of rosewood for the fingerboard and the addition of some extra internal bracing.
I'm still not too happy with the quality of the frets, although both frets and fingerboard are better finished on this guitar.
ENCORE 7EGNS
At the top of this pile in both price and quality is Encore's Ovation lookalike, the 7EGNS.
A laminated spruce top is mounted onto a parabolic bowl and edgebound with white plastic.
The green sunburst finish is well done and attractive.
If you don't like green, then grey sunburst is offered as an alternative.
For the bridge Encore have used rosewood, with the strings fixed through from the rear edge.
This is how Ovation do it, and it certainly means less hassle when it comes to changing strings.
Rosewood is also the choice for the fingerboard, although for the neck and headstock Encore have opted to use a single piece of sakura.
While the 7EGNS has a low action and plays easily, there is a tendency for the strings to buzz, and close inspection reveals the cause to be nut slots cut too deeply on the A and D strings.
It's more annoying than serious, really, but serves to highlight problems commonly associated with less expensive instruments.
On a more positive note, the electrics are very good for a guitar in this price range.
The pickup is a bridge-mounted active piezo type, controlled by a 3-band EQ, with treble, mid and bass sliders providing a considerable amount of cut or boost to each frequency.
A fourth slider takes care of volume and a status light shows when the circuit is powered up.
The battery is clamped to the back of the circuit housing, and while the clamp is a great idea (it stops the battery falling out), it makes battery changing more fiddly.
Acoustically, the 7EGNS sounds bright and clean, and considering this is a lightweight instrument the bottom end is surprisingly fat.
Plugged into an amp the EQ takes things from bright, jangling treble to a fat bass which feeds back at the lowest volumes when the relevant slider is pushed way up.
Generally speaking, though, feedback isn't an affliction from which this guitar suffers.
Comments from around the office about the amplified sound were all very favourable and with a little work (on the nut, in particular) this guitar could more than handle a pro gig.
CONCLUSION
I suppose I could be accused of damning with faint praise.
But let me say that's not my intention.
The first three instruments here are obviously not intended for the serious player but for the beginner, or to be strummed once in a while as a second or third instrument.
All the same, they have to represent value for money, and while they might not score too highly under professional or even semi-professional scrutiny, they are certainly worth their asking price.
The fourth is a few steps up the ladder and could easily be used as a gigging guitar, although it still carries hallmarks of the mass-produced Korean instrument.
What I'm saying here is that, if you fancy one, it should be checked out carefully in the shop before parting with the ready folding, even though, for the price, you'd have to go a very long way to beat it.
All these guitars have slim necks, which helps to make the beginner's life easier, and providing they are treated with the same care and respect as more expensive instruments, they should give good service for many years.
For further information please contact  
BLACK IS BLACK Tony Iommi's John Diggins Custom This black SG-style guitar is one of possibly five made for Tony Iommi in the early '80s by ex-John Birch luthier John Diggins.
John remembers making Tony two red ones, and possibly another three in black…
By Eddie Allen.
John Diggins' involvement with Tony Iommi began back in the early '70s when working with guitar builder John Birch on Tony's original black guitar.
Tony's enthusiasm for the feel of this SG-shaped model with its 24 fret neck enabled JD to take the dimensions and incorporate them into the new instruments he built for Iommi.
Of course, the original John Birch model is still owned by the Sabs' mainman.
The body and neck of the Diggins are made from Brazilian mahogany, unlike the John Birch which was made entirely from much heavier maple (Birch insisted that maple was the only timber for guitar building).
Appearances can be deceptive, and while the Diggins looks like a typical through-neck guitar of the period, it's actually a glued neck, a design which John still incorporates into his famous Jay Dee basses.
As he says, ‘I don't see the point of having a through neck once you've cut a big hole out of it for the pickups.’
One obvious feature of Diggins' guitar which makes it instantly distinguishable from the John Birch is the headstock.
JD recalls: ‘That was a design I thought about when I first started working for myself.
It's based on the two fingered symbol of peace, and although it was originally designed for lead guitars I eventually scaled it up to use on my basses; it's one of the features that makes them instantly recognisable.’
Because of Tony's damaged fingers he insisted that the ebony fingerboard was lacquered, making the frets seem lower and providing a smoother action.
One of the myths surrounding Tony Iommi concerns the mother-of-pearl crucifix' inlays interspersing the 24 frets.
It has often been said that Tony played a guitar with the crucifixes upside down, for a more sinister and satanic embellishment, but John Diggins is adamant that he never built one like that and he's pretty certain that no such thing exists.
He reckons that if Tony was ever seen using one it was probably a right-handed guitar upside down.
Iommi's involvement with John Birch's pickup development is reflected in the pickups on the JD guitar.
These are a pair of humbuckers with stainless steel covers painted black, the pole-pieces replaced by rails' and wired to John Birch's specification of 24K.
The theory behind Birch's design was that a continuous magnet provides far better balance across the strings, whilst individual pole-pieces also interfere with sustain when the strings are bent.
It was Tony's suggestion to put the rails across, prompted by a desire for more even sustain.
JD says that for some reason the rails also seem to amplify the high frequencies, but can't say why.
He does know that they're powerful: ‘I got used to playing around with Tony's guitars, and although the fact that he sometimes detunes and uses very light strings doesn't help the output, these pickups are very powerful — a fair bit more powerful than conventional humbuckers.’
The guitar is conventionally equipped with two volume and two tone pots, just like a Gibson SG, and John Diggins is quick to add that there's nothing fancy about the wiring.
The JD has undergone some slight changes over the years.
For instance, the original vibrato unit has been replaced by a Washburn Wonderbar, and the nut has been swapped for what looks like graphite, presumably to aid tuning stability.
Originally the nut would have been bone or brass, although JD couldn't specify which.
The original Schaller M6 machineheads have survived, though.
‘One interesting point concerns the two jack sockets on the face and edge of the body; these were wired in parallel so either could be used.
However, at one stage, one of Tony's roadies — apparently a bit of an electronics whizzkid — wired the guitar to send the signal from one of the sockets to a transformer and into a mixer, while the other went straight to the amp.
In the end, though, this idea didn't work too successfully and the sockets were returned to their original configuration.
The final word on Tony Iommi's custom-built JD guitar has to come from John Diggins himself: ‘Apart from the fact that Tony's been threatening to take me out for a drink ever since I've known him, things have changed a lot, and now we don't get the time to get together any more.
Tony used to come up with some quite amazing ideas and we'd try and put them into practice.
But every time we came up with something we never seemed to get it beyond the initial idea, and then suddenly someone else would come out with it!
It was very frustrating…’
Guitarist would like to thank The Guitar Factory in Mill Row, Bexley, Kent for the loan of the guitar, and also John Diggins of Jay Dee Guitars for his invaluable help with this article.
STAGE PRESENCE Lowden LSE-11 Lowden's thin-bodied stage'n'studio acoustic aims at striking the perfect balance between acoustic tone and amplified usability…
Review by Rick Batey.
Acoustic players will doubtless recall the last Lowden we had around these parts, the ‘Guitar Of The Year’ giveaway, and they will also recall that we drooled — virtually slobbered over it, it fact.
Frankly, if you'd played it, you'd have slobbered too.
So we're more than looking forward to reviewing this one, although before we examine it in detail perhaps we should take a quick look at Lowden's model-numbering system, since with so many different options available, like cutaways, special inlays, different bindings and decoration, it's sometimes hard to spot which model is which.
It's not actually that complicated, because the range is basically divided into three types of guitars.
First, the ‘O’ or ‘original’series Lowdens are the big-bodied ones, and they come in virtually any combination of mahogany, walnut or rosewood backs and sides and cedar or spruce tops.
Secondly there's the ‘F’ or ‘flat-picking’series.
These are smaller-bodied than the ‘O’ series — about an inch narrower and half an inch shallower — and the necks are slightly narrower too, being 43mm at the nut instead of the standard 45mm.
And finally we have the Lowden ‘LSE’ or ‘stage edition’series, with exactly the same dimensions as the ‘F’series save for one thing — they're considerably shallower, being 80mm deep instead of 120mm.
The LSE guitars are designed to be stage-usable straight out of the box, and so feature cutaways and undersaddle pickups as standard.
CONSTRUCTION
The Lowden LSE comes in two versions, the mahogany-bodied LSE I and the rosewood-bodied LSE II, and it's the latter model we have here for review.
All LSEs come with spruce tops, not cedar, and our particular top has a natural pale brown colour and displays some wayward but attractive figuring.
Some players hate anything but perfectly even-grained tops on acoustic guitars but I think this one only adds character.
In the best Lowden tradition the entire guitar has been given a matt ‘wire-wool’ type finish and again, like all Lowdens, it has a very hefty-looking top — almost twice as thick as those of some other makers.
But in spite of this and without sacrificing Lowden's characteristically solid construction, the LSE II manages to be an amazingly lightweight instrument — a reminder that there's no single ‘right’ way to make a good-sounding guitar.
The two-piece rosewood back is reinforced inside with four spruce braces, all shaved to a sharp point, and the sides have little mahogany strips every six inches or so to prevent cracks from spreading too far should the guitar be dropped — heaven forfend.
Internal finishing is laudably neat and clean, all sanded smooth and completely glue-free, and I only wish they'd finished it off by putting the label on straight!
On the outside, the LSE II has all-wood decoration: contrasting rings of rosewood, walnut, maple and mahogany all gathered in a single band for the soundhole rosette and purflings of walnut, maple and rosewood running around the top edge.
The main edge binding, back and front, is sycamore; Lowden refrain from using pearwood for the binding on their cutaway models because, like an American car, it's great on the straights but scary on the corners.
The LSE's neck joins the body at the fourteenth fret, with the cutaway giving access to all twenty frets.
It's made from one piece of mahogany, with no extra bits making up the headstock or heel, and it's a superb piece of work.
The profile is so comfortable that you hardly notice it, and the heel and volute are unmistakably the work of someone who believes that ‘just good enough’ is just not good enough — brilliant stuff.
The familiarly-shaped headstock has the pearl ‘Lowden’ logo inlaid into an exotic wood facing, and it carries a set of gold-plated machines with swirly-amber plastic buttons.
The fingerboard is high-quality ebony, with no position markers save for some little pearl side-dots.
There's no fingerboard binding, and perhaps a little more care could have been taken in filling the ends of the fret-slots — mind you, that's practically the only cosmetic flaw on the whole instrument.
The only practical flaw I can find is some faintly uneven string-spacing at the nut, making the top E string too close to the B string and too far from the edge.
It's faint, but it does blemish an otherwise faultless job.
Lowden bridges are unusual in two respects: the saddles are split into two sections for optimum intonation on wound and unwound strings, and the strings mount through from the back of the bridge rather than via the old bridge-pin method, which would mean a longer string-changing time.
We'd have liked to try the LSE with Lowden's new preamp system complete with volume and treble/bass controls on the upper bout, but none were available at the time and we've had to make do with the non-controlled version.
This has an EMG undersaddle pickup, and EMG's new endpin-jack.
The battery is clipped to the neck-block, and the plastic clip itself is far too strong — help!
I'm only a puny musician!
The truss rod nut would also be extremely awkward to adjust in any kind of a hurry, but considering some players' sketchy ideas of how a truss rod works, perhaps that's no bad thing.
IN USE
As one of the few major acoustic companies who aren't trying to emulate anyone else, Lowden's guitars have great strength of character and thus tend to polarise guitarists into two camps: those who utterly adore them, and those who are left dry-eyed and unmoved.
It just depends on what kind of player you are.
It's hard to imagine a guitar further from the honourable but over-copied Martin tradition, both in feel and in sound.
Martins tend to be stiff, precise and demanding; in comparison, Lowdens seem loose and relaxed.
The LSE is one of those rare guitars which you hardly notice after a couple of minutes, because you're too busy playing the thing.
The neck fits into the hand, the slim body eases the usual arm-aches, the action is low and easy, the intonation is spot-on, and you're away.
Just as I have no idea how Lowden keep their guitars as light as this, I've no idea how they get such a warm, full response out of a medium-sized, thin-bodied instrument.
C'mon, guys, this is an electro-acoustic and it's supposed to sound toppy and cheap, not all soft and natural and expressive.
How on earth do you expect to sell ‘em?
Of course, some of the LSE II's bass response must be down to the rosewood back and sides; the chances are the mahogany version would be toppier-sounding, but both would make equally top-notch recording guitars.
And so to the pickup.
I won't go into the EMG system in extreme detail, because we're presently preparing a special acoustic pickup article in which we can compare it against the other big names, but it seems to suit the Lowden very well.
Getting undersaddle pickups to reproduce highs is easy, coping with the lows is more difficult, and coping with the mids — the Lowden's strongest point — is more difficult still, but all the same the EMG provides a high-quality representation of the LSE's warm, woody acoustic tone.
I was a bit worried about how the string-balance would work out on this guitar, since the pickup has to be bent around the corner on the Lowden's split-saddle channel, but everything's fine.
The EMG also sounds a good deal less synthetic and elasticated than other types I've tried.
The only aspect of the sound I'd find fault with is a common concern with these pickups: the first few milliseconds of the note.
The EMG adds a faintly ‘thuddy’ kind of attack to the LSE's lovely round single-note tone — but it's liveable-with.
I'm looking forward to trying another guitar with the EMG pickup and the Lowden preamp, though, mainly because I find electro-acoustics without volume controls a bit frightening.
At only £40 extra, the preamp sounds well worth it.
There's one small improvement that Lowden could easily make to the LSE, and that would be to have a strap-button at the heel as a standard feature.
This is a ‘stage’ guitar, after all, and I can't think of anyone who actually prefers to hang their strap from a machinehead.
The chances are that any LSE owner would have an appropriate button fitted as soon as possible, so if Lowden themselves fitted them, making sure the job was done elegantly, that would keep the guitar original and prevent any screw-ups by those amateur guitar repairers who've never heard of pilot-holes…
CONCLUSION
Pretty scrumptious stuff.
Lowden have managed to pack a big sound into a small package and the end result is a guitar that can cope with anything from basic stage accompaniment to virtuoso-standard fingerpicking.
The prices of Lowdens reflect the cost of materials and the time put into them.
Obviously, for most of us a guitar like this would be a once-in-a-lifetime purchase (for some, a never-in-a-lifetime) but the LSE is in fact very, very good value for money.
Their construction standards seem as high as ever, since the LSE II is superbly finished both inside and out.
The only area in which it loses out to the deeper-bodied F-model is on sheer projection, and I could well imagine some players foregoing that extra bit of welly just for the comfort and convenience of the LSE's thin body.
Comparisons at this level of guitar-building are difficult; you're welcome to argue the relative merits of Lowden, Martin, Santa Cruz, Taylor, old Fyldes and so on until you're blue in the face, but the fact is that they're all different guitars which excel in different areas.
I wouldn't buy a Lowden LSE for four-on-the-floor bluegrass flatpicking, but for melody/fingerstyle techniques with jazz or Celtic influences, it's a winner.
A guitar for discerning types everywhere.
OLD, NEW, BORROWED, BLUE Fender ‘62 Vintage Re-issue This guitar was responsible for a spontaneous ‘down tools’ when it arrived here last week.
A Strat-orientated glee club meeting was held and the guitar given marks out of 10…
Review by David Mead
Vintage re-issue Stratocasters from any period in Fender's history are no strangers to the pages of this magazine, and the excuse for examining yet another is the buzz that this particular specimen caused when it was first spotted and unanimously coveted by the Guitarist editorial staff at the Northern Music Show in May.
A few months ago we looked at the Fender Hot Rod Strat, featuring a DiMarzio humbucker at the bridge: an off-the-peg version of one of the most common custom options requested of guitar repairmen today.
Now, having no doubt asked themselves the question, ‘How can we make a Japanese ‘62 re-issue Strat even more appealing?’
Fender have hit upon the idea of using the dodgy antique dealer's favourite ploy: artificial ageing.
It is well known that the plastic used on original Fenders used to fade from white to a sort of greenish grey, and this type of scratchplate has been on offer as a cosmetic retro-fit for some time.
But faded switches, pickup covers and so on have been next to impossible to find.
So including them here on a stock instrument represents something of a treat for the would-be vintage guitar purchaser who has been otherwise stopped in his tracks by the silly money habitually demanded for early '60s Strats.
CONSTRUCTION
The thing that concerns me, as I go about describing, for the Nth time, the world's most famous electric guitar, is that it's all been said before.
But just in case there is one among you who doesn't know…
The accurately curvaceous body is almost certainly made from alder.
It's difficult to be 100% sure, of course, with a layer of Sonic blue polyester in the way, but it's more than likely.
The neck is maple, with a slab rosewood fingerboard which has sprouted twenty-one nicely seated, thin frets.
The machineheads are in the older Kluson style, with incredibly convenient slotted string posts for tucking those unwieldy string ends into, thus protecting oneself from the horrors associated with hypodermic guitar string injury.
The headstock has the single butterfly-type string guide, to maintain a healthy break angle across the nut, which itself is nicely cut, if a mite too high for some tastes.
There is an unsightly splodge of yellow-tinted polyester lacquer on the side of the nut, spoiling the otherwise neat and appearance of this end of the guitar.
Of course, the watchword here is certainly ‘vintage’ and Fender are well practised in the art of duplicating an earlier model in a successful range.
Any omissions are usually for quite practical reasons and here the ‘clay dot’ position markers have been replaced by the cleaner and harder-wearing cream plastic variety.
Accessed from the body end, the truss rod is the old ‘slotted head’ type, which needs nought but a humble screwdriver to adjust: good news for those of us who find the successful storage of appropriate Allen keys in accessible places an impossible task.
The tremolo is the normal, pre-Floyd type with the bent metal bridgepieces, as opposed to the later, cast mazak type.
The trem arm is all of an inch longer than those of late, which is actually quite nice.
The stars of the show here just have to be the aged scratchplate, covers and knobs that I mentioned earlier.
But strange, because although Fender have chosen to include the full vintage set on the audience-orientated front side of the guitar, the spring cavity cover on the reverse side is still boring old white.
PLAYABILITY
Being a bit hard up for anything new to tell you in this section I'll say that the weight of the guitar is medium/light and, true to form, it balances perfectly whether you choose to sit or stand while playing.
Acoustically, there is enough zing to brighten up even your darkest hours of noodling and the neck is remarkably choke-free considering the fingerboard's 7½ inch ‘vintage’ radius.
If you're wondering whether it sounds like a thirty year-old Strat, the answer is an obvious ‘no’.
Part of the mystique associated with a mature instrument is how the years give it an individuality and a sonic thumbprint of its own, and it's still very early days for this one.
It does, however, possess that lovely, pingy, springy sound which, with a bit of echo, takes you direct to the Fillmore West!
Generally, old blue's sounds are pretty much conventional modern Fender Strat.
As always, the bridge pickup lacks any serious punch, but its middle and neck cohorts do an admirable job, if a little buzzily due to a lack of any serious screening.
Dare I say that a set of vintage pickups and a lick of conductive paint would almost complete the sonic illusion, in the same way that burying the neck and body in peat for a few months would crown the guitar's appearance!
Otherwise, all is fine in the electrics and wiring departments, although if I were a real fanatic, I would change the switch and possibly the pots for the better, USA variety.
CONCLUSION
One of the major problems I've encountered with this review is actually keeping hold of the guitar long enough to form my own opinion.
Every time I turn around someone else has run off with it and I've probably walked a good few office miles in its retrieval.
It is amazing that in this age of guitar exotica, courtesy of PRS, Valley Arts and so on, most players cannot help but become romantic and misty-eyed about an old Strat — even one that was made in Japan only a month or so ago.
Fender have certainly hit the nail on the head with this one, but if blue's not your hue then how about vintage white, black, three-tone sunburst or candy apple red…?
Oh, and the marks out of 10?
Well, we don't really assess things that way, and the romantic aspects of this guitar make objectivity even more difficult than usual.
But given a better switch and pots, and a beefier bridge pickup, old blue wouldn't fall far short of the maximum.
LOVE IN A COLD CLIMATE Guy Chadwick The House Of Love are by all accounts a fairly traumatic band to be involved with.
Guitarist and songwriter Guy Chadwick tells of the trials and the tribulations, and reveals some surprising influences…
Interview by Rick Batey.
We're sitting in a pub in South London, near the Elephant & Castle, waiting for Guy Chadwick, the mastermind behind The House Of Love, purveyors of some of the best guitar-band pop of the '80s.
Superbly intelligent and well-crafted on record, surfing along upon churning, chiming guitars, Chadwick's crew have proved unpredictable enough onstage to make for a compelling night out.
After the House Of Love's self-titled and difficult first album came ‘Fontana’, the, erm, difficult second album.
Now we've got ‘Babe Rainbow’, the third one, and as you'll probably guess, this one wasn't exactly a breeze either.
Guitarist Simon Walker left right at the end of recording and so, as of a few weeks ago, we have a brand-new House Of Love guitarist — ex-Woodentop Simon Mawby, fresh from playing funky Chic-style stuff behind Jimmy Somerville, and now in the unenviable position of trying to learn the new album while compressing three guitar parts into one in order to play it live.
Chadwick arrives, breezing into the bar, looking well and happy, with a big grin and his hair all over the place.
And the first surprise of the interview comes straight away, as soon as Chadwick accepts the proferred copy of Guitarist .
It's the issue with the Tom Verlaine article, the one where Chadwick contributed some Verlaine-orientated thoughts for the piece — but instead of turning first to that, he flips straight to the cover interview with Slash.
Crikey!
It's hard to imagine a band further from the ‘are ya doin' awright?’ approach than The House Of Love…
‘Well, I've always been into all kinds of guitarists,’ Guy explains.
‘The ultimate rock guitarist for me is Hendrix — for me, no-one else has ever come close to what he did.
I'm a really big Jimmy Page fan as well.
And I like a lot of the contemporary American rock groups.
I mean, Metallica's guitar sound is unbelievable!
‘As for Guns N’ Roses, I bought ‘Appetite For Destruction’three years ago and the one thing that struck me was just how exciting the guitars were.
Slash has got a blend of really gritty aggression with the more traditional kind of rock'n'roll stuff.
He obviously likes Jimmy Page and it's pretty easy to tell where he's coming from, but he's got a good sound and it's really fresh.
‘I think it was probably Peter Green that first inspired me to play the guitar.
Of all the guitarists I've ever heard, he's easily my favourite.
It's just the beauty of his playing, the sound, the taste, the way he arranged his guitar parts.
I do think he's got to be the best rock guitarist…
Well, that's obviously a bit of a ridiculous generalisation, but there's just something about his playing that was unexplainable.
‘He was such a good singer as well, and his guitar playing and his songwriting style went together perfectly.
Every guitarist ought to listen to an album called ‘Then Play On’, which is the last album Green ever did with Fleetwood Mac.
Funnily enough, it's an album that hardly anyone seems to have heard of, apart from the real Fleetwood Mac enthusiasts — perhaps it's because it doesn't have any of the famous tracks on it.
But all the guitar playing on it is fantastic; it's a brilliant guitarist's album.’
Although Chadwick was gigging, it seems, for six or seven years before the conception of The House Of Love, he's a touch loath to reveal the finer details of his musical past.
However, the fact that his present band came together when Guy had reached the supposedly late age of thirty gives encouragement to other musical late-starters…
‘I didn't actually start playing in bands until I was about twenty-three,’ says Guy.
‘It was during the post-punk kind of period and I went through a series of bands, but I must admit I found working for other people really difficult.
I was signed to RCA at the time, and the music I was into was really hard dance music.
My favourite group was New Order, and I was a big fan of Depeche Mode and The Cure as well.
But the single most important song for me was Public Image by Public Image Ltd.
It just completely changed everything that I thought about music.
‘Anyway, I was trying to get all these things into my music, trying to sound like me only different in a way, and it never really worked.
I always ended up making compromises.
It seemed that I just couldn't turn desire into reality.
And at that point, in 1985, everything went wrong on me.
‘First I got dropped from RCA, then I was dropped by my publishing company, and then my marriage split up — it was a terrible time all round, really.
And, well, I wasn't doing anything, so I just started writing songs again — but this time they were guitar-based songs and I was working on a Portastudio.
‘I'd worked in studios before, really complicated state-of-the-art stuff, and I'd always been obsessed with multi-tracking.
I love the recording process.
But here I was stuck back on the dole with a Fostex 250, a guitar, a microphone and a drum machine, so I worked out a way of getting up to about eleven tracks on the Portastudio by constantly bouncing to and fro.
I used to record the bass, rhythm guitar and drums on three tracks and then bounce them down on to one; then I'd do two more guitar tracks to try to make a richer texture, then I'd do one more main overdub on guitar, and finally two vocal tracks.
‘It was a process of necessity, really but, since it was just me and a Portastudio, it was the first time I'd ever been in the position of being able to write and record without any kind of pressure from anyone else.
And that's where songs like Destroy The Heart and Christine and Shine On all came from.
‘And after about six months of work I'd got about ten finished tracks together, and to be honest, they sounded great!
So I thought to myself, ‘Right, I'll have one more stab at it.
This is how it sounds, so let's see if anyone else is interested.
So I put out an advert for a guitarist.
Terry Bickers was one of the people that answered, I played him the stuff, and he loved it, so…’
So, The House Of Love was born.
Although the self-titled first album contained corkers like Christine and Man To Child , Chadwick doesn't seem too happy about it these days.
‘It was just far, far too rushed — four days to record it, and two days to mix it!
Creation was a really small label at that time and they hadn't been successful for about two years, so there just wasn't the money.
At one point we didn't even know if we could record the thing at all.’
He's slightly happier about ‘Fontana’, the second album and the one that yielded a hit in the shape of Shine On , but personnel problems were beginning to mar the band's outlook and it soon became common knowledge that there was wet rot in The House Of Love.
‘It was such a difficult record to make,’ sighs Guy.
‘This was the time when the group should have started to become a real group, but it seemed that everybody had an opinion on how the record should sound and we ended up becoming less of a group.
And I think my own sort of obsessive nature in the studio really started to get to Terry, and he just gave up trying.
It wasn't that I wouldn't try Terry's material, because we did try it; it's just that none of us really liked it.
Terry was really taken at the time with bands like The Cardiacs, but none of the rest of us could get off on that impressive-sounding, orchestral rock band kind of approach.
And, you know, you just sort of grow apart, without realising it.’
Did Guy learn a lot from Terry Bickers?
‘Yeah,’ he admits.
‘I mean, Terry's not a very musical guitarist, but he's got a really nice touch.
I just love the way he can play a note, just one note.
At the start we used to copy each other and bounce off each other all the time, and I really gleaned everything I could.
But although he's a very dynamic guitarist, he's terribly inconsistent, and that could be very frustrating at times.’
And so Bickers moved on to form Levitation, and into his shoes stepped Simon Walker, just long enough to tour extensively and to record the latest album before he, too, split.
Chadwick implies that musical differences were the cause, saying that Walker's style was inconsistent with the parts that Guy wrote for him to play.
‘It would be unfair to criticise him,’ he adds.
‘It's just the nature of his guitar playing.’
But doesn't three guitarists in the space of three albums beg the question that Chadwick might be just a little hard on his sidemen?
‘No, I don't think so,’ Guy says.
‘I just have very specific ideas, and I'm quite forceful about them.
I mean, I write things in a certain way, so I expect them to be played in a certain way.
But, like I say, I'm a really big fan of guitarists and I've always been a fan of the guitarists in the group, whoever they've been.’
This time around, Chadwick's approach to recording the album was to spend as much time as possible rehearsing and re-rehearsing the songs before they went into the studio.
‘It's the last time the band will ever make a record like this,’ claims Chadwick.
‘It's the record that I always wanted to make, in the sense that the basic backing track was completely based on the way we rehearsed the songs before we recorded them.
After that I did a lot of arranging of the parts around the dynamics, and we recorded the whole thing at Eel Pie (Pete Townshend's studio ).
It was pretty straightforward, really.
Everyone knew what they had to do, so we did the backing tracks live, without having to worry about them too much, so the whole thing's got a very natural feel…
‘The thing I've been trying to do all along is to create a very large-sounding rock record — orchestrated, in a way — combining that with my songwriting style, which is pretty eclectic, I suppose.
But it's mood music, really — that's how I see the band.
And in the last couple of years I've been listening to music that's going in the same direction, like The Beach Boys, for instance, but trying to keep it within a guitar format.
‘I've also been listening to a lot of Glenn Branca recently.
He basically composes music for electric guitars, and he does some wild things.
For instance, he'll write a guitar part for a guitar strung with six E strings, just the same note all the way across the neck.
I've tried it, and it's incredible.
You just bang away on it, and the ringing and the discords are just devastating.
That's where Sonic Youth got a lot of ideas from, because their guitarist Lee Renaldo actually used to play with Glenn Branca and in a way it's Sonic Youth that took that drone style into pop music.’
Is it difficult to be original at this present point in pop history?
‘Well, I think it's got to be,’ says Guy, after a moment's consideration.
‘On the other hand, I think it's always been hard to think up something new; nothing's really changed.
And the bands we think of now as being the most original have always, always based their music on someone else's.
I mean, the Sex Pistols took it from The Stooges, the Stones took it from Muddy Waters and John Lee Hooker, and the Beatles…
Well, The Beatles based themselves on just about everybody that was currently successful, from the Everly Brothers to Carl Perkins.
They were rampantly influenced, but their originality came from the collection of influences and the way they interpreted them.
‘The Smiths are another good example of that: a totally English sort of pop band but with an incredible gift for creating their own sound.
But if you listen to Johnny Marr, there's actually nothing there that you haven't heard before; it was the combination of that weirdly familiar kind of backing with Morrissey's voice and lyrics that did it.
I was a big Smiths fan at the time, but after a while I found it just wasn't raw or hard enough for me.
It sounded just a touch too traditional.’
But like Johnny Marr, Chadwick is a bit of a whizz at mixing layers of filthily distorted guitars into a clear, cohesive whole.
How does he do it?
‘I don't know, really,’ says Guy.
‘I suppose I'm really into the mathematics of music.
You know, you get to certain point in the recording which almost dictates which mood you should move on to next, and it's a completely mathematical thing.
‘But yes, what I really like are really cranked up sounds that all come together to create a very clean melody.
It's back to Peter Green again, because he used absolutely burning sounds that still sounded clean, because of the way they were played.
He used that incredible intensity of sound to enhance the melody.
‘And while I like using acoustic guitars, I'm not a great fan of clean electric guitars, and most of the sounds on the new LP are really dirty.
I suppose the way to stop it sounding like a complete mess lies in three things: the way you play it, the exact part you play, and the sound itself.
The thing is, you can use the filthiest sound in the world, but if you mix it really low, you'll actually perceive it as a clean sound.
‘But then everybody does it differently.
I mean, I just haven't stopped listening to Nirvana's ‘Nevermind’ LP, and the guitars on that are very simple and grungy and effective.
It's really got me thinking and questioning my approach in the studio, actually.
There are obviously loads of guitar overdubs on it, but they've managed to keep it sounding like a record made by a three-piece band.
In fact, it's just about the complete opposite of the way that I do things.
I mean, on the second album we sometimes had as many as forty guitar tracks on one song.
God knows why.
Literally forty tracks: ten rhythm tracks, loads of acoustic guitars, electric guitars, electrics with different effects…
I don't think the other members of the band were too impressed by the washy sort of effect that resulted, because it tended to bury the textures of the bass and the drums.
But anyway,I liked it!’
And there's the nub of it: Guy Chadwick knows full well that, for good or bad, he's got to call the shots in The House Of Love.
What's the best way to cope with being writer, arranger, singer and frontman all at the same time?
‘Well, I won't deny that at times it's been a murderously pressurised position to be in,’ Guy admits, ‘and it's been very difficult for the other group members.
I suppose it's just something that I've learned to live with.
I sort of half like it, half don't.
‘But I don't really question it.
I mean, I formed the band, and so I've accepted the responsibility.
I suffer quite badly from lack of confidence from time to time, but then everybody does.
It's hard to put yourself on the line; you need incredible conviction, and you've got to be dead sure about what you're doing, because leading a band is absolutely riddled with paranoia.
And having done it, and having experienced aspects of being a solo artist, I know that in many ways it's a lot easier being a solo artist!
‘But the most difficult thing about this band for me is actually playing parts live and singing at the same time!
I've always really had to depend on having someone else for the intricate stuff so that I can keep things fairly simple for myself.
And with time and experience it's something that I'm getting better at.
It's still not perfect, but I don't feel half as hindered as I used to…'
GUITARS IN THE HOUSE OF LOVE
‘The red 335 is just about the only one I use onstage these days,’ says Guy.
‘I bought it new about four years ago and it's just brilliant.
I'm not actually sure what model it is — I think it's a 335 Dot — but I've just been out and bought another one for a spare, and luckily enough it feels exactly the same.
It's a very heavyweight guitar, but the action and the intonation is just perfect — I hate guitars that never quite play in tune.
335s are just such effortless guitars to play.
You can turn them up to the most incredible volume and strum them very lightly, and you get a really lovely sound.
I'm totally addicted to them!
They feed back really nicely, too — very controllably.
‘So that's the live guitar, but in the studio we use all kinds of things — we had about fifteen different guitars on the new LP.
I've been using a Strat on and off for about five years, and we also hired in Telecasters, Rickenbacker 12-strings, all kinds of stuff.
You know, when you've got a part to do, you usually have an instinct for the kind of guitar sound that's going to work.
‘The same goes for the way you record guitar parts, usually.
Sometimes you need a lot of volume, because it's only at high volumes that you get certain frequencies and certain kinds of feedback.
For example, when we were recording this album at Eel Pie Studios, Pete Townshend's amp was sitting in a corner, so of course I had to try it!
It was this customised 250-watt Hiwatt head with a 4x12 cab, so I switched it on, plugged in a Rickenbacker, turned it up to about 2 or 3 and, well, it just took your head off.
It was indescribable.
The sound was so brittle, and yet the low end was unbelievable — you just banged one chord and you got this huge belt in the stomach.
I've never heard anything like it…’
Alas, Townshend's monster Hiwatt never made it onto the House Of Love album.
Instead, our man relied almost entirely on a fairly new Fender ‘The Twin'.
‘I really like it,’ Guy says.
‘When I use it live, though, I tend to beef it up with either an ordinary 4x12 or one of those Hartke cabinets with the aluminium speakers.
I'm not sure if it's meant to be a guitar cab or a bass cab, but it suits me.
The Fender can't really cope with the 335 at high volumes because it's such a powerful guitar, so the Hartke adds a hard kind of edge and it keeps the bottom end really tight and sharp.'
What I really like are really cranked up sounds that all come together to create a very clean melody
On ‘Fontana’ we sometimes had as many as forty guitar tracks on one song.
God knows why…
Leading a band is absolutely riddled with paranoia.
It's a lot easier being a solo artist
DI BLUES?
Hollis Research GX-7 Amp Simulator
For studio recording directly into a desk, there are various options.
Using an amp with a good speaker simulator is likely to give the best results, while there are various effects units with built-in speaker simulators.
Both of these choices are expensive.
A third possibility is one of the small amp simulators; SansAmp was the first of these, followed by Award's SessionMaster.
Each does a job, but the latter costs around £200 while the former retails at just under £150.
Hollis Research appreciates that there is a market for such a unit costing less than £100.
The GX-7 is a small plastic box measuring some 12cm x 6cm x 3cm with a minimum of controls: two rotaries for Drive and Level and a bank of eight miniature switches to set up the gain and simulation modes.
This is similar to the idea used on SansAmp, as is the nine volt PP3 battery.
The GX-7 gives between 50 and 100 hours use.
To fit a guitar amp simulator into such a small box entails one compromise: the Output socket is a stereo 3.5 mm jack socket.
Stereo?
Yes, because the GX-7 is also intended to be used for mixing guitar input with the output from a Walkman-style cassette player for rehearsal purposes.
an Aux(iliary) Input (also a stereo 3.5 mm socket) connects a cassette player to the GX-7, the guitar output is mixed in and can be heard via a pair of Walkman headphones connected to the Out, the guitar appearing at the centre of the stereo image.
As small headphones are dreadfully inefficient at the bottom end, there is a built-in bass boost which helps the guitar sound in this situation — switch eight lets you turn this off when not working with headphones.
Nice idea which works well.
In use, switches one and two are first set for gain control; the four available levels should suit any guitar.
Backing off the Drive rotary turns off the LED next to it; this indicates that the GX-7 is in clean mode.
Turning on switch three adds a presence boost which acts in both clean and overdriven modes and is well tapered — clean guitar sparkles, but keeps the body of its sound.
Turning up the Drive then brings in the overdrive effect and is certainly flexible — none of this ″either on or off″ syndrome.
Without any of the other switches in, the overdriven sound is smooth and reacts very well to the volume pot being backed off.
Just a hint of distortion is easy to obtain but there's still plenty of sustain — a situation which is possible but more difficult to achieve with SansAmp.
Of the four remaining switches, Soft Clipping takes some of the harsh overtones out of the sound while H.F. Distortion does the opposite; screaming harmonics are the order of the day here.
Clean Amplifier seems to mix a little more of the clean sound in with the overdrive.
For instance, the melody of a solo becomes clearer.
Finally, Close Mic Effect has a more dynamic result than Soft Clipping leaving a full, rounded sound with only a hint of edge.
My one criticism of SansAmp has always been the harshness of the top end; the GX-7 certainly has less odd harmonics and so produces a distortion sound which is more pleasing to the ear.
Changes?
I'd like to see a switching facility between the clean (with the excellent Presence control) and the overdrive sound by the simple inclusion of a footswitch socket.
Apart from that, the GX-7 begs to be DI'd in a studio environment with a favourite guitar processor patch and played.
At £80, this is a snip.
FRET BUZZ
STEVE HARLEY Original Phantom and Rebel without a pause, Harley contemplates the compilation game…
Steve Harley and Cockney Rebel have been touring seriously for the last three years, having played to over a million people in a stint of two hundred and eighty-five concerts.
Following his string of single and album hits in the '70s, a marriage and children, Steve let the '80s slip by.
But now there's a new compilation album out, an LP of all-new material waiting in the wings, and the perennial single Come Up And See Me (Make Me Smile)just re-re-released…
But what of the long lay-off?
‘I've heard people talking about Chris De Burgh's new album — first one for three years — and Springsteen — first one for five years.
They talk about it as if that's such a long period, and yet it seems like yesterday when my last one came out, but you don't realise it's that long; you don't sit round watching the calendar.
Harley didn't sit around totally idle; there were some one-off specials — Hammersmith Odeon and Camden Palace — and of course he was six months working on Andrew Lloyd Webber's ‘Phantom Of The Opera’…
‘I had the hit record, the duet with Sarah, but I actually did all the songs with the orchestra, pretty well the whole Phantom role.
I know it was out of character, but it was a big experience.
We were a whole week in Westway film studios making the video with Ken Russell directing.
Heck of a film!
I was there at six o'clock every morning in make-up, having this scar put on — you know, prosthetics, latex…
‘And I auditioned and was given the stage role, but I think Michael Crawford called them and said he wanted it, and they ousted me.
So I sued for breach of contract.
I remember the Daily Mail called me and said, ‘You must feel really bitter.’
I said, ‘No, I'm not.’
‘You must be.’
‘I'm not.’
‘Well, how long did it take you to get over it?’
‘Five minutes — as long as it took to accept that it was a fact of life and then find my lawyer's phone number.'’
How do you avoid the ‘nostalgia’ tag which afflicts the '50s, '60s and '70s acts?
‘That's a real worry.
Sometimes when you're doing radio interviews they introduce you like you're a '70s rock star making a comeback.
Then I just snap at them and say, ‘Enough of that.’
But no, this ain't Alvin Stardust, and anyone who tries to lump me with these people gets the wrath of Harley straight on their head.’
How come the Europeans accept musicians who've been around for a while, but we British just pour scorn on them as has-beens?
‘It's Europe, America, Australia — everywhere except the UK!’
Is it a by-product of our musical inventiveness, this perpetual desire to applaud the new and deride the old?
‘Yes it is.
We want to be leaders all the time.
It's this island race mentality: the paranoia, the xenophobia, having no land-bridge for twelve thousand years.
The average Briton is practically racist!
We're not good Europeans yet, but we are leaders musically.
And European rock is terrible.
There's a few German acts, like the Scorpions, but really very few.
But remember I'm a writer, and there's a lot of difference between what I did in the '70s and what so many of them did.’
Your compilation album…
I believe it's not that common for the artist to compile the songlist…
‘They called and said asked me.
I said, ‘Are you sure about this?’
Sounded rather forward-thinking for a major record company and I wanted it confirmed…
‘The one thing I didn't feel happy doing was a running order.
There's at least one track from all eight albums, and two tracks are from a live album, so I gave it to a wonderful guy called Jonathan Downs from the Fan Club, who knows an awful lot that I'd forgotten myself, or never even knew!
And he wrote the sleeve notes on two or three of the CDs.
So Jonathan set the running order up and I was really pleased; I'm quite proud of it.
I'll never play it, though.
I mean, I'll get a box sent to me and it might get one spin at home so that I can relax, sort of wipe my brow knowing it doesn't jump, the quality's good and it's loud enough…’
Going away from the compilation to your new work.
How do the record companies treat you?
Do you have a deal?
‘Not in Britain at the moment, no.
This new album will be licensed.
I own it, I paid for it, but it would only go to someone that was old enough, mature enough.
I wouldn't be able to deal with a twenty-four year-old A&R man.
I would want someone that was on my wavelength, roughly my age, preferably a supporter, and I wouldn't sign anything until I had at least a serious gentleman's agreement that nothing could be issued without the artist's agreement.
It's a shame to have to write that sort of thing into a contract, but you can't trust the buggers.’
In terms of what you write these days, are you thinking of a style?
Are you thinking of an era?
Are you consciously telling yourself it's 1992?
‘No, never, never would that cross my mind.
That's got to be the kiss of death.
I think that, no matter what you do, you have to be true to yourself.
If you try to be someone you're not, or follow a market that isn't really your own style, boy, you're going to get caught out!
‘I like some of the new stuff.
The KLF is fantastic — bloody hell, great records, especially through those wonderful club PAs!
I don't buy it and then go home and play it, because I'm not going to get anything from it at home, but at 2am, after a gig in Oslo or Munich or Berlin, it sounds damned good.
‘On this new album there's one huge track called The Lighthouse , which a lot of people have heard because I've been playing it on stage — an hour out of two and a half is this album.
There's also a track called Star For A Week .
All over Europe they react to it as if it's a massive hit; as soon as we start this thing the applause is as if it's one of your hit singles!
The Lighthouse is almost the same.
That one's very atmospheric, very similar to Sebastian and the stuff with orchestras that I was doing in 1974.
‘But getting back to your question, what I really wanted from this album was for anyone who hears it to say they like it or they don't like it, but that it's pure Steve Harley.’
The last time I saw you, you had an old Gretsch which you were thinking of getting rid of…
‘I've had that for fifteen years.
It's a 1959 Gretsch Country Gent in Cadillac Green which I paid three hundred and fifty quid for.
Christie's have got it and they're just waiting for the right sale.
‘Actually, I've got about fifteen guitars but I have no interest in collecting them.
I've got three handmade for me by Tony Zemaitis which are unique.
The 6-string is just wonderful.
Tony Zemaitis told me in ‘76 that it would be ten years before it sounded right.
But it's a dream, and I've got its twin in 12-string.
I'd never part with them because they were made for me.
‘But actually I've just bought the best electro-acoustic I've ever seen or heard — a Takamine.
I don't know the model number but it's the number one that they make — retails for about £850.
The problem is, they've got this parametric EQ and when I first toured with it my guitar roadie couldn't figure what was wrong, because it was cutting out and crackling.
And what was happening was, I was dripping sweat into it and rusting bits and shorting the battery.
So now we set the EQ, which is always in the same position at soundchecks, and he puts black gaffer tape over the entire parametric box so all that's on view is the volume knob.
I've never heard of anyone else having the problem, but I can't be the only one who sweats like a pig!’
Okay, suppose Come Up And See Me goes in the charts and they ring you up and say, ‘Steve, how do you fancy going on Top Of The Pops?’
‘Ah, that's a bit of a worry.
I saw a group last year that had a re-release go top ten; they appeared on Top Of The Pops and they looked so old and so wrong.
Obviously I couldn't mime to a voice of seventeen years ago, no way on earth!
But even playing it is a real worry; I think I'd only do it if I had my band playing live, the way I do it now.
But these guys, doing a song from twenty years earlier…
I saw it and said, ‘Not me, baby, I'm not going to get caught like that.’
So it's a bit of a worry.
I mean, I've got an album full of new music and I've got to be very careful.
I don't mind Come Up and See Me being released; God willing it will go high enough for them to invite me on Top Of The Pops!
NM 
CLEM CLEMPSON Steve Marriott's former spar and pillar of Colosseum on the art of the ultimate EC impression…
Everyone who has seen the Vauxhall commercials featuring Layla will be familiar with the playing of Clem Clempson.
But surely, I hear you cry, that's blues maestro Eric Clapton playing those momentous opening bars…
Well, I'm sorry to disappoint you, but the music on the advert is an extremely clever copy.
During the '70s, Dave ‘Clem’ Clempson established himself as a guitarist-to-watch, toting a ‘58 Les Paul goldtop in such bands as Jon Hiseman's Colosseum, Humble Pie and The Jack Bruce Band.
All of a sudden, at some point in the early '80s, all went quiet on the Clempson front.
‘I decided I was fed up with having to go out on the road all the time in order to pay a mortgage on a house I never spent any time in!’ he told me.
‘So I started thinking about alternative ways to earn a living.
That's how I started to get into session music.’
So how did he come to be involved in the Vauxhall Layla advert?
‘It was just a session I was booked for.
I didn't even know what it was until I got to the studio.’
Trying to recreate something as well-known as Layla must be like trying to forge a Picasso.
Was it a fairly daunting task?
‘It wasn't difficult at all; I mean, it's just a simple guitar riff really, not a Mahler symphony or anything!
I didn't consciously try to get close to the original sound, but I think my style has always been fairly close to Eric's anyway, plus I generally use a Strat in the studio.
‘The producer had written out all the parts…
There's actually several guitar parts on there, doubled in different octaves, then you've got the slide part on top, which makes it very distinctive.
Without that it wouldn't sound close.’
I asked Clem if there had been any other jingle sessions where he'd had to recreate an original.
‘The soundalike things don't happen very often.
But one incident that amused me was that I was booked for a coffee commercial and the producer phoned me up the night before the session to let me know the track we were doing, because he said he wanted to get it as close to the original as he possibly could.
He said, ‘I don't know whether you've heard it, but it's an old Humble Pie track called Black Coffee …’ which was fantastic, because I had to go into the studio and copy myself!
It was great because Steve Marriott was on it as well and I hadn't seen him for a couple of years.
But he was the same as ever — just went in and did it in one take.
That was the last time I saw him.’
So which guitars does Clem prefer to use in his studio work?
‘I still use Strats a lot.
In fact, I'm using the Clapton Strat more than anything else at the moment in the studio.
The versatility of it is the big attraction; it can sound like anything from a vintage Strat to an Ibanez or a Les Paul, with the mid-boost in it.
But my favourite guitar really is my Custom Shop Fender Telecaster, with Joe Barden pickups on it.’
What about amps?
‘Generally, for session work, I'm using a Groove Tubes Trio preamp, which is fantastic, because the versatility of it is brilliant.
It's basically two different Fender preamps and a Marshall preamp in one box, which pretty much covers everything!
‘I also like to take along my new Fender Twin, which is a ‘65 reissue.
It's fantastic; the Fender reissues are really great.
‘I use the Trio with a Palmer speaker simulator, which makes life very easy for me because of humping all my own gear about.
I can do most things on that, but the one thing I've always had a problem getting with that type of preamp setup is the kind of crunchy combo sound.
Basically, there's nothing like a combo for doing that.’
Are there any effects that Clem particularly favours?
‘I've got a Rocktron Intellifex unit that I always take around with me, which is great quality but, more often than not, the engineers prefer me not to use anything other than, say, a bit of chorus.
They don't like to be tied down to certain types of delay; they'd rather leave that sort of decision until the mix.’
Apart from what sounds like a fairly hectic studio schedule, I wondered if Clem found time to get out and play live.
‘Well, I've just done a week at Battersea Arts Centre with this blues band called The Dolphins, who I play with quite regularly now.
What I did there was I had my Trio preamp going through a Boogie 295 power amp into a couple of Boogie Black Shadow speaker cabs and I was switching between that setup and the Fender Twin.
It's the closest I've been to my ideal live setup, really.
It was great to be working in one place for a few nights on the trot so that I could afford to go to that amount of trouble.’
I told him that I had heard he was involved in a recording project with Mo Foster.
‘It's really just a bunch of guys that I work with on the session scene who all write a bit, and we've come together in order to find an outlet for our writing.
We haven't decided on a name for the band yet, though!’
Apart from Clem, the band will feature Mo Foster on bass, Brian Bennett on drums, Steve Gray on Keyboards and, according to Clem, Paul Hart plays everything else!
‘I don't think there's much he doesn't play — guitars, mandolins, fiddle, upright bass, keyboards — he's a bit of a genius really!
He wrote a guitar concerto for John Williams, amongst other things.
But the plan is for us all to write a couple of things to put on an album.’
The result of this collaboration should be available by the autumn.
Meanwhile, the ‘Colosseum Live’ album, featuring Clem's playing, has just been reissued on CD.
He has also been involved in doing benefit gigs for Colosseum bandmate, sax player Dick Heckstall-Smith.
‘I wonder if I can send Dick my love and wish him a speedy recovery through Guitarist …?’ asked Clem.
Our pleasure…
DM 
THE STAIRS Three tambourine men who claim that retro's not a dirty word…
If nothing else, young Liverpudlian guitar/bass/drums trio The Stairs will put a big cheesy grin on your face.
Lead singer, bassist and songwriter Edgar Summertyme is only twenty-one years old, but early exposure to an older brother's record collection left him with a headful of songs by The Yardbirds, Love, The Byrds and Them.
And although Edgar's present listening has extended out past the Beach Boys, Credence Clearwater Revival and sundry American garage bands, The Stairs have made an inadvertent name for themselves as the most frighteningly authentic British beat combo in existence.
From their recent single Weed Bus — a bastard offspring of The Stones' The Last Time — and from the whole of their nineteen-track debut album ‘Mexican R'n'B’, it's obvious that The Stairs have mastered The Kinks' grungy guitar sound, a yowling Jaggeresque vocal and the Beatles' patented minor/major chord shift.
To this they've added some irreverent lyrics, a penchant for unusual recording techniques and an impressive line in psychedelic guitar wig-outs.
As a bass-player, Edgar definitely prays in the direction of Macca.
‘I used to be very much of a guitar-turned-bass player,’ he admits, ‘although this past year I've started listening to bass players properly.
McCartney is a big influence, but I also really love Ron Wood's bass playing on Jeff Beck's ‘Truth’ album.
Then there's the feller out a band called The Blossom Souls, who did one great psychedelic album years and years ago, and Colin Moulding with XTC and The Dukes Of Stratosphear — his stuff is great.
My favourite guitar players are people like Arthur Lee, Jeff Beck and Dave Davies.
And I'm really into Steve Marriott at the moment.’
The Stairs came together ‘gradually’, according to Edgar; he and guitarist Ged Lynn actually met while working on a YTS scheme, and formed the band two years ago.
As soon as they'd assembled a set of songs, they reverted back to 1964 by securing themselves weekly club residencies in Liverpool and Manchester.
‘Well, they weren't very glamorous clubs,’ explains Edgar.
‘But it was important for us to play together as much as possible, whether it was to a new crowd or just the same old people.
Unfortunately, both clubs went bust just as we were starting to draw a decent audience!
But I'm glad we did it.
There are thousands and thousands of bands that just practise and practise all the time, and they never get round to playing any gigs.
As far as we're concerned it's best to get out there and make mistakes.
It's the only way you're going to get better.’
Almost unbelievably, The Stairs recorded their entire album in mono — which seems totally crazy, until you start thinking about the Presley Sun Sessions or Buddy Holly or Phil Spector.
‘It's just something we started doing,’ says Edgar.
‘We only recorded Weed Bus because we wanted a mono seven-inch single of us to have in our record collections!
And the mono thing worked; we found it was a format we could really use well, so for the time being we're carrying on down the path.
I'd actually like to use a bit of stereo on the next album, because it's so hard to keep any kind of clarity in mono — everything's coming out of the same speaker.
But it helps to give the band our own sound, and I can't think of anyone else in the whole world that's doing it.’
As you'd guess, most of ‘Mexican R'n'B’ was recorded live (although Edgar did have to double on guitar when regular guitarist Ged Lynn went AWOL in the middle of recording).
Effects were kept to a minimum, mostly just a touch of reverb on the occasional guitar part, although the band admit to a growing interest in outdated analogue floor pedals.
As for guitars, The Stairs travel armed to the teeth with a motley collection of Gibson semi-acoustics.
‘Ged uses mostly ES-335s and ES-330s,’ reveals Edgar, ‘and I've got an old EB-2 bass…
Well, I've got two of them, but they play and sound completely different.
My main one has got a really thin neck, while the other has a huge neck and sounds either dead bassy or just disgusting.
I like EB-2s because they've got a really full kind of sound.
It's more of a noise than a sound sometimes, but in a way it's how a proper bass should sound.
‘The guitar amp we use is a blue-speaker Vox AC30, and the bass amp's a really old Ampeg stack.
I got the Ampeg for free; it used to belong to a lad who played with The Pale Fountains, but he had a brain haemorrhage or something really sad and his girlfriend was nice enough to pass his amp along to me.
Trouble is, I keep blowing it up and it's £80 a time to fix it, so I'll have to get something else pretty soon…’
The inclusion on the album of two seven-minute songs amongst the other three-minute pop nuggets point to The Stairs' keenness to gravitate from 1965 towards 1969.
‘Yeah, we're about to move into a more British psychedelia kind of thing,’ laughs Edgar.
‘We'll be doing more long songs, but this time they'll be long because there's more to them, not because they're jammed out…
‘People say we're ‘retro’, but as far as we're concerned we're just going through a learning process.
I don't see us as the best band in the world; we're just putting out records because the rest of the music scene is so crap at the moment.
I really want us all to move on as musicians, which is something that other bands don't seem to be doing.
No-one seems to progress very far from the point at which they started, and if they try, they generally get it all wrong.
The big advantage we've got over bands from the '60s and '70s is we can look back and see the exact point at which they all turned shit — and we're not going to make the same mistake!’
Any final words?
‘Yeah,’ says Edgar.
‘Just put in something about fashion, and how much of a seven-letter word it is.’
Oh, alright then.
RB 
T-RIDE Former Satch student and Valley type, Jeff Tyson holds an amp scavenging masterclass…
When Jeff Tyson was put up for the job of guitarist for Californian metal trio T-Ride the recommendation came from his ex-guitar teacher, Joe Satriani.
But it wasn't just Tyson's playing credentials and Satriani's say so that impressed original members Dan Arlie and Eric Valentine.
As Dan pointed out, ‘Jeff's an amazing guitar player, but when he branded the T-Ride logo onto his arm, we were sold.’
The production credits for the band's first album ‘T-Ride’(released on Hollywood Records) go to drummer Eric Valentine, while the songwriting was the work of bassist Arlie.
The combined force of the rhythm section and the group's percussive sound meant that Tyson had to come up with a different approach to his playing.
‘The very percussive stuff was something I had to work out.
I had to kind of invent a way to do that to make everybody happy.
Dan could hum what he wanted but it's very difficult to play that sort of thing.’
This led to Jeff's development of a personal tapping style, one which deviates from the two-handed norm…
‘It's all left hand, it doesn't have any right-hand tapping.
It's really a combination of tapping and picking.
It's hard to explain but, for instance, segments of the down beat are divided into single notes.
Usually I pick the single note and hammer on the chord so I can get a polyrhythmic sort of thing going.
By not picking the chord my pick is free to play something completely different.
The low notes can maybe play 16ths and the chords play maybe fours straight on the beat.
It's hard to explain but it makes a lot of sense.’
The combination of this new technique and some old technology have helped to create some interesting guitar sounds…
‘We did try to make the guitar sound as different as possible, like with the song Backdoor Romeo .
On the very beginning we plugged the guitar through a home studio effect and then played the guitar with a violin bow.
On a couple of things there is a wah-wah pedal but then there's also a very old flanger that has the sweep controlled by a pedal.
The flanger is always on, though it doesn't really sound active until I hit the pedal.
‘They don't make them any more, but it's a great thing.
I found it in a pawn shop and I wasn't sure what it was, but I bought it for about 20 dollars.
Then for another song we layered and layered an E-Bow.
Other tracks like You And Your Friend have harmony guitar, and the track Ride also has a lot of layering, building chords note by note.’
This layering works well enough in the studio, but it can create problems reproducing tracks live, something the band are well aware of.
‘So far everything that we've done we've done keeping in mind that it has to be played live.
They come across as the same songs although they don't sound as huge and magnificent and lush as they do on the record.
Although I might have layered a lot of notes on one part it's still basically, say, a D minor chord or whatever.
So far, we haven't had any real problems playing the stuff live around California.’
The lack of guitar solos is another of this LP's trademarks.
Jeff has strong views on ‘the guitar solo’.
‘I avoided the massive guitar solo thing because it never really fitted in the songs and that's what's important.
There's an instrumental track called Bone Down , and there was originally a guitar solo after that but it didn't fit well — you know, like a good solo will make the song move in the right direction.
‘If there ever is a T-Ride song with a guitar solo in it, it will have to be the most extraordinary guitar solo and it'll have to fit perfectly.’
‘T-Ride’ was recorded using some very old equipment, including a '70s Neve mixing desk, but when it comes to equipment and its reliability Tyson again has his own views.
‘We had two old Marshalls that sounded great sometimes, but by the end of the record the only way we could get them to sound good was by taking them out of their cases and placing them on their sides in a certain temperature and a certain humidity — then they were great.
But when it comes time to play live the old equipment is ridiculous.
I've got round it with a couple of amplifiers that I've built myself; they're very reliable and they both sound the same.
‘It's really not that complicated to do: just open up a Marshall, trace a wire and say to yourself, ‘Now I have to do that.'
It's really not hard at all; you just have to dive in at the deep end.’
Does the ‘old sounds best’ theory apply to his guitar sounds too?
‘We spent a lot of time trying to make a guitar sound good.
We spent a lot of time with different amps and different pickups and different guitars, because if you're playing a major chord on a guitar with a lot of distortion it isn't going to sound good — it's going to sound like a big mush.
But there's a great many major, minor and diminished chords in T-Ride's music that have to sound right.
Looking at the way other people did it and sort of experimenting on my own I came up with a combination that worked.
I use a very old Gibson pickup and wired it with hardcore, heavy duty cable on a guitar built by a guy out in San Francisco called Gary Brower.
Even so, it took us about two years to get a guitar tone that worked.
It was very frustrating but I'm glad we did it.
I actually bought the guitar off the shelf but I didn't know what it was.
Somebody told me it was handmade but I didn't know anything about it for years.
Then I needed to have it refretted so I took it into Joe Satriani's guitar tech and he said, ‘Wait a minute — where did you get this?
I built this guitar.'’
This encounter isn't Tyson's only connection with Satriani; as a one time pupil he remembers his unorthodox teaching style.
‘He asks you questions which have no real answer.
For instance, we'd be working on a style of music, like maybe rockabilly, and he'd say, ‘Have you ever done any psychedelic drugs?’
And I'd say, no.
So he'd say, ‘I'd like you to imagine going into a recording studio, you've never met the band in your life, you're going to do a session for them and you're going to be paid very well and they're all on Acid and they're playing rockabilly.
What are you going to do?'’
SEE THE DIFFERENCE
You don't need ears like Eric Johnson to distinguish Guitarist from some other guitar magazines.
And while not everyone can detect the tonal nuances of brass and chrome jackplugs it's as plain as the selector switch on your ‘62 Strat that one mag has more body, more highs and more sustain than a patent-applied-for Shredbucker.
But life is short enough, friends, and when the last copy of your favourite read has been snaffled a the newsagents you might be tempted to take Eric's advice and head for the Cliffs Of Dover .
But that's a mug's solution.
You can ensure that Guitarist hits your doormat each month like an E7£9 from a ‘67 plexi Marshall by simply filling in the form below.
Like Eric you'll discover that you can tell the difference!
GUITARIST — Great tone guaranteed
Superior tone with no distortion can be had year long for just £25.50 in the UK, £30 for Europe and overseas by surface mail, £42 for Europe by air and £52 for overseas by air.
Make your check payable to Guitarist Publications Ltd, complete the form below and send it to .
Dr ROBERT Answers Your Queries The advantages of wireless systems are well-known, but there are disadvantages too.
The Doc investigates and comes up with some simple solutions…
As the prices of wireless guitar systems drop, more people are turning to them as an alternative to the shackles of the guitar lead.
The benefits of such radio systems are obvious: no leads to trip over or become entangled in, hi-fi sound quality, far greater range, mobility etc.
The disadvantagesare less well-known and yet far more common than most people realise — even with the more expensive systems.
I have received numerous letters from guitarists in recent months relating the problems they have encountered with guitar transmitters, so this month's column deals with some of the more annoying, but hopefully curable, drawbacks of going wireless.
The most common, and certainly the most irritating problem mentioned is the increase in noise from the volume pot of the guitar.
Often it ‘clonks’ at the fully open or fully closed positions, and sometimes the guitar howls uncontrollably when the pot is turned all the way down.
These problems can be due to poor pot construction, or to the fact that the carbon track on the pot is reacting like an old-style carbon granule microphone, thus making the pot noisy when used.
As with all guitar noise problems, this effect is most prevalent when the amp is very loud, or set up for an overdrive sound.
Any minor problems that exist are much more noticeable when the guitar is used with huge amounts of gain.
Pickups tend to be more microphonic and noisy, as do patch leads (between the guitar and the transmitter) and of course the wiring and switches in the guitar itself.
Switches and pots can also become noisy due to a small voltage leak across the transmitter's input.
This would be caused by a faulty transistor or IC device in the first audio stage of the unit.
This is not a serious problem and once detected can be rectified easily, by replacing the faulty component.
Active guitars are not immune to problems, either.
An increase in hiss and buzz are often apparent, along with a severe lack of headroom (the difference between the nominal output level and the maximum output level) accompanied by heavy compression.
The lack of headroom and the increase in compression reduces both the attack and the dynamic range of an instrument.
This is particularly noticeable with active circuitry (and especially in electro-acoustic instruments), due to the increased output levels involved with actives.
To prevent unwanted distortion, most transmitter circuitry incorporates a level control for optimum matching and unity gain and a compression circuit to deal with transient (peak) signals.
It is this compression circuitry that comes into play when active guitars are used.
The level control built into the transmitter can help to reduce this effect, but can rarely eliminate it without compromising the output level.
Poor quality jack plugs and sockets can also introduce noise, especially if they have become dirty or corroded.
Other problems include poor screening on the guitar and bad earthing.
As the transmitter itself is not connected to a real earth or ‘ground’ it is essential that the instrument used is adequately screened and all wiring connections are in good condition.
Rectifying the problems mentioned is not too difficult, although it is virtually impossible to totally eliminate all symptoms, especially when huge amounts of overdrive and distortion are used.
Starting with the transmitter unit, check for voltage leak across the input with a multimeter set on the DC millivolt range.
If you detect a leakage voltage greater than 5 millivolts then return the unit to your dealer for repair.
If the transmitter is fitted with a screw connector aerial, ensure that the connections are kept clean (use a miniature wire brush and contact cleaner regularly), as poor aerial connections will reduce operating range and cause severe noise problems.
The receiver is basically foolproof and generally consists of an external power supply, output jack, level control and RF damping.
The output level usually needs to be set fairly high to drive distortion pedals etc., so as to achieve the best signal-to-noise ratio.
The RF damping control should be set so that when the transmitter pack is turned off no extraneous noise is heard.
Start by turning the control fully open (a horrible interference will be heard) and then turn the control back until the unwanted noise stops.
This is the optimum setting.
Most transmitters come with a fitted lead and jack (hardware) and although the cable is of reasonable quality the jack plugs are usually not!
Try to obtain a good quality plug, preferably gold-plated, to replace the existing one.
Also ensure that all switches, sockets and plugs are cleaned regularly with a lubricating cleaner such as Electrolube.
Cheap pots are more often than not responsible for noise, irrespective of whether the host instrument is used with a wireless system or not.
To ensure noise-free operation I would advise replacing carbon based controls (this includes American Switchcraft pots and most expensive oriental pots) with a Cermet type pot.
These are often sealed and lubricated for life and come in a variety of styles and values.
Cermet pots are available from Maplin Electronics, P.O.
Box 777, Rayleigh, Essex SS6 8LU.
It would also be a good idea to replace any unscreened cables over 2cm long with screened cable, and also screen the internal control cavities with adhesive backed aluminium foil (obtainable at builders' merchants).
You will need to remove all pots and switches to do this, so make a good diagram of the wiring before you do so.
If your guitar is 10 years old or more I would suggest that you replace all pots, switches and sockets for modern, low noise types.
(Remember, of course, that the value of vintage instruments can be compromised by any modifications, even to pots and switches, etc.)
It would also help to replace the jack socket with the stereo type and use the additional contact as an extra earth terminal.
This will definitely help reduce noise when used with a wireless system.
The headroom/compression problem (electro-acoustic/active guitars) can be alleviated by fitting a 22kOhm ¼ watt metal film resistor.
The resistor should go in the signal line, inside the actual jack plug coming from the transmitter.
This modification is not recommended for use with passive guitars as it reduces both volume and treble.
If you have to use one transmitter for both types of guitar, make the modification to the input socket on the active guitar only: ie. fit the resistor inside the guitar, in series from the output wire to the jack socket.
These modifications (which amount mostly to improvements in the quality of pots, switches and plugs) should make a significant difference to the way your wireless system and guitar interact.
However, if you still have problems, contact the manufacturer's service department for further technical advice.
Feedback Your Letters To The Editor Sound, style, taste and harmony all appear in this month's Feedback.
If you'd like to contribute your ha'peth to any debate, write to:.
STYLE PROFILE
Dear Guitarist Regarding your review of the Godin Artisan ST-V (June 92), you say, ‘The design looks like a combination of a Stratocaster's bottom half and the lower cutaway of a Jazzmaster, with a long top horn…’
That's as maybe, but a much simpler answer can be found by turning to the front cover of the same issue, and Phil Collen's ‘custom’ Jackson.
Drop the arch-top, jiggle the controls around a bit — oh, and don't forget to lose the pointy headstock — and what have you got?
Yes, you've guessed it, the Artisan.
Admittedly it makes a change from Stratocasters, but whatever happened to originality?
→ If you took a dozen sheets of clear cellophane, drew around a dozen different guitar designs, including Strat, PRS, Ibanez, Jackson and various others, then laid them on top of one another, you'd be surprised at how little difference there actually is between them.
A quarter of an inch in the waist here and a few millimetres on a horn there is often the extent of it.
But if manufacturers were to try too hard to come up with new ideas we'd be constantly faced with designs to rival Gibson's semi-mythical Moderne and Burns' Flyte in the grossness stakes.
But apart from that, some people like bound Teles while others prefer the plain version, so small changes can often make large differences to our choice of instrument.
HONKYTONK TRAINTIME BLUES
Dear Guitarist There was I, sat on Bracknell station waiting for a train with 20 minutes to go.
So I pulled out my SG, and not plugged into anything or making any pretence towards collecting money, started to exercise my fingers scale-wise.
Not 10 minutes had gone by before I was asked, in a very accusing tone of voice, if I had a ticket, and on producing it was informed that I should cease and desist.
Countered with, ‘You must be joking,’ the response was, ‘It's against all rules and regulations.’
I wish therefore to nominate this uniformed halfwit for a Jobsworth Award (First Class).
→Yeah, but you're only giving us half the story.
I mean, how do we know you weren't playing Stairway To Heaven, Smoke On The Water or Eruption ?
In that case the Jobsworth was quite justified.
I think he should have his say…
Q.E.D.
Dear Guitarist
As both a guitar fetishist and a hi-fi victim I read with interest the letter from Jonathan Simmonds in the June issue, since his comments about Eric Johnson's ability to hear the difference between jack plugs reminds me of the debate in the hi-fi world a while back about whether interconnect and speaker cables made any difference to the sound of a system.
The ‘if you can't measure it, it doesn't exist’ brigade long maintained that they didn't, as long as they were of good enough quality, but the generally accepted view among the hi-fi fraternity is that they do, and that different pieces of gear respond differently to different bits of wire (and indeed to different plugs!).
If you're rich/daft enough you can pay hundreds of pounds for a 1 metre pair of pure silver, hand-woven, dew-picked interconnects to join your three grand CD player to your ten grand amp!
→ Well, when I replied to the very first letter criticising Eric's apparent tonal excesses, I mentioned the differences that we've all heard between one Marshall, or Boogie, or Strat, or Les Paul from the next.
I pointed out that several seemingly inconsequential factors can combine to create a change that even the most cloth-eared among us would notice.
As you hint at in your letter, the musical ‘anoraks’ are often of the ‘wouldn't know it if they heard it’variety anyway, and hate the thought of anyone having an intuition, or a touch or a sense of hearing which they themselves could never muster.
I once astounded a good guitarist friend of mine — who was also an electronics engineer, believe it or not — at the difference in tone and volume between a Whirlwind lead and a cheapo cable.
But I had never questioned the effect that jack plugs exert over a guitar's sound, let alone done an actual listening test to prove or disprove the Johnson theory.
And I'd bet most guitarists are like me.
So has anyone out there actually done it?
If so, let us know your findings and we'll publish and/or be damned!
MARSHALL FLAW?
Dear Guitarist
I would like to thank you for interviewing Jim Marshall on the thirtieth anniversary of the company which bears his name.
But hold on a second, Jim isn't a real REAL GUITARIST, is he?
Which albums has he appeared on?
Why is he being interviewed in the pages of this magazine?
I refer in jest, of course, to the remarks originally targeted at Aspen Pittman by Jonathan Simmonds (Feedback, June ‘92).
Suffice it to say that Jim Marshall appears on merit and I, for one, hope that he returns in five years’ time with yet another superb anniversary amp series.
Many thanks also to Phil Collen for his comments on widdley-widdley guitarists.
I agree with him entirely.
The Spinal Tap film may be over ten years old but the traits which it parodies still seem to be very much in evidence today.
What is all this guff about sequencers?
Making expressive music with the aid of such devices is easy: just switch the quantisation off and treat the sequencer exactly as you would a multi-track tape recorder.
If you have the cash and a few decent musical ideas, you cannot go far wrong.
Finally, Neville Marten, how dare you dismiss the guitar as a mere machine?
It is a veritable multi-purpose wonder.
Yes, you could make music on one but that would be sacrilegious considering all the other exciting possibilities that it has to offer: eg. killing fascists (Woody Guthrie), saying sorry (Billy Bragg), as a firelighter (Jimi Hendrix), for clubbing amplifiers senseless (Pete Townshend), for levelling stage floorboards (Ritchie Blackmore), as a mini-TV stand (Billy Gibbons), to stimulate groupies (Steve Vai), to cream yourself (Hendrix again, that infamous Tokai advert or even that sad figure in the current Trantec Systems advert), as a shop sign (Original Flying Vee), as a cricket bat (Ian Botham with the Staccato magnesium bass), as a baseball bat (Steinberger XL), you could use one to kill her mama (like Frank and Dweezil) and, if you are still bored after all that, you could electrocute yourself with it through your dangerously hot-rodded stack.
Don't worry.
This is just my idea of humour.
I am not seriously advocating suicide right on stage, although I know a man who does.
It's only rock'n'roll but I like it!
SUBJECT TO OBJECTIVITY
Dear Guitarist Struan Hellier's remarks (‘Goat's Bum Soup?’) about objectivity of taste were completely wrong.
He made three obvious mistakes.
Firstly, just by supplying paradigm instances of high and low art, he has gone no way towards showing that there is not an area of genuine indeterminacy in between.
Secondly, the word ‘taste’ can be rather confusing, as it covers judgements of both art and preferences.
Struan seems to confuse these two uses.
Art is judged against a background of an aesthetic theory: preferences are entirely subjective.
I imagine that Struan is operating, probably unconsciously, with a theory of art in which art is counted as higher when it is more complex, subtle and displays greater emotional depth.
However, to establish from this that taste is objective he needs an extra premise: that higher art compels greater attention and provides greater enjoyment to the observer than low art.
This, however, is clearly not true.
If art and preferences went hand in hand, we would spend all our time listening to only the most ‘artistic’ music.
It may well be the case, as Struan says, that Beethoven displays more artistic merit than Struan, but if Struan's music uses overdriven guitars, I may well prefer to listen to it.
Thirdly, just because preferences are subjective, it does not follow that there will not be a degree of consensus about them.
Struan seems to see this consensus as evidence of objectivity.
It may well be in fact that there is a consensus about subjective taste, but this is quite different from saying that taste is objective!
We could have a ‘What Is Art?’ debate if people want it, but pop and rock music, and the role of the guitar playing in them, have always been about preferences, not art.
It is entirely consistent to ask, ‘Is Steve Vai more artistic than Lemmy?’ and to answer, ‘Yes, but I prefer Motorhead!’
That's rock'n'roll, so let's have no more irrelevant, uninformed crap about art.
TRASH METAL?
Dear Guitarist
I recently spring cleaned my lovely home, as one is inclined to do now and again, when I came upon a pile of old magazines which had been in the house for years.
Junk!!
Or so I stupidly thought…
Imagine the horror on my beloved's face when he discovered I had in fact flung in the rubbish his much prized and read collection of Guitarist magazines!
About 40 copies new and old gone in 5 minutes after years of collecting!
Not being musically inclined, I had no idea how much they meant to him, and I've subsequently spent about 3 weeks in the dog house.
I can't afford to replace them, so I was wondering if any of your readers would like to donate any Guitarist s they may have and no longer read.
Any month and year would do.
Just something to help me get back in his good books!
HARMONY GUITAR
Dear Guitarist
Four years ago I bought an old Harmony Sovereign acoustic guitar for £20 from an absolute prat.
It's fairly knocked about but has vintage feel and character and I hope I ripped him off.
Brown ‘boiled-up cow’ type glue is holding the all-solid construction together remarkably well, and the high action makes it the perfect instrument for playing bottleneck and slide blues.
It has a rich mellow tone when played with a metal slide in open D tuning and teamed-up with my suicidal vocals and ‘Sonny Terry-Alike’ blues harp playing, it never fails to get my ol' cats a-howlin' and a-wailin'.
I was very surprised when a bloke in 1990 was asking £250 ono for the same guitar.
The classified ad in your magazine said ‘1950s — 1960s Harmony Sovereign Acoustic, black, large head’, etc., etc.
Was he mad?
Am I mad?
Does anybody give a damn?
Will somebody tell me: if the Chicago-based Harmony company mass-produced ten million guitars since 1945 (as they claim), were the guitars so bad that people threw them in the bin like you did with my last letter and lovely photograph?
Why have I seen only three Harmony guitars for sale in your classified section since 1990?
Why has there been no mention in your mag of the Harmony company, who seemed to be one of the earliest to rely on mass-production techniques to rival the ‘hand-built’ approach of Martin, Gibson and Washburn in terms of sales figures and affordability?
What happened to the Harmony company?
Have surviving Harmony guitars become rare, collectable or valuable?
→ The Chicago based Harmony company came to real prominence after it was acquired by the USA's foremost mail order firm Sears, Roebuck in 1916.
As manufacturers of all kinds of stringed instruments, Harmony concentrated on mass production and made relatively cheap instruments (it's been said that they sat somewhere between Kay and Gibson).
They also bought other companies along the way, among them both Stella and Sovereign, hence the model name of your guitar, Mick.
As the USA's leading budget guitar maker, Harmony was hit the hardest and the soonest when the Japanese instrument invasion began in earnest in the 1960s.
What's more, having themselves expanded to massive premises during that time, Harmony found themselves supporting a business whose sales were being rifled wholesale by cheap(er) imports.
The firm finally folded in the mid '70s.
Whilst surely representing the pinnacle of guitar mass-production (500,000 per year sometimes) you're right that only a small percentage seem to have survived in the UK.
Of course, America is a different story, and I have it on good authority that Harmonys still abound there.
Well-known models that found favour in the UK include: the H75, a three pickup semi in the style of Gibson/Gretsch; the Stratotone, a very vaguely Les Paulish guitar (often advertised as Les Paul copies in the '60s); and of course the Sovereign, a big-bodied, solid-topped, double scratchplate acoustic.
The Sovereign sits alongside the Swedish-made Levin Goliath as a well-made, medium-priced acoustic which plays well, sounds okay and is probably worth about £150.
PATCHES, I'M DEPENDING ON YOU…
Dear Guitarist
I have recently purchased an ART SGX 2000 preamp/processor which I use in my current setup, which consists of a Marshall 9005 stereo valve power amp and a pair of Celestion 2x12 cabs.
Having used the preamp for a few weeks now I have got bored with the presets and want to start using it to create some more familiar sounds.
Unfortunately there are so many parameters available that I don't know where to start!
How about a monthly column showing how to set up the ever-expanding range of multi-effects processors to get the sounds made famous by the professionals: eg. Eddie Van Halen's ‘brown’ sound, Brian May's sound and Nuno Bettencourt's sound, just to name a few.
I realise exact settings would be out of the question, due to the many different effects units available, but a rough guide to setting the amount of distortion/EQ/chorus/delay etc. would surely be a step in the right direction.
→ A while back I did suggest that if readers found some particularly great patches they could write in, stating the model of processor and the parameters used, and we'd print them.
One or two people did this but it wasn't taken up generally.
That offer is still open and I think it could work well if people could be bothered.
NEVER MIND THE B***OCKS
Dear Guitarist
In reply to the comments you had to make on my recent letter to your magazine, I have some observations to make.
I did not mean to imply that Guitarist had somehow ‘hoodwinked’ the public regarding Eric Johnson's comments on brass vs chrome jackplugs; if you felt that, I apologise for it.
If you think I am wrong, then fine, but you must know it's bollocks, he must know it's bollocks, so why must you even try to get this point across in a publication that has such a big influence on budding, enthusiastic players, a lot of whom have no other contact with the rock establishment?
I feel you should have maybe said, ‘Yes, Eric, okay, that's really relevant,’ and then edited the comment out just as you did with the rest of my letter.
I think printing Hartley Peavey's letter in the same issue as mine was maybe a bit of a gaffe — but I hope the local amp repairer doesn't have a slip of the brain when he fixes your amp, or your local mechanic doesn't connect up your battery in the car properly.
I would place Aspen Pittman's article in the same league as time share selling, or book clubs or something equally hazy with the truth that happens to make a good profit.
And why should you save Aspen's face?
You're only reporting what he must have said.
It's really sad that integrity has sunk so low that any magazine has to print stuff that isn't really true.
(Aspen Pittman made a slip of the tongue, but has appeared on record many times as saying what he really meant to say to me.
Your analogy would be more accurate if you'd talked of a mechanic saying he was going to the boot of my car to check the battery, having of course meant to say the bonnet.
Ed).
I'm really glad that Jeff Beck and Joe Satriani found the Nigel Tufnel article so brilliant; I bet they paid their £1.80 on the nail when they got the magazine.
So what?
They're only humans, people who have to go to the toilet and fart just like the rest of humanity.
Why is it so necessary to beatify and live in awe of people because they have a God-given gift that is so wonderful?
By real guitarists I mean people like Hubert Sumlin, Cesar Rosas, Dave Hidalgo, Corrado Rustici, James Calvin Wilsey, and the host of mind-blowing talent there is in London alone.
(My criteria would be the same as Struan Hellier's, your letter of the month).
Jimbob and Fruitbat, although successful and possibly wealthy are, I'm afraid not what I'd call guitarists.
But don't misunderstand me; I don't disagree with the fact that you interviewed them.
It's good that all musical bases are covered.
I would just like to see more diversity of people and styles.
What did happen to Manitas de Plata or Julian Bream?
And why do we have to have double bass players featured?
If I'm not mistaken, their instruments are from the bass and viol family and have little to do with the guitar, either from a playing standpoint or a technical one.
The musical instruments that you say are machines are by Oxford Dictionary definition, indeed machines.
The essential difference, I feel, is that they are operated by humans in a much more direct way than a computer or beatbox.
The skill in producing ‘machine’ music requires far less effort or commitment than that of someone who chooses to learn to play a musical instrument or make an artistic statement — however lowly.
They've got a device that sings harmonies now — next the bloody things will be writing songs for us, no doubt sponsored by Pepsi, or Coke so that they can pick up the publishing.
I do enjoy the magazine, and on the whole feel that you do a good job based on the difficulties that you must have keeping it interesting.
The reviews are spot on, and John Hammond's interview was brilliant.
But please make sure of your subject before writing about it.
I think a lot of paying readers would agree.
→ With regard to the Johnson saga, see my reply to Bob Meyrick.
Generally, the people we interview do go on our ‘free’ list.
Do you have a problem with that?
It's only standard practice (you'd get the same treatment were we to interview you) and has nothing to do with fawning over ‘stars’.
I think if Jeff Beck ever remembered having met me it would be precisely because I didn't crawl all over him in sycophancy.
Jeff Beck is a great guitarist and I respect and admire him for his talent, but no more so than an unknown guy down the road who's also brilliant.
We offer, I think, as broad a range of interview matter as any guitar magazine in the world.
But musical style does come into it, and whereas we tend to stick to ‘popular’ rather than classical guitar styles (hence no Bream, as yet), we do talk jazz and rock'n'roll, hence the very occasional upright bassist, like Danny Thompson, or Lee Rocker of the Stray Cats.
ALTARED IMAGES?
Dear Guitarist
I do not know if Gibson Keddie was serious when he invited users of 30 watt bass combos to write to him (review of the Carlsbro bass combos in the June edition of Guitarist ), but I accept the invitation.
I use the excellent Marshall bass combo, rated at 30 watts, every Sunday when I play in the music group that leads the worship in Staines Congregational Church.
The instrumental line-up is clavinova, drums, lead, rhythm and bass guitar plus additions from trumpet, violin, flute, flugel horn and recorder.
We usually have five or six singers amplified through the church PA.
We regularly have 200 worshippers singing with us and this requires quite a lot of volume from the band to lead effectively, but I never find it necessary to increase the master volume on the Marshall beyond half way.
Modern church worship songs range in style from rock to romantic ballads.
I play a Westone Thunder 1A and a fretless Thunder 3A and I use the JHS Bass Box as a preamp.
This combination gives me more than sufficient choice of tonal colour to match the different kinds of music and is easy to adjust during the service.
There are hundreds of amateur musicians who Sunday by Sunday use their skills to praise God and lead worship.
Most of us find that modest combos between 30 and 60 watts meet our requirements.
ASPEN BITES BACK
Dear Guitarist
Judging from the tone of Mr.Peavey's letter to your Feedback column, I guess Hartley did get ‘peeved’ over my interview in your March ‘92 issue.
Hartley's letter is chock full of down-home metaphors that question the intelligence of your readers and our customers, the musicians.
Remarks like ‘Snake Oil salesman’, and ‘(tubes) soaked overnight in swamp water to give them soul’ are pretty heady statements, even for Mr.Peavey.
Very astutely, he uses most of his response to promote his latest tube amp launch: ie. ‘our latest tube amp efforts far surpass anything done in the past’.
This is very subjective and I question whose past he's referring to.
He goes on with self-glorifying statements like, ‘I made my first tube amplifier in 1957’.
This is interesting since Peavey didn't even start business until 1965; Hartley was just a kid in 1957.
Hell, I made a crystal radio while in Junior High School, but I don't include it as part of my credentials.
He did have one valid point, which unfortunately was the basis for his Groove Tubes bashing, and this was the transposition error pertaining to the state of electrons: ie. positively/negatively charged.
I'll gladly accept responsibility for this single mistake, although the essence of the paragraph was not lost because of it.
It would appear that Peavey's primary motivation is business-orientated — to sell as many Peavey products as he can.
This is a valid objective and should not be denounced.
On the other hand, Groove Tubes' primary motivation is serving the music community by offering a product for the artist and musician who can hear the difference between guitars, amps, pickups and tubes.
We continue to provide the best product, provide factual production information and if a customer is not satisfied that his amp sounds and performs better after installing Groove Tubes, we'll give them their money back.
It's been a wonderful and rewarding 14 years generating an ever-widening circle of friends and customers, and I can't recall a refund.
Groove Tubes has worked with ‘legendary guitarists’ as well, who all endorse Groove Tubes (unsolicited and not under contract), some of which are also Peavey endorsees.
For the record, I would like to clarify a few of Mr.Peavey's erroneous assertions:
Point One: ‘Aspen's assertion that somehow his tubes are built ‘special’ is extremely doubtful.
Amazingly, he seems to believe that none of us know about the Tesla factory in Czechoslovakia and the various tube factories in China.’
I have never said our tubes were ‘built special’.
Groove Tubes are special because of our unique testing procedures, not because of the way they were built.
Although we constantly work with several factories to improve construction and quality, tube performance will vary drastically no matter who makes them; it's the nature of the beast.
Our testing system measures meaningful data from power tubes under actual performance conditions so that we can closely match the tonal characteristics and produce a set of tubes with consistency of performance, better harmonic balance, more sustain and longer usable life.
We process thousands of tubes from all the tube factories in the world, and our rejection rates vary between 10% and 50%!
We clearly indicate the country of origin and, more importantly, give the musician the information in practical language to best select their tubes.
Groove Tubes has had success through the years because we tell the truth about tubes (and tube amps).
We don't just brand the cheapest tubes available, bubble pack them in pairs and hang them up on a dealer's wall.
Furthermore, I never even hinted that Hartley didn't know about these tube factories in Czechoslovakia and China.
I'm sure Hartley knows, since most of his tubes packaged under ‘Peavey USA’ come from these ‘various Chinese factories’.
My experiences with the erratic supply of tubes over the last two years were shared for the benefit of those Guitarist readers who might not know as much as Hartley Peavey.
Point Two: ‘Surely anybody knows that if you take an ancient set of tubes and replace them with new tubes that are of reasonable performance, you're going to get a hell of an improvement in sound.
In my mind that ain't a revelation or magic.’
Hartley talks about ‘Snake Oil’, ‘Swamp Water’, ‘Little Pyramids’ and such, and his often used ‘matched candle’analogy (‘it's like lighting two candles at the same time; they're going to burn down differently’).
So, presto, no sense matching tubes!
We match for tonal characteristics, not candle light or simple power output, as Hartley's analogy would have you believe.
Additionally, while older sets of Groove Tubes exhibit normal loss of output power, they remain closely matched in our performance testing system, with balanced harmonics, longer sustain and prolonged usable lifespan.
Point Three: ‘I suspect this (those silly ‘positive’ electrons again) is about as accurate as Aspen's often repeated claims that a soft vacuum creates a soft sound and a hard vacuum creates a hard sound.’
I am hesitant to possibly bore the Guitarist reader with too much technical information.
I'm a musician, not an engineer, and I prefer to discuss issues like this in musical terms.
However, I suppose I'll now have to explain this soft/hard vacuum principal more technically, if only for the benefit of Mr.Peavey.
The ideal atmosphere for the vacuum tube is no atmosphere at all, or a perfect vacuum.
Naturally, there are no perfect vacuums and even if we create a perfect vacuum inside the tube, the elements will ‘outgas’(the material will put out oxygen and other molecules from gases absorbed in the metal) and the vacuum will not be perfect any more.
The Getter is a component added to control out-gassing, but it is not 100% effective.
Therefore, when producing vacuum tubes, the manufacturer pumps out the atmosphere from the glass bottle of the tube with an ion pump, until there is a minimum acceptable vacuum to guarantee the tube will be stable and operate to spec.
The longer the tube stays on the pump, the harder the vacuum, but the more time and money spent in production.
A minimum (soft) vacuum is adequate, but a harder vacuum is better.
The vacuum is needed to prevent collisions between electrons (flowing between the plate and cathode) with various gas atoms.
If these collisions occur, gas ions are generated, which will flow freely as an additional current to the plate (if they are negative ions) or to the cathode (if they are positive ions).
When these ions collide with the plate or the cathode, they will erode these components, knocking additional electrons and ions loose.
These phenomena show up as excess noise, distortion and reduced tube life.
Stated more simply, the softer the vacuum the more distortion, and visa-versa.
Minimum vacuum standards are used by most of the tube manufacturers today because they need tubes made as quickly and cheaply as possible.
There are exceptions, most notably the current G.E.
6550 production and some types from the Czechoslovakia facility.
The Chinese tubes have a relatively softer vacuum specification as compared to original US-made tubes.
Lastly, Hartley refers to our customers as those who would ‘be entertained by self-serving fairy-tales’.
Hartley wrote the book on self-serving.
He would lead us to believe the classic amp designers were mere technicians, while he's been making tube amps since 1957.
Hopefully,Guitarist readers see through this attempt by Mr.Peavey to re-write tube amp history to include himself.
I'm confident musicians will continue to judge our products on their performance, and not on the opinions of Mr.Peavey.
Mr.Peavey is entitled to his opinion.
I respect that.
However, what disturbs me most is Hartley's total disrespect for the ‘ancients’ as he calls them, and the musicians who use and love these products, and ours.
This is demonstrated by such statements as: ‘you pays your money and you takes your pick’.
Hartley is an astute businessman, but he never passes up an opportunity to disparage a successful competitor, and I'm certainly not the first.
He says my interview was self-serving, while his tome closes with his statement ‘(We at Peavey) continue to lead the pack in the world of guitar amplification’, the implication being that he currently leads the pack.
Well, if ‘Einstein is rolling over in his grave’ about those positive electrons, Leo must be turning triple somersaults in his.
→ This has been a fascinating contest of wit and wisdom, with both sides stating their cases fully and with great lucidity.
But can I now declare the debate closed?
PHIL HILBORNE Solo Analysis KNOCKIN' ON HEAVEN'S DOOR — SLASH
Scales
This solo uses one scale type throughout:
G major Pentatonic scale with an added 4th and ♭3
G A B♭ B C D E G
1 2 ♭3 3 4 5 6 1
Notice in the above scale description that the B♭ is the ♭3 of G; in the solo this note is only played against the C chord and therefore functions as a ♭7.
This point also applies to the C note; during the solo this is played against the G chord where it is a 4th, the D chord where it is a ♭7 and the C chord where it is a root (1).
Performance Notes
1)
During bar 1 the A-B bends should be pitched slightly flat in order to produce the bluesy effect that can be heard on the track.
2)
Throughout the solo the depth and speed of the left hand vibrato is quite varied, so it is a good idea to listen carefully to the record and pick this up aurally.
3)
The staccato notes found in bars 1 and 7 should all be cut off very quickly by muting the desired notes with your right hand palm.
4)
Slash played this solo on a Gibson Les Paul through Marshall amps/cabinets.
Thanks for suggesting this month's solo go to Mr J. Webb from Barking, Essex; a couple of sets of Scalar strings, courtesy of Clive Norris at Selectron U.K. will be sent soon!
Taken from the Guns N' Roses album ‘Use Your Illusion II’— Geffen GFSC 21. 1991 The David Geffen Company.
Used by kind permission of Warner Chappell Music Ltd.
Have fun!
Phil Hilborne ‘92 
HILBORNE'S Rock Guitar PAUL GILBERT'S COUNTRY STYLE
This month I would like to illustrate the application of country style ideas in a rock context by taking a look at a couple of parts that Paul Gilbert played on the recent Mr Big album ‘Lean Into It’(Atlantic 7567-82209-2).
The first example shown in fig 1 is the intro from the track Voodoo Kiss .
On the record this was played using fingerstyle acoustic guitar, but it is equally effective when played in the same manner on an electric guitar.
Notice how Paul uses open string ideas (bars 6–7) in a way that is very similar to the phrases that we looked at last month.
Performance Notes
1)
The first bar should be played with all six strings slightly damped by the left hand.
You should then lightly strum these muted strings as indicated, to produce the notated rhythm.
2)
The accented B♭s that occur as pick-up notes for each phrase in bars 2–5 should be played by hooking your r/h thumb under the G string and releasing it so that the string slaps against the fingerboard.
If done correctly this should produce the snappy percussive effect heard on the record.
3)
As you play the 9th chords in bars 6 and 7 you might wish to finger the full voicing for each chord and only lightly strike the top three strings as indicated in the music.
The appropriate movable 9th chord voicings are shown below.
E♭9 D9 C9 
4)
The E7 and D7 chords in bar 8 should have left hand vibrato applied to them.
Be careful not to overdo this and accidentally bend the notes sharp!
5)
The phrasing of this piece should be ‘swung’ throughout (eg. the 16th notes should be played with a slight broken triplet shuffle feel).
If you have any problems with this, it would be a good idea to work at the phrasing aurally, by listening closely to the record.
The next example (fig 2) is taken from the intro of the track Just Take My Heart .
This shows the technique behind the ringing open string scale fingerings that we looked at last month, but applied to a short musical piece.
As you play through this, don't forget to re-tune your low E string up a semi-tone to F and to let the notes sustain into each other wherever possible.
A touch of stereo chorus coupled with a fairly bright guitar sound should also help.
For analytical purposes I have shown the chord tones under the music notation and the possible scale/chord sources under the tab.
After playing through these parts remember to work out other similar ideas of your own invention.
See you next month…
ALAN LIMBRICK Pentatonics LINKING LICKS…
This month I'm going to give you some common licks that demonstrate how to link up various positions on the fretboard using pentatonic scales.
In other words, these licks are ‘moves’ which give you access to and between all areas of your fretboard in the same key.
I've picked A minor (or C major) for our four examples, as this is a common key for jamming and there are no sharps or flats to worry about when reading the licks.
Example 1 is a typical country/rock lick that works well over Am or Cmaj.
The D sharp note really means that this is a Blues Scale lick as opposed to a pure Pentatonic lick, but just think of the extra note as a passing note.
As you'll notice when you play this, it's actually the same phrase or ‘motif’ taken up through 3 octaves using 3 Pentatonic positions on the fretboard; we start in the 3rd position and finish in the 10th position.
Example 2 is a common blues lick descending from high A down to A two octaves lower.
This one is useful for moving from the 5th position down to the 2nd position in A minor.
Example 3 is an ascending lick moving from the 10th position up through the 12th position to finish in the 15th position.
Again we're using repetition of the same starting phrase in two octaves here.
Example 4 is a great lick for covering the whole fretboard from top to bottom.
Again we're using repetition in different octaves and lots of slides and pull-offs to make a smooth transition between each position.
Take your time with this one and make sure you experiment with different left hand fingerings before settling on the best one for you.
Good luck, and see you next month.
ASSIGNMENT
1
Work out the best fingering for each lick.
Pay attention to the notation for slides and pull-offs.
2
Practise each lick from memory with a metronome set at a very slow tempo.
3
Once you can play each lick perfectly at a slow tempo, use your metronome to push the tempo up towards the target speed, suggested in brackets above each example.
4
Try and make the licks work in a playing situation now : ie. jam with them!
JOHN CURRIE Bass Analysis ABBASS
I hope the majority of regular readers of this column appreciate a broad spectrum of modern, popular music styles; after last month's metal mayhem, we now have Martin Rooms of Leicester to thank for requesting an article on the track One Of Us from the album ‘The Visitors’ by one of the purest pop acts to emerge in the last 20 years, ABBA.
Not only is Martin now the proud owner of a brand new set of Elite Strings, but is also ‘eternally grateful’ to me for featuring this bass part and naming the bassist involved, a certain Rutger Gunnarson.
Whatever your opinion of ABBA's music, you must admit they had a hell of a knack for penning a commercial tune; the chord sequence here is fairly standard but with a couple of nice twists, with the bass playing a central role in the arrangement.
Rutger here has gone for a tight, hard, back pickup sound ideally suited to the staccato style he uses, and note the contrast between the sparse verse and much busier chorus patterns.
Notes
1)
Rutger often uses chord tones other than the root to a give a smoother movement between chords: eg. the min 7th (D) of Em7 to lead from the root (E) to the next chord root (C) in the bars 14 and 15, followed by the major 3rd (B) of G major in the same bar.
In the chorus from bar 25 we see a very common scale-based line of root G major (G), followed by the major 7th of Gmaj7 (7£), the root of E minor (E), the minor 7th of Emin7 (D) to the root of C major (C).
2)
Note the use of secondary dominant E7 in bars 27 and 35 to highlight the coming A minor.
The strings here play a melodic line including the major 3rd of E7 (G£), while the bass gets away with a low G natural (as it is only a sixteenth note long and not in an exposed position!).
3
In bar 37 we see another secondary dominant, this time an A7, but now the bass does play a very obvious major 3rd (C£) to emphasise the change.
However, a good deal of tension is created at this point, with the bass playing the expected D while the accompanying chords are first a G major, then an Amin7, finally releasing this tension by coming together on the sustained D major, which leads positively into the beginning of the next verse, a G major.
This type of groove should be played very tight, smack on the beat at all times, but with a little bounce.
Next month, something probably completely different…
Bye for now!
GERRY HOGAN Rockabilly'n'Country Licks CHET CHAT
We're coming forward in time by about 5 years this month.
From the mid-'50s, where we've been for quite some time, we're suddenly into the '60s, 1961 in fact, and a finger-picked instrumental written by Chet Atkins, entitled Trambone .
This tune has been requested by Mr. Peter Williams, who kindly furnished me with a 45rpm record of the tune, by the Krew Kats, featuring Jim Sullivan and recorded 31 years ago (HMV 45-POP-804).
It was great to watch Jim play at the Guitarist Show last November.
He was always one of my guitar heroes and he's certainly one of the world's finest pickers today.
Playing Hints:
1)
Trambone is in the key of C and the main theme (repeated in bars 1 to 8 and 18 to 25) is most easily played by sticking with the simple chord shapes of C, Am, F and G, which I have diagrammed below.
These leave finger 4 free to be used elsewhere.
2
The lead-in note to bars 1, 3 and 5 (also 18, 20 and 22, which are identical to these) are lowered by the tremolo arm before you pick them, in order to achieve the ‘slide’ effect of a ‘trombone’.
Picking the note and then letting go of the arm allows the note to rise in pitch, giving that requisite smooth gliss into the note.
(Look back at the Cliff Gallup solos we  coveredin June and July and you'll notice he did just that, too.)
For the first of these (bar 1), hold the C chord I've diagrammed: press the tremolo arm to lower the C note (string 5, fret 3) to a B (equivalent to fingering at fret 2, and the reason I've written ‘2’ in the tab as the lead-in.
The TA LB stands for ‘Let the tremolo arm Back’.
Similar instructions go for the F note at the start of bar 5.
At the end of bar 2, leading into bar 3, I've written (-1).
Now, don't panic!
It's very similar to the two previous instructions, but because you're going into an open A note, I need to show that you must previously lower it by the equivalent of 1 fret, so you simply pick the open A, having already lowered the note by a half-tone with your tremolo arm.
I trust this makes sense.
3)
In bars 1, 2, 18 and 19, use finger 3 on strings 5 and 6 at fret 3.
Some players can cover both strings at once, but if you're like me you'll have to move finger 3 from one string to the other when required, holding the C chord with fingers 1 and 2 only.
4)
Remember to use the thumb of your fretting hand for string 6 on the F and G chord shapes!
5)
For those not familiar with musical shorthand: the two dots in bar 1 and bar 8 mean ‘repeat the passage between the dots’.
So, first time through you take the ‘first time bar’(ie. bar 8) and return to start back at bar 1 again.
The second time through you miss out the first time bar (8) and take the second time bar (9) and continue on with bars 10, 11 etc.
When you reach bar 33 you'll notice ‘D.S. ** al Coda’.
This means ‘go back to the ** sign (at bar 18) and continue up to and including bar 24; then take the Coda (from bar 24), skip to bar 34 and play to the end’.
6)
Rest the palm of your hand on strings 5 and 6 at the bridge to get a damped bass line with the thumb.
For the next couple of months we're back with some Cliff Gallup licks and solos.
See you then…
MICHAEL FATH Technique and Harmony APPALACHIA
It's one thing to possess great technical ability and knowledge, and quite another to actually play a song with conviction and emotion!
You should never underestimate the value of playing songs, and I highly endorse the idea of doing as much group and solo performance as possible.
This piece,Appalachia , was recorded by myself about 3 years ago and can be found on my record ‘Shake’.
It is a solo steel string acoustic number that has a sort of progressive bluegrass/rock feel to it.
This up-tempo number features hybrid picking, pull-offs, chord melody and sweep-picking.
Of course, good melody will sound fine at any tempo, so play slowly and gradually pick up speed.
Thanks to Sam Wright for the transcription and many thanks for reading.
ADRIAN INGRAM From Rock to Jazz IMPROVISING THROUGH CHORD CHANGES II
Perhaps the best way to familiarise yourself with the sound of specific intervals is by relating them back to the major scale based on the root of the given chord.
This will enable you to construct both stepwise (scalic) and intervallic (arpeggio-based) improvisation patterns.
Below is an example of a C major scale with corresponding intervals altered to match those in the given chord.
Example 2 shows how the appropriate arpeggio can be found.
The same principle would also apply to chords containing a minor third:
And to augmented (+) chords:
Study and play the following examples and then invent some of your own.
Next month we will begin linking the patterns together.
TONY MUSCHAMP'S Bass Space MINOR SCALES
This month we're going to look at minor scales and their application.
If asked where you would use a minor scale, the obvious answer would be over a minor chord, but if the chord was Am7£5 or Em7♭5 your choice of scale would have to be more precise.
But there is always more than one scale to use over any given chord; it's up to you to decide which scale sound you like.
You should also note that when we talk about scale uses, this does not mean merely running up and down the scales like a machine; scales are there to show you which notes to use, the idea being that you are supposed to make melodic phrases or lines from them.
The first scale we'll look at is the Dorian minor, which can be played over a minor seventh chord providing it's the II chord of the key we are in.
Looking at the intervals from which the scale is built, there are only two that differ from the major scale: the 3rd and the 7th.
Another popular scale is the Aeolian, which would be used over the VI chord of a harmonised major scale, or over a m7£5 chord.
If you are soloing over a straight minor seventh you would not want to resolve a melodic line onto the minor sixth interval, although this would be okay on a m7£5.
If we had to play over a m7♭5 chord, I would use a Locrian scale.
This scale has quite an unusual sound and takes a little getting used to.
What scale would we use if we had a min/maj7 chord?
Well, there would be two choices open: Melodic Minor and Harmonic Minor.
Here's the melodic minor; note that it is identical to the major scale apart from the 3rd degree, which uses the minor 3rd.
The second scale we could use over a min/maj7 chord is the harmonic minor:
This scale has an Eastern flavour to it caused by the fifth, sixth, seventh and eighth degrees.
Try playing these intervals up and down and you'll hear what I mean.
Last month I gave you some homework.
Here are the answers:
The first eight bars were II-V-I-IV-VII-III-VI-VI in E major
Bars 9 to 12 were II-V-II-V in F major
Bars 13 to 16 were I-IV-III-II in B♭ major
Bars 17 to 20 were II-II-II-II in E♭ major
Bars 21 to 24 were I-V-IV-III in A major
See you next month…
JOE HUBBARD'S Bass On Top DEVELOPMENT OF A GROOVE — PART III
Infectious grooves are sometimes the most simple.
Being able to come up with a strong hook in a bass line can make a song.
Will Lee was recently quoted as saying, ‘The ways I approach grooves are either to lock with the kick drum and playing fills around that, or to ignore the kick drum and create a melodic hook that allows the bass part to shine.’
Will Lee is a master of these techniques and the same sort of plan was evident in last month's Marcus Miller bass line.
In learning to create these kinds of grooves you must have a direction with the music, and to develop a direction you must be listening to that kind of music.
Listening is the most important skill for a musician to have.
I recommend that all my students listen to records at least two or three hours a day.
When listening to records, or to a band at a gig, even if you are checking out what the bass player is doing you still hear the whole thing.
This is a result of being relaxed about the music.
The thing to work on is applying this same principle to the playing situation.
When we worry too much about the way we are playing it inhibits us from listening to all the elements of the music.
A great album for checking out killer grooves is ‘Rapture’ by Anita Baker.
This Grammy Award winning disc is chock full of infectious bass lines of varied styles, including Song Sweet Love played by Freddy Washington.
This tune is based on an eighth note subdivision which is stated on the hi-hat of the drum groove.
Remember to use this as your internal reference point for locking.
Program the drum pattern for practising this transcription and if you have a sequencer, program the chords as well.
Here's the drum pattern:
To create dynamic contrast with the drum part, program a cross sick pattern on the A section and a snare drum pattern on the B section.
When going to the C section keep the snare going.
Groove Observations
1)
This is a complete transcription made up of five, eight bar sections.
We will refer to these as intro, A, B, C and coda shape of a circle with a cross on it.
At the end of the transcription there is an alternative fill for bar 5 of section A to be played on the 2nd time only.
2)
This whole tune is based on two elements of Will Lee's plan: playing with the kick, filling around that and creating a melodic hook that shines.
3)
The intro locks with the kick, adding subtle fills in the first four bars.
There's a very nice melodic fill in bar 5.
Note that the last note in this bar is a non-diatonic note over the B♭ maj9 chord.
This is heard as an anticipation of the next chord, resolving by scale step.
Section A is fairly similar to the intro, but going through this section for the second time don't forget to use the alternative fill in bar 5.
4)
Section B is the melodic hook that shines.
I could listen to this over and over again, but I guess that's what made it a hit.
5)
Section C is taking the basic feel from A and making it a little busier (this is a good technique to use over a middle 8 section in order to build it dynamically, but not lose the original direction for the song); it then repeats to A and goes to the coda.
At the coda it repeats the B section groove until the fade.
As always, try to get this recording, start listening to all the elements, and check out the way the notes feel .
Spending time with your bass should be like spending time with a good friend.
Look at it like this and it will make you and the music feel good!
Bass Regards…
READERS ADS'
FOR SALE
ACADEME bowl-back electro-acoustic, Adamas style, new, cost £400.
Sell for £290.
ACOUSTIC 136 bass combo, 100 watt, 15″, £195.
ACOUSTIC Model 114 combo with reverb and distortion, £70 ono.
Also one pair of 205 hi-fi speakers, little use.
ADA B-200S stereo bipolar amp, £325 ono.
ADA MP-1 guitar preamp, excellent condition, £425 ono.
Also Carlsbro 150 watt power amp, £120 ono.
ADA MP-1 valve preamp, 128 patch programmable, 19″ rackmount, recent valves, £350.
ADA programmable preamp, updated software, stereo, new valve, chorus compression, £325.
ALESIS Quadraverb GT, brand new, £325.
AMPEG S-3T 810E bass cab, immaculate condition, £675.
AMPEG SS-140 stereo chorus guitar head, twin channel and mono/stereo effects loop, excellent condition, £350 ono.
ARIA ES-500 semi-acoustic, 335 copy, twin humbuckers, flamed maple body, £240 including hardcase.
ARIA Pro 2 Cat Bass, Columbus chorus pedal, JHS headphone practice amp, all £160.
ARIA Pro Cat 2AB 4-string bass, with case, studio use only, superb, £200.
ARIA Pro II fretless bass, black, £190.
ARIA Pro II XR, Kahler tremolo system, fine-tuners etc, electric blue, as new, 3 years old, £200.
ARIA Pro II, No. 87063, natural, cased, £120.
Sessionette 75, ungigged, £140.
ART Multiverb 3, £225.
Marshall Drivemaster, £40.
Both boxed, home use only.
ART Multiverb Alpha and X-15 Ultrafoot, absolutely new, unused and boxed, £480.
ART Multiverb LT, good condition, boxed, £130 ono.
BACK issues of Guitarist from the 1st of June ‘84 to May ‘90, apart from March ‘89, reasonable offers.
BASS Collection SB-301 bass, almost new, beautiful condition and sound, translucent red, £220 including case.
BC RICH Mockingbird bass, NJ series, £250.
Wanted, Musicman HD-130 head and 115 cab.
BLADE R-3 Strat, needs re-wiring, hence £250.
PX/Swap for Portastudio.
BOND Electraglide guitar, carbon graphite step-neck, immaculate, with hard case and power supply, £250.
BOSS CH-1, £45.
OS-2, £30.
Alesis Microverb II, £65 or £120 the lot.
All boxed and in immaculate condition.
BOSS DR-110 drum machine, with case, good condition, £40.
BOSS GE-7, £50.
SD-1, £25.
Pearl OC-07 Octaver, £50.
BOSS ME-5 multi-effects unit, immaculate, boxed with manuals, £160.
BOSS ME-5 multi-FX unit, programmable floor unit, mint condition, boxed, never gigged, £230.
BOSS MZ-2, distortion, chorus and delay all in one, unused, with receipt and warranty, £55 quick sale.
BOSS Overdrive, £35.
DOD chorus, £30.
Flanger, £30. 2-second delay, £70.
Crybaby wah, £35.
Korg tuner, £15.
BURMAN 140 watt valve head, very powerful sound, clean, plus three-stage overdrive, very good condition, £150 ono.
BURNS Black Bison bass, 1962-'64, collectors item, recent refret, good condition, offers.
BURNS Marvin guitar, 1964, all original except machine heads, £1,500 ono.
CARLSBRO Cobra 90 watt combo, very good condition, £175 ono.
CASIO PG-380 guitar synth with hard case, excellent condition, £500.
CHAPMAN Stick, case and accessories, hardly used, fantastic condition, £500 ono.
CHARVEL Limited Edition with reverse headstock, lovely mint condition, £460 ono.
CHARVEL Model 3DR, immaculate condition, £300.
CHARVEL Model 4 active, excellent condition, plus Charvel hard case, may PX.
CHARVEL Model 4, colbalt, Jackson hardware, quality Japanese guitar, pristine, pro set-up, never gigged, £350 ovno.
CHARVEL Model 5, plus case, £275.
CHARVEL ST Custom with hard case, excellent condition, £300.
Crate G-60XL combo, twin channel, reverb, £150.
COMPLETE rack, Roland GS-6, Marshall 8004 power amp, 2 speaker cabs, Midi foot controller, power supply, flightcased, £700.
COMPRESSOR Rocktron, with pick limit and D-S-ing facilities, recent purchase, £150.
CRATE G-60 XL combo, 60 watts, twin channel reverb, good condition, £180.
Tom Sholtz Soloist, £80.
CRATE G-60XL head, twin channel and reverb, 3 months old and never gigged, excellent condition with manual and footswitch, £210.
CRATE G-160XL 160 watt amp head, Eminence 4x12″ 300 watt cab, loud, great sound, never gigged, £360.
Will split.
CUSTOM made Explorer by Andy's, 1 humbucker, Strat tremolo, £300 or PX/swap for Portastudio.
CUSTOM Telecaster, see Guitarist August ‘87 review, completely made of birdseye maple with gold hardware, home use only, immaculate, plus case, £550.
DAN Armstrong Ampeg plexiglass bass, 1969, excellent condition, £750.
DAN Armstrong, natural solid mahogany body, single sliding pickup, all original, with case, £500.
DESKTECH 6-into-1 mixing desk, £175.
DIGITECH GSP 21 Pro, perfect condition, with box and manual, £450 ono.
DIGITECH GSP-5 with footswitch, £200.
DIGITECH GSP-21, with foot controller, excellent condition, boxed, £400.
DIGITECH Multiplay with chorus, flanger, 2 second delay and infinite repeat, never gigged, excellent condition, £80 ono.
DIGTECH GSP-21 Pro and foot-controller, boxed and as new, £500 ono.
DOD stereo chorus pedal, brand new, still boxed, £40 ono.
DUNLOP Cry Baby, as new, still boxed, £50.
ECHOREC drum machine, £200 ono.
ELECTRIC guitar, good condition, DiMarzio pickups, Steinberger locking trem, ebony fingerboard, mahogany flame top body, £150.
EMPTY Elgin 2x12 speaker cab, very strong and in excellent condition, offers.
ENCORE Strat, red, Gorilla 10 watt amp, Boss Turbo Overdrive 2 pedal, leads and books, £150 ono.
ESP George Lynch black Kamikaze guitar with Duncan Pearly Gates pickup, £800.
ESP M-1 electric guitar, Strat shape, tremolo, metallic coral, maple neck, flightcase, mint condition, £200.
ESP M-1, mint green, Schaller locking machines, OBL XL at bridge, good condition, amazing sound.
ESP Telecaster, light blue, rosewood neck, Paul Reed Smith vintage neck pickup, Hot Rails bridge pickup, good condition, with case, £325.
EV loaded bass speakers, 200 watts each, good condition, cost £1,020 new.
Sell for £450 ono.
FENDER ‘57 reissue Strat, Evans pickups, £250 ono or PX/swap for Portastudio.
FENDER 12-string semi with case, £225.
Fender left-handed Jazz guitar with case, £275.
FENDER 1982 Strat USA, with case, £400.
Or PX for Telecaster.
FENDER bass guitar spares, most parts available, either original or name replacements.
FENDER Bassman 135 watt valve top and Fender 2x15 cab, sounds and looks great, £325.
Or swap for quality combo.
FENDER BXR-300C 300 watt bass combo, £370 ono.
Great sound and condition.
FENDER Deluxe 85 amp, excellent condition, £230.
FENDER Dual Showman Reverb 2x12 combo, all valve, oldie but immaculate condition, classic Fender sound, offers.
FENDER Jazz Bass fretless, black, home use only, excellent condition.
£230.
Also old but usable Jazz Bass hard case.
FENDER Jazz Bass, 1973, white, maple neck, Seymour Duncan bridge pickup, very good condition, £325 including gigbag.
FENDER Lead 1, purchased USA, great sound and action, £250 ono.
Or PX for Fender Jaguar.
FENDER M-80 combo, 3-channel, as new, £200.
FENDER Malmsteen Stratocaster, USA-made with case, cream with scalloped neck, good condition, £485 ono.
FENDER Precision Bass, 1975, USA, maple neck, good condition with case, £375 ono.
FENDER reissue Twin Reverb 100 watt valve amp, brand new, £725.
FENDER Silver Anniversary Strat with moulded flightcase and certificate, £450.
FENDER Squier Precision Bass, Japanese, absolutely immaculate condition, £145.
FENDER Squier Precision bass, black with case, barely used, £165 ono.
FENDER Squier Stratocaster, first series, Hot Rails pickup, Sperzel locking machines, tweed case included, £185.
FENDER Strat 1964, serial 36641, all original parts apart from bridge top, sounds great, £800 ono.
FENDER Strat Plus Deluxe, turquoise with active mid-boost, good condition, £450.
FENDER Strat Standard, USA, sunburst, maple neck, 2 years old, immaculate, with Fender case, £375.
FENDER Strat USA Standard, black, with maple neck, very good condition, Fender case, £300.
FENDER Strat USA, 1979, natural, £350.
Fender Twin Reverb valve 100 watt amp, fitted with Groove Tubes, £380.
FENDER Strat, 1978, blonde, maple neck, EMG pickups, case, £550.
Or swap for Levinson Blade.
FENDER Stratocaster 12-string, mint condition, never gigged, £350 including tweed case.
FENDER Stratocaster 1971, absolutely gorgeous, cream with rosewood neck, pre-CBS pickup, looks, feels and sounds like an old one, present owner of 12 years.
£550, no case.
FENDER Stratocaster USA, 1970s, sunburst finish with maple neck, includes case, £250.
FENDER Stratocaster, ‘79, rosewood neck, black, trem, case, £395.
Washburn Hawk, superb, £195.
Cry Baby, £40.
FENDER Stratocaster, 1979, USA, sunburst, mint condition with tags, home use only, £500.
FENDER Super 60, all valve, mint, unused, £325.  15 pm.
FENDER Telecaster Custom, mid '70s, sunburst with rosewood neck, Bigsby palm pedal fitted, £495.
FENDER Telecaster Thinline, 1973, natural body, maple neck, twin humbucker model, very good condition, £550.
FENDER Telecaster USA model, 1978, rosewood neck, black body, hard case included, £400.
FENDER Telecaster USA, oldish, good action, blonde, £650.
Ovation Legend Custom acoustic, 9 years old, good condition, with case, £850.
Peavey Classic 50 watt 2x12, old valve model, £400.
FENDER Telecaster, L-series, ‘64, well used, £950.
FENDER The Twin, never gigged, 12 months old, excellent condition, too loud for bedroom, £495 ono.
FENDER Twin Reverb amp, silver face, beautiful sound, £320 ono.
FENDER Twin Reverb, 1970, non-master volume type, excellent condition with flightcase, £375.
FENDER Twin Reverb, latest model, with footswitch, brand new and unplayed, pristine condition, £560 ovno.
May PX for Mesa Boogie or similar small all-valve combo.
FENDER Twin, immaculate, £250. 1965 Fender Super Reverb, 4x10, £250.
Wanted Musicman HD-130 head and 115 cab.
FENDER USA Stratocaster, 1979, sunburst, standard with case, £325.
FENDER USA ‘57 reissue vintage Precision Bass, PX or swap for anything interesting, or cash.
FENDER USA Standard Stratocaster with hard case, gunmetal blue, excellent condition, £350.
FENDER USA Strat ‘62 reissue, good condition, with case and strap, £255 ono.
FENDER USA Strat Plus, all black with rosewood fingerboard, excellent condition, with case, £395 ono.
FENDER USA Telecaster Custom, 1973, all original, good condition, sunburst, £395.
Or swap for Strat Plus.
FENDER Walnut Strat, 1981, mint condition, original case, £675.
FENIX Custom Tele, birdseye maple, green, gold hardware, Kent Armstrong coil tapped pickup, mint condition, £230.
FENIX Telecaster, natural wood finish, excellent condition, £95.
FERNANDES The Revival electric bass, excellent condition, with case, £160.
FLIGHTCASES for Fender Telecaster, bass guitar and classical guitar, £70 each.
FOSTEX 260 4-track recorder/mixer, punch in pedal, as new, £340 ono.
FYLDE Orsino acoustic, superb tone and workmanship, handcrafted Martin type, with case, £275 ono.
Also Pilgrim Mk2 electro-acoustic with cutaway, £275 ovno.
GALLIEN Kreuger 206 combo, excellent condition, cased, £495.
Or swap for Valvestate chorus 80 watt combo.
GALLIEN Kreuger 400RB head, 200 watts, Gallien Kreuger 4x10 cab and 1x15 cab, EV speakers, never gigged and virtually brand new, £1,000.
GIBSON 335 cherry Dot plus custom case, mint condition, £700 cash.
GIBSON 345, cherry red with gold plating, 25 years old, immaculate condition, £1,200 or swap for Paul Reed Smith Custom.
GIBSON Barney Kessel Custom, 1969, excellent condition, £895.
GIBSON Chet Atkins CE, nylon strung solid guitar, wine red, mint condition, with case, £650.
Te: 0706 712036, Rochdale area.
GIBSON collectors’ Les Pauls, 1954-style Gold Top, late 60's reissue, rare, £1,350. 40th Anniversary LP Standard, mint, £995, PX considered.
GIBSON Epiphone Sheraton semi-acoustic, as new, with hard case, £285.
GIBSON ES-335 Dot, blonde, 1 year old with case, hardly used, immaculate condition, £599.
GIBSON ES-335, 1958, sunburst, dot neck, PAF's, original case, near mint condition, £3900.
GIBSON ES-335TD, absolutely immaculate condition, £500.
GIBSON ES-335TD, with coil tap and case, tobacco brown, good condition, £700 ono.
GIBSON ES-347 semi-acoustic guitar, split coils, gold fittings, ebony fingerboard, block inlays, case, £700 ono.
GIBSON Exploer, with Kahler trem, mint condition, with case, £400.
Swap for Kramer Barretta.
GIBSON Flying V electric guitar, with hard case, good condition, hardly used.
GIBSON Flying V, Schenker Custom Shop limited edition, Kahler trem, with case, £475 ono.
GIBSON Howard Roberts Custom, 1973, cherry finish, mint condition, £700 including case.
GIBSON Hummingbird acoustic, early '70s, excellent condition, brilliant tone, original hard case, £495.
GIBSON Les Paul Active Artist, 1978, tobacco sunburst, active electronics, very rare, Gibson case, £900.
GIBSON Flying V, 1979, beautiful condition, a real poser, £375 ono.
GIBSON Les Paul Artisan 1978 Limited Edition, gold hardware, three pickups, very good condition, £850 ono.
GIBSON Les Paul Custom, beautiful cherry sunburst, built Nashville 1982, great player and sound, cased, £600.
GIBSON Les Paul Custom, white, superb condition, £600 including case.
GIBSON Les Paul Deluxe, sunburst, £625.
Also Mk35 Gibson acoustic, £400.
Both in good condition.
GIBSON Les Paul Special, double cutaway, two P-90s, cherry red, with case, 1960, £850 ono.
GIBSON Les Paul Standard, 1972, complete with Gibson protector case, £525.
GIBSON Les Paul Standard, 1981, tobacco sunburst, £550.
GIBSON Les Paul Standard, 1989, black, Seymour Duncan Invader pickups, Graphtech trem nut, chrome pickup surrounds, straplocks, Gibson case, all in excellent condition, £500.
GIBSON Les Paul Standard, cherry sunburst, with Seymour Duncan pickup at bridge, £575 ono.
GIBSON Les Paul Standard, Heritage cherry sunburst, 12 months old, with case, £700 ono.
GIBSON Les Paul Standard, tobacco sunburst, immaculate condition, never played, £550 ono.
GIBSON Les Paul Standard, wine red, Gibson hard case, as new, £550.
GIBSON Les Paul, 1976, black with DiMarzio pickup in bridge position, plus case, £450.
GIBSON Melody Maker, 1964, double cutaway, twin pickups, very nice, £450.
GIBSON Melody Maker, 1986, one humbucker, Grovers, black refinish, £295.
GIBSON Mercury amp and cab, plus tremolo, classic '60s collectors item, freshly overhauled, £295 ono.
GIBSON P-90 pickup, chrome type, '60s, very clean, £65 ono.
GIBSON reverse Firebird, 1976, plus case, gold hardware, beautiful condition, may swap for Ibanez Jem or offers.
GIBSON SG, '60s Custom with custom pickups and bridge, £600 ono.
GIBSON SG, ‘62 reissue, cherry, immaculate, never gigged, £450 including case.
GIBSON SG, 1964, twin humbuckers, superb lead tone, low price for quick sale, £325.
GIBSON Thunderbird ‘86 Custom Shop, 1 pickup, very good condition, with case, £750.
GODIN Artisan ST-1 Strat-type, birdseye maple top, Seymour Duncan pickups, Kahler trem, £480 including case.
GOODFELLOW Player bass, similar to Alembic, same quality, cost new £995 with Custom case, sell for £550 ono.
GORDON Smith GS-1, with P-90 pickup, 1980, £150.
GORDON-SMITH II electric guitar, with case.
Fender 65 amp, plus distortion and wah, excellent condition.
GRETSCH Country Classic II, never gigged, mint condition, £700 ovno.
GRETSCH Filtertrons, chrome pair, very good condition, £45 each or £80 the pair.
Gibson gold machineheads from ‘79 Custom, tulip buttons, £15.
Also two Japanese humbucking pickup covers, chrome, £1 pair.
Tel 0272 422423.
GRETSCH Tennessean, immaculate condition, with Bigsby and plush lined case, £900.
GUILD D-40NT, 1977 with case, good condition, £395.
GUILD D-40NT, absolutely mint condition, no.145979, with Guild case, £600 ono.
GUITAR For The Practicing Musician and Guitar School magazines, ‘84 to ‘92.
GUITAR pickups, humbuckers, various makes, DiMarzio, Seymour Duncan etc.
GUITARIST mag from May ‘86 to May'92, few missing, £50.
GUITARIST magazines, just one issue missing, £70.
Some other guitar magazines, also footswitch, £7.
HARTKE Transporter 4x10 cab, Hartke 350 watt head, 6 months old, mint condition, £695.
HARTKE XL series 2x10 bass cab, immaculate condition, £350.
HERITAGE Les Paul, cherry sunburst, very good condition, £400 ono.
HH 150 watt Performer combo, 2 channels, 4x10 speakers, with echo, ADT, phasing and reverb, footswitch, £250.
HH mid-range PA speakers, pair, excellent condition, £175.
HIWATT Custom 100 amp head, original '60s model, excellent condition, great tone, collectable, £100 ono.
HOFNER Committee semi-acoustic, blonde, birdseye maple, good condition, also Selmer Zodiac valve amp, 50 watt tremolo, new speakers, £550.
HOFNER Committee, late '50s, natural finish, excellent condition, £450 ono.
HOFNER Congress guitar, sunburst, excellent condition, £250.
HOFNER President, 1963, left handed semi-acoustic in original blonde with f-holes, excellent condition, offers please.
HOFNER Senator acoustic, brunette, early '60s, case, Hofner pickup, beautiful, £175 ono.
Vox AC10, tremolo, classic tone, £300.
Both very good condition.
IBANEZ Artist AS-100 semi, 335 type, sunburst, good condition, £240.
IBANEZ Artist Professional series, solid body, natural finish, bound edge and fretboard, age unknown, £250 ono.
IBANEZ AT-series acoustic, EQ/volume, cutaway, rosewood body, 1 month old, mint condition, £270 with Hiscox case.
IBANEZ EA-400 electro-acoustic, cutaway, with active graphic EQ, set up, plus hard case, £265.
IBANEZ Jem 77, new blue floral pattern, unplayed, immaculate condition, flightcased, £795 for quick sale.
IBANEZ Paul Gilbert body, neck and pickups, all new, needs trem and machineheads only, £400.
IBANEZ RG-540 Saber, rare basswood body, many switches, DiMarzios, with gigbag, £570.
IBANEZ RG-550, immaculate condition, mauve, including case, £275 ono.
IBANEZ RG-560, white, Floyd Rose, 6 months old, hardly used, superb condition, £500 new, sell for £380 with case.
IBANEZ Starfield all-valve preamp, as new, £200.
IBANEZ X-series, dark metallic red, excellent condition with hard case, £380.
JACKSON Tube amp, 50 watt, like a supercharged Marshall, this is one of only 3 in UK, designed by Jackson USA, made in England, £350.
JASMINE electro-acoustic cutaway, EC28C, plus Hiscox Lightflite case, excellent condition, £550.
JOHN BIRCH J2, sadly must part, £400.
Peavey 212 Stereo Chorus, immaculate, £475.
Or £775 both.
KIMBARA electro-acoustic guitar, blueburst finish with cutaway, good preamp, good sound, £120 ono.
KITTYHAWK Quatra preamp, £175 ono.
Kittyhawk stereo power amp, £300 ono.
KNIGHT Imperial archtop, natural, as new, £900.
Harry Stone archtop, natural, with pickup, very good condition, £300.
KORG A5 programmable effects, delay, compression, distortion, chorus, flanger and reverb, excellent sound, as new, £150 ono.
KRAMER Barretta MkIII, 3 months old, Seymour Duncan pickups, Floyd Rose, mint condition, £450 ono.
KRAMER Stagemaster, autographed by Ronnie James DIo and Blackie Lawless, collectors piece, one off, flip flop blue, Floyd Rose, £800.
KRAMER sunburst, 1979, cherry maple top, Seymour Duncans, refret, excellent guitar, £375.
KUBICKI bass, £695.
Squier Jazz Bass, £110.
Marshall JMP 20 watt valve head, £85.
L'ARRIVEE RS-4 electric, carved flame maple top, matching headstock, thru-neck, inlaid ebony fingerboard, Floyd trem, Seymours, £725 ono.
L'ARRIVEE RS-4CT Canadian handbuilt Super Strat-type, ebony fingerboard, thru-neck, Floyd Rose and carved top, cost £700, sell for £450 ono.
LANEY Linebacker 100 reverb combo, £120.
Rat Mk2 distortion, £25.
Boss digital delay plus power supply, £90.
LANEY old valve head, great sound, £115.
Sessionette 75 watt mosfet, with footswitch, £175.
LEFT-HANDED 1963 Fender Stratocaster, refinished but otherwise original, offers.
LEFT-HANDED Epiphone Sheraton, immaculate condition, £265.
Also mint left-handed Fender Jazz Bass, £350.
LEFT-HANDED Gibson Les Paul Custom, 1970, £650 ono.
LEFT-HANDED Gordon Smith Flying V, unmarked and never gigged, £399.
LEFT-HANDED Les Pauls, one Standard and one Custom, both sunburst, £650 each.
Yamaha SG-1000S, black, £395.
All very good condition and cased.
LEFT-HANDED USA Strat, ‘76, natural, R/N, £450.
Marshall JCM-900 4102, £500.
Boss PS-2, £60.
LEFT-HANDED Washburn KC70-V, translucent red, black hardware, Floyd Rose, bedroom use only, £300 ono.
LEFT-HANDED Westone Thunder 1A bass, £100.
LES PAUL copy by Satellite and Daion Strat-type, £65 each.
LEVINSON Blade, black with gold fittings and maple neck, Fender and Seymour Duncan pickups, very good condition, £450.
LOWDEN S-7 handmade acoustic guitar, cedar top, Schaller machineheads, luxury hardcase, £495.
MACKENZIE 100 watt Q-Max bass head, 100 bass bin and Peavey 4x10 cab, £250 ono.
MAISON Super Strat-type, sunburst finish, 1 hum/2 single coils, double locking Floyd Rose trem, great sounds, good condition, £195 ono.
MARSHALL 2x12 cabs in full aluminium flightcases with wheels, £210 ono each.
MARSHALL 50 watt combo, Anniversary 25/50, 1x12″ speaker, complete with cover, footswitch, mint condition, £275.
MARSHALL 50 watt master volume Mk II lead head, £200.
Boss CS-3 compressor-sustainer, boxed, £50.
MARSHALL 9001 valve preamp, boxed, excellent condition, with footswitch, boxed, £300.
MARSHALL 9004 preamp, boxed, as new, get that Marshall sound for only £100.
MARSHALL 9005 valve power amp, £330 ono.
MARSHALL bass stack, JMP-100 valve head, 4x12 Marshall cabs, scruffy but loads of character, £350.
MARSHALL Bluesbreaker combo reissue, with cover, £450 ono.
MARSHALL JCM 900 50 hi-gain dual reverb head with 4x12 angled cab, almost new, immaculate condition, £500.
MARSHALL JCM 900 series, 50 watt, 2x12 valve combo, £299.
MARSHALL JCM-800 100 watt split-channel reverb head, £270.
Marshall 12 watt reverb combo, £80.
Excellent condition.
MARSHALL JCM-800 MkII lead, recently retuned and biased, excellent sound and condition.
MARSHALL JCM-800 top, two 4x12 cabs, good condition, £575.
MARSHALL JCM-900 100 watt dual reverb head and 4x12 angled stero cab, as new, £650.
MARSHALL JCM-900 100 watt valve combo with extension cabinet, very good condition, £500.
MARSHALL JMP 50 watt master volume head, excellent condition, £200.
Korg monophonic synth, full working order, £150.
MARSHALL JTM 45 MK2 plus Park 4x12 blue-face cab, offers.
MARSHALL Model 3310 100 watt amp with two 12″ cabs, makes a great stack, mint condition, home use only, £325 ono.
MARSHALL small logo Mk2 100 watt amp and slope cab, collectors item, £420.
MARSHALL Speaker Emulator, SE-100, £200.
Ibanez Starfield all-valve preamp, 4 overdrive settings, £200.
MARSHALL split-channel valve head, mint condition, £260. 1968 4x12 cab, £200.
Charvel Model 4, mint condition, with protector case, £375.
MARSHALL valve amp, 25 watt, good condition, original orange covering, gold trim, £200.
MARSHALL valve combo, 50 watt 1x12, split channel, separate tone controls, hardly used, £280.
MARSHALL Valvestate 80 watt combo, excellent condition, £270.
Auto Wah pedal, £30.
Psychoacoustic processor, £40.
MARSHALL Valvestate 100 stack, excellent condition, £400 ono.
MARTIN 000–16 with Martin hard case, July ‘90, as new, £750.
MARTIN 000–16M with case, 6 months old, original condition, £650.
MARTIN D-28, with case, very good condition, £795 ono.
MESA Boogie 22 watt amp, £450.
MESA Boogie Mk111C, £1,100.
Roland JC-120, £400.
Selmer Zodiac Twin 30, £200.
MESA Boogie MkII 60 watt combo, with reverb, graphic and EV speaker, studio use only, £600.
MESA Boogie Quad preamp, £750.
Mesa Boogie 295 power amp, £700. 12-unit rack, £80.
MESA Boogie Studio preamp, £275.
MUSICMAN 65 watt 2x12 combo, early model, fitted with Boogie valves, great sound, £275.
Also Rockman sustainer and chorus/delay rack, with power supply.
MUSICMAN Eddie Van Halen Signature, yellow flame top, 1 month old, perfect condition, £1,000.
MUSICMAN HD-210 combo, 135 watt, good condition, £265.
Strat-type, custom made by Bill Puplett, including Seymour Duncan pickups, locking machines etc, £260.
Hofner Senator, professionally setup, £125.
MUSICMAN Silhouette guitar, translucent cherry red with white scratchplate, 3 single coils, non-tremolo version, with fitted case, £450 ovno.
MUSICMAN Stingray 5-string bass, blueburst, with gigbag, mint condition, £700.
MUSICMAN Stingray bass, natural, pre-Ernie, excellent with full flightcase, £550.
Wanted, Wal Custom or Pro 2E.
MUSICMAN USA 1979, pre-Ernie Ball Stingray bass, used 4 times only, offers.
NADY 201 True Diversity guitar radio system, £130.
NADY 201 True Diversity wireless system for guitar, £140.
NED CALLAN SG original, the first handmade edition, needs renovation, offers?
NOTE for note tapes, G'n'R, Hendrix and Page, mint condition, £70 ovno.
OBERHEIM DX drum machine, separate outputs etc, very usable, £80.
ORIGINAL Marshall JTM-45 plexiglass, old logo, £500.  15 weekdays.
OVATION 12-string Balladeer, USA model, immaculate condition with Ovation case, £450 ono.
OVATION 1621 Custom Balladeer with original case, very good condition, £425.
OVATION Adamas 1978 Limited Edition, signed by Mr. Kaman.
Blue/grey speckled top, carved bridge, goldplated fittings, neck inlays, £950 ono.
OVATION Applause 6-string, deep bowl, excellent condition, £200.
OVATION Classic Balladeer, nylon-strung, serious offers only please.
OVATION Matrix Special Edition, sunburst finish, good condition, £400 ono.
OVATION Pinnacle, 3 band EQ, great sound, £400 ono.
Or PX for Fender Jaguar.
OVATION Preacher electric guitar with sculptured Ovation hard case, mint condition, superb instrument and very rare, £500.
OVATION Ultra deep bowl, sunburst, excellent condition, good to play, complete with Hiscox case, £350 ono 
PANGBOURN handmade custom 6-string electric guitar, £900.
Interesting PX considered.
PARAGON f-hole arch top acoustic guitar, made by Clifford Essex, 1940, £600.
PEAVEY Bandit 112 85 watt combo, with footswitch, excellent condition, £200 ono.
Boss BE-5 multieffects unit, £100 ono.
PEAVEY bass combo 300 with Black Widow speaker, good condition, £350.
PEAVEY Encore 65 watt valve combo with Musicman speaker, needs slight attention, hence £180 ono.
PEAVEY Express 1X12″ 65 watt combo, reverb, distortion, 5 months old, £180.
Or swap for stereo power amp.
PEAVEY Express 112 60 watt guitar combo, footswitch etc, £175.
PEAVEY KB-100 keyboard amp, excellent condition, £200 ono.
PEAVEY MKIV bass head, 310 watts, graphic, D.I., effects output, compressor, £295 ono.
PEAVEY Rage practice amp, loud and portable, A-1 condition, £45 including guitar strap and stand.
PEAVEY Reknown 160 watt 2x12″ twin channel combo with footswitch, £275.
Fender Strat, white with hard case, £175.
PEAVEY Rockmaster valve preamp, clean, crunch and lead channels, 5 FX loops, footswitch, rackmount, £250.
Tel Mark 091 237 5108, Newcastle area.
PEAVEY Triumph 60 watt valve combo, 3 channels, reverb, footswitch, versatile and powerful amp, excellent condition, £325.
PENSA-SUHR guitar, built, signed and numbered by John.
1 of 3 in the world, offers.
PENSA-SUHR the ultimate guitar, unique, mint condition, phone for more details.
PERFECT Pitch ear training course, £50.
Stuart Hamm, Billy Sheehan and Steve Lynch videos, £10 each.
PETERSON 120G 120-watt split channel guitar amp, footswitches included, 1x12 Electro Voice speaker, exotic hardwood cab, above excellent condition, £549 ono.
PETERSON EV-100 combo, mahogany, £300 ono.
Also Roland JC-120 stereo combo, £370 ono.
Both in excellent condition.
PETERSON Guitar Special 100, EV loaded, £395.
Vox AC30, '70s model, superb condition, £275.
USA Fender Strat, as new, £325.
Gibson J-45, £850.
Guild acoustic jumbo, £425.
Tom Mates custom Tele, £575.
PIGNOSE 150-R, crossmix true twin channel amp, designed by Rivera, unbelievable distortion, bargain at £250.  15 pm.
PRS Classic, solid red, excellent condition, with case, never gigged, £600 no.
PRS Custom, vintage yellow, 10 top, bird inlays, immaculate condition, £1,050 or PX for Mesa Boogie Studio or Quad preamp.
RACK SYSTEM Quadraverb, ADA MC1, MP1, Boogie 295 with speakers, harmoniser, £2,795 complete.
RAMIREZ classical guitar with case, fine instrument, deserves a good home, £500.
REH videos, Don Mock, Robben Ford, Herb Ellis, Joe Pass blues, and many book and tape sets.
RICKENBACKER 330, black, excellent condition, £475.
Vox AC-30, 1966, excellent condition with blue speakers, £450.
RICKENBACKER 4003/S 8-string bass, metallic blue, excellent condition, offers.
ROBIN Medley Standard 2, handcrafted Strat-type, figured neck, white stained body, 2 humbuckers, Floyd, £675.
ROCKTRON CE-1 compressor/expander, £60.
Also Hush 2X noise reduction, £70.
Both with adaptor, £100.
FENDER Squier Stratocaster, red and white, Fender parts, trem, mint condition, as new, £130.
ROLAND GP-8 effects processor, 8 simultaneous effects, excellent condition, never gigged, manual, £295.
ROLAND GS-6 guitar preamp and digital effects rack, boxed with manual, immaculate condition, £160.
ROLAND guitar synth with foot controller (this guitar will also trigger keyboards) very good condition, £450 ono.
RSD Studiomaster 8 into 2 powered mixer, 3x80 watt Mosfet amps, includes foldback and graphics, £499 ono.
RX-20 Exciter and Imager hush unit, £250 ono.
Roland SRV-2000 digital reverb, £200 ono.
SCHECTER Super Strat-type, 1982, bookmatched flame maple top, EMG pickup, Floyd Rose tremolo, birdseye maple neck, stunning instrument, £895, PX considered.
SELMER treble and bass amp head, perfect working order, FX loop model, classic amp, £100 ono.
SESSION 75 watt combo, excellent amp, £150.
SESSION 75, excellent condition, 90 watts, very loud, £150.
SESSION 100 bass combo, 15″, graphic, compressor, good condition, £195.
SESSION 112 Duette guitar amp, 2 channels, reverb and overdrive, footswitch, excellent condition, £130.
SESSIONETTE 75 watt 1x12″ combo, tweed finish, £170.
SEYMOUR Duncan pickups, brand new, boxed, Jazz neck and ‘59 PAF bridge, £90 pair.
SHAFTSBURY Les Paul with hard case, black, £125 ono.
SQUIER ‘62 Jazz Bass, black with white plate, made in Japan, hard case and stand, plus H/H 100 watt bass amp, £345 ono.
SQUIER Telecaster, black, excellent condition, £150.
Also Westbury Standard, burgandy, needs attention but playable, £50.
SQUIER Telecaster, black, maple neck, still in box, with tags, £150.
STARFORCE 7008 bass guitar, 3 pickups, volume, tone, 3-way selector, controls, 24 frets, metallic red, £199.
STATUS Series 2, plus case, maple body.
STATUS Series 2000 4-string graphite bass with full flightcase, mint condition, original receipt and documents available, delivery possible, £795 ono.
STATUS series 2000, £300 just spent on refinish by Status, new hardware etc.
Finished in Fender Sonic Blue, only one in the country, must be seen, no case, £850.
STEPP DGX digital Midi guitar, very good condition, recently overhauled, ideal for studio.
Also Chapman stick, bass size, fretless, offers.
SYNTHAXE and pedal unit, new specification, very good condition, £525.
TAKAMINE EF-400SC, natural finish, gold parts, preamp/EQ, paid £750 18 months ago, barely used, £475.
TASCAM 488 Portastudio, Alesis SR-16 drum machine, Alesis MMT8 sequencer, £1200 the lot, may split.
TASCAM Porta 1 4-track portable studio, boxed, carrying case, with mains adaptor and instructions, £250.
TC-2290 new, boxed with manual, £975.
Yamaha D-1500 digital delay, Midi, good condition, £195.
Watkins Rapier 44, superb condition, £125.
TOKAI STS-50, nice to play, beautiful sound, reference Guitarist Nov ‘91 page 105, £200 ono.
TOKAI Super Edition Strat, metallic red, £250.
TRACE Elliot 200 watt bass combo, Model 2710, 4 months old.
Rickenbacker 4001 bass, superb sound, £625 the pair.
TRACE Elliot 715 bass combo, brand new, cost £500, sell for £400.
TRACE Elliot 1628 2x15″ speakers, plus AH 200 head, as new, will spilt, £750.
TRACE Elliot 7210 bass combo, 200 watts, only 4 months old, cost £650 new.
Sell for £400.
TRACE Elliot AH-100, rackmountable, plus Trace gigbag, mint condition, £200 ono.
TRACE Elliot AH-100, £180 ono.
Marshall 200 watt 4x10 bass cab, £100 ono.
TRACE Elliot AH-200 bass amp, rack mountable, £380 ono.
TRACE Elliot twin valve combo, very loud, all valve, immaculate condition, £700 ono.
TRACE Elliot VA-350 valve bass amp, recent re-valve, immaculate condition, £799 ono.
TRAYNOR YGL-3 100 watt valve twin reverb combo, master volume, warm sound, £150 ono.
TUB Bass 30 amp, unused, £130.
VARIOUS effects and accessories for sale, some brand new, phone for more details.
VINTAGE Vox V125 bass amp with matching 2x12 cab, recently serviced, absolutely mint condition, £350 ono.
VOX AC-10, rare, 1x10, tremolo, classic tone, clean or screaming, loud, £300.
Hofner Senator acoustic, case, pickup, £175 ono.
Both in very good condition.
VOX AC30 Limited Edition, footswitch and cover, home use only, £450.
VOX AC30, pre-1965, blue speakers, tremolo, footswitch, £350.
WAL Pro 2E bass guitar, black, ex-Nick Beggs, excellent condition with Wal case, £525 ono.
WARWICK Thumb bass, £800.
Status Series 2 5-string bass, £875.
WASHBURN D-30SN acoustic, lists at £468, mint condition, selling for £200.
Also Encore Coaster 3-pu electric, £89.
WASHBURN J-6 semi-acoustic guitar, sunburst/gold, was £750.
Sell for £450 ono.
WESTONE Thunder 1 bass, solid alder body, recent setup, plays superbly, £120 ono.
WESTONE Thunder II bass, active, fretless with lines, original case, £150 ono.
Or PX for Musicman Stingray.
YAMAHA BB-3000 bass guitar, red, gold hardware, with hard case, £380 ono.
YAMAHA FX-500, mint condition, £200 ono.
YAMAHA MSG Deluxe, red, locking trem, coil taps, with case, brand new, £400.
YAMAHA MSG Standard, immaculate condition, with hard case.
May PX, or offers.
YAMAHA P-2250 500 watt stereo power amp, £350.
YAMAHA PE-235MAP, 250 watts per side, stereo, £450.
YAMAHA RBX-550 5-string bass, immaculate condition, £250 including padded gigbag.
YAMAHA SG-512 12-string, like new, £150.
YAMAHA YSG guitar, translucent black lacquer, gold hardware, straplocks and case, superb instrument, £295 ono.
ZOOM 9000 guitar effects processor with foot controller, boxed with manuals, brand new, sensible offers.
ZOOM 9000 with foot controller, AC adaptor, boxed, as new, £225 ono.
ZOOM 9002 multieffects unit, £170.
ZOOM 9030 guitar effects processor, 6 months old with rackmount, £375.
ZOOM 9030 guitar effects unit, £250.
ZOOM 9030 studio guitar effects processor, still boxed, mint condition, £450.
Tel; Andy 0582 414843, Luton area.
PERSONNEL
AGEING near-knackered 45-year old rhythm guitarist, available weekends with limited time through week, would like to join band.
AMBITIOUS lead guitarist and bass player require powerful vocalist and drummer, own material, Staffs area.
BAND with original material influenced by Simply Red/Deacon Blue, require bass player to complete line-up.
BASS player experienced in jazz and commercial seeks gigging band or good player to jam with.
BASS player required for established gigging rock band, must be willing to relocate.
BASS player required, electric-acoustic or double bass to join acoustic duo, Leicester/Northants area.
BASS player wanted for versatile band, we need someone with a bit of groove.
BASS player wanted for well-established hard rock band.
Commitment, gear and transport essential.
BASSIST and drummer required, 15–17, to join two great guitarists for funk rock with a twist.
BASSIST and singer/guitarist wanted to jam and form group, into Nirvana, G'n'R, Dokken and Aerosmith, Blackpool area.
BASSIST required for folk/rock band in Northampton area.
BASSIST required into all styles including slap.
BASSIST wanted for interesting rock band, original material and covers, influences include Jackson Browne, Genesis and Roachford.
CHRISTAIN lead guitarist/vocalist wanted for rock H/M band in Northampton area, aged 16–30.
DEF Leppard influenced guitarist seeks other musicians to form commercial hard rock band, commitment important.
DOCTOR Hemely needs a singer with an original approach to rock.
DRUMMER and vocalist wanted for blues band, into Howlin' Wolf.
DRUMMER required for thrash/hardcore Lincoln band, dedication and ambition essential, no timewasters.
DRUMMER urgently required for thrash metal band, gigs and demos waiting.
ENTHUSIASTIC guitarist wanted for rock band, Croydon area, aged 17–20, previous band experience not necessary.
EX-SABBATH members, Watson and Desmond, require bassist for new project, dedication and image essential.
EXPERIENCED guitarist/backing vocalist seeks dedicated partner, main vocals and guitar, for duo work.
FEMALE guitarist required for all-female band, Coventry/Warwick area.
Management, studio time, record interest, dedication essential.
GUITARIST aged 17 seeks others to form band with in Lancashire area.
Into Hendrix and blues.
GUITARIST aged 18 seeks working band or musicians for covers/original band, into Hendrix etc.
GUITARIST aged 23 seeks casual band in Sussex/Surrey area, hard rock/blues or anything really, own transport.
GUITARIST aged 27 seeking working, gigging rock band.
GUITARIST intermediate, 18, into Jam, Ozzy, rock, seeks other for indie band, Beds area.
GUITARIST looking to join/form pro-minded heavy rock band, North Bradford/Manchester area.
Good experience and dedication, no time wasters.
GUITARIST required to join band, studio work imminent, into U2, INXS and funk.
GUITARIST requires bassist to start up new band in Hastings area.
Into Maiden, Ozzy, Kiss, Metallica and Crue.
GUITARIST totally into Extreme, Living Colour and Queen, 21, ex-pro, needs young band.
GUITARIST with good vocals, professional and versatile, ex-name, preferably looking for name band.
LEAD /rhythm guitarist required, in mid-to late-teens, for heavy metal band, no egomaniacs.
LEAD /rhythm guitarist/vocalist and writer seeks to join/form dedicated rock band, influences Cream, Purple, Sabbath, Zepp and The Cult.
LEAD guitarist and drummer required, south Bucks area.
MEDIOCRE guitarist aged 17 seeks line-up to jam with, Leicester area.
Jamming space with no noise reductions available.
NEWBURY based experienced bassist seeks musicians for crusty punk/grunge band, gigs available.
Interested?
ORIGINAL East Kent area melodic rock band require keyboard player and bass player, commitmentessential.
PRO-MINDED lead guitarist/singer seeks dedicated musicians (bass, rhythm, keyboard and drummer) to form rock band, aged 16–20, Essex area.
SINGER wanted for rock band, must have enthusiasm, into The Who, Dave Gilmour and Led Zeppelin.
THRASH lead guitarist wanted to form teenage thrash band, into Slayer, Overkill and Sepulchtura, Guildford area.
TWO guitarists aged 19 looking for bassist and drummer to jam and possibly form band with, influences Hendrix, Metallica, Led Zeppelin and Satriani.
VERSATILE guitarist seeks tight band with professional attitude, into Hendrix, Cream and Johnson.
VOCALIST /bassist wanted to join St. Annes/Blackpool duo into rock and blues, work waiting.
VOCALIST required for competent heavy rock band, dedication essential, Bournemouth area.
VOCALIST required for original rock band based in South Yorkshire area.
Varied influences.
VOCALIST rhythm guitarist, 21, seeks to join/form blues/rock band, into Whitesnake, Bon Jovi, Thin Lizzy and Albert Collins.
WANTED
ARIA Pro 2 SB, black and gold bass, or black ST Integra bass.
BURMAN guitar amplification wanted, any model considered, will collect.
BURNS Jazz Split Sound with Wild Dog knob, sunburst.
CELESTION SR-3 speakers with SR-3 C1  controller.
COPY of the Rush Concert, broadcast May 29th on Radio 1.
EPIPHONE ET-270, 3-a-side headstock, you've got, I want it for a reasonable price.
FENDER Japanese Telecaster, any colour, good condition, £175 paid.
FENDER Jazz replica/copy bass wanted for cash.
FENDER Super 60 or Concert valve amp, almost any condition taken.
FENDER Vibroverb, in excellent condition.
Swap for Fender Princeton Chorus and Hohner Les Paul, excellent condition, plus cash adjustment.
GIBSON A-5 mandolin, oval hole/twin point bracket, or copy; Epiphone, Aria or Kasuga preferred.
GIBSON Les Paul Heritage 80 or quality reissue, must be good condition, sensible money please.
GUILD Songbird electro-acoustic.
HOFNER Beatle bass wanted, must be original and old, good price paid.
HOHNER G-2T, in excellent condition.
HOHNER G3T or ‘The Jack’ headless guitar, in good condition.
Also travel guitar.
IBANEZ jazz guitar, preferably Gibson copy, fair cash price paid.
IBANEZ Jem and Ibanez George Benson wanted.
IBANEZ LR-10 Lee Ritenour model, must be in good condition, cash waiting.
LEVIN Goliath acoustic guitar, must be in good condition.
MAHAVISHNU Orchestra videos and transcriptions wanted, also any interviews with John McLaughlin.
MARSHALL amp and cab wanted urgently, age and condition unimportant, can collect.
MARSHALL JCM 900 series 100 watt dual reverb head, good condition.
MARSHALL JCM-900 dual reverb head, or 1960A angled cab.
MARSHALL Valvestate 100 watt, cash waiting.
MESA Boogie MKIII in hardwood with flightcase.
RACK flightcase wanted with room for two 19″ rack units, with front and back covers, must be very good condition.
URGENTLY wanted, guitar case for Gibson Les Paul, must be clean, good price paid.
URGENTLY wanted, tracing of a Fender Jaguar body for rebuild project.
Contact: Matt, 35 Croft Rd, Thame, Oxford 0X9 3JF.
VOX AC30, any condition but must be working, blue speakers preferred.
WESTBURY Custom, will travel.
SWAP
AMPEG Trace Elliot.
Your Ampeg amp for my Trace Elliot Twin valve combo, immaculate condition.
ATARI Lynx PC, boxed, for your Korg A-4, Boss ME-5 etc.
BALDWIN 706-V semi-acoustic, late '60s.
Swap for amp, effects etc.
Or sell for £200.
BOSS digital delay pedal.
Swap for a harmonizer pedal.
BOSS HM-2 distortion pedal, mint condition.
Swap for good chorus, delay, octave or pitchshifter pedal.
CHANDLER custom-built super Strat-type, Floyd Rose trem, Seymour Duncans.
Swap for USA Jackson.
DIGITECH GSP 21 Pro, with case.
Swap for Gibson Les Paul, cherry sunburst.
EMG 81 humbucker, swap for EMG 60 or Strat pickup or sell for £40.
FENDER Strat USA Standard, black with maple neck, very good condition, Fender case.
£300.
Or swap for Fender The Twin amp, cash adjustment 
FENDER Stratocaster, 1971, gorgeous guitar, cream with rosewood neck, pre-CBS pickup, superb tone.
Will swap for Les Paul or Rickenbacker.
FENDER USA Stratocaster Plus Deluxe, vintage white.
Swap for Gibson Les Paul Standard or Custom, preferably white, with cash adjustment.
FENDER USA Stratocaster, black with rosewood neck and hard case, excellent condition.
Swap for Hayward guitar, cash adjustment.
FENDER USA Stratocaster, black, rosewood neck, hard case.
Swap for Gibson Les Paul, any condition considered, cash adjustment.
GIBSON Les Paul Custom, white.
Swap for Yamaha SG-3000S and effects pedals, guitar must be black, immaculate and with case.
LEVIN Jumbo acoustic, excellent original condition, old Swedish make.
For valve combo, preferably Fender or Vox.
MARSHALL 50 watt master volume MKII lead head.
Swap for Marshall Valvestate 100 watt split-channel reverb head.
Model 8100.
MARSHALL 80 watt 1x12 Valvestate combo, as new.
Swap for Vox AC30 valve amp, any condition.
MESA Boogie Caliber 50+ combo, including full flightcase.
For your Musicman 212 cab and head, must be in good condition.
MUSICMAN RD 100 115 EVM combo, mint.
Swap for ‘59 Bassman or Vibroverb reissue.
PAUL Reed Smith Custom, vintage yellow, ten top and bird inlays, immaculate condition, £1,050 or PX for Mesa Boogie Studio or Quad preamp.
QUADRAVERB GT, for your Zoom 9030.
WESTONE Thunder 3, good condition.
Swap for Fender Jap Strat, preferably white.
YAMAHA SA-2000.
Swap for Fender Vibroverb or Bassman.
STOLEN
FENDER Telecaster, maple neck, natural finish, serial no.
S835508.
Customised with ESP bridge, wide frets, and push/pull tone control.
Please telephone 081 337 1689, 0459 111100, or Chiswick Crime Desk on 577 1212.
YELLOW Ibanez Saber LTD, with very distinctive green-coloured volume and tone controls.
Please phone Gerry on 081 673 6205, London area.