

Editorial
Continuing last month's comments on guitar design — remember I spoke about the bolt-on semi-component jobs that we see virtually everywhere?— there's been a development.
I was with a group of music journalists at the recent British Music Fair, talking to the President of an ascending international guitar company, and the topic turned to instrument design.
So I put it to him, ‘Being famous doesn't necessarily endow a guitarist with insight into the design and workings of the guitar, so why are artists so often asked for their input and reviewers almost never, when our job is to understand, examine and pass judgement on guitars on a daily basis?’
Wouldn't this, I reasoned, eradicate at least some of their problems and at the same time reduce the level of criticism from us?
The truth, of course, is not hard to fathom: everyone's heard of them and no-one's heard of us ; therefore they'll sell thousands of guitars for these companies while we'd sell zilch.
Okay, my mum'd probably buy me one for my birthday but that would be about it.
The ‘Signature’ artists themselves might have a thing or two to chip in, too: ‘Whadda yous lot know?
We're out there playing these guitars to their extremes; we're the ones who use the things in anger.’
And that's true, but it's often forgotten that some of us on this side of the fence also play professionally — they say teachers are failed musicians and I suppose many people see music journalists as those not good enough even to teach!
But when I criticise a tremolo system for being awkward to change strings on, or a truss rod for being inaccessible, it's because I change my own strings and adjust my own truss rod.
I don't have a guitar roadie there to do everything for me, so I interact with my guitar on every level.
What's more, a reviewer's design would have to be seen to work in every respect, not simply look outrageous, or match this tour's stage set.
But I digress…
Our rather astute businessman did what any self-respecting President would do; he threw the hot potato back at us by saying, ‘Okay then, draw up your perfect guitar and we'll build it.’
Sounds like a wonderful opportunity doesn't it?
But think about it and you'll see that several cans of worms open here for people in our position.
For instance, being in the business, and purporting to understand the wider implications, our designs would have to be sensitive to the practicalities and compromises involved in production — whether or not these instruments ever got to that stage.
And then, what design do we actually submit?
Something akin to our current favourite guitar (a bashed-up old Tele, perhaps, but rebuilt to perfection?
Hardly radical!); or something we feel would suit the preconceptions of the average player (hence Floyds, humbuckers, big frets etc.
Even less radical, if I'm to stand by the comments I made last month); or something that we think is missing from current trends (something a bit retro maybe, but where's your originality?).
It's not looking quite so easy now, is it?
And if that's not enough, any design emanating from a music paper or magazine might appear to expose some underlying editorial stance, and in doing so raise the question of impartiality (or partiality).
We were given thirty days to come up with our designs.
Ten days have elapsed already and I haven't even thought about where to begin.
But I do intend to do it, and if it comes off I suppose I should put my money where my mouth is and offer up my effort for your appraisal.
Of course I'd remind you that not all drawings get to the prototype stage and not all prototypes reach the production line, whereas my design would go from a piece of paper to the factory, and from the factory I'd receive a cardboard box a couple of months later.
And that's fairly thin ice on which to skate one's credibility!
But I'm making excuses already, aren't I. Nevertheless, your opinion does concern me; I mean, supposing you think it's a pile of dog's dos?
Or, maybe worse, supposing I think it's a pile of dog's dos!
Oh well, all we can do is see.
And I'll see you next month…
N.M 
What's New News & New Products This month, Fender forbid G&L from mentioning Leo's name, new bits and pieces from Warwick, SWR, Carlsbro and Fishman, the return of John Birch and some news on how to win yourself a year-long guitar scholarship…
FENDER FIGHT
A press release from Fender Musical Instruments Corporation informs us that a settlement has been reached during preliminary legal proceedings against G&L Music Sales for ‘direct infringement’ in the use of the Fender name and trademarks.
‘Terms call for an immediate cessation of the Fender name on, or attached to, all G&L guitars, basses and components,’ states the document.
‘G&L is restricted from using the Leo Fender name or likeness in advertisements and brochures…it must cease use of ‘The Real One’ and similar terms suggesting that G&L guitars and basses are the original or classic Leo Fender or Fender designs.
There will be a time provision for the sell-off of current stock and for the headstock modification of certain G&L instruments.’
‘We have spent considerable time, effort and money protecting and defending the Fender name and its trademarks,’ adds the current Fender president Bill Schultz, ‘not only for our benefit, but also for the benefit and protection of our dealers and thousands of consumers who purchase Fender products.
‘In line with this responsibility, we had to take action against G&L.
This was a difficult action for us, due to our utmost regard for the memory of Leo Fender, but one that was necessitated by the actions of the new management at G&L.’
To which the cynically-minded might reply that while it's certainly fair for Fender to give inferior, rip-off copies of their guitars as hard a time as possible, did Leo design G&L instruments, or didn't he?
STONE ME
All the way from San Francisco come these rather beautiful and correspondingly expensive picks made from Brazilian agate, a form of natural quartz.
‘I've had some feedback on them from some jazz guitar players,’ says the importer, Steve Spurling of Take Note Services, ‘and they all swear they'll never use anything else!
What the picks do is give you a much smoother treble, with none of that awful ‘ping’ you get with ordinary plastic ones.
They also seem to give a more even tonal transition from the bass strings to the treble.
‘I've also shown them to some bluegrass musicians, a guitarist and a mandolin player, and they say that they're really fast once you get used to them.
The only thing to watch out for is dropping them on the pavement — because they shatter!’
The agate picks cost £6.50 each and come in five different sizes.
Although they might be in major shops soon, they're presently only available from 
PLAYSCHOOL
Providing you live in London, there's a chance for you to win one of two scholarships to attend The Guitar Institute's one-year, full-time course commencing this September.
The money comes from the BBC's Greater London Radio, whose benefit concert on National Music Day featuring Bob Geldof, Midge Ure and Julia Fordham raised nearly £6,000 towards the Guitar Institute scholarships.
Anyone wishing to apply for one of the scholarships should send a cassette tape of their playing, no longer than five minutes long, to ‘The Guitar Institute GLR Scholarship’, 6 Warple Way, London W3 0RQ.
All applicants must live in the Greater London area, and must be able to attend the school five days a week between September 1992 and July 1993.
Incidentally, any players interested in other courses at The Guitar Institute, Basstech or Drumtech might fancy going along to their second Open Day on Saturday, 19th September at either 3.00pm or 5.00pm…
THE RETURN OF YOB
Readers whose memories were pleasurably tickled by our ‘Oldies’ article on Dave Hill's Superyob guitar might be interested to know that John Birch is back in the guitar business after a ten-year absence.
Now based in West Bridgeford, near Nottingham, John is offering a range of ‘familiar-style’ guitars in the £250 bracket and is ready to launch what he describes as ‘a sensational new pickup system’on an unsuspecting world.
Actual details are vague, but John claims that whereas every other pickup in existence suffers from a muddy, limited response, his design (available fitted to any guitar, single-coil or humbucking, at a cost of £150) gives the first genuinely ‘full range’ sound.
The hows, whys and wherefores are available from  N.B. Please see letter in Feedback .
STOLEN
On the 5th of July in Clitheroe, Lancashire, a reader's band lost just about everything when their van was stolen.
The orange LWB Ford Transit (reg.
B510 BCK) contained, amongst other things, a Status Series 4000 bass serial no. 015, a black Westone Thunder fretless, a Fender Stage 185 amp with the Channel 1 midrange pot snapped off, an Orange 4x12 cab, a Peavey MkIV bass amp, a new-style Fender 4x12 cab, a Rhodes electric piano, a Hammond X5 organ, a Solton combined Leslie cabinet and amplifier, various Sonor drums, a pair of Bose 402 PA speakers and a custom-built effects board containing an old Tube Screamer, a CE2, a Cry Baby, an Ibanez Phaser, an orange ‘mute’ box and a Korg chromatic tuner.
If any of these items are offered to you, please contact Clitheroe Police on 0200 23818 or Andy Wilkinson on 0200 23853.
On a slightly happier note, the Bass Centre would like to thank Johnny Roadhouse in Manchester for helping to retrieve one of the Status Empathy basses whipped from our Northern Music Show.
Still missing are a see-thru red Bass Collection SB502 fretless 4-string and the other Empathy, serial number 1024, so keep 'em peeled.
BABY DRIVER
The latest addition to Carlsbro's Sherwood acoustic guitar combo family is called, appropriately enough, the Baby.
The Baby pushes out 30 watts through a single ten-inch dual-cone speaker, and features two channels.
The first has a high impedance input and a 3-band graphic EQ with a parametric midrange control, and the second has low and high impedance inputs in conjunction with a 2-band graphic.
Both channels have gain controls and reverb in/out switches, and the amp also features a footswitch for the Accutronics reverb, master reverb and master volume controls, plus FX loop, line out and headphone sockets.
Contact 
MAINSTREAMER
Fresh to the Warwick range comes the awkwardly-named but indubitably funky Streamer Stage 1 Classic Line bass.
The new bass essentially follows Warwick's well-known design philosophy, but this time it's crafted entirely from flamed German rock maple to give a different tonal character.
Other modifications include the ‘Easy Rider’ pickup suspension system and 1992-style MEC pickups.
The Streamer Stage 1 Classic Line comes in 4-string, 5-string and 6-string versions and, in addition to the standard ‘oiled’ finish, a whole range of thirty standard colours as well as custom colour and airbrushed graphic finishes.
Unfortunately, Warwick have no UK distributor at the time of writing.
However, you could always talk to the people themselves at 
BLACK BOX
With an all-tube preamplifier and a transistorised power stage, the chunky-looking new ‘Bassic Black’ combo from SWR kicks out 140 watts into 8 ohms through a 15-inch speaker and a piezo tweeter (there's an extension cabinet available containing another fifteen-incher and another tweeter).
It has passive and active input jacks, gain and master volume controls, an ‘aural enhancer’, a tuner input, tone controls for bass, midrange and treble, an effects blend control, clip indicators for both the preamp and power amp and a balanced line output.
SWR's Bassic Black combo costs £764, and more info is available from 
JUMPING JACK FLASH
It doesn't look much, but the new endpin jack from Fishman Transducers will make life a whole lot easier when you install a Fishman AG-125 or the Fishman-made Martin Thinline 332 acoustic guitar pickup.
Because this one is designed to be tightened up from outside the guitar, it can be used on guitars without conventional round soundholes by pulling the jack through the endblock with a piece of wire.
Other advantages of the new endpin jack include a shielding cap over the solder connections, thereby reducing annoying noise from nearby fluorescent lighting and dimmer switches.
Furthermore, this jack can deliver two different pickup signals or can be adapted to provide on/off switching when used with battery-powered circuits.
The Fishman endpin jack is available through Fishman and Martin dealers.
strait talking Mark Knopfler Talking to Dire Straits' frontman backstage at one of the band's £150,000 per day tour dates, Bob Hewitt mused that when Guitaristlast spoke to Mr.Knopfler six years ago, further outings on the scale of ‘Brothers In Arms’ seemed unthinkable.
So what's changed?
‘I just got to miss it,’ shrugs Knopfler.
‘There's no pressure this time; in fact this tour is much easier than ‘Brothers In Arms’.'
The band are well past their 150th gig of the tour now and Mark insists that they're playing better than ever: ‘Everyone plays great and we all get on really well…’
While the logistics and finances for the ‘Brothers In Arms’ haul seemed horrendous way back in ‘86 — the tour was costing £25,000 a day — those statistics have been quite literally dwarfed by ‘On Every Street’.
‘Because of the big outdoor venues it's more like £150,000 a day this time.
Plus, we've got three stages leap-frogging around Europe.
So with 46 trucks, yeah, it's pretty huge.
And we used to be able to get all the gear in John Illsley's car…!’
But with the much-talked-of world recession, finance must be a major consideration for Straits' manager Ed Bicknell.
‘Of course it is,’ agrees Mark.
‘Ed would tell you the implications of playing a football stadium in Poland, for instance.
You could fill it up with people and not make a penny — wouldn't even cover our costs.
We could probably only charge about £4 a ticket, so even if we could do an Eastern European tour, we'd lose so much money on it.
In fact we just couldn't do it.
You see, with costs like this, even if you take a few days off you're a million quid in the hole!’
Every once in a while an album captures the public's imagination in a big way.
Whether it's simply the right songs by the right band at the right time, who knows.
But the album will reside in the charts for months, chalk up incredible sales and launch its writers, singers and players into megastardom.
Over the past two or three decades similar stories can be told of Pink Floyd's ‘Dark Side Of The Moon’, Mike Oldfield's ‘Tubular Bells’, Fleetwood Mac's ‘Rumours’ and, of course, the 1985 sales blitz that was ‘Brothers In Arms’, an LP which became the flagship of the burgeoning CD generation.
Number one in over 25 countries, the following year's ‘Brothers In Arms’ tour covered 250 dates worldwide.
A period of personal retreat followed this exhausting tour and the rumour, expounded even by Knopfler himself, that Straits had split seemed underlined both by the band's non-activity and the growing involvement of the frontman with a variety of other artists.
This included projects with Randy Newman, Chet Atkins and Buddy Guy, and also continued Knopfler's previous association, from ‘Local Hero’ and ‘Cal’, with further film soundtracks.
Then came the Notting Hillbillies.
Originally intended as an almost recreational activity, the Hillbillies were formed by Mark with former musical associates Brendan Croker and Steve Phillips.
The idea was to record and tour with the band, but Knopfler saw an essentially fun project with his mates develop into something which came close to getting out of hand.
More action resulted from Mark's invitation to tour with Eric Clapton.
The favour was reciprocated when Dire Straits were re-formed to play at the Nelson Mandela birthday concert at Wembley Stadium, where Clapton helped out on guitar.
After headlining at 1990's Knebworth gig, Knopfler, having pronounced himself ‘back in love with music’, began work on the songs that were to make up Straits' latest offering, ‘On Every Street’.
Comparisons between ‘Street’ and ‘Brothers’are inevitable.
Was ‘Brothers’ a hard act to follow, even five years on?
‘No, never.
They were both just records to me, so I've never felt anything like that.’
The rehearsals for a tour this size must be on a massive scale.
How is it all done?
‘You do it in two stages.
You begin with little rehearsals in little rooms, and then a big rehearsal with a PA system and lighting rig in a big room!
The two stages take about nine weeks.
We change the sets often, so you learn how to do things at different venues as you go along.
We rehearsed so much stuff that it's given us plenty of music to play around with on the tour.
‘The beginning of our show goes pretty much the same each night.
Then, after Sultans , we can throw in different numbers as and when we like.
One of the things I did learn from the last tour was to rehearse enough material so that you don't get fed up playing the same things over and over again.’
After ‘Brothers’, you toured with Clapton as a sideman.
How did that come about?
‘He just asked me to do it, and I felt like playing live again to keep my chops up.
I hadn't been out for a long time, so I did it for the relaxation, really!’
You've involved yourself in lots of other projects between ‘Brothers’ and ‘On Every Street’; was this a deliberate decision?
‘No.
Things just get long.
And you get tied up.
Then someone turns around and says, ‘It's been five years since your last tour,’ and you say, ‘What?!’
Anyway, that's the way it goes with me, I'm afraid.
But I'm going to make sure it doesn't happen again in the future.
You know how it is; one project goes into another — a film or a production thing — and the next thing you know, a year has gone by.
With the Hillbillies project, I enjoyed doing the record so much that I just wanted to do a little tour.
But that thing escalated.
It's just so difficult to control…
‘But I'm learning how to say ‘No’ now.
I'm not getting too sidetracked and I don't want to do anything unless I'm really turned on by it.’
Did the Notting Hillbillies project help you to get away from the pressures of ‘stardom’, and get back to the ‘pub band’ gig situation?
‘Not really, because it got so much bigger than we wanted it to straight away.
We wanted to do clubs, but it ended up in City Halls and things.
And we sold a couple of million records, so it got a bit popular!’
Did that spoil it for you?
‘In a little way it did, because we did really want to keep it small.
But at least we managed to keep it in the UK, although we had lots of offers to go abroad.
We just did one TV show in the States, but we didn't do any gigs over there.’
Are there any plans for another Hillbillies-type project?
‘Well, Brendan and I have talked about getting a rhythm and blues outfit together, but a lot harder that the Hillbillies, with a lot more ‘thump’ to it.
But I don't know when we could do that.
I was talking to Terry Williams (drums, ex-Man and Rockpile ) about it in Cardiff the other day, because Terry would be great for something like that.
I just don't know when we could get it all together though — that's the only problem.’
The current tour continues until October.
Can you sit down for a while after that?
‘No, because I've got involved in sorting out this live album.
We've recorded a few shows, but I want to put some new things on it as well…’
If Dire Straits hadn't been so successful, would you have carried on as a circuit band, or would you have gone back to teaching or journalism?
‘Yes, of course we'd have carried on if we'd been able to make a living at it.
But it's very, very difficult.
I mean, it was hard then to get anything going at all in the way of income.
I remember when we got out of playing the tiny places, and we were resident at The Marquee and packing it out.
We got £110 for doing the gig, but the PA cost us £105 to hire, so we bought beer with the other fiver — and that's when you could get a few beers for a fiver!
‘The teaching was just something that kept me alive; I'd tried to live off music before that, and failed.
But the songs were pushing so hard I had to get out there and do it.’
Was there any particular inspiration behind ‘On Every Street’?
‘No, there was none at all.
It's just a bunch of tunes I wanted to record and I just felt it was time to get an album out again.
I like some of the recordings too, because they are absolutely ‘as done’, without any messing about in the studio.
Things like Fade To Black and Ironhand are untouched, and I like them rather more than the ‘worked on’ stuff.
But ‘On Every Street’ is a good recording; it's actually the only album I've made that I can listen to!
‘You see, after you've played something live, time after time, it's obvious that you just end up doing it better.
So after that, the record doesn't seem to have any life to it.
I do hope we've got some good stuff for this live album, because it seems we always play better on a night when we're not recording.
But then that's just Sod's Law, isn't it!’
Who's left from the last band and who are the new members?
‘There's Alan and Guy (Clark and Fletcher, keyboards ), Chris White (saxophone ) and John (Illsley, bass ) of course.
So that's four from the old line-up.
Then I've added Phil (Palmer, guitar ), Paul Franklin (pedal steel ) who's a killer player, and Chris Whitten and Danny Cummins (drums and percussion ).
I wanted full-time percussion because it's like the pedal steel — it gives you another dimension and enables you to do so much more, arrangement-wise.’
Would you describe yourself as a hard taskmaster?
A real bandleader?
‘Yes, sometimes.
But sometimes not.
If things are happening I just leave them alone — I don't touch it at all.
Some things I will be choosy about, though — quite insistent in fact.
So it varies from nothing to a lot of involvement, and much of it depends on the song.
‘But we're really breezing along now.
The better you rehearse, the less you have to do as you go along, and once the tour started there were no more rehearsals.
We don't even do soundchecks now!
Once in a while, maybe on the first night of a stint somewhere, and we've got the time, we might just do a brief check of some songs.
‘Actually, one of the things I found very tiring on the ‘Brothers In Arms’ tour was soundchecking.
And in fact I found from playing with Eric, that it was much more fun to just turn up and the first playing you did was to the audience.
It's less tiring because otherwise you've got to come in during the afternoon, then you have to decide whether to go back to the hotel or stay at the show.
So even though we have a lot of tricky stuff to get right soundwise, the crew is so great that they can do it pretty much without us.
‘Then our engineer Robert Collins will try and sort out everything as much as possible out front, as we go along.
And if we're doing a bunch of dates in the same venue, it gets to sound better and better each night.
For example, doing Earls Court, by the time of the last show the sound is really fantastic.’
Do you ever envisage working with your brother David again?
‘Maybe, yeah.
I've never really thought about it, though, because I've always had so many other things to do.
When we first started strumming, there was definitely a real affinity with the feel, so who knows?
He plays mostly keyboards these days, so maybe one day.
I'd certainly like to…’
How about something else with Chet Atkins?
‘Oh yeah!
I'd love to play with Chet again.
I spoke to him the night before last, and he's doing fine.
We spoke about getting together, but it's the same old problem — like with Brendan, it's just a question of when.
‘But it's very exciting having things like this to look forward to.
I mean, these were people I was listening to when I was kid, and then suddenly I'm having dinner with Carl Perkins!
It's such a thrill.
‘There was one time…
I went round to see Scotty Moore in Nashville.
I was sitting talking to him — Chet dropped me off there and after a couple of hours Chet came back and was talking to Scotty, and I was thinking, ‘If I was a music writer, this would be just pure gold!’
I mean, you get the lowdown on stuff that writers never get, because you're working with these people and you get the real story — not the stuff that goes on in books and magazines.
It's a highly privileged situation to be in.
‘Carl Perkins has actually talked Scotty into playing again now, and they've recorded some stuff already.
I don't know how it is because I haven't heard it yet, but I'm going to get some advance material any time now.’
We talked about the Mickey Baker chord book last time we met.
What would you say you have learned about the guitar in the past five or six years?
‘Well, there's a lot of ‘post-Mickey Baker’!
I spent a while some years ago just improving my chordal knowledge; I just sat down and learned it, because I was playing with players who were a lot more advanced than I was, and because I was doing a lot of sessions and stuff.
Basically, I just wanted to improve my knowledge of music.
This was before I was playing with Chet and everything, so that's all it really needed, and I've just tried to keep up since then.
‘With Chet or any other people I play with, I just steal a lick or two and use it my own way.
That's all guitar players do, I think, they just steal licks off each other and then make it their own somehow.
I sit down with Paul Franklin every now and then and we swap licks — just basically show each other what we know.
It's very exciting sitting around with Paul, because he must be the greatest player on the pedal steel guitar there is.
But he also plays a steel type Dobro that his father designed and built, called a ‘Pedabro’.
It looks like a pedal steel, but is has the cubic capacity of a Dobro, with a resonator on the top and pedals.
He also has a lap box which his father built for him, and that sounds great for blues.’
Would you say your sound has changed over the years?
‘I don't know really.
I still just do whatever the songs require; the song is king to me, and I just do whatever works within any given song.
And I also have a bunch of instruments that I might try out in a song; you get to know what each one will do, but you still have to try two or three to see which has the best voice for the tune.’
The Pensa Suhr seems to be your main guitar now.
How did that come about?
‘I just walked in there one day; it was the nicest store on 48th Street.
I got very friendly with Rudi Pensa and I was very keen that Rudi follow a quality path.
And now I think he's so far in front of the others it's not true.
And it's nothing to do with me.
John Suhr is so talented, and the guitar is just the last word as far as I'm concerned.
It's tremendous.’
Is the story true that you actually sat down and drew the design on a paper napkin?
‘Yeah, we were in a little coffee shop up the road from Paul's store.
I showed Rudi what I wanted and now he gets requests for them from all over the world.
For the band stuff it's great — so quiet, no buzzes like the old Strats.
On stage, using radio systems, I find it closes the sound down a lot, which I don't like.
So the wireless is not as good as a lead for that sound.’
Do you use other instruments to give yourself a different texture or feel when you're songwriting?
‘Exactly.
I nearly always write with an acoustic, but if it's tuned to an open chord you will obviously have to write something different; if you stick a capo on it you'll write something different; if I use an amplifier and an electric guitar I'll write something different again.
So that's what I do.
I just change the format a little bit here and there so it makes me write differently.
‘A perfect example of that is Sultans Of Swing .
That used to be a completely different tune; I had the lyrics, but I played it on an open tuned National, then when I got the Strat and plugged it into an old Fender Vibrolux amp, it became what it became on record.
So I think if you've got the creativity to write in the first place, you just need to change, not so much the instrument, but maybe change the tuning or the pitch.
Then you might find you write something different.
‘Different keys make a difference too.
Say if you start in a A flat minor, that opens out the E chord for you, and so forth.
Brothers In Arms is in A flat minor, for example, and it runs right down into that E. So very often the structure itself helps, and the music comes from what you are playing and the key that you choose to play in.
I also love playing in F.
‘And even the type of strings you use will make a difference to the kind of music you produce.
If you've got big heavy strings on an acoustic, you can't bend them around, so you'll concentrate on getting the best possible tone from those big strings.
When I did a lot of my chord studying I used a Gibson 175, and a cello guitar will obviously make your music go in a certain direction.
If you pick up something like a Super 400 you play things like Fade To Black rather than Heavy Fuel .
‘Sometimes I'll pull out the pink Strat in the studio.
It's always great to hear it; there's nothing quite like it, is there?’
The first time saw you with Clapton, you just used a guitar straight into a Boogie.
What's the setup now?
‘I use Soldanos now; they're very dependable amps.’
Did Eric Clapton put you onto Soldanos?
‘No, actually it was the other way around, I put E.C.
onto the Soldanos.’
So, after the tour and after you've put the live album together what do you see happening?
‘I have a rest!’
But that's what you said last time…
‘Yeah, I know.
But I will this time, and that's a promise!’
Details of Mark's rack come courtesy of Ronnie (from Bromley) Eve, who is also photographed here with some of Mark's guitars.
Mark's stage system is as follows: The guitar goes, via a Sony Wireless system, to a Pete Cornish Control unit.
The control unit routes the signal to A or B preamps and then to modified Soldano stereo power amps.
Finally it's fed to a pair of Marshall 4x12s loaded with EV speakers.
Mark's effects are relatively straightforward, comprising: TC Electronics delay, an Alesis Quadraverb, a Boss CE-200 Chorus and a Zoom 9010.
STYLE FILE
Hilborne on Knopfler
Most of us have dabbled into Mark Knopfler's early country/rock/blues style…
I mean, who hasn't learned a few Sultans Of Swing licks?
So I thought an illustration of Mark's later playing, as demonstrated on Dire Straits latest album ‘On Every Street’, might make for a welcome change.
Here's his great solo from the opening track Calling Elvis .
This solo uses the B Blues scale throughout:
Performance Notes
1)
To achieve a sound similar to that on the record (forgetting, if we can, the unbelievable production quality of this whole album) you should use a fairly distorted amp setting and play the solo using fingerstyle throughout.
Mark generally uses the flesh of his r/hand thumb and first finger, plus occasionally his second (don't use your fingernails), and for support he tends to rest his palm on the bridge and his remaining fingers on the front of the guitar…
2)
The most difficult part of this solo is the opening two-bar descending blues scale phrase.
I have given a suggested r/hand fingering in the music notation, but you should obviously feel free to amend things to suit your own preferences.
As you play through this passage you should be careful with the position shift occurring on the third 16th note (beat three) of bar one.
Also, the open D that is played at the last 16th of bar 1 may have been accidental, and if you agree with this you might wish to play the B on the 9th fret of the D string instead…
3)
The muted notes which are found at the beginning of bar 7 should be produced by damping the strings at the seventh position (approx) and then picking them with a gentle up-stroke using your r/hand index finger.
4)
The only other areas which may cause problems are the first finger bends which occur in bars 11–12.
If you're not used to bending strings up with your first finger these will probably take a fair amount of practice to master…
5)
This solo was played on an alder-bodied, maple-necked Pensa Suhr guitar, either through Soldano or Mesa Boogie amps…
6)
Taken from the Dire Straits album ‘On Every Street’— Vertigo 510160–2.
Used by kind permission.
LITTLE AND LARGISH Vantage VG-15 & VG-30R Combos Bedroom guitar frenzy is an affliction many parents are familiar with.
But teenage mirror-posed strum mastery has so far been hampered by lukewarm, docile ampishness…
Review by David Mead.
There is and always has been a yawning gap at the budget end of the amplifier market.
Many manufacturers have tried, but so far none have been able to produce a model as enduring in the lower price bracket as, say, the old Fender Champ.
Of course, the lifestyle of the average small combo will differ greatly from that of its bigger, badder cousins.
A life of serious touring is exchanged for less glamorous travel: moved once a week when mum hoovers the bedroom.
Nevertheless, the paradox is that a small, cheapish amp still has to sound like a beast, whilst remaining tame and housetrained in all other respects.
Vantage's bid for mighty mite stardom comes in the form of these two amplifiers from the lower end of their VG range, the 15-watt VG-15 and the reverb enhanced 30-watt VG-30R.
VG-15
The overall dimensions of the VG-15 are diminutive, to say the least.
Standing only a foot tall, by 7″ deep and 12½″ wide, it is hardly likely to be the cause of any serious furniture rearrangement, in even the most modest of hovels.
And a weight of just a little over 11 lbs will delight physiotherapists and back sufferers alike.
The front panel comprises low and high inputs, followed by the overdrive section with its depth control, on/off selector and volume pot.
Next in line is a separate volume control for the clean sound, giving a sort of pseudo-twin channel operation.
The EQ is controlled by the normal treble, middle and bass rotaries and the front panel is completed by line and headphone outputs and the unusual inclusion of a microphone input and level control.
This is independent of the distortion circuit, and presumably high impedance, so it would not completely rule out the use of tapes and CDs inputted here so that your hours of lonely practice can be enhanced by accompaniment.
Vantage have used a sealed back on the VG-15 and so the reverse side is featureless, save for the mains cable which trails from its lower edge.
The cabinet is made from chipboard, with rugged overriders on each corner, while the 8 inch speaker peeps at you from behind a sort of nylon fabric.
Visible too, are the two ports which let the speaker breathe.
VG-30R
Obviously these two amps have a great deal in common, but the most striking difference is one of dimension.
The vital statistics of the VG-30R are as follows: 18½″ high, 14¾″ wide and 8¾″ deep.
The weight this time is a slightly more butch 17½ lbs.
The only other differences are the inclusion of reverb and a presence control.
Apart from that, the layout is almost identical.
There is an input for a footswitch to turn the reverb on and off, but no footswitch comes supplied.
The size of the speaker has gone up a notch here to 10″, with the dimension of the ports increased accordingly.
IN USE
The VG-15, despite its size, is a creditable little amp.
I found nothing about it that I didn't particularly like and plenty that I did.
The clean sounds available cover a pretty good range, the EQ giving a very good account of itself throughout.
The unit offered a good bass response for its 8″ speaker and the treble was crisp and well-defined.
Volume, too, was in abundance, although any serious overindulgence in this respect was rewarded by distortion of a not altogether pleasant type.
Switching on the overdrive channel, however, gave immediate access to the right stuff.
Most of the popular rock guitar sounds were available with a bit of EQ twiddling, including the bass boosted, mid-range cut Metallica type of mega-grunge, if that's to your taste.
It's tempting to say that the bigger model was just more of the same, with added reverb, but that wouldn't be true.
The same sort of EQ and similar electronics are going to produce a marked sort of family resemblance, but the VG-30R has a few sound characteristics of its own.
For a start, there is more power available and the larger speaker obviously lends a great deal to the 30's overall performance.
On the clean sound, reverb really does make a difference, adding as it does greater depth to any guitar's tone.
The overdrive, too, benefits from reverb and the presence control allows a bit of sophistication in the upper treble range, giving more control over the amp's response.
Unfortunately, the distortion can easily become rather boxy, unless the EQ is just right.
This sort of nasal overdrive sound, reminiscent of a blocked sinus (and about as difficult to get rid of), dogs many a small combo amp and I was surprised not to find it in abundance on both VGs.
Only the VG-30R showed any signs of congestion; on little brother all the tunes breathed easily.
As for volume, the VG-30R is a very well-mannered 30 watts.
I wouldn't expect it to compete for the funnel-web spider ‘small but deadly’ award in the same way that a Mesa Boogie .22 could, but look at the price difference and you'll appreciate why.
CONCLUSION
Nobody expects me to say that you could gig with either of these amps, do they?
Good, because I don't think Vantage would consider the concert platform as a viable workplace for either of these little combos.
But their strength as vehicles for practice or as a first amp for a budding shredder would be difficult to challenge.
For more information please contact 
SPACE INVADER Ampeg B-1R Bass Head Desirable as ever, Ampeg bass amplification offers definitive and powerful tones, but will dramatic reductions in unit dimensions see compromised standards…?
Review by Gibson Keddie.
In order to answer a demand for serious power levels from ever smaller systems, Ampeg recently introduced the B-1 bass combo.
The B-1 is an attractive-looking (and sounding) package featuring a 150-watt amplifier within a conveniently small cabinet (21″W × 18½″H × 13″D).
This ported enclosure also houses a heavy-duty 12″ driver working in conjunction with a high-frequency 4″ horn (which is both selectable and attenuable).
The B-1R head, as used within the B-1 combo, serves as an example of just how compact useful power levels are becoming.
For the purposes of the review, and to allow us to really put the B-1R through its paces, Bluebridge Music have additionally loaned us a brand new example of the HE (horn loaded) series 4x10 SVT speaker cab.
Initial impressions of the B-1R were extremely favourable; at only 1U high it's slim and stylish, and yet so functional.
An attractively understated colour scheme of black, battleship grey and white (push buttons and gradation markings) adds to the utilitarian aura.
As you move around the amp, your eye is drawn towards a mini-fan situated in the input side of the unit.
Power means heat production, a situation made even more critical by the fact that internal space for heat dispersion is at a premium on a unit such as this, currently the smallest rackmount amp available with this power rating.
Of course the rack environment itself will subject the B-1R to additional heat from other units, so the fan is a far from decorative facility.
In fact it's no accident that the fan's position is on the input/preamp side of the B-1; part of the reason for Ampeg's legendary SVT tone comes from the use of dedicated all-tube preamp systems, and the B-1R is no exception.
The preamp is powered by three 12AX7As, giving additional warmth and colour to the sound.
The cooling fan acts across the valves, thus aiding consistency of performance and also prolonging valve life.
The front panel layout is extremely good: single input, then a small LED which operates with the accompanying gain rotary to warn of overdriving the valve preamp stage.
An excess of gain even at low settings (ie. from an active bass with powerful pickups) can be compensated for with the lower of the two white switches, which operates a 15dB attenuation ‘pad’ to clean up the signal.
The upper switch is an ultra-low boost.
The bass rotary in the three-band EQ is of the pull-shift, two-function type.
Primarily it offers 17dB of boost or cut at 40Hz, but pull the knob to its second position and this changes to 18dB of boost/cut at 80Hz, thus offering a more mid-based sound.
The midrange control itself offers 15dB boost/cut within an operative range of 200 to 600Hz.
The treble rotary is also of the ‘pull shift’ type.
In the normal position, ±17dB is available at 5kHz, with an exceptional ±22dB at 10kHz when in the ‘shift’ position.
Upper harmonic overtones are further augmented by an ‘ultra-high’ push-button.
Below this sits another push-button for selecting a pre- or post-EQ balanced out signal.
In the second ‘window’ on the front panel are two controls related to the amp's ‘solo voice’soloing channel.
This allows you to set up a different sound by altering the mid emphasis, coupled with selectable additional boost which can then be triggered by either the front panel ‘enable’ switch or via a footswitch.
A small accompanying LED lights to show that this channel is operative.
With power levels such as these on tap, the B-1R contains the obligatory limiter, and Ampeg have opted for a suitably compact, high-tech ‘optocoupler limiter’ system which uses an interrupted light beam to even out peaks in the signal.
Last comes the master volume rotary, with the mains rocker switch located to the far right.
The back panel is equally straightforward: detachable three-pin plug power cord socket, then a pair of output sockets for speaker connection.
The minimum load is 4Ω (ohms), which the outputs run at anyway, giving the B-1R's full 150 watts, and so care must be exercised if hooking up additional speaker cabs not to drop the total load below this figure — one cab can be run at 4Ω, but if two are used in parallel then they must both be 8Ω, and so on.
A ‘power amp in’ socket bypasses the B-1's preamp, and a ‘preamp out’socket offers the converse facility for external power amping or front-of-house mixing.
Send and return jacks come next, then a three-pin balanced XLR out and finally the footswitch jack socket for the ‘solo’ channel.
IN USE
As the B-1R is, after all, designed to be racked, it looks a bit daft sitting on top of the 4x10, even if it does allow you to whack all the necessary connections together in about thirty seconds flat.
For the sake of appearances (and to keep it away from any detrimental vibration), I popped the B-1R into our studio rack, reconnected all the leads and…ignition!
It's impressive stuff: the power, the tones, the facilities — the unit is so businesslike about what it does.
I mentioned the interactive EQ system earlier: this is a comprehensive method of allowing you to quickly change the characteristics of your sound.
Pull-shifting the bass control emphasises the mid-range, mellowing out the overall tone by automatically moving the centre point of control away from the higher frequencies.
Similarly, pull-shifting the treble control lifts the operational frequency band and, again, moves the midrange automatically to compensate.
Selecting the ‘Ultra-Low’ facility releases a forceful bass sound, designed to be at its most effective when using the low E and B on a 5 or 6-string.
It's around this time that the optocoupler limiter proves its worth, ensuring that the sound stays clean, even at fairly ridiculous volume levels (thanks to its 30dB of compression).
What is especially good about this unit is that you can also replicate big brother SVT's trademark ‘growl’, if required; the limiter can be set to allow the power amp to be safely overdriven, without fear of blowing the speakers apart with harmful transistorised clipping.
CONCLUSION
I liked the whole concept of the B-1R.
Just look at the front panel: it's attractive, minimalist and totally functional, with even enough room for Ampeg to insert their logo.
No gimmicks, either, so Ampeg's reputation can only be further enhanced by the B-1/B-1R.
At 1U high, containing a pure valve preamp and solid state power amp within that petite package, plus the ability to offer a really wide range of tones, the B-1R is exceptional.
Pop this in a 2U flight case with an effects unit, and you're ready to take off in some considerable style…
For more information please contact 
SWELTERWEIGHT Fender Champ 25SE Fender's new Champ 25SE has the longest reach, boasts the biggest biceps and packs the heftiest punch of any previous incarnation of the model.
But how does it perform in the clinches?
Review by Neville Marten.
The big question here is actually why Fender are using the Champ moniker for this 25 watt, channel switching, all-purpose tube amplifier, when previously ‘Champ’ has been a synonym for ‘diminutive but pokey practice amp’.
Of course the legendary Super Champ (why don't they just bring it back and be done with it) was the nearest thing to a ‘Boogie in a matchbox’(or, for that matter, why don't Boogie?) and I suppose the Champ 12 forms an obvious transitional link between that and this new model.
So, having accepted that the 25SE is something other than we expected it to be, let's examine it more closely.
Quite a few ‘don't likes’ from around the office on opening the carton; the wider front, squarer edges and lack of the traditional Fender rake back for the control panel take most of the criticism, although Fender's spindly new knobs, which no-one here much cares for, received their share of whinges.
Of course, we all had to admit that the 25SE was built well, using ‘proper’ looking materials, components and hardware, something the Americans are so expert at and where so many British amp manufacturers fall down.
I suspect, though, that the 25SE's appearance is going to grow on us, and that it will probably also form the basis for further new combos from Fender.
FEATURES
The Champ 25SE combines tube and solid state technology to bring you, it maintains, the ultimate in versatility and therefore the best of both the valve and tranny worlds.
The tubes are a pair of 6L6GCs in the power stage and a single 7025/12AX7A in the preamp.
The Champ's two boxed-off channels are labelled Normal and Drive.
The former acts as a pretty straightforward rhythm channel; treble, middle and bass rotaries are complemented by a Mid Shift button, which boosts the bass and knocks out some upper mids to create punchier and cleaner tones.
The Drive channel is governed by the usual Gain and Volume pots, for selecting the amount of overdrive in the sound, and for setting the level between that and the Normal channel's output.
Like the Normal channel, the Drive side also features treble and bass controls (the treble comes ‘post’ distortion and so can be used to tailor the lead sound's smoothness or harshness), but instead of a mid control this channel uses what Fender term ‘Contour’.
One or two other manufacturers have opted for a similar idea to this, where the knob sweeps through an infinitely variable range of tones, from soft and middley to bass and treble-heavy ‘crunch’.
The last ‘box’ on the front panel contains the amp's two Master controls, one for the onboard reverb and the other taking care of the Champ's overall output volume.
Fender have called this control ‘Loudness’ for two reasons: one, because it varies the amp's loudness, and two, since it operates in much the same way as a stereo system's ‘loudness’control, boosting both bass and presence to create more palatable tones at low volume settings.
Around the back it's sparse, since the amp's effect loop and headphone sockets are sited on the front panel, where the ‘phones socket is most easy to access in the practice situation and where floor pedals most sensibly connect.
Rear panel features include a line out socket (when used with a stereo lead the signal is said to be ‘quasi-balanced’; when used with a mono cable it's unbalanced), a socket for the complementary channel change and reverb footswitch, plus of course the regulation Slo-blo fuse.
The open-backed cabinet is sturdily built (as is usual for Fender), with the Accutronics reverb tray sitting in the bottom.
The enclosure also houses a single 12″ speaker, plus the aforementioned footswitch, which neatly Velcros to the side to keep it safe and out of the way.
IN USE
Twenty-five watts may not be regarded as knockout stuff, but as Fender are quick to point out, ‘Tube watts sound a lot louder than solid state watts.’
Plugging a Japanese Strat into the high impedance Input 1 socket, the Champ booted up in the Normal channel.
This is one of those channels where it's hard to find a bad sound; everything set on 5 is about right, full-bodied but still jangly, exactly how it should be.
The Mid Shift button offers quite a marked change in tonality, and is something to be left to the taste of the individual and his/her guitar type.
It's a clever way of offering different sounds, and one which Fender have used to good effect before, notably on The Twin.
Switching over to the Drive channel, keeping the volume low and still using the Strat, I was expecting ‘Super Champ but louder’, but initial results were disappointing.
Everything seemed brittle, and while that's not uncommon with Strats, I've been using this guitar regularly and it's a particularly smooth one.
Fender say that Input 2, which is primarily for higher gain or active guitars, provides a ‘darker’ sound when using a regular guitar through it.
So I switched, but things weren't any better — just a little muted.
Turning the amp up louder (and getting those bottles working) provided part of the solution, and switching to a humbucking guitar completed the transformation.
The Gibson (an SG) elicited the kind of basic sound the Champ seems best at: smooth, strangely vintage, almost Kossoff-ish in fact, with the gain set at around mid-way.
For my tastes, the Contour control was only usable up to about 5, where it started to take on that ‘no tone’ sound, evoking images of preserve jars and trapped insects.
Determined not to be beaten, my Strat and I ventured back, whacked the Drive channel's Gain right up and the channel Volume on full and tried again.
I still found I had to keep the Contour and Treble rotaries backed completely off, and the Bass right up to get anything like a ‘normal’ lead guitar sound.
Turning the Treble up to about 4 and the Loudness above 5 induced those Hendrixy bridge pickup sounds which are wonderful, but require more control than many people (and their guitars) can muster.
Turn the gain down a bit and the reverb up and this translates into old Roy Buchanan — anyone remember Sweet Dreams ?
One touch I like about the Champ 25 is that the power LED flashes when the amp is on standby.
The light shows through the membrane-type front panel — which a couple of people here didn't like because they felt it looked a bit cheap.
CONCLUSION
Volume-wise, Fender reiterate what we've always said when they talk of ‘louder tube watts’.
This is a very loud 25 watter, and you could probably gig it; you could certainly gig it if your band miked up and used foldback.
At the upper levels the 25SE does get noisy, but so do all amps when up near their limit.
Although with a more powerful unit you'd have greater headroom and a reduced noise problem, you couldn't push the power stage to its ‘sweet spot’ at such manageable volumes.
This is where the Champ excels, especially when driven hard with humbuckers.
By including the footswitch and having it Velcro in place inside the amp Fender win more Brownie points.
I personally feel it's a shame that certain manufacturers are making amps to please thrash metallers only; I've tried several recently which an average guitarist couldn't use without the treble and presence rolled completely off.
I say let the thrashers get that horrible sound with their pedals, the way they always have, but make amps so that good basic sounds can be found using ‘normal’ settings.
But I digress.
Other than that last point (which goes some way towards alienating the Champ 25SE from its natural ally, the Stratocaster) this is a good, solidly made amplifier, which has had a lot of thought put into its design, is likely to maintain its resale value and deserves examination.
RRP: £385.00
There is also a more basic Champ 25, which lacks the SE's master volume, line out, mid cut/boost and has a smaller cabinet.
This retails for £325.
For further information please contact 
OPEN SECRET Pat Metheny Back in the late '60s, the term ‘fusion’ was coined as a means to mischievously re-classify a form of jazz that had strayed away from the mainstream towards the outlawed territories of rock music.
The younger musicians, influenced greatly by Miles Davis, liked their jazz, but liked it loud.
Interview by David Mead.
Often hailed as a jazz fusion pioneer himself, Pat Metheny is nevertheless no stranger in the Grab-a-Grammy stakes.
His albums ‘Travels’, ‘Still Life Talking’ and ‘Offramp’have all seen him walk away with a guitar case full of awards.
I asked him if he considered the fusion tag to still be relevant…
‘Well, it's never been one of my favourite words, mainly because it emerged from a marketing concept more than from musicians.
I've rarely heard musicians use that term; it's more usually the record companies.
‘When most people hear the word fusion, they think of electricity.
For me, as a guitar player, the first thing I did was plug my guitar in!
That was my first musical gesture.
I've been having to deal with electricity since the word go and I've tried to use it in a musically creative and responsible way.
As technology made itself available to people like me, it was very natural to try and use it.
It opened up orchestrational possibilities for a small group that didn't exist before.
I loved the fact that I could have a four, five, six piece group that was capable of making this huge wall of sound in addition to what we did as just a jazz quartet.’
You come from a musical family…
What's your earliest musical memory?
‘Well, my older brother Mike, who is five years older than me, was a spectacular young musician.
By the time he was eleven, he was like a child prodigy, playing the Purcell Trumpet Voluntary in Kansas City churches; he was really something.
And so my early music memories are probably hearing him and my father play duets; my Dad's also a very good trumpet player and my grandfather, too, is a professional trumpet player.
So mostly it's trumpets.’
You've said before that you were put off trumpet, and that you were drawn to the guitar because it was the instrument that your parents most feared.
‘That was definitely a large part of it.
When I was about eight years old, the Beatles thing happened and the guitar took a place in the panorama of western culture that attracted me.
Also, my brother was such a good trumpet player that I knew I would never be as good as he was, so there was that in there too: like, ‘God, I don't really want follow in this guy's footsteps.'’
And of course your parents not wanting you to do something is merely putting out a fire with gasoline.
‘It's funny, because people talk about rock'n'roll as the music of rebellion.
But, to me, jazz was always, and still is, much more rebellious than rock'n'roll, especially now.
Rock'n'roll has become so totally predictable and everybody has been doing exactly the same thing now for, like, 25 years.
‘Jazz, to me, was always the music of individuality.
There are so many colourful characters within the jazz spectrum and as a form it really demands that you get in touch with your own personal self; if you don't have your own sound in jazz then basically it's nothing.
In rock, the more you can sound like everyone else the better.
Rock was rebelling against my parents, but jazz was rebelling against my parents as well as all my peers, because they didn't have any idea what I was talking about!’
You do have a unique sound, but that sound has now been very much copied by an awful lot of jazz players.
Does that bother you in any way?
‘Well, it is a little strange.
I don't necessarily feel like I invented anything; I always played what I wanted to play.
I saw it happen with Jaco Pastorius — I know what it was like the first time I heard him.
There was nothing like that, nothing even close to that before.
But whoever first comes up with something doesn't necessarily get the credit for it.
It becomes part of the vocabulary and that's the natural course of events.
‘I see people get very defensive and say, ‘Well, that's my shit.
People are stealing my shit.’
But you can't do that.
We're all part of a community and everybody is collectively working to advance the cause, and every now and then somebody gets a little glimpse of something and everybody else thinks, ‘Yeah, that's a good idea.’
In my case, for four or five years I think I was probably the only person that played with digital delays and two amps and all that, and it was like a new thing.
But now everybody does it and I'm not going to sit around and say, ‘Oh yeah, well that was my shit and everybody copied my sound.’
My reaction to it now is to take all the delays off and play with just the straight guitar — do something different!’
Was there a point in time when your sound actually clicked?
Can you put a specific date on it?
‘Yeah, it was kind of an accident, actually.
When digital delays first came out they were very expensive and very cumbersome — five rack space things and they were, like, 8-Bit!
Anyway, I was living in Boston at the time, but I was in a studio in Oslo and saw a Lexicon there, noticed that the company was in Boston and said, ‘Can you put it on the guitar and see what it sounds like?’
It was supposed to be used for vocals, for ADT, and the guy said, ‘Oh, yeah.’
So when I got back to Boston I thought, ‘God, there must be a way to do this live,’ so I called up Lexicon and said, ‘I'm this guitar player…’and they gave me one!
‘I messed around with it and got into this thing of splitting up the amps because I always thought that the guitar was a bit flat in mono.
It seemed like when I heard a saxophone player like Sonny Rollins the sound seemed to come from all over the place — it didn't come from this one little spot.
So I tried it and that was it.’
Does the fact that you have such a distinctive sound confine you in any way?
Have you ever wanted to just pick up a Telecaster and rock out?
‘Whenever I do play with any kind of distortion, if I go and sit in with somebody, I find it's so easy.
It all kind of runs together and you don't really have to make the notes speak.
Also, if you play anything fast at all you sound like Allan Holdsworth!
With the kind of sound that I use, if I miss any part of the note you hear it as a big clang.
I find that other kind of sound very forgiving; I can get through it technically, but I can't make it come alive the way somebody else could.’
You started writing the new album, ‘Secret Story’, a long time ago.
How do you decide between material which would suit a group or solo project?
‘I do think this record is unlike any record that I've ever done before.
It's sort of a culmination of everything I've done.
Usually, everything I write I try out with the group, because that is my main format.
So I had stuff which I knew was good, but that didn't quite fit the group because the tunes needed to be more orchestrated.
But there's no real rule, although maybe for the group it has to be conducive to live performance because we are such a live performance band.’
Have there been any developments on the guitar synth front which you've taken up for this album?
‘I did try the new Roland GR-1 and it's pretty amazing.
The one before it, the GR-50 was pretty spectacular, but on the album I still play my old GR-300.
That's the one for me because it's so raunchy sounding and it's got a real grit to it that I think is just fantastic.
‘But guitar synthesis is such a difficult engineering problem.
All the people that I've seen trying to do it have all my sympathy, because I know what they've been going through.
Some have done better than others, but there's just the physical reality of how long it takes the lower two strings to speak — it's going to take a few milliseconds for that to happen.
But they're making progress; each generation gets better, so we've all got to hang in there.’
Do you think it's like the mathematical conundrum where you keep halving the distance to your goal, but you never actually arrive?
‘Yes I do.
Actually, that's a good way to put it.
But I think when you get down to 20ms you're in the ball park, and you can handle that.’
Any other equipment changes?
‘I haven't changed anything for about four years!
I should probably update one of these days because I know there are all kinds of new things that have come out — especially things that are smaller but which sound really good.
But basically, my thing has stayed the same because I've got really used to it, although it's not even all that efficient.
‘Anyone who gets really used to something will know what I'm talking about here, but my stuff is pretty noisy and when I came up with a way of getting rid of the noise, I really missed it!
If you play 300 gigs a year for ten years with the same stuff, it's really hard to get used to something different.
But I plan over the next year to completely renew my rig; there are just too many hip new things.
It's been a good four years for me to lay low, because they've changed the stuff so many times and they now seem to be getting down to some conclusions about MIDI and stuff.
So it's really settling in and I've been waiting for that to happen.’
What about this new Ibanez ‘Pat Metheny’ guitar?
‘There are actually a couple of different prototypes.
The first one is the one I played on the entire record of ‘Question And Answer’.
It's basically an Ibanez Joe Pass model, except that the pickup is in a more conventional position and it's got a different neck on it.
It's a great guitar and I love the way it sounds and the way it plays.
However, I don't think I would stop playing my Gibson ES175 to play that all the time.
‘I realised that if I was going to switch guitars, I wanted something that had some kind of improvement, rather than just being more or less the same.
So I got together with the main designer at Ibanez in Japan and we traded ideas, and the new prototype — I've got one already and I'm picking another one up in a month — is very unusual, and I think a really exciting development for a jazz guitar.
I think it is the freshest new design for a jazz guitar since the George Benson came out.
‘It's got total access to 24 frets, but it's a full jazz guitar.
There's a double cutaway arrangement and it's a very different body shape from any jazz guitar that I've seen.
It has just one pickup and we've talked about the idea of doing a version of it with a pickup in the bridge that you can mix in too.
‘But it's a beautiful guitar.
It's easy to play — fat, but not too fat — and the question now is just getting it to sound exactly right.
We've gone back and forth a couple of times on pickups and pickup placement — one of the problems with having 24 frets is that the pickup has to be slightly further towards the bridge and it's not such a warm sound, so there might have to be some compromise there.
But we're working on it, so it should be out in the not too distant future.’
On ‘Secret Story’ you play a Pikasso Guitar .
What exactly is that?
‘It's an instrument made by a woman guitar maker in Canada, named Linda Manzer.
It's basically a 6-string guitar with two sets of crossed strings underneath and another set of plucked strings down where the volume and tone controls would be.
Then there's another neck that comes across the other way and you can tune the strings any way you want; I basically tune to groups of diatonic notes with whatever melody I want to play.
It's really far out!’
Do the other strings work like the drone strings on a sitar?
‘No.
They do resonate a little, but you hardly hear them, it's more to be able to get to some unusual voicings.
‘You have recently collaborated with the American composer Steve Reich.’
Steve had done several pieces for solo instruments with tape, and he decided he wanted to do one for guitar.
So he called me up and asked me if I wanted to play it, which was incredibly flattering because I'd been a fan of his for such a long time.
I got really excited about it and the process of working with him was really inspiring.
Most of my contact with other musicians has been with other improvising musicians, and to get to work with one of the major American composers on something like that was fascinating.
‘He didn't know anything about the guitar.
He said ‘Okay, I want you to show me everything,’ and I said ‘Well, there are six strings, they're tuned like this and written down an octave,’(For those that don't know, when guitar music is transposed onto a stave, it's dropped a whole octave to keep it on the treble clef — Ed) and he was taking notes and I gave him a beginning guitar book so that he could see how it was all written out!
The piece is very closely related to the other two pieces that he did for flute and clarinet.
There are ten guitars involved and two electric bass parts, which I also play.
‘Technically, it's one of the most difficult things I've had to do because his music is based on repeating rhythms that lock together to create composite melodies.
You have to play each part very, very precisely, rhythmically, and it's a kind of straight up and down rhythm playing style that I've just not done.
I usually play with my own phrasing and kind of jazz it up a little.
But this had to be real specific and it was probably the biggest challenge I've ever had.
The record has been out for a couple of years, and it's called ‘Electric Counterpoint’.
The piece I did is on one side, and on the other is a piece by The Kronos Quartet, called Different Trains .’
You write mainly on piano.
Is this in order to create a different harmonic point of reference?
‘That, and for me it's just much easier to think on the piano because there is only one version of each note.
That still messes me up on the guitar.’
And do you find that if you sit down with a guitar to write, with all the best intentions in the world, you end up…
‘…
Just playing the guitar.
Exactly!
And you end up writing guitar music which sometimes is okay, but after a couple of records I'd written enough guitar music for a while.
And when I started to write on the piano I found that when I translated it back to the guitar it was better.
Sometimes I still pick up the guitar for ideas, but I find that I end up finishing them on piano.’
You use a great deal of different textures on ‘Secret Story’.
‘To me the record is really a collage, with different elements that come and go.
There are sounds and just noises throughout the whole record.
I wanted there to be this constant floor of noise…’
Your early ECM albums were recorded very quickly.
Do you find that now you need the luxury of having longer in the studio?
‘Yeah, I do.
I need it to get the thing that I want.
The ECM records were recorded in two or three days, with maybe a day or two to mix.
I still like doing records like that —‘Question And Answer’ was done in six hours, fifteen tunes in six hours!
But with the group albums, and this one, there is a level of detail that I want to get which just takes time.
I want people to be able to listen to the records over and over again and I think for that to happen you have to create a depth of information that's rock solid.
And that takes time.’
When I've seen you play, you seem to regard the fretboard from a horizontal point of view, playing along the strings rather than across the fretboard…
‘Well, you know why that is?
It's because I like the way the note A sounds on the top string better than I do on the second, but I like A on the second string better than I do on the third, and so on.
So, if I want to play a melody, I'll think of it along the strings rather than across, to take advantage of that.
If there is any way to do it that way, then I will.’
Your playing also incorporates a great deal of chromatic tones…
‘Well, I think that anybody who studies improvising long enough will eventually get to the point where they find a way to get all twelve notes available all the time.
The next step after that is to start using them!
A lot of it is a matter of hearing: you just start to hear it that way after a while, especially if you listen to a lot of Coltrane and people who really developed that part of the language.’
I've found with my own teaching that if a player wants to move away from a purely diatonic mode of improvising, their initial steps are dogged by their own reaction to the chromatic tones, by perceiving them as sounding ‘wrong’ somehow.
‘This whole thing of learning to improvise via chord scales is very useful, but it can be deceiving.
All seven notes of a chord scale are not equal — some are definitely stronger than others.
So I encourage people to play entire solos, only using chord tones, not using any approach notes or scale notes at all, but only using the three or four basic notes of whatever the chord is.
The idea is to be able to play melodies using only arpeggios, but not making them sound like arpeggios.
‘If you can do that, then you have in your mind what the strong target notes are and you can start going in with the other notes of the scale.
When you're hitting the main chord tones pretty hard and you've got the other scale tones as passing notes then you can start going for the other chromatic tones.
It's really four chord tones, three other scale tones and five chromatic tones.’
Do you think in terms of a pure chromatic scale?
‘No, I mainly think of the triad.
I think if you were to analyse what I play, I'm landing on one of those three notes a lot, mostly on the third; I play a lot of third-based melodies.
The reason I started writing tunes was because I couldn't find tunes that set up the kind of guitar playing I wanted to do as an improviser.
Some of that has to do with the guitar — we need material which is set up more for the guitar.’
Are you going to tour with the new album?
‘Yeah, I'm going to do some kind of a tour in the Fall.
It's going to be a nine or ten piece group and somehow we're going to try and simulate some of this.
Then there's a live Metheny Group album in the can, which is due for release in the summer of ‘93, and I've just done another album with a really interesting young sax player called Gary Thomas.
It's an unusual kind of record for me.
Also I just played on six tunes on Bruce Hornsby's new record, with Bonnie Raitt and Phil Collins.
That's kind of a different thing for me!’
It sounds like a drastic departure…
‘Well, I've always wanted to try and do something like that — play eight-bar pop guitar solos.
It was fun, and I think I actually played some great shit, and if it gets on the radio it's going to be good for all jazz guys, because there are some pretty hip notes in there…!’
WALKING THE PLANK ESP Kirk Hammett Custom How much more black can you get?
None more black — at least, not until they invent black frets and black strings.
Rick Bateytries to look mad, bad and dangerous, and fails…
The crowds of ‘name’ model guitars that have been thrust in our faces over the years can be split into three categories.
The smallest category comprises those that have actually become minor classics.
Here you might quote the Clapton Strat, the McGuinn Rickenbacker and a few others (argue about it amongst yourselves).
Then comes the majority: the decent, reasonable guitars that never sell too well, among which you might include Gibson's BB King and Fender's Burton Tele.
And finally, there are the ones that seem little more than a cue for a really good cackle.
Did the world really need Steve Vai's Ibanez Universe?
What happened to the ugliest Strat of all time, Fender's Alex Gregory model?
And who needs eight pints followed by a dodgy curry when we've got John Entwistle's Warwick Buzzard bass?
These are all personal views, of course…
But if signature guitars are a window into the psyches of the guitarists concerned, then what can we learn about Captain Kirk?
He's certainly got a thing for the trappings of metal (skull'n'crossbones fingerboard inlays — whoooo!
Scary!) and yet, underneath all that, this is a surprisingly sensible dirt-disposing machine.
Does Hammett remember his mum's birthday, and does he drive a nice medium-sized Ford?
I think we should be told…
But as you may know, ESP guitars are handmade in just one factory in Tokyo; this is not one of those companies that farm out their work to whoever gives them the lowest quotation.
This Tokyo factory is the one that makes the modern Schecter guitars as well as the Casio synth guitars and Kramer electrics (recently deceased) so they've a long history of making quality instruments.
The Kirk Hammett model (let's just call it the KH) is a medium to heavyweight guitar with an alder body, a good straight-grained maple neck and a rosewood fingerboard, all topped off with a reverse headstock, two humbuckers, and the obligatory Floyd Rose with locking nut.
In this case the Floyd is a special ESP unit made in Germany by Schaller (one of the better versions around, and one of the least likely to suffer from peeling chrome or self-stripping screws) and the machineheads are black chrome Schallers to match.
Black is the overall colour of the KH model, although other colours can be custom-ordered, and the finish is top-class — completely flat and very highly polished.
The body is fashionably square-edged, but includes a big waist-cut, an arm chamfer and a reduced-depth heel, with a tapering neck-plate to allow for an extra triangular slice to be taken off the heel in the interests of upper-fret access.
Built to a 25½″ scale, the neck carries twenty-four high'n'wide jumbo frets on a rosewood fingerboard.
These big frets are perfect for big bends and wide vibrato, and the actual quality of fretting on the KH is faultless: good, hard frets, all properly seated and beautifully hand-filed at the ends.
This has been done in a similar fashion to Martin's approach, where the fret ends are chopped off square and then individually rounded, rather than by running a fret file down the sides of the neck and lopping all the ends off at a 45 degree angle.
ESP's and Martin's method gives you a greater length of fret to play over, and lessens the chances of the strings falling over the edges when using the kind of vib that Kirk sometimes does.
Also, the neck is so straight that the frets have needed hardly any dressing at all.
I wouldn't change a thing on this guitar; the nut height and the overall action is fine and, most surprising of all, this is a factory setup, straight off the boat and out of the box.
The inclusion of a very attractive volute behind the nut is a major improvement, since it puts back the wood that the bolt-through locking nut removes.
I also like the accessibility of the truss rod cover screw, all too often hidden behind the strings on spiky-headed guitars.
And those skulls and crossbones are well done; there's no less than seven different sizes of inlays on this guitar, and although there's a big ring of filler around each one, at least the filler matches the rosewood.
The pickups on the KH Custom are ESP's own LH200 humbuckers.
For some reason they're mounted on angled surrounds, which I quite like the look of, but the coils are screened by black plastic covers which look pretty cheap and make a nasty scratching noise if you hit them with a pick.
The black-chromed, Telecaster-knob controls are unusual in that we've got two volume controls, one for each pickup, and a master tone control.
It's more like a simplified Gibson arrangement than a Fender one, and there's no coil-tapping facility.
The selector switch is a three-way Strat-type, perhaps slower to operate than a toggle-switch, but not too hard to reach in its position beneath the first volume knob.
The only really bad cosmetic point on the whole guitar is that the switch is held in place by big, cheapo dome-headed screws, instead of the small, black, countersunk ones they should have been.
That aside, the KH Custom is all fun.
The neck is thin but not awkwardly so, and the satin-finish lacquer and those huge, well-polished frets combine to make it a fast guitar in every direction.
The Floyd Rose does all the usual things, like letting you tie knots in the low E string, and the arm is firm with no clunky play.
Acoustically, the KH has a promising blurry ring to it and although it's not loud, due to the Floyd, it does seem to sustain particularly well.
Plugged in, it sounds nice and smooth, with plenty of top, and the double volume knob arrangement is useful for pre-setting lead and rhythm levels.
The bridge pickup provides a healthy kick, the neck pickup is a little less screechy and the middle position is quite well-mannered.
I could have done with a little more natural variation in the sound, but seeing that all Kirk is probably going to do with it is leave it on the neck pickup, knock all the middle off at the amp and turn it up to an excruciating volume, it doesn't have to be the most variable guitar in the world.
CONCLUSION
You expected me to hate this one, didn't you?
Well, the whole image is very much love-or-hate, but the Kirk Hammett model does work, and it works well.
As ever, ESP are busy doing the obvious thing, but they're doing it in a manner a cut above some of the other ‘rawk’ guitar manufacturers.
Unlike all too many pointy headstock/Floyd-equipped guitars, the KH Custom has been put together with a degree of understanding, and not just by numbers.
It's a good, powerful, all-round guitar with sound hardware and pokey pickups, and a very high-quality neck with lovely big frets that makes it ideal for most forms of overdriven excess.
It seems a bit on the pricy side, especially as no case is included, but it might well be worth the extra for the feel of the neck and the promise of high reliability.
Get out there and give it a jolly good rogering.
RRP: £869.00 
Left-handers available at 10% extra
For further information please contact 
SUPERNOVAE Starfield Guitars I didn't know exactly what to expect upon opening these guitar cases, but I found myself in danger of becoming seriously enthusiastic about the contents…
Review by David Mead.
The Starfield range was the brainchild of Yoshiko ‘Joe’ Hoshino, the president of Hoshino Gakki in Japan.
He wanted to design and build a range of guitars which would succeed in shrugging off the ‘another Strat, another Tele’ tag which other companies seem content to carry.
The range was designed in the USA under the watchful eye of Chris Kelley, the director of Artist Relations for Hoshino and who has in the past been responsible for such marriages as Joe Satriani and Steve Vai with their custom Ibanez guitars.
There will be both American and Japanese ranges in the Starfield line and the two guitars we have for review are from the latter source.
ALTAIR SJ CLASSIC
One thing which is immediately apparent here is that the designers have been looking at the Music Man and Chandler ranges for their inspiration.
This is by no means a criticism, though, because they still score a considerable number of points for avoiding direct imitation of Fender's favourite son.
The body of the SJ is a three-piece made from alder.
The upper edge and lower horn have been dressed away slightly for comfort and accessibility's sake, while the rest of the body has been left relatively square.
The vintage style, two-tone sunburst finish has been expertly applied and gives the SJ a classic appearance.
The neck joint is similar to Ibanez and Heartfield's ‘all access’ variety which does away with the usual bulky metal plate and offers as an alternative four recessed bolts and a sloping, shaped heel, which really does feel good under the hand.
The neck is maple and has been designed so that the infamous timber saving scarf joint under the third fret can be avoided in favour of an equally conservationally sound one-piece affair.
It was the pointy headstock revolution which led to the wide usage of scarf jointing, as the thinner necks which went with such guitars were prone to breaking behind the nut, where the headstock pitched back but the wood grain didn't follow it.
With the scarf joint such breakages were minimised since the headstock section was grafted on so that its grain ran parallel with the neck's pitch.
Another tradition has resurfaced on the Classic's neck in the form of a volute, arguably a headstock's best defence against accidental decapitation.
While up at this end of the guitar, I must mention the headstock shape.
Some would say that it is ugly, others merely distinctive.
It reminds us of the Ibanez headstock, without the little scoop on the tip, but Starfield have cleverly disguised this similarity by opting for three-a-side Gotoh locking tuners as opposed to six.
The necks on the entire Starfield range are oil finished.
On this model the profile is thin and narrow-ish, without exactly falling into the ‘speed’ category.
The separate maple fingerboard on the SJ is nicely finished with 22 well seated frets, of the medium to chunky variety.
The nut feels like graphite and has been cut well, although there is a little burring in evidence here and there.
The truss rod cover I don't like particularly; I can't say exactly why, but it just looks alien to the rest of the headstock and doesn't fit too well on this example, either.
The pickups and scratchplate look familiar, of course, but this is little more than a tip of the cap in the direction of Fender.
The tremolo is a two pivot-point semi-floating type and promises to be an improvement on the traditional design, while not going the whole way into the locking camp.
IN USE
It is inevitable that a guitar with this pickup combination will be compared to a Strat, irrespective of body shape, and that may seem a little unfair when you consider that Starfield have avoided things Fenderish in most other respects.
But we are talking the world's favourite guitar tones, and they are present on this guitar just where you expect to find them.
The pickups are on the hot side of the Fender equivalent, when compared side by side, and in every other respect the Classic delivers its payload with accuracy and quality.
The tremolo is especially worthy of note: it is extremely smooth in operation and although it detuned slightly when used in real anger, it settled in more each time I played it.
CABRIOLET SJ
With this model, Starfield have entered the semi-hollow arena occupied by such notables as Godin and Washburn, although again avoiding any kind of slavish imitation.
The body of this guitar is made from mahogany for the back and sides, with an attractive birdseye maple top.
The most outstanding feature is the ‘sound chamber’ in the upper half of the body.
There is little doubt that there are some sounds that come from semi-acoustic guitars which are beyond the realms of an EQ job on a solid.
Modern trends have introduced the need for this half-and-half sound but from slender and more sexy-looking guitars.
So the Cabriolet's top is hollow down at least as far as the bass E string, and I suspect a little further.
The rest of the body, apart from the routing for pickups and controls, is solid.
The back is nicely rounded and benefits once again from the neck joint present on the Classic.
The Cabriolet's perimeter binding strays and splutters around the lower cutaway, but apart from that is clean and accurate.
The neck joints on both these guitars are superb; often there's a yawning gap down at least one side of the neck, but here everything is very snug.
As before, the neck is oil-finished maple, but this time the fingerboard is rosewood.
The frets are similar to those of the Classic and the workmanship once again well up to scratch.
The machineheads are Gotoh, but of the non-locking type, as the Cabriolet features a fixed bridge.
The bridge pickup is mounted on a sort of Tele-style plate, which when combined with the overall shape of the guitar gives the memory a bit of a jog and you find yourself starting to think Thinline or HM Telecaster, which may not be a good thing if Starfield are aiming at total individuality.
Volume and tone controls mated to a five-way switch complete the basic layout of the Cabriolet.
IN USE
A large part of the fun I had testing this guitar through an amplifier came from not knowing what to expect.
The body shape and layout didn't imply anything, and so for once I had to take things as they came.
Pickup selection is interesting: on position one we get the bridge pickup by itself; on number two it's both pickups coil-tapped; position three is both humbuckers; position four is the neck pickup coil-tapped; while number five is the neck humbucker by itself.
I started out by trying to take advantage of the Cabriolet's acoustic properties, so clean sounds were dialled, fingers flexed and picks replaced in pocket.
Working through the various pickup combinations yielded some very respectable semi-acoustic tones and, with a little bit of fiddling, some believable electro-acoustic sounds.
The Cabriolet was already taking on an adaptable demeanour, but when I hit the distortion channel things became serious; these humbuckers are capable of some pretty heavy stuff.
I suppose a guitar is only as good as the number of styles you can successfully impose upon it, and this one went through the card without a problem.
If you are in a band where there is a lot of chopping and changing between electro-acoustic and chunky electric, then check this guitar out immediately.
CONCLUSION
It was put to me recently that a guitar's country of origin is irrelevant when determining its overall quality in the market place.
In a perfect world, perhaps that would be the case, but the fact is that Japan is at present responsible for some of the finest guitars available, and the Fuji Gen factory, from which the Starfield Japanese range comes, is home to the best of the best.
The workmanship on show here is some of the best I've seen and the designs for the whole range are fresh and exciting.
Further evidence of Starfield's commitment to quality is provided by the fact that every guitar which comes into the country is checked over by repairer Martyn Booth before being dispatched to the shops.
I really liked both of these guitars and would urge anyone to try one, but I've saved the best news until last: just look at the prices…
No left-handers at present.
For more information please contact 
PEDULLA POWER T4, T5 and ET6 Thunderbasses Bass players are a fussy bunch.
Attention to detail counts for a lot, and attention to detail is what you get with one of Michael Pedulla's instruments…
Review by Gibson Keddie.
It's commonly held that instruments are generally better made these days — even the cheap ones — and one of the prime benefits of this is that the purchaser has a better than even chance of buying a worthwhile instrument, regardless of cost.
Even so, some names will elicit more anticipatory excitement than others, and I would hazard a guess that, even if they've never played one, most bass players are aware of Pedulla's reputation.
MV Pedulla go through great pains to make their basses as unfussy and playable as possible.
Having impressed the bass world with their Buzz basses in particular, Pedulla have introduced a new range, the Thunderbass T-series.
These models have just arrived in the country, and the Bass Centre have let us grab a look at them at very short notice.
For the T-series, the organic body styling of the Buzz bass has been rationalised to a more streamlined, elongated outline, with the current favourite sharkfin-shaped top horn.
The Thunderbass series comprises through-neck designs in four, five and 6-string formats.
These are then categorised under either a ‘T’ designation (which indicates solid maple with a gloss polyester finish), or the ‘ET’moniker (flamed maple with a bubinga or zebra wood top and oil/urethane finish).
The T-series also has the additional sub-designation of Custom or Signature, referring to the grade of maple used; the Customs use AA grade maple while the Signature versions opt for the superior AAA grade.
It's certainly something of a treat to have three such delectable instruments to look at, and so in an attempt to be logical I'll examine the T4-SB four string first, then the five and the six last.
T4-SB
Featuring ‘AA’ grade Eastern curly maple, the T4-SB's three-piece laminated maple neck with quarter sawn centre section, topped with a 24-fret clear polyester-coated ebony fretboard, is obviously responsible for much of the instrument's tone.
The T-bass does have an attractively simplistic look to it, with the output from two humbucking pickups being controlled by only three rotaries: a master volume, a pickup pan with a useful centre-detente at the ‘blend’ point, and a master tone.
Electrics-wise, Michael Pedulla has relied upon the famous Bartolini brand of custom active pickups and, in the belly of the beast, a Bartolini TC-4 preamp.
The gold-plated ABM machined brass bridge is simple, elegant and strong.
The roller saddles sit on small threaded shafts within the individual bridge pieces, allowing the user to make slight adjustments to the string spacing, as well as the more normal height and intonation changes.
The overall dimensions of the bass are equally elegant and comfortable, with a standard scale length of 34″ and an overall length of 44″.
A beautifully cut bone nut carries the strings over to the ‘one-under’ layout of the four Pedulla/Gotoh machines.
The ‘Thunderbass’ legend is silk-screened on to the flamed maple truss rod cover, along with the Pedulla ‘P’insignia.
(The Bass Centre tell me this has now been superseded, although details of the new ‘P’ logo have not yet been made available.)
Pedulla now incorporate a dual-action truss rod design, which provides for neck adjustment in both directions.
This is augmented by two small stiffening bars inlaid into the neck, parallel to the truss rod, said to optimise the action of the rod along its entire 24 fret range.
Incidentally, Pedulla supply a superb wood-handled truss rod wrench with each bass — a real touch of class!
The finish here is an attractive and striking ‘Arctic Night’ which looks superb over the distinctive maple of the body wings, adding to the instrument's air of exclusivity.
T5-SB
The T5-SB Custom has a similar specification to the four, again using an identical body shape with three-piece, neck-through-body maple construction.
The appearance of very impressive tiger-stripe maple wings is enhanced by the vintage cherry sunburst finish.
The nut width on the five is 1⅞″, and the neck widens to 2¾″ at the 24th fret.
The layout of controls, and the electronics used, are identical to the T4.
The bass powers up by the insertion of a jack into the switching output socket on the lower rim of each Thunderbass.
ET-6
Although the ET-6 also makes use of the new T-bass shape, its natural-finished, more exotic woods separate it from the plain old ‘T’ version.
The bulk of the wood used in the six is still maple, although the ET range utilises a five-piece neck laminate, with two pieces of bubinga flanking the thin central section of maple.
Again, immaculately-jointed soft curly maple wings form the body, but this time there's a zebra wood top on both body and headstock, the zebra wood separated from the base layer by a laminate of black anigree.
Pickups, hardware, controls and circuitry are as on the four and 5-stringers, with the familiar 24 frets on an ebony fretboard.
IN USE
It's always interesting to compare the individual members of a range of basses.
In this case, the mating of these unique bodies and the Bartolini systems makes for a distinctive family sound.
Pedulla's stated aim is to produce an instrument which will sound ‘alive’ even at flat tone settings, and credit for this goes to the Bartolini powerhouses and Pedulla's tone-shaping circuitry.
This consistency of sound effectively means that your choice of instrument is determined by your preference for number of strings or, maybe more likely, price.
Of the three, the 4-string looks and feels the most user-friendly, with its super-smooth, slim neck.
The five is equally sweet to play, with only minimal intrusion from low string fretbuzz — a common problem with heavy and loosely strung bottom Bs.
The use of a different laminate and fingerboard in the neck of the six helps to elicit a slightly darker sound, but the power is still there, without a doubt.
Weight-wise, there's no significant difference between these instruments, which range from 6½lbs on the four to 8½lbs on the six.
Balance is enhanced by the extended top horn and abbreviated headstock design, which also helps to minimise neck-heaviness.
CONCLUSION
As Pedulla say, these basses are designed as pure playing instruments, although I can't think of a manufacturer who'd admit to any other motive for building guitars.
Although the initial reaction might be to question the price tags, closer examination provides the answers: the joinery and general standard of manufacture is exemplary.
Pedulla say that these basses are effectively customs without the exorbitant custom price tag.
Whilst some might quibble with the second part of that statement, who could argue with the first?
And for those determined enough to stand out from the crowd by virtue of understatement, that may well be enough.
Left handers available to order, at £125.00 extra
Pedulla Hard Case: £95.00
For further information, contact 
WILD ABOUT LARRY?
Valley Arts Larry Carlton Std The first hundred of these guitars actually bear Larry Carlton's signature.
So come in number 72, your time is up…!
Review by David Mead.
Upon opening the Carlton Standard's case, and after being initially overjoyed that I wasn't looking at yet another Strat derivative, I must admit that my aesthetic values were backed into a corner while I tried to work out exactly what I was looking at.
While we've all been quick to condemn guitar manufacturers for being too timid to boldly go where no other has gone before design-wise, I found myself unwilling to applaud the Valley Arts Carlton for its daring to be different, but not being able to understand exactly why.
This could be due in part to the fact that the only guitars I could draw any parallels with, in terms of appearance, were the infamous Jedsons of the late '60s and early '70s, guitars which many of us have nightmares about even now.
But the Standard, of course, represents the fruits of a collaboration between ‘Mr 335’, Larry Carlton, and Valley Arts Guitars to whip up something to suit Mr Carlton's personal playing requirements.
First impressions are that he offered them a recipe of component parts from many different guitars and the result is a sort of nouvelle cuisine which leaves this weary plucker scratching his head.
CONSTRUCTION
The body is made from a single piece of mahogany, which came as quite a surprise, because at a casual glance you'd think it was ash.
Gibson once used ‘Limed Mahogany’ as a finish on some Les Paul Juniors, and that may be the desired effect here, but the translucent mushroom colour of the Carlton certainly hides a lot of the mahogany's natural colour and grain characteristics.
Not that that's necessarily a good or a bad thing.
The body is remarkably slight, measuring only 11¾″ at its widest point and just a smidge over 14½″ from strap peg to neckplate.
Enhancing the Carlton's diminutive appearance still further is some very Stratocaster-like chamfering on its upper side to produce the familiar contouring beloved of rib cages and right-hand forearms everywhere.
On the reverse side of the body some wood has been removed in a sort of crescent moon shape, extending from the upper to lower horn, presumably to increase access to the upper reaches of the Standard's fingerboard.
The neck is made from birdseye maple, which is satin finished along its playing length, but as the reverse side of the headstock has been signed and numbered by Larry himself, a layer of clear lacquer has been used to protect the area.
The fingerboard is rosewood, with hardly any discernible radiusing.
There are twenty-four medium-sized frets and the board is lipped over the end of the neck at the body end, leaving the 24th fret hanging in space.
The truss rod is accessed from this end of the neck and so the fretboard extending in this way means that the truss rod is either neatly tucked away, or a pain to get to for adjustment's sake, depending on how you view the situation.
The fretwork is well up to Valley Arts standard, with nothing that offends the eye or fingers in any way.
The scale length is the Gibson-like 24¾″, which actually feels a lot shorter than it is, introducing an almost short scale element into the Carlton story.
The nut appears to be plastic and, if I were to be really picky, has been cut a hair on the high side.
The machineheads bear the Valley Arts logo, but exude the Schaller/Grover lineage, possibly via Gotoh.
The rest of the Standard's hardware is a potpourri of virtually every guitar that Mr Carlton has been associated with.
The tune-o-matic bridge can be considered to be the 335 connection, but looks a mite out of place on such a small body.
If it weren't for the tailpiece, there would be distinct LP Junior/Melody Maker overtones, especially in view of Larry's choice of pickup.
These are not Gibson P90s, but the later and more refined P100s, which had the advantage of being stacked, humbucking and thus less noisy than the 90s, while still retaining their distinctive sound.
The controls are standard volume and tone, with a three-way pickup selector switch.
A black, tri-laminate scratchplate completes the overall look of the Carlton.
If you've followed the plot so far, you'll see what I mean about the conglomeration of bits and pieces from different instruments that have been amassed for this guitar.
I'm still uncomfortable about the overall effect, but keep reminding myself that I'm dealing with someone else's baby…
IN USE
The neck on the Carlton has the distinct advantage of lacking any characteristics borrowed from elsewhere.
I say advantage because if you were to close your eyes while playing, it would be impossible to say which guitar the Carlton's neck reminded you of most.
In short, it means that it becomes possible to impose almost any character you want on it, which should make the Standard a session player's dream.
It certainly is a remarkably comfortable guitar to play, the contouring giving an immediate snuggle factor usually associated with well worn-in instruments.
I did find it to be a touch neck-heavy though.
The positioning of the controls leaves me a bit cold.
The volume control is too far back; this makes quick access a pain and any sudden movements in that direction invariably set your finger(s) on a collision course with the selector switch.
The action of the pots is a little on the gritty side, too.
I think all signature models should carry a warning that the potential purchaser will not automatically sound like the player the guitar has been designed to serve.
It's only common sense, but I've seen a lot of hard-earned cash parted with in the pursuit of instrument-enhanced choppery and there just ain't no such thing.
Meanwhile, through an amp the Standard sounds good, the P100s being a sort of compromise between conventional humbuckers and single coils.
Again, you are placed in the situation of having to work quite hard to impose a personality or style on the guitar, which, if you think about it, is how things perhaps should be.
The lack of tremolo means that certain areas of style are limited access only, but this is the Standard model; Valley Arts are happy to provide any custom options on top of what you see here.
I found a little bit of string choking on the upper three frets and on inspection, found there to be a slight bow to the neck.
Probably nothing a quick tweak on the truss rod and bridge adjusters wouldn't sort out, but seeing as that would have involved taking the neck off, I didn't pursue it…
CONCLUSION
Everyone, without exception, who has seen this guitar has commented on its appearance in not particularly glowing terms.
Even after sitting and playing it for quite a while, I didn't find myself warming to it, and believe me, I wanted to.
Looks, of course, aren't everything, but they do have a bearing when it comes to choosing an instrument, and the Carlton's sales figures may speak for themselves in the months to come.
Who knows?
One slight Twilight Zone coincidence is that the serial number on this particular guitar is 01335, which, when you take into account who it was designed by, is most spooky…
As a summary, the Carlton's build quality is very high, the guitar offering versatility and almost unrivalled exclusivity.
But I find myself coming down against its styling (subjective, I know) and awkward control layout (still somewhat subjective, but two people here reckon they would trap their little fingers between the switch and volume control).
So, although I'm sure that in the hands of Larry Carlton this Valley Arts guitar would acquire the voice of angels, I just can't bring myself to sing its praises.
RRP: £1300 including case
Left-handers available
For more information please contact 
BUCKING THE SYSTEM Lindsey Buckingham It's been four years since Lindsey Buckingham left Fleetwood Mac, and for the last three of those years he's been writing, performing and working to complete his new solo album ‘Out Of The Cradle’.
Interview by Eddie Allen.
‘Out Of The Cradle’ is a project undertaken by Lindsey Buckingham with the help of long-time collaborator Richard Dashut.
The album contains all the hallmarks of Lindsey's distinctive electric guitar style, although he's quick to point out that his playing owes as much to the acoustic as to the electric guitar.
But ‘Out Of The Cradle’ isn't just an acoustic album, as tracks like Countdown and Don't Look Down illustrate.
‘I wanted to use the presence of the guitar more aggressively,’ says Lindsey, ‘not only in solos and in the classical bits in between some of the songs, but in terms of what was actually driving the songs.
In order to have all that you've got to keep things a little more contained.
I mean, if you've got a fuzzy-sounding guitar running through everything it takes up a lot of space in the mix.
Buckingham used his Takamine for a lot of the acoustic parts, but various electrics and other acoustic guitars were also employed.
Interestingly, though, according to Lindsey much of what sounds acoustic on the record isn't actually acoustic; it's electric guitar recorded direct, and in mono.
But why record in mono?
‘If you want to create a certain density with a guitar you record one instrument with three mics and you get this wonderfull stereo spread.
The trouble is that, like with the fuzzy guitar, you've then taken up so much space in the mix.
One thing direct recording in mono does is it keeps everything very contained.
Of course some people don't go for recording the guitar that way because they think you lose the dynamics.
Well, they're right, but with what we were doing we wanted the containment of a mono mix to be even more contained.
What I mean by that is that if there are eight or ten things running across the spectrum from left to right, they're all at specific points, and that way you can do a more sophisticated job of layering, while still retaining a certain delicacy.’
The opening instrumental to the first track Don't Look Down reminds me of Les Paul and his legendary recording tricks.
Did you use any tricks in the creation of that sound?
‘No, that's actually two guitars doing the same part, but very tight and panned left and right.
You could almost think that was a stereo spread of one performance but if you listen to it on headphones you can hear it properly.’
You're a fingerpicker aren't you, even on electric guitar…
‘That's right.
When I first joined Fleetwood Mac, Mick (Fleetwood ) kept trying to get me to use a pick, but fingerpicking is the only way I can do it.’
Did you arrange all the tracks so you could play them solo, using just an acoustic, if you had to?
‘Well, my Takamine is great because it means I can go around radio and TV stations and play songs on my own.
But no, there are certain tracks which lend themselves and certain ones that you can make stretch to sound okay on just acoustic, but I don't generally think like that.
Sure, I could adapt any song and get away with it, but I can't say I'd be as satisfied doing it that way, and I certainly wouldn't choose to interpret those things on one guitar.’
I believe one of the reasons you left Fleetwood Mac was because you didn't want to tour.
But aren't you going to have to tour with this new album?
And if so, how would you go about it?
‘Well, touring with Fleetwood Mac seemed like something that was not going to be much of a pleasure for me.
That situation in general had got to the point where it wasn't conducive to creativity any more.
And being the one who was taking the raw material and bashing it into the records I had to pick a time to leave where it wasn't going to be a huge blow to everybody else.
‘But touring with ‘Out Of The Cradle’ it would be great to to do some of the show on my own and some with a band.
The way I would start forming a band would be to get a bass player and drummer first; get a core of people who are on my wavelength, especially on the bass, and a drummer who's got a really good right hand, almost like a jazz player, who can play light and not just hard.
By using two people who can play really lyrically you could do some great things as a three piece.
‘But then, for those things that are more filled out, to do them properly you'd really have to get a few musicians out there.
A certain amount could be sampled, so the keyboard can do that, but that only takes you so far.
If I really wanted to make it all ‘organic’ I'd take out a section of, like, six guitarists, who could all double up on parts.
But it would have to be people who have an overall musical sensibility about it.
It wouldn't have to be people who are virtuoso, and certainly not the ‘high dollar’ boys.
‘I know a lot of people around who could fill the parts and the vocals very well, a lot of people in LA who are not working that much who would love to do it.
A lot of those parts would be worked out anyway, almost like a big band having charts, so it's not like you're looking for a vision from those people in the way that you would be from a group of high dollar players, who are hired to create their own thing for you.’
You're reportedly influenced by big bands.
Is that true?
‘Well, that's something that seems fresh to me.
I look at people like Harry Connick Jr., and what he's doing is very appealing, but that bypasses rock altogether and there is something fresh and very ‘adult’ about it.
Keeping that in mind it gives you somewhere else to go musically, and those themes tend to be a little more prominent from an adult point of view.
It's like looking back and reflecting, with a certain wisdom that maybe the cliché of rock'n'roll doesn't address.
And for someone in my position to make a jump from one thing to another and to be feeling better than I've felt in ten years, feeling like I'm at the top of my game creatively at the moment, must mean that I've grown in the making of this album.
But then again, rock'n'roll is basically rhythm and you're never going to get away from what that's about…’
Although Fleetwood Mac were a rock band, and you're regarded as a rock guitarist whatever else you do, you've always made ‘left turns’ along the way…
‘You know, we did ‘Rumours’ and that was a sixteen million album phenomenon at the time.
It was like the Michael Jackson thing and that's a strange place to be, because it's only the celebrity that's talked about.
But then we made a sort of left turn with ‘Tusk’, which dumbfounded a lot of people, not just the record company who obviously wanted the market, but a certain amount of the public who were expecting something that they'd already labelled and were comfortable with.
‘So, although that album kind of jumped the tracks for the band, it allowed me to feel that I could do whatever sprung to mind, whatever made sense for me.
So that was the start of this psychology for me, as opposed to making ‘Rumours 2’ and ‘Rumours 3’where you'd start to lose your musical perspective.
‘Admittedly there was a sort of backlash from outside, and even from within the group, so we then sort of backtracked.
But I think if we'd made ‘Rumours’ then ‘Mirage’then ‘Tango’and then ‘Tusk’it probably would have made more sense from the listeners' point of view.
But it was ‘Tusk’ that started me thinking along the lines of trying to be true to what I think's interesting and not necessarily just what people want to hear.’
Would you agree that you were responsible for the sound of the ‘new’ Fleetwood Mac?
‘To some degree, sure.
With influences dating all the way back to Rodgers and Hammerstein I certainly had the most complete musical education, or at least the broadest.
I mean, Mick has maybe a deeper one in a narrower area, so I learned a lot from him.
‘But when I was maybe eighteen I had a stereo Sony machine and was doing sound on sound recording.
So I had a handle on all of that before I even joined the band.
I did have a sort of ‘Les Paul’ mentality about how to use a tape machine and that did run through everything I did with Fleetwood Mac.
Yeah, I would take some credit for that but you've got to remember that in Fleetwood Mac I was working with great writers and great singers.’
Something I've noticed from your soloing is that you're not afraid to stay on one note.
I'm thinking in particular about the end of the solo on Don't Stop and the solo on The Chain , both from ‘Rumours’.
‘Well, you can get a lot of rhythm going within one note, by leaving it for about as long as you can.
But another thing I hear, which isn't necessarily solo work, but in a more orchestral sense, is roots and fifths.
A lot of people are doing that now because you can work with those two notes across any number of chords, sort of not moving while everything else is moving.’
That sounds like a Chuck Berry influence to me…
‘Well, I was influenced by AM radio all the time I was growing up, which was all the great '50s rock'n'roll, and I suppose I would have to include The Beatles in that.
So my pop sensibility was formed by the radio.
‘Brian Wilson from the Beach Boys was another obvious influence.
He was a great melodist, but he had a real struggle being caught up in the machinery of making hits.
Then he got to a point where he wanted to expand his horizons and he started making music that was far more experimental.
Yet his family was totally dependent on him, not just his brothers but his mother and his father, so he couldn't buck the system; the pressure to rein him back in and continue the status quo and what was making money won over.
So I appreciate that struggle, and identify with it to a degree.’
Would you cite any guitarists as playing influences?
‘Guitarists I listen to are classical and pseudo jazz-classical players.
But although I played lead for a long time in the group I never cite lead players like Clapton or Beck.
By the time that came along I had already been playing for some time.
I started playing when I was seven, so by the time The Stones happened it was not difficult for me to play, so I could appreciate it for the music alone.
‘I loved what Hendrix did, but he wasn't an influence.
Maybe I can cite Page because he was someone who understood the studio so well.
I can't say I'm doing a Page-type thing in the studio, but he was someone who was able to make very soulful records, and that was something that generated excitement in me at the time.
‘But I'm totally untechnical; my theory in the studio is ‘turn the knobs until it sounds good’.
If you've got the ears to know what sounds good you're going to be pretty much alright.’
I believe you didn't mix ‘Out Of The Cradle’ yourself.
How did you feel about giving the album over to somebody else?
‘It was a little weird at first.
Chris Lord-Alge mixed most of the stuff, and when I walked in and Chris said, ‘Sounds great doesn't it?’
I said, ‘Well, I don't know.’
It took me about six months to even be able to hear what he'd done; I just couldn't relate to it because I had so many preconceptions about what I thought it should be.
‘The thing is that no-one else completely realises whatever vision you have — you know, everything being intact the way you visualised it.
But at the same time there may be limitations in your own vision and he brought out parts that maybe I wouldn't even have used.
So in the long run I think his objectivity may have helped a little bit.
The other thing is that these people have a really good handle on the EQ'ing process at the very end.
‘We also did quite a bit of work with Kevin Killen.
Kevin would either lock into it or he'd miss, but you've got to let these people do what they do and if it doesn't work, it doesn't work.’
Are you more creative working on your own?
‘Working on my own as opposed to working in Fleetwood Mac is really two different things.
I've always maintained the analogy that working with Fleetwood Mac was like movie making, because you have an idea, but to get from point A to point B you've got to go through all these steps.
You've got to verbalise it and it gets very political, too.
‘When I work on my own it's more like painting, because I've got a canvas there and it's an intuitive thing.
I may have the idea that makes me start putting the brush strokes down, but at some point the canvas will take on a life of its own and lead me off in a direction I never expected to go.
So the writing and the record making process are inseparable in a way, but the way I work certainly seems to open up possibilities for discovery.’
But knowing where to stop can be a problem…
‘Yes, sometimes you create this illusion for yourself, because you've been with it a certain number of hours, but it can also go the other way: you might think something's horrible and then come in the next day and realise it's actually pretty good.
So it all balances out.’
There are some interesting sounds on the album…
‘People always assume that because there are a lot of different sounds on a record that you've used twenty different guitars.
But I probably only used about five guitars in total.
You can use one guitar in a hundred different ways if you can hear the sound.
Beyond that it's just a matter of trying to perceive whatever vision you have.
Sometimes you might have a vision for an entire song and sometimes the vision is just for a particular part that relates to the next particular part.’
I'm intrigued by the acoustic/electric guitar I saw you using in Fleetwood Mac.
What is it?
‘It's an electric, which, from a distance looks like an acoustic.
It was made by a guy named Rick Turner who used to work for Alembic.
He made a lot of hi-tech guitars and he kept trying to sell me one, but there was something very sterile about them to me; they had more gadgets than I needed.
At the time I was playing a Les Paul, which wasn't my first choice because I had been playing Telecasters when Stevie (Nicks) and I were working together before we joined Fleetwood Mac, but when we joined the band there was an existing sound and the Telecaster wasn't cutting it.
Anyway, I said to Rick, ‘Look, if you're going to try to sell me something that I'm going to play, make me a guitar that's a cross between an Alembic and a Les Paul, but make it simple.’
But didn't he fit a rotating pickup?
‘Yeah, but it never really came into play, although it's a nice idea and it looks good.
There's one parametric control and one pickup and almost anyone from a distance would think that where the pickup is positioned is a soundhole, but the weight of it soon tells you it's not hollow!’
Your approach to instruments, playing and writing isn't as obvious as I thought it would be…
‘Well, you see, I had what I would call an ‘hermetically sealed’ musical education.
I was from a family in Northern California, about thirty miles out of San Francisco; I had an older brother who had and still has a great collection of 45s, but we were actually swimmers.
Music was a sideline and I was sort of the loner of the family, sitting for hours in my brother's room listening to records.
‘But the family weren't artistic in any way, really.
My mother and father both encouraged me in my playing, but I wasn't encouraged to get into the business because they knew it was kind of tough.
‘So I swam all the way through High School, and I was never in a band because of that.
In fact, nobody even knew I played, although I played pretty well by the time I was out of High School.
‘At the end of High School I got together with a drummer, who is still one of my best friends, and over the summer of ‘67 we got into a group situation.
We met Stevie Nicks right after that and for about the next four years we were in a band in the northern California area.
I actually shifted over to playing bass — and here's the typical young garage band mentality coming out — because I didn't have the gear for guitar.
So I played bass for about four years in that group with Stevie.
‘Although Stevie and I had known each other for a while we had never been romantically involved.
Then somehow we did get romantically linked up and some people, right near the end of the situation with that band, singled us out as potentially more interesting than the band, which I suppose was a cruel situation really.
‘By this time I had already been fooling around with sound on sound recording, and then in 1971 some aunt that I never even knew left a small house to me and my two brothers.
The house was sold off and I ended up inheriting 12,000 dollars, so I went straight out and bought an AG 440 Ampex professional four track machine and took it up to my father's coffee plant, and every night when he left I would drive up and work on Stevie's and my songs.
‘We were preparing for what we thought might be our future and so we got back to the people who'd singled us out, and a guy called Keith Wilson, who was eventually responsible for recording and co-producing our first Fleetwood Mac album, got us down and we put an album out, which kind of came and went.
‘But we had managers who were trying to get us to play the steak houses of LA, which is like a trip to nowhere, and yet there was this cult thing growing on the East Coast and in the South, and it turned out that by the time we joined Fleetwood Mac we were headlining in our own right to five thousand people in the South and East, but totally starving in LA!
It was a bizarre kind of inconsistency, and that made it more difficult to make the decision to join Fleetwood Mac, because we thought there might be something going on here.
‘But then right at that time Mick Fleetwood came into the studio, just looking for a studio to use, and happened to hear a song from the Buckingham Nicks album, which was just being used to showcase the room.
Mick had an idea that Bob Welch might be leaving the band and so he asked us to join.
That was it.
And the rest, as they say, is history…’
MAPLE LEAF SWAG Patrick Eggle JS Legend There is usually a bonding period of at least a couple of weeks between a player and a new instrument, but this time romance was in the air straight away and…what the hell…
I think we're engaged…
Review by David Mead.
I first ran across the new range of Eggle guitars at this year's Northern Music Show and was stunned by the beautiful, figured tops and obvious quality of workmanship.
In the subsequent show report, I proclaimed that it was love at first sight and when I heard that a new model was in the offing which would, the company told me, prove to be their most eye-catching to date, I pestered them for weeks until they sent me one for review.
When we received this guitar it was just one week old.
The Legend started life as a collaboration between Patrick Eggle and Jim Sullivan, hence the ‘JS’ part of the guitar's name.
Based upon the company's flagship Berlin Pro model, with modifications and custom options suggested by Big Jim himself, the JS will be a limited edition with an expected run of only 150 units.
CONSTRUCTION
The body is made from four pieces of deeply figured maple, bookmatched both front and back and bonded together to form a sort of sandwich.
The actual contouring and shape of the body is almost exactly the same as the Berlin Pro, but Jim asked that some additional chamfering be applied to the top of the body.
This means that the already very sleek 1 inch thickness on the top edge slims down to an amazing ″ at its thinnest point.
In fact, the carved top measures only 1½″ thick in the middle, making the Legend an extremely svelte affair indeed.
The body has been left unfinished, and only an oil sealant has been given to the wood to protect it.
Apparently, Patrick Eggle has talked with manufacturers of quality, ‘unfinished’ furniture and has chosen an oil which not only protects, but also enhances the natural grain of the wood.
I spoke to him about this and he confided that it was a mixture of polyurethane and Danish oil.
He also mentioned that when the guitar reaches full production level, a care kit will be included with each one — which comes as something of a relief, because at present I would be nervous about approaching this instrument even with something as seemingly innocuous as furniture polish.
The neck, too, is unfinished.
And it feels great.
Despite the fact that this guitar is only days old, the neck has a vintage feel to it, as though it has been active in the field for thirty years.
It is slim and fast and fits in the hand like it belongs there.
The fingerboard is ebony, with exquisite maple leaf inlays lacking nothing in detail as they appear to drift down the neck towards the body.
This is somehow a very natural idea — maple body, maple leaf inlays — and the whole design concept seems to gel quite splendidly.
The only blight here is the numbering at the top of the neck, which does look out of place to me.
I could probably live with it, but really this perfunctory business belongs out of sight.
The twenty four frets are fat, but not too tall, giving the playing area a chunky, but not cumbersome feel.
The nut is made from Wilkaloid, a substance that it is even more slippery than graphite and a closely guarded industry secret.
The headstock has a macassar ebony veneer and boasts six Sperzel locking tuners.
The tremolo is the Wilkinson type, which we've covered elsewhere in this issue.
But, to summarise: most of the clever stuff is confined to the arm itself, having a spring-loaded cam which locks the bridge in position when the arm is released from the player's grip and allowed to drop into a ‘rest’ position.
This means that string breakage will not lead to sudden and catastrophic detuning, and leaves the guitar at least 5/6ths useful.
It also lets the player rest the palm on the bridge, without the worry of unwanted pitch variation as a result.
The pickups on the Legend are Reflex Red actives, a departure for Eggle guitars.
Patrick told me that he was a little worried about the brightness in tone that would inevitably result from a totally maple body and so he suggested to Jim Sullivan that actives might well hold the answer.
Jim collaborated with John Oram at Reflex and designed a tone circuit especially for the Legend.
This, to the outside world, is a little black box, hidden away in the control cavity at the back of the guitar.
The controls for the Legend comprise a volume control/pull pot, which coil taps the bridge humbucker, and a separate rotary which acts as a mid-range boost/cut.
The toggle switch selects either pickup or both, in time honoured fashion.
I must say that the black and gold hardware that has been chosen for this guitar is excellent, too.
IN USE
The weight and balance of the JS are superb.
I've already said that the neck feels wonderful, but the good vibes don't stop there.
The feel of the natural wood itself is a very sensual thing, and the desire to pick the instrument up is considerably enhanced, which is in no way a bad thing.
It took me a few minutes to get the hang of things when I put the Legend through an amp.
I'm not usually a fan of active pickups, but I'm rapidly succumbing to the Eggle's charms in this department, too.
There is an incredible amount of power here and the switching/coil-tap options combined with the mid-range boost mean that you can happily sit for hours and still find new sounds.
With the bridge humbucker on full and the boost up all the way, the Legend emits the kind of sounds that would frighten children and small animals.
Coil tap the bridge, back off the boost and you are into a whole new range of hot single coil sounds.
Some of the overdriven sounds lean towards the honky, but even then, it's useful honky.
Clean sounds are rich and very varied.
Careful manipulation of the mid-boost even provided some pretty creditable electro-acoustic sounds, which speaks volumes for the versatility of the instrument and its circuitry.
Some of the sounds are familiar, yet not instantly Fender or Gibson-like in origin.
In fact, the whole instrument stands up for itself without relying on those industry stalwarts for support in any way, which makes a very refreshing change.
CONCLUSION
I've tried to keep this review from trespassing too far into Mills & Boon territory, but it must be obvious to all and sundry that I love the Legend to bits.
It also gives me a patriotic thrill, knowing that it's British designed and built.
So often, when a company introduces a new model, there follows a wave of disappointment when it invariably fails to break any new ground.
But this is far from being the case here.
The workmanship is impeccable and I'm certain the Legend could face any musical challenge and suit a variety of styles, from downhome country to lock-up-your-daughters metal, making it versatile, durable, good-looking and I want one.
Badly.
RRP: £1599.00 including case.
Left-handers available.
For more information please contact 
REVELL-ATIONS Tony Revell Guitars A full-time guitar maker and repairer since 1978, Tony Revell now lives in Wales and makes mandolins, acoustic guitars and electric guitars, in that order…
Review by Rick Batey.
Tony Revell began experimenting with guitars at the age of fourteen, and five years later he landed a position working with Chris May and Andy Preston, refining his skills while turning out Overwater electrics.
In 1981 Tony struck out on his own, repairing and making guitars in the North East, and since his move westward to Wales six years ago, he's been free to concentrate more on building.
Rather than examine just one of Tony Revell's acoustics, we thought we'd take a look at two instead.
Although one is definitely much more ‘mainstream’ than the other, doing two should give a better idea of the scope of design ideas from this very interesting maker.
A-15 CUTAWAY GUITAR
Designed as a dedicated ragtime/ fingerpicking guitar, Revell's A-15 model is small-bodied and correspondingly light in weight.
The top is of fairly wide-grained European spruce, and the back and sides are Honduras mahogany with the maker's distinctively pale, honey-coloured lacquer, set off with maple binding on all edges.
Tony is a big fan of mahogany's sound qualities, and he also uses walnut for backs and sides, and koa wood too.
He likes rosewood's appearance and bass response and will use it if asked, but deep down he feels it's too heavy to be an ideal guitar-building wood.
The A-15's neck is Brazilian mahogany, with a head veneer of Indian rosewood for an added hint of exotica.
The fingerboard is high-quality ebony from Papua New Guinea, and the bridge is rosewood.
Wisely, the whole guitar has a nice, thin covering of satin-finish lacquer — essential for maximum sensitivity and volume on guitars of this type.
Apparently the starting point for this design was the body of an 0–18 model Martin, but the slightly less angular shape and rounded Venetian cutaway have given the guitar a look all its own.
Rightly, the decoration is simple and understated; a single thin black line separating the spruce from the maple binding, a well-proportioned herringbone soundhole rosette, a marquetry stripe down the centre of the back and small pearl dot-markers running up the fingerboard.
Inside is evidence of Revell's idiosyncratic approach to luthiery.
The label is in fact not paper, but a maple veneer — a classy touch.
The back struts take an unusual approach by ‘stepping over’ the centre-strip, instead of cutting through it.
The maker hand-cuts the kerfing (the triangular-section strip around the inside edge that increases the gluing area of the sides for securing the front and back) so that the saw-cuts are widely spaced in some areas and closely spaced around the tight curves of the cutaway.
Nice idea, but unfortunately it looks a bit messy.
Far and away the most interesting aspect of this guitar is the neck block and heel design.
It's Revell's own invention (Patent Applied For), and an absolute peach of a job — probably the best solution to the cutaway acoustic heel problem that I've ever come across.
The photograph best describes the elegance and practicality of this feature.
At one stroke, Revell has increased the ‘free’ area of the neck by a good two frets, while incorporating a smooth curve from the heel into the cutaway.
And, what's more, he's done it without sacrificing the lightness and strength of the guitar, nor any of its internal volume.
This is a wonderful design in that it combines real style with light weight and gives you totally unimpeded access to all but the very top fret.
The A-15 plays very sweetly.
The neck is on the narrow side for a fingerpicking guitar, with a soft rounded profile.
The satin finish suits it well.
The machineheads on this guitar are copies of big-buttoned chrome Schallers, and though they work well enough, they could be better finished, and some players might prefer something subtler and more in keeping with the general style.
However, the maker does a good fret job and has included useful features like a compensated saddle, with a ‘step’ cut into the bridge behind it to ensure a good break angle for the strings and plenty of room for future saddle-height adjustment.
Electro-acoustic versions of all models are available, generally with Fishman or Martin Thinline transducers, and sometimes with the Shadow EQ system.
The sound of this guitar would be ideal for acoustic bluesers and fingerstyle players of most descriptions.
It's not really an all-rounder's instrument, as over-application of a flatpick can reveal some boxy and harsh overtones, but without those same qualities the guitar would lack the fast, bright response and the bounce and snap that make it what it is.
Played softly it sounds clear and well-balanced, and if you dig in really hard then it shifts up a gear and becomes well funky.
In a way the sound reminds me of a small-bodied Gibson from the '30s or '40s, but with more volume and a clearer bass end.
NY-5
Just a touch over eleven inches wide in the lower bout, Revell's diminutive NY-5 guitar is modelled after the parlour guitars of the late nineteenth century — a design that faded fast under the onslaught of steel strings and the increasing demand for more and more volume.
This instrument has been used as a demo model for some time, so it's well played-in; one potential buyer (a music-shop owner, would you believe) strung it up with enormously heavy strings and loosened the truss-rod, but the NY-5 has survived this ill-treatment with just the faintest distortion of the belly.
To our late-twentieth century, dreadnought-accustomed eyes, guitars like this look more like toys than serious players' instruments.
I mean, no guitar as small as this could possibly be any good — right?
Well, no.
Revell's tactic has been to make the body four inches deep, to maximise the volume of air within the guitar; the body is in fact almost as deep as the soundhole rosette is wide.
This generous depth, combined with a full-scale neck, a heavily arched back and a lightly-strutted belly, means that the guitar packs a lot more punch than it has any right to — more than a Martin 0–16 New Yorker, I'd say, although that's only from memory.
However, you'd buy an instrument like this for tone, not out-and-out volume, and this one possesses a weird and rather wonderful sound: a subtle, silvery treble, slightly nasal and Martin-like G and D strings, and a bass sound that's tight but surprisingly rich.
Stick that lot together along with the teeniest, faintest soupçon of banjo, and you've got something that sounds almost like a miniature piano.
Open tunings work particularly well on this guitar, although the Spanish-style Schaller tuners have a strong delayed-action feel and leave a lot to be desired.
The NY-5 loved being tuned to dropped D, settled more than happily into DADGAD, and didn't even have a problem coping with a low C on the bottom string in conjunction with a heavy plastic thumbpick.
The guitar's dimensions do limit its penetrating power, but what you get instead is a sparkly, ultra-fast response that clearly articulates fingerpicked notes as fast as you can spit them out.
This is one of those guitars that imparts a whole new sonic quality to even the oldest of the old faves — bizarre, but addictive.
Cosmetically, the NY-5 is a bit over the top.
The ‘rope’ binding around the front and headstock is very tasty, as are the snowflake fingerboard inlays (although they could have been installed straighter) but I'm not at all sure about the classical-style rosette complete with touches of green and fluorescent pink.
The nut is scalloped; some players like it, but to me it's an ugly feature.
The side-dots are odd in that black dots alternate with white dots set into big black squares, and I think that from the player's viewpoint this almost spoils the whole line of the guitar.
A more sober approach to decoration might be more in keeping with the guitar, given that the basic quality of materials is so high: a Brazilian mahogany neck, an ebony fingerboard, a Sitka spruce top with some lovely hazelling on the treble side, and some truly spectacular wood for the back and sides.
The latter's called Imbuya, it comes from Brazil and it combines the rich orangey-brown colour of Brazilian rosewood with the kind of wildly complex grain pattern you sometimes see in American walnut.
Tony Revell says it's living hell to work with, and I believe him.
It's well worth the trouble, though, firstly because it's obviously ideal for bringing out the bass in small guitars, secondly because it looks just fabulous, and thirdly because it makes the inside of the guitar smell like an explosion in a spice market.
Pardon me, I think I need another hit…
CONCLUSION
I have no hesitation in recommending Tony Revell's work.
In a way, his approach reminds me of Rob Armstrong's, in that he views the guitar first and foremost as a sound-producer, rather than a beautiful piece of furniture which the maker hopes is going to sound good.
Revell has a strong and distinctive style, allied with a sound guitar building technique — not spectacular, but clean and efficient enough.
What sets him apart is a very open-minded attitude which seems to have borne fruit in the shape of some seriously great ideas.
His cutaway heel is world-class stuff, and with a patent in the pipeline I can think of a number of major manufacturers who'll be after him for a slice of the licensing action.
A maker to check out.
Left-handed versions available at 15% extra
For more information please contact 
LOWER SIX?
Fender Bass VI The first Bass VI I remember seeing was being used on television by Jack Bruce, during a mimed performance of Strange Brewby Cream.
What memories!
Gibson Keddietries out his old hula-hoop…
Recollections indeed: an extremely ‘fashionable’ Cream, with serious sideburns all round, grossly extended collars on satin shirts, Clapton's Hendrix perm, flared trousers and Les Paul.
Being nobbut a sprog, I remember wondering why bassist Bruce was playing a guitar.
Only he wasn't, of course; he was playing a Fender Bass VI.
He also became arguably the most famous exponent of the instrument, along with Eric Haydock of The Hollies.
I think I could be excused for my mistake.
In many ways the Bass VI was a true cross-bred guitar and bass, containing physical and structural elements of both, while being neither.
The Bass V reviewed in ‘Oldies’, April ‘91 belonged more obviously to the dedicated bass side of the Fender family, but wasn't introduced until 1965, whereas the Bass VI appeared on the scene directly after the Jazz bass, which itself appeared during the tail-end of 1960.
A tribute to Leo Fender's apparently limitless creativity, almost before the Jazz bass had leapt off the drawing board he was working on yet another guitar concept, the marriage of guitar and bass which was to become the Bass VI.
Although marketed as a bass by Fender, Leo personally viewed it as a baritone guitar, thus creating a confusion in the minds of the company and ultimately the guitar-buying public, a confusion which was to dog the instrument throughout its career.
But let's have a look at the details of this delightful halfbreed.
Visually it's quite easy to identify the model's Dad as Fender's Jaguar guitar; the body outline is very similar to the Jaguar, with that distinctive ‘leant forward’ look caused by the pulled-back lower bout, offset waist, longish top horn and distinctive stubbed lower horn.
The body is made from alder, which helps in maintaining a very reasonable playing weight.
The VI sports three Jaguar-like single coil pickups, with a Jag/Jazzmaster-type bridge and ‘floating tremolo’, the push-in arm of which locates between the 1st and 2nd strings.
This model also has an eleven-screw, three-ply mock-tortoiseshell scratchplate, chromed control plate with volume and tone rotaries plus jack socket, and a small individual metal plate on the lower horn area of the scratchplate containing the later version's four slide switches, more of which later.
The Bass VI is some 44½″ long in total, and boasts a 30″ scale length — again, directly halfway between a guitar and bass.
The neck/body join is the traditional Fender four-bolt system, with the serial number (this one's in the high-200,000s, indicating that the instrument was manufactured around 1969) stamped above the F-logo on the neck plate.
There is also some Strat-style comfort contouring on the body for the ribcage and forearm.
CBS's subsequent ownership of Fender saw many model ‘refinements’ and changes throughout the whole range of guitars and basses.
As far as the Bass VI was concerned, these were mainly restricted to the addition of neck-binding and block position markers on the 21-fret rosewood fingerboard.
Truss rod adjustment was, as with other Fenders of the time, via a crosshead screw in the body end of the neck.
The larger Fender headstock is adorned with F-stamped Kluson enclosed machines, these having begun to replace the original Kluson fitments from 1967.
Fronting the headstock is CBS's gold-edged black ‘television-friendly’ Fender logo of the time, underwritten with ‘Electric Bass Guitar’— just in case you weren't sure!
The various patent numbers and the small ‘Offset Contour Body’ transfer complete the headstock picture.
It's all very '60s Fullerton, exemplified by the lovely three-tone sunburst (although various DuCo custom finishes could be specified, such models are particularly rare).
When you play the guitar you can understand why the Bass VI was the victim of a life-long identity crisis.
Its split personality means you have to lock your mind into ‘guitar mode’ or ‘bass mode’and stay with it, but it's so close to both that playing confusion is inevitable.
Make no mistake, this instrument is absolutely nothing like a modern multi-string bass — the only exception being Music Man's very latest model, currently used by Albert Lee.
The problem is that the player's reference points are all wrong.
First of all, the Bass VI is a tuned-down guitar, one octave to be precise — EADGBE as opposed to a 6-string bass's customary BEADGC.
That, of course, doesn't take into account the initial upset caused by the dimensions of the neck, which is much more guitar-related, with a nut width of only 1½″.
It's identical to that of a Jazz bass and narrower than, say, a Strat, but this has six heavy gauge strings running across it.
And the twelfth fret width is only 1″.
This schizophrenic air also infiltrates the sound of the instrument.
The bass possesses a surprising variety of tones thanks to those aforementioned pickup selection switches; in the same cluster there's also a ‘tone’ switch to allow the low end to dominate.
Overall, though, strummed chords are a no-no.
Slash chords or barre chords in the upper registers are fairly usable, however, and the trem has a beautifully lazy, sweetly-damped action, adding some gentle and melodic pitch variation to the occasion.
But twelfth-fret harmonic dive-bombs are OUT!
Using the bass-biased sound gave the 5th and 6th strings some extra impact for more ‘normal’ bass lines.
However, the short scale, coupled with such light gauge strings for a bass, severely limits this facility.
This was part of Fender's problem, of course, and the 30″ scale length strings were so unusual at the time as to cause major headaches in manufacture.
If this were the conclusion to a regular bass assessment, and not a fond peek into the past, I would have to say that I didn't get anywhere playing the VI.
The string spacing is far too narrow, not only on the fretboard but more especially with regard to the right hand.
Strumming's mostly out, because of the resulting sound, and there's just not enough room to play fingerstyle with the necessary authority.
A plectrum helps with accuracy, also adding attack and brightness to the sound, so as such it would appear to be the required compromise.
Overall, the sound lacks the substance and depth demanded in this day and age.
However, don't make the mistake of assuming that you necessarily need a conventional bass to construct a bassline.
Les Paul, on his famous multi-tracked recording with Mary Ford, never actually used a bass; he played all the bass parts on a regular guitar, tuned to normal concert pitch.
So there's food for thought!
Even so, despite the creative efforts of musicians like Jack Bruce and Eric Haydock to inject some purpose into the instrument, the Bass VI remained a misunderstood and under-used machine.
Which makes the fact that its production continued at Fender until 1975 even more puzzling; CBS were never noted for soft-spots in their accountancy approach, even with the best-sellers in the range, let alone the fringe elements like this.
The owner of this curio, Mark Noel Johnston, has decided to put the Bass VI up for sale, alongside a variety of other desirable instruments.
If you're interested, the asking is £1295.
Mark can be reached on 0480 493260.
In the meantime, thanks to him for the loan of this lovable and interesting guitar.
A Celebration of the BLUES Hammmersmith Odeon: 28th June 1992 National Music Day's Hammersmith Odeon blues extravaganza, presented by Harvey Goldsmith Entertainments Ltd and Guitaristmagazine, featured such legends as Mick Jagger, Gary Moore, Otis Rush and Buddy Guy.
David Meadwoke up that morning…
Pancake Day, Mothers' Day, Valentine's Day and now National Music Day.
The notion of people sending each other greetings cards in the future with ‘Happy Music Day’ complete with pithy, humorous and probably quaintly vulgar subtext is an amusing one.
But whatever your opinions are concerning the concept of the UK enjoying an annual Music Day, the aftermath of the first event seems to bode well for the future.
For one day, it seems the country gave itself over to the pursuit of all things musical, in a wholehearted and thoroughly charitably-minded fashion.
When the idea hit the streets, we at Guitarist were unanimous in wanting to throw our weight behind the project.
And how better to do it than to collaborate with one of the prime movers behind National Music Day, Mick Jagger, in a concert to celebrate The Blues.
So, on the evening of June 28th, a packed Hammersmith Odeon was witness to three hours of the best in blues.
The line-up was impressive, featuring Pops Staples, literally the founding father of the gospel band the Staple Singers and who has recently embarked on a solo career at the tender age of 77!
Gary Moore, a born again bluesman who certainly needs no introduction from us, had broken off from his European tour especially to take part in the event.
Gary played up a storm, putting one of his sunburst Les Pauls and his old pink Strat through hell, while including favourites from his albums ‘Still Got The Blues’ and ‘After Hours’.
Stones drummer Charlie Watts showed another side of his percussive skills by providing some Charlie Parker inspired be-bop with his own quintet.
Blues veterans Jimmie Rodgers and Otis Rush both created their own blues magic and surprise guest Buddy Guy stunned the audience with some of his best and most fiery playing to date.
Ron Wood invited Buddy to stay on stage for his own short set and then Gary Moore strode on once again, his keyboard player teasing the audience with a few notes from the Stone's classic Satisfaction , hinting at what was to come.
The band launched into an almighty blues riff and Mick Jagger appeared on stage in one of the most impressive entrances we've seen.
Despite being on stage for an all-too-brief twenty-five minutes, Mick proved that he has in no way lost touch with his roots and years of playing to huge, stadium-sized audiences has not impaired his ability to communicate with a comparatively ‘small’ crowd.
At the end of the evening, the whole cast, including three-fifths of the Rolling Stones, were assembled on stage for a rendition of The Blues Is Alright — and nobody there was going to argue with that .
Considerable credit must go to the superb Gary Moore and his band for underpinning the whole evening with some musically adept ducking and diving, particularly during the unpredictable Buddy Guy's set.
If National Music Day is to become an annual event, and we're hoping that it does, then next year you can be sure that Guitarist will be involved once again in some significant way.
CUSTOM STANDARDS Manson ‘Classic S’ This handmade blend of the traditional and the modern aims to stand out from the crowd with its high-class simplicity and the best and latest in hardware…
Review by Rick Batey.
It's a strange but true fact: the majority of guitarists who order custom electrics from a specialised builder actually ask for something that's pretty conventional.
Why, you may ask?
Why commission a craftsman to labour for weeks on a design of guitar that was specifically intended for mass production?
Why risk the possibility that the invariably expensive instrument may be ‘not quite what you wanted’, and thus face the steep depreciation between brand-new to second-hand common to all custom-built guitars, when modern ‘copy’ guitars are so good and so cheap?
After all, mass-produced will always be mass-produced, but the whole point of mass-produced electrics is that you can walk into a store, pick the very best example from a row of several, spend a little money on a great setup, and maybe some pickups, and still save enough over a custom guitar to buy yourself an extremely nice amplifier.
The kind of people who'll order a guitar like this Manson will argue in reply that:(a) a production guitar will never have a handmade guitar's combination of all the right bits with that extra edge of quality;(b) it's obviously better to go for a traditional design than some mutant battle-axe because you're less likely to get sick of it and they're a lot easier to customise further and there's nothing better at fitting into virtually any style of music than an S-type or a T-type; and (c) it's their money, anyway.
And there's no answer to that one.
Hugh Manson has made hundreds and hundreds of custom guitars since he turned full-time over a decade ago, and now he's decided to standardise some of his most popular guitars into the ‘Classic’ range.
Just two body styles are available: Classic S and Classic T, neither of which should need any explanation!
Although these are ‘custom’ guitars, there's a whole range of options available: different colours, different types of maple tops, different pickups, tremolos and fixed bridges, a choice of fingerboards and fret sizes, and so on.
Our review guitar is a Manson Classic S of the back-routed design — which means that the pickups are mounted straight into the body, instead of being built into the scratchplate in the traditional manner (although you can order that, too, if you wish).
The whole Manson range are based around bodies of alder, a stable, medium-to-lightweight timber that Fender themselves often used on guitars from late 1956 onwards.
This guitar has a two-piece alder body with the join well off-centre, but because alder is such a plain-looking wood, the join is hard to spot — something the Manson shares with most Fenders.
On top of the alder we have a quilted maple veneer, joined down the middle — but it's not your usual wafer-thin, cosmetic-reasons-only veneer, since it's a good 2mm or 3mm thick and rather cleverly bent to follow the forearm chamfering on the front.
The back has deep, '50s-style chest-contouring, and the whole body is finished in a delicately-sprayed sunburst that darkens from a deep yellow at the centre to a medium orange at the edges.
It's a very high-quality finish.
The neck is maple again, with a separate but similarly-birdseyed fingerboard — which means no skunk-stripe around the back to house the double-action truss rod.
The scale length is traditional Fender, and the width at the nut is ″, though there's a slightly narrower and a slightly wider option available.
Hugh Manson has tried for the best combination of feel and usability by planing the fingerboard to a compound radius — a medium-curved 10″ radius near the headstock, but flattening right out to 16″ as it reaches the upper frets, in order to minimise the strings choking off when you play bent notes and to allow a lower overall action.
It's an excellent idea, and sadly one that only custom builders — and one must include Jackson here, as Jackson include the feature on their ‘custom’ guitars — seem to have the time to implement properly.
The frets on this guitar number twenty-two, and they're ‘narrow’ in size, which means, fact fans, .096cm high and .047cm wide (there's a wider, more ‘Les Paul’size of fret available, too).
I'm really surprised that the maker has neglected to scrape the frets clean of lacquer after the final coat, but Manson actually prefers to do it this way.
I don't think it does much for the feel or the looks of the frets, but there you go.
The machineheads are the new Schaller locking types, finished in polished black chrome, and with large knurled knobs on the backs of the gear casings that make them look very much like Sperzels.
In a way they're nicer: Sperzels always look a bit‘military issue’ to me.
The Schallers feel about as positive as Sperzels do, and allied with the well-cut graphite nut, they certainly deliver the goods.
There's no string tree on the Classic S, since the string posts are staggered — not staggered individually, like Sperzels, but in a ‘three high, three low’ formation, which seems to work just as well.
The bridge is a Wilkinson, which you're probably familiar with by now(and if you're not, maybe you should be).
The main advantages are: the bridge is fixed with the arm in the ‘down’ position (perfect for playing country bends in tune, or for keeping strings in tune should you break one); it's impossible to strip the thread by screwing the arm in too tightly; you can choose to load your strings through the block or just through the bridge; and it feels good, like a light Stratocaster trem, with none of the fudginess of more complex units.
As for playing the Manson, well, it took me a little time to get into it.
Nothing wrong with it, but at first I thought it was nondescript, and then I thought it felt weird.
That's the compound radius fingerboard for you, and having just come straight from playing a ‘62 reissue Strat, the Manson's fingerboard around and above the octave felt virtually flat in comparison.
But the semi-gloss finish of the vintage yellow lacquer feels welcoming straight away, and the neck profile — just on the fat side of average — should please the vintage buffs and alienate the Charvel supporters in one fell swoop.
Anyway, the sound of the three Seymour Duncan Alnico Pro II pickups is as good an incentive as any to get used to this guitar.
Manson offers EMGs as an alternative, but I can't imagine anyone objecting to the sound of the Seymours.
They provide all the classic tones, from full and ripe through soft and pingy to pure and sharp, all with remarkably low noise and completely even volume levels from position to position, with the Manson's maple top, generous neck and heavy machineheads adding a great sense of solidity and authority to the sound.
The knobs perform the function you'd expect, with master volume, and tones for pickups 2 and 3, and, essentially, the whole guitar performs its part in an unsurprising but efficient manner.
CONCLUSION
I'll draw no conclusions on the whole factory/handmade dilemma here; you'll just have to read the first two paragraphs again and make up your own mind.
But as for the Manson Classic S, I reckon it adds up like this.
For: very nicely made out of very posh wood, well finished, with a good chunky neck and that very practical compound radius fingerboard, with top-class hardware to finish it off (the Wilkinson is deservedly this year's tremolo, while both the locking Schallers and the Seymour Duncans are excellent).
Against: almost nothing I can put my finger on, except that it's a darned expensive guitar and I expected it to justify its price by being inspiring — which, for all of us who tried it, it somehow failed to be.
Classic S, as reviewed £1,315
Left-handers at no extra charge
For more information please contact 
MAKING TRACKS This month we have more on copyright, plus we look at a great new drum machine from Yamaha and an Alesis compressor to make your home demos sound ‘pro’…
PERFORMING RIGHTS The Dos and Don'ts of Copyright
In this second article,Anthony Braine of MCPS addresses the subjects of home taping, sampling, and music in audio visual situations…
HOME TAPING
I am only too aware that the issue of home taping is very much a hot potato; any number of recent magazine articles and letters have shown this to be true.
I have to admit that our company, among others, was heavily involved in lobbying parliament to have home taping covered by a blank tape levy in the 1988 Copyright Act.
Although no levy was eventually included, with legislation in place across most of Europe, it can only be a matter of time before something happens here.
Can I just say on this subject that while I understand the arguments on both sides of the fence, remember that for every successful composer there are hundreds who are not, and their cause is not helped by someone taping their album for a friend.
Away from home taping, I think it can safely be said that no-one's cause is helped by the bootlegging/piracy/counterfeiting trade that goes on.
Those of you who have paid out good money for these products will know how shoddy they usually are.
MCPS are involved in policing this area in conjunction with the BPI Anti-Piracy Unit (APU).
Both ourselves and the BPI welcome any information from the public about anyone involved in these criminal acts.
SAMPLING
As we all know, samplers are powerful tools offering many creative possibilities.
However, these machines have no scruples and accept sounds from any source.
Although the new copyright act does not mention samplers, it does in general restrict the unlicensed recording of any recognisable piece of copyright music and sound recording.
There is a widely held untruth that as long as you don't copy more than eight bars, you are in the clear.
Wrong!
The important word here is ‘recognisable’, and as I often tell people, Beethoven's 5th Symphony can be recognised within four notes.
Pop music history is littered with examples of out of court settlements as a result of unlicensed sampling.
I have also heard, anecdotally, that there is someone gainfully employed at Polygram Records to listen to new releases for the James Brown ‘scream’.
As a result, record labels and publishers are trying to get together some form of code of ethics on sampling.
In the meantime, though, if you are releasing a work which includes samples of other people's records, get them cleared through the labels and the music copyright owners.
Don't think that releasing it through your local record shop is the answer — just ask DNA what happened when they tried it with their version of Tom's Diner shortly before the A&M rep visited the shop.
They may have got a number one, but it cost them!
AUDIO VISUALS
If you're a composer, you may already have composed music for an AV production of some sort.
This may have been for a local production company producing a video for one of their corporate clients; at the other end of the scale, you may have written some pieces for the broadcasters (BBC, ITV, etc.).
But whatever purpose your music has been commissioned for, it is typical that the company who commissions the piece obtains the copyright to it as well.
Let's look at the situations where you may use music as a producer of an audio visual work: this could be a wedding video, tape/slide programme or an all-singing, all-dancing drama/documentary for a broadcaster.
As far as we are concerned, there are basically three types of music a producer can use in a production: commissioned, commercial or production/library music, commissioned music being an original piece written specifically for the producer by the composer.
COMMERCIAL MUSIC
Commercial music is anything you can buy in a record shop.
And as any good record sleeve will tell you, re-recording a record without a licence is illegal.
Even if you use it in the rough edit stage to see how the music fits the visuals, without the licences it is theoretically illegal.
So how do you get a licence for the musical works?
Well, MCPS have a team of Licence Negotiators whose job it is to negotiate between the producer and our member to arrive at an agreeable rate.
Because we know who to contact and where to contact them, we can often save the producer a lot of time, trouble and even money.
This is a service free to producers, but one we can only carry out on members' music.
Be warned though: commercial music can take a long time to clear and can also be expensive.
A producer recently told me of a quote he was given to use a piece of music from the '60s — for 30 seconds it came to £40,000!
This is an extreme example, and most tracks come in the hundreds rather than thousands.
Remember also that whenever you use a commercial record in a production you must get the permission of the appropriate record label, and this will incur a separate fee to them.
PRODUCTION AND LIBRARY MUSIC
There are companies producing a whole range of discs of both music and special effects for use in AV productions.
Company videos almost always feature production music, as do TV and radio commercials; add to these programme incidental music and also theme music.
The theme for the ITV series ‘Van Der Valk’, called Eye Level , which got to number one more than a few years ago, was from a production library disc.
So if you are a composer hoping to get into supplying music for the AV industry, this is an off-the-shelf service that you will do well to reckon with.
So how do you get to use it?
Well, the vast majority of production music libraries are MCPS members and we therefore license their works.
If you want to use production music, you have to sign a code of conduct.
This code allows you to actually record any production music before you come to us for a licence.
Once you have signed the code you can approach the libraries for a selection of their discs.
These discs cover a wide range of musical styles and are supplied to you free of charge; you only pay for them if you use them.
As for the charges, these are fixed depending on the end use of your production.
For example, 30 seconds of production music on a video for showing to a non fee-paying audience (ie. your average company video) would cost £15 — somewhat less than £40,000!
If your client baulks at having to pay to have music, remind him that composers have to earn a living too.
PRS estimate that 85% of their membership receive less than £1000 a year from them!
With average salaries currently at the £12–14,000 mark that's quite a shortfall to make up if you want to be a working composer.
MEMBERSHIP
If you have read your way all through this article, then I'll assume you are interested in membership.
Membership of MCPS is quite simple.
All you basically need is one composition fixed in any material form, be it record, tape, manuscript or any other, which can be commercially exploited by the public.
Obviously, you also have to be the copyright holder of that work.
Membership is free; we earn our living by deducting a small commission (between 5% and 15%) from any royalties we collect for you.
The idea is that if we don't collect any money for you, we don't get paid.
Once a member, we will license the recording of your works.
Once licensed, we will collect the royalties due and then pass them on to you.
However, membership of MCPS is anything but a get-rich quick scheme.
Royalties are out there, but they are not in the abundance that some might like you to believe.
And that's it!
As I said at the beginning, copyright is rather a dull subject.
But it's essential, and ignorance of it can be costly.
I hope these articles have shown why.
If you wish to take anything further, the following three contacts may be of use:
FEELING THE SQUEEZE Alesis 3630 Compressor/Limiter
The difference a good compressor can make to vocals, drums, bass, drum machines and even final mixes should never be underestimated.
One of the best and cheapest around is the Alesis 3630 which, at only 1U, offers features often not found on a single model.
A noise gate is built into each channel (both of which can be linked for stereo processing) and the 3630 offers hard or soft knee operation and peak or RMS sensing.
For those not familiar with these terms, with ‘hard knee’ selected, nothing happens until the signal passes the threshold, when a fixed amount of gain reduction is applied, regardless of how far the signal actually exceeds the threshold.
With ‘soft knee’ the compression ratio increases progressively, so that signals exceeding the threshold by a small amount are compressed less than those exceeding it by a larger margin.
This usually makes the compression less obvious for vocals and final mixes, for example.
Hard knee is great for bass guitar, when it's actually okay for the compression to be heard.
Basically, though, there are no real rules as to what to use when.
The difference between Peak and RMS switching is that, with Peak, the compressor monitors the true signal peaks which may be much higher than the average level; for drums, therefore, Peak makes most sense.
RMS on the other hand would work better for a mix or vocal sound, where the levels are more consistent.
CONSTRUCTION
The 3630 uses an external power supply and the overall appearance is that of a professional studio tool.
Connecting up is simple, with both inputs and outputs using unbalanced standard jacks with a slide switch selecting the correct operating level.
A further stereo jack provides a side chain insert point, allowing for items like equalisers to be connected to make the compressor sensitive to certain frequencies — for example when ‘de-essing’(removing unwanted sibilance from certain words).
External signals may also be fed into this input to ‘duck’ the signal being fed through the main input.
This is good for voice-overs or to push down the level of the rhythm guitar to allow for the lead guitar to come over.
The 3630 will ‘duck’ in either mono or stereo.
The front panel controls are identical for both channels, except for the centrally located stereo link switch (pressing this hands everything over to the channel A controls) and the power switch.
The compression ratio is from 1:1 to infinity:1 and Threshold, Ratio, Attack and Release controls are provided, along with an Output level control which makes up for any gain lost during processing.
To meter the proceedings a 12 section LED shows the degree of gain reduction, with a further 12 green/amber/red lights showing either the input or output level.
One of a group of four push buttons provides the switching for this, while the other three buttons switch the hard/soft knee, peak/RMS and bypass features.
The gate is controlled by two rotary pots: Threshold and Rate, the latter determining the gate's release time.
Green and red LEDs show when the gate is open and closed, and the gate can be used on its own by turning the compressor ratio control to 1:1.
IN USE
First impressions are of a compressor/limiter to suit everybody.
The straight ratio mode (hard knee combined with peak operation) is really quite flexible in adding punch to drums and bass, and the midway setting on all the controls is the most sensible place to start.
Using up to 50ms attack time, the impact of the bass drum is significantly enhanced.
Interestingly, this setting also works for a complete mix, affecting mainly the percussive sounds but leaving the overall feel pretty much unchanged.
In RMS/Soft Knee mode the change in sound is negligible, with no dulling of top end details.
In fact, quite large amounts of gain reduction can be applied before the signal starts to show signs of being squashed.
The gate works simply and positively, and providing the threshold is set as low as possible and the release rate as long as possible, no untoward clicks or glitches show up.
Overall sound quality is good, without the dulling and squashing side effects that some products can produce; pumping can be provoked in the hard ratio mode by extreme settings, but that's only to be expected.
CONCLUSION
The Alesis 3630 is easy to get to know and its quiet performance is better than its modest price would suggest.
It looks and performs like a pro unit, and even allowing for its reliance on unbalanced connections (avoid long cables!) it's an all-rounder which amply suits any home or semi-pro studio.
Alesis reverb units are par for the course in home studios; and their 3630 should enjoy the same popularity.
And a compressor really can make all the difference.
Eddie Allan 
RRP: £299.00
For further information contact 
BASS IN POCKET Yamaha RY10 Rhythm Programmer
You know how it is, you're in the middle of nowhere when you suddenly think of a drum pattern and bass line for your latest track.
Well, Yamaha's battery or mains powered RY10 can use its own internal speaker, or headphone output, to enable programming just about anywhere but in the shower.
It can be used in either mono or stereo; a guitar can be plugged in to access the onboard tuner and allow you to play along with a drum pattern; it's MIDI compatible, and with a Yamaha FC4 or FC5 footswitch you can start and stop the machine, tell it to drop in a fill pattern, or tell it to advance to the next pattern or song.
IN USE
The RY10 is easy to use.
Inside lurk 211 wide-ranging drum and percussion sounds, 30 sound effects and nine bass sounds.
Extra effects provide various industrial and ambient noises, along with off-the-wall sounds which work well in contemporary rhythmic contexts.
The bass section of the RY10 provides slapped, fingered and various synth bass sounds which appear flexible and sound convincing.
The sounds are played via the 12 fingertip-sized pads spread across the bottom quarter of the front panel.
These pads have been laid out like a C to C octave on a keyboard, with the lower row of pads as the white notes and the upper row the black ones.
They're not velocity sensitive (ie. they won't respond to how hard you hit them with changes in signal), and although you can record rhythms and bass lines of varying dynamics into an RY10 pattern from a MIDI source, the incoming velocity values aren't recorded by the drum machine and so the sounds play back at a fixed level.
You can group sounds 12 at a time into banks, or ‘drumkits’ and the RY10 comes with 15 preset banks.
You can also create another 15 of your own, using any of the sounds.
For each bank you actually get three: Drum, Percussion and Bass.
That's 24 drum and percussion sounds and one bass sound per pattern.
The Bass bank spreads the selected bass sound across all 12 pads, in semitones, and you can also assign three different octaves to the pads for bass playing.
The RY10 comes with 50 preset patterns and 50 preset fills, and allows you to program a further 50 of each yourself.
A fill can be dropped in at any time while the pattern is playing.
Unfortunately, each pattern can't be more than 16 steps long, a fact which leads to some limitations on time signatures and record resolutions (for instance, you can't record triplet 16ths in a 4/4 bar), although there is a ‘swing’ function which allows you to program a rather rigid swing feel on 16ths.
CONCLUSION
Although step time and real time are both available here, the RY10 isn't the most versatile of machines in the programming department: there's that limit of 16 steps per pattern and due to the velocity limitations you can't record dynamic performances.
But these are restrictions you have to live with on a budget machine.
There are drum machines which allow more programming scope and greater flexibility — for instance Yamaha's own RY30 and Roland's R70 — but they're more expensive and don't have the RY10's ‘use anywhere’ portability, nor its basic simplicity.
Sonically, this little machine packs a real punch, has a very commendable number and variety of sounds, and is a very modern-sounding drum box.
Simon Trask & Eddie Allan 
For further information contact 
MODS AND ROCKERS Lee Jackson of Ampeg I was recently invited to visit the home of Ampeg and Crate amplifiers, in St Louis, Missouri.
During my visit I spoke to tubeman extraordinaire Lee Jackson, about his history, and the future of Ampeg under his guidance…
Interview by Gibson Keddie.
Manufacturer visits are (a) brill (b) hell — delete where applicable.
However, it's always nice to be asked, and since so much of life consists of filling in that essentially dull period between waking up and going to sleep, it's quite exciting to be wooed in the form of a tempting jaunt-ette to parts foreign.
My invitation to St Louis Music was as part of their annual International Dealer ‘92 conference, an essentially informational programme for dealers (and a few journos) revolving around the main products marketed under the SLM banner.
In the UK these include Ampeg, Crate and Alvarez.
At a convivial get-together one evening the company was joined and mingled among by Mr Big's Billy Sheehan and Paul Gilbert, both confirmed Ampeg fans.
Billy and Paul had just disembarked from their tour bus after a 17-hour journey from the previous night's gig supporting Rush in Fort Worth, Texas, and were on their way to play in St Louis the next evening.
And I thought I was knackered!
The guy who arrived with the Mr Bigs, though, was none other than Lee Jackson, one of the amp world's own Mr Bigs.
Lee is currently casting his magic spell over Ampeg's tube guitar amp range, although we also suspected some Jackson-type involvement in Crate's GT-50 Stealth combo when we recently reviewed it.
We weren't far wrong there, as it happens…
Of course Lee Jackson doesn't require any introduction to those who know about hot-rodded valve amps.
Initially gaining a reputation for modding Marshalls and Fenders, Lee's valve mastery became a legend amid the burgeoning LA musicians’ scene at the turn of the '80s.
Having arrived at St Louis with Paul Gilbert and Billy Sheehan, I presumed the Jackson association was not a recent one…
‘Oh no, I've known Paul since 1984 when he first appeared on the LA scene in an excellent band called Black Sheep.
He showed up at my door with a Marshall 50 watt amp under each arm, saying, ‘He-e-lp!’
After Black Sheep, Paul went on to be involved with Racer X, and so on, but yeah, I've been taking care of his gear for many years now…’
You began your career by hot-rodding Marshall amps.
What did you think they lacked at the time?
‘Well, I began playing guitar professionally when I was about 15 or 16 years old, and was recording albums by the time I was 17.
It was always my dream to be in that situation.
Then I began modifying my own equipment because it just never sounded right to me; it didn't seem to have enough of anything I wanted.
But what was interesting was that after I began modding my gear, a lot of big-name guitar players — Brian May, for instance— if they saw our show, would come up afterwards and say, ‘What is that you're using?
It sounds terrific!’
‘In the early days, of course, I would keep it secret, because it was ‘my sound’ and so I wouldn't do anything for anyone else — it's that whole trip about being a guitar player!
And so I got more and more involved with the electronics thing, and stopped playing in groups completely in 1980, having started work in the design section of various electronics companies like Pignose, Oberheim and BC Rich, who I'd actually started with in ‘77, then Fender during ‘81 and ‘82.’
Was this on a freelance basis, or full time?
‘This was all as a full-time member of staff.
While I was at Fender I decided that I was going to start my own company, and in 1983 went ahead with Metaltronix.
It's always difficult to know how to start a completely new venture, but the way I did it was to take out an ad in Guitar Player magazine, offering to modify any piece of equipment — anything that anyone wanted done.
‘I had no idea what the response would be, but all of a sudden all this equipment started coming in from all over the world.
I had two people working for me then, and basically what we did for two years was to do this type of work on unbelievable amounts of equipment.
We had it organised so that when people contacted us in the first instance, we gave them a menu of mods that we would do, depending on what the customer wanted.
Interestingly enough, after I'd announced that I was going to do this, my very first clients were all the star names who had asked about the sound I got when I was playing!
Right off the bat, George Lynch, Warren DiMartini and Steve Vai all asked for my services.
‘It also made a lot of sense that part of the service Metaltronix offered was that I would go into the studio and tweak the gear while these guys were recording, and that's what happened.
George was recording ‘Under Lock And Key’, Steve was doing ‘Eat ‘Em And Smile’ in David Lee Roth's band (with Billy Sheehan ), Megadeth were doing ‘Armored Saint’, and the list went on from that.
Plus, of course, there were all the regular studio guys who wanted their gear done.
And when the public started seeing my name on the back of these albums, the subsequent demand was staggering!
Add to that the work from my advertisements and that all-important word-of-mouth reputation and you can see I was busy!’
Did all these guitarists want basically the same kind of modifications?
‘When George Lynch, Steve Vai and all the others came to see me, it was all within a six-month period.
And although the guys knew each other pretty well, they didn't know they were each coming to me, and they also didn't know they were asking for essentially the same mods!
And I did build their amps virtually identically, but because they use their own types of guitar and their own different effects, the amps all sounded different.
You know that you could line up six guitarists with the same gear and they'd all sound different…
‘And that actually created some problems for me, because guitarists would call me from the States or Britain and say, ‘I want the sound that George Lynch gets on ‘Lock And Key’.
I want everything he uses: amps, effects, the lot.’
So I'd say, ‘Okay, this is what he used; it'll cost this amount of dollars for the whole kit.’
I'd then build the whole system, test it, then ship it out to them, and what happens?
They'd call me to say, ‘This doesn't make me sound like George Lynch,’ and I'd say, ‘Well, do you play like George Lynch…?’
‘Even in Racer X, though they had identical equipment they still sounded totally different.
And they used to moan at each other: ‘Your system sounds different from my system…
I want that sound you've got there!’
‘But we always tried to be more sympathetic than most, and went out of our way to work with the people who wanted to use our stuff.
Guitarists write to me a lot for advice, I guess because there's not a lot of people out there who can really help.
Incidentally, although it's impractical for people to call Ampeg, I have a box number for anyone who might want to write to me for advice.
(Lee's box number is printed at the foot of this article ).
‘The situation with M'tronix went on till ‘87, but I realised around ‘86 that I wasn't getting to the public with my own stuff; all I was doing was perpetuating Fender and Marshall's reputations, because their amps formed the bulk of our work.
All the studio guys used hopped-up Fenders, and all the rock players used Marshalls, but ultimately there was nothing on the front of the amp that said my name.
If you went to see George Lynch or Steve Vai play, people would say, ‘Wow!
Those Marshalls sure sound great,’ but although I'd done the work on them it didn't really help me a lot.
‘Anyway, everyone kept asking why I didn't do my own brand amps and so about ‘86 I started.
I guess I was the first person to develop the idea of the modular system: ie. everything from the preamp to the power amp was modular.
We called it the ‘Perfect Connection’ system, and that really hit the mark too.
‘So there were effectively two Lee Jackson companies by this time.
One was the Perfect Connection side, all hi-tech rackmount gear for that type of player, and Metaltronix for the heads and cabs side — anything that was large!
And the players I'd been working with previously went along with me, from using my modified equipment to using my custom-built equipment.
‘The problems came when I started to find myself more and more entrenched in the business side of things, and unable to actually design stuff like before.
By this time the company was large, with many employees, and we were manufacturing a wide range of products and supplying a world market.
And it got to a point where I couldn't move.
24 hours wasn't a long enough day.
Then offers started to come in from other amp and electronics companies, asking me if I wanted to branch off and do some design work for them, which I could see the advantages of — plus I wanted to have a life!
‘St Louis Music was one of the companies I went to see at that time, and it felt like Ampeg, especially, was home for me.
They'd been designing tube amps for decades, and manufacturing them on site, whereas other companies were perhaps wanting to get into the tube amp market from scratch.
But I wanted to be involved with a company who was well into the swing of tube amps and take it on from there, and so I started with Ampeg in 1990.’
Is the new Crate valve range your doing?
The Stealth combo which we recently reviewed in Guitarist smacks of your handiwork…
‘Yeah,’ Lee laughs, ‘most people in the know seem to have sussed that one.
Actually, I had more than a hand in it; I designed all of Crate's new tube line, even though it doesn't have my name on it.
They'd didn't have anything in that area and wanted to get into it, hence the whole GT series: the GT-50 head, the GT-50 Stealth, the GT-100 head.
The only reason my name isn't on it is purely because of product definition within the company.
‘The thing I get asked most about the Stealth is why there's an ‘aux in’ socket on the front.
But one of my favourite things is to plug in a drum machine, a tape or CD when I'm practising, and get a groove going.
That's fun — nothing is more boring than playing to a metronome.
And it's wired right into the power amp, so you don't have to worry about tone circuits or reverbs — you've just got a good sound to play along with.
Plus you could plug a processor, like a Zoom, in there, and play along with a friend who's using that.
I just tried to make it really versatile.’
I suppose that's your playing experience showing there…
‘Right.
Back when I was with a certain company — I won't mention who — they had a situation that I could never have imagined: they didn't have a guitar player on staff!
They were all brilliant people, but nobody could sit down and play.
They would have to send their gear out to be reviewed, and wait for the reviews to come back to know whether or not the product was any good!’
Do you have a formal qualification in electronics, or was it an interest that got slightly out of hand?
‘No, it's official!
I went to school and learned my stuff.
However, no school will teach you about tubes, and that was the problem.
Formal electronics schooling teaches you about resistors, capacitors and transistors, obviously; I did hear about one school in Michigan that specialised in tubes, but that didn't happen for me.
In the later stages of Metaltronix I had a guy work for me who had a tube engineering degree, but that kind of knowledge still doesn't teach you about designing — the times I asked him to design certain circuits and he'd just stare at me!
‘At Ampeg now it's a lot freer for me.
All I have to worry about is designing, instead of production ETAs or trying to work out my taxes whilst being in a million meetings a day.
Now I just worry about whether we'll still have tubes or not.
This month the Yugoslavian situation has affected us quite badly; we can't get tubes from Yugoslavia at the moment, and that's not going to change in the near future.’
Did Ampeg give you a free hand when you joined them, in terms of what you wanted to do, or spend?
‘Absolutely!
When I came aboard they didn't have a lead amp line as such; they were famous for their bass amps, obviously, but their lead amp line was just there, no real profile, and the consumer didn't really realise that they had anything other than bass amps.
So when Ampeg came to me they said, ‘Okay, it's a free range.
Take any components you want, design it however you want, just make it a real amplifier landmark like the bass amp is.’
‘So I started by reviewing what they did have.
For instance, they had a 4x12 cabinet with spring handles and the big ‘A’ logo, just like the bass gear.
So I decided the first thing we had to do was define the difference between lead gear and bass gear, so we had to completely change the look.
I then took all the cabinets and gave them deep-dish handles, plus I used the old logo from the early '50s and expanded it length-wise on a computer, to see how it looked.
It seemed okay, so we went for it.
‘Obviously we have people who help, but you have to present the design ideas.
You have to speak to the cabinet makers and so on, so at least I don't have to get up there and saw the wood!
‘However, we had to sort out the speakers too…
We did a back to back test on about eight speakers and found that two were drastically different from the rest, and that was the normal 25-watt speaker and the Celestion Vintage 30.
But at least that was an easy decision, because the 25 watter handled just that, whereas the Celestion handles 70 watts with that classic tone, so the cabs could handle 280 watts.
‘When I was designing Metaltronix gear, I made everything bigger, for product visibility, but I would get letters telling me that the Marshall ‘standard’ head dimensions were what they wanted, so that's what I based these new amp heads on.
Also at Metaltronix, I was toying with the lighted logo idea, and that really seemed to suit the '50s logo image — the old ones used to light up when you hit the switch, too.
The same with the on/off key idea…
‘When I came to Ampeg I had a whole book full of design ideas — everything drawn out and ready to go — which I presented them with, and the amps that you're seeing right now are almost exactly what was in that book.
The high-grade components I wanted to use were all okayed, too, and so Ampeg now have very high-grade systems which have filtered into the stuff that the other guys are designing.
That has given the whole company a step up, including Crate, who, as we mentioned earlier, are now making use of the systems that I came here with.’
Following on from the Ampeg Lee Jackson stacks, and as we now know the Crate Stealth combo, is there an Ampeg Lee Jackson combo on the horizon?
‘I'm working on that right now!
It'll be finished in a couple of months and it'll be pretty tricky, too.
I've put so many features on this, but also put a lot of thought into the layout, so it's easy to see what switch does what.
It's a very practical unit, very user-friendly.
We're also doing a lot of work on the component costings, trying to get the best deals possible in order to make the new combo as competitive as possible.
It's going to be based on a three-channel system, each channel having a completely different voicing, so hopefully there'll be a sound there to suit everyone.
Some might even like all three!’
Again, your own taste and experience will have dictated what we see in the combo…
‘Well, I do like to think that I'm not only a guy who does electronics; I'm a player, too.
And I've played a lot of different equipment.
I still do a lot of recording, because I have a recording setup in my house and I'm in there most every night I can.
I'm working with ideas, still writing songs, so I have my personal input from that, plus I'm always interested in the input and suggestions I get from the letters I receive from all over the world.
‘And that's also why I try to make my equipment as versatile as possible in the way it functions.
I'm not designing an amp for one person now; I'm trying to make my amps as useful as possible to as many people as possible.
‘One time, back in the Metaltronix days, I got a call from a violinist who was in one of the Philharmonic orchestras, and she was using a Perfect Connection preamp for her electric violin.
That really made me smile when I thought of this rock'n'roll preamp being used in that situation.
But I guess it must have worked…
Anyone interested in contacting Lee Jackson, please don't write or call Ampeg direct.
Lee can be reached at 
ROUGH TRADE Your Rights Explained Chris Roan is Head of Technical Services for Cambridgeshire County Council's Trading Standards Department.
As a new Guitarist service, Chris will be answering queries and hopefully quelling crises arising from the purchase or supply of equipment…
Problems in what should otherwise be a straightforward and, let's face it, downright enjoyable process — ie. buying a new guitar/amp/effect etc. — are not uncommon.
Despite the availability of consumer magazines like Which ? people are still not always sure of their rights when it comes to the purchase, or indeed the sale, of goods.
So, from this month on, if purchasers or dealers have any queries regarding the legalities of any situation relating to a particular sale, they can write to Chris Roan here at Guitarist .
Chris will state the legal position, helping to sort out individual problems and informing readers of their rights before they get into that sticky, embarrassing, sometimes costly and almost always avoidable involvement with solicitors and the courts.
Hopefully, Chris's advice will help both sides bypass that unnecessarily drawn-out confrontation with a previously friendly dealer/customer.
Now, what we don't want are detailed particulars of the shop, the salesperson's home address and physical attributes.
We won't be printing names; this is not going to be a dealer persecution service, nor even a personal arbitration service such as Which ? magazine's ‘Personal Service’, because we simply cannot become involved on that level.
What we can do, though, is to illustrate, by example, who has the right in any given situation.
Hopefully, that way, problems can be resolved quickly, easily and even amicably.
Or better still, avoided.
So over to Chris…
OKAY THEN, ANSWER ME this: what's the difference between a guitar, a sandwich and a pet snake?
Well, I'll tell you later…
In the meantime, in this first article we will look at what your rights as a purchaser are, what you can expect from goods purchased, how to resolve some irritating problems with items already purchased, and some tips for avoiding the aggro in the first place.
First of all though: if it doesn't feel right, doesn't sound right, doesn't play right, then maybe it isn't right…for you.
But remember it was your decision to buy it in the first place, nobody else's, and if it's you that's wrong, or you that doesn't suit the item , then you probably don't have any entitlement to an exchange or a refund.
So…
Rule 1: FIND OUT THAT WHAT YOU'RE ORDERING IS WHAT YOU REALLY WANT BEFORE BUYING IT — NOT AFTERWARDS
The Sale of Goods Act 1979 only gives you an entitlement to money back if the goods are faulty, misdescribed or not fit for the purpose you requested them to perform.
Each is a breach of contract.
A change of mind doesn't fit any of the above criteria, although if the order or advert states that you can have your money back if you have a change of heart, then of course you can.
However, in this case you will most likely have to pay return postage.
Talking of Acts, there's another one worth noting.
The Consumer Credit Act 1974 can prove particularly useful when buying goods by mail order, because, with all due respect to the advertiser, you don't always know much about where your hard earned wages are going when ordering from a paper or magazine.
If your purchase is for more than £100 and you have paid by a credit agreement linked to the supplier — into which category credit card payments (Visa, Access etc.) fall — the finance company or bank behind the credit is, as well as the supplier, responsible for any breach of contract.
Breach of contract includes: non-supplying of goods (maybe due to supplier liquidation/bankruptcy or simply running off with your money); supplying faulty goods; or supplying goods different from those requested or ordered.
So…
Rule 2: FOR PURCHASES OVER £100 PAY BY CREDIT CARD FOR EXTRA PROTECTION FROM SECTION 75 OF THE CONSUMER CREDIT ACT 1974
Ever been told, ‘I will give you the name and address of the manufacturer and you can contact them’? when that long-awaited item finally arrives, and doesn't work?
The trouble is, you bought the goods from the supplier — the supplier took your money.
You therefore have a contract with the supplier,not the manufacturer.
So, politely and reasonably explain to the supplier that it is his/her responsibility, not the manufacturer's.
While you're at it, check that you have done everything correctly — blown fuses and loose connections are always good for an entry into the ‘my most embarrassing moment’ contest.
You are entitled to a money refund for breach of contract.
But usually you want the goods, so an exchange of goods is normally considered quite acceptable.
Begin keeping a record of all events at this point; hopefully it won't be needed, but if it is you've made a good start.
So…
Rule 3: THE PERSON/COMPANY YOU BOUGHT THE GOODS FROM IS RESPONSIBLE FOR DEFECTS OR MISDESCRIPTIONS.
Some goods also come with guarantees or warranties.
These can only give extra benefits to those legal rights just discussed and are not permitted to affect them.
It's true that guarantees are normally given by the manufacturer, but it's also worth noting that he doesn't have to give one.
The guarantee can be made for as long as the manufacturer chooses.
6 months, 12 months or even 5 years: the choice is his.
The existence or terms of a guarantee can be one reason for deciding that one supplier's product represents better value than another.
‘This guarantee does not affect your statutory rights’: we've all seen it written and, believe it or not, this statement must by law be on all guarantees, in order to explain and remind us that we also have rights against the supplier, as well as the issuer of the guarantee.
So do send off the guarantee registration card; the manufacturer usually asks for the return of the card as a term of his guarantee.
Why should you do this?
Well, if you have a problem after, say, the tenth month after purchase, you will be too late for any claim under the Sale Of Goods Act, but you will still have a claim under your guarantee — as long as it is for more than ten months, and providing you sent off the registration card!
So:
Rule 4.
SEND OFF THE GUARANTEE REGISTRATION CARD
Okay, I hope these hints will help you make the most out of your purchase.
But remember, to make this series work we need to hear of your problems.
Send them to me, Chris Roan, at Guitarist, Alexander House, Forehill, Ely, Cambs CB7 4AF .
Whenever articles are written or programmes broadcast about consumer rights, they always seem to put the trader into the ‘bad boy’ box.
Most traders, and I'm sure this applies to those advertising in Guitarist , want to provide a good service and usually do.
Of course, only the bad stories are told; obviously, the good ones don't make for good copy.
Equally, all customers are not squeaky clean, so there's quite often a story to be told from both sides.
So be honest and accurate.
I mean, if the cheque bounced three times before your wah-wah pedal went wrong, can you really blame the dealer for being a trifle tardy with the repair…?
So, maybe some of the suppliers and advertisers in the magazine have some thoughts, questions or comments of their own, to enable a fair and balanced picture to be portrayed.
I look forward to your contributions.
Oh…and the difference between a guitar, a sandwich and a pet snake?
None at all: they're all items covered by the Sale of Goods Act and everything above applies to them.
THE NATTY TREAD?
BOSS ME-6 & ME-10 BOSS's success in the effects pedal market was expanded some time ago with the introduction of the ME-5 and BE-5 multipedals.
And now BOSS's new generation of footpedal processors are here, ready to challenge the ever-increasing competition.
Eddie Allenchecks them out…
The ME-6 is the less expensive of these two pedalboards from BOSS.
But both products offer an alternative to the mess of cables and adaptors that go with compact effects, and an alternative to the racked processor format.
ME-6
With a plastic top affixed to a metal base the ME6 looks and feels like it will stand up to a fair bit of punishment.
It's light enough to carry around, tipping the scales at just under 5lbs, but with the help of large rubber pads on the base it should stay put on stage.
Power is supplied by a 12 volt AC mains adaptor and to prevent accidental unplugging from this type of lightweight plug BOSS have included a cable hook on the back panel to secure the cord.
Alongside the power socket are a pair of sockets from which to remotely switch the effect bypass and to take the ME-6 from ‘program’ into ‘manual’mode, where each of the 6 pedals activates individual effects, making the ME-6 work just like a series of ordinary pedals.
There's also a socket for connecting an expression pedal, to allow real time control over your volume.
Hooking up the Boss FV 300L pedal to this socket inserts into the effects chain after the compressor, distortion and noise suppressor but before the delay, chorus reverb and master; this allows the reverb and delay to decay naturally, instead of being suddenly cut off when the patch or volume level changes.
Of the main stereo outputs, the left doubles for mono.
These sockets are followed by a useful tuner output which feeds any external guitar tuner without interrupting the signal path.
The final socket on the rear panel is the guitar input itself.
Obviously the top panel is where all the action takes place.
As well as the six LED-lit patch selection pedals are the programming push switches and a graphic display showing the effects available and the parameters governing each effect.
There's also a value/bank numerical display showing either the levels (when in program mode) or which bank is being used (when the ME-6 is in play mode).
The way BOSS have set out this unit's top panel (and the ME-10's as you'll see later) is excellent; it's like having part of the manual right in front of you at all times.
For those petrified by the prospect of even the simplest programming, this basic approach is a real help.
IN USE
Connecting the ME-6 up to an amp, power amp or mixer is as easy as connecting any effect pedal, and once hooked up the ME-6 can store 25 different effect combinations in five memory banks.
Each effect patch is identified by a combination of bank number and patch LED; the former appears in the ‘value/bank’ readout while the patch is indicated by the relevant pedal.
BOSS have set up the ME-6 to work in two different ways: it can be left to recall programmed patches or, by using the manual programming button, be set to operate like a series of pedals with each footswitch activating an effect in real time.
As previously mentioned, the top panel display has a series of boxes with a description of the effect and a status LED showing if the effect is on or off.
This works in both manual and program modes, although in manual mode the bank select footswitch becomes the reverb on/off switch.
Back in program mode, operating the ME-6 begins by stepping on the bank switch to select a bank; this causes the value/bank LED to flash.
You then press the relevant patch pedal to set the bank number and repress the relevant patch pedal to activate the chosen sound.
In general use the ME-6 is very user-friendly, and this simplicity carries over into its programming.
Modifying one of the factory patches is very simple to do, even though the parameters for adjustment are limited.
This isn't a problem with effects like delay, chorus and reverb, where there is enough variation for a good workable effect to be achieved, but while there are two types of overdrive/distortion available I think these could be more flexible.
Using the ME-6 through a valve combo I found myself trying to squeeze more tone out of all the distortion settings, something I don't ever remember trying to do with BOSS's DS1 compact distortion pedal which, for some reason, I assumed the overdrive on the ME-6 would emulate.
There's a lot of effect available, but although the ME-6 has its own programmable EQ I had to employ the combo's tone controls to get anywhere near the results I wanted.
The same was true when I tried recording with the ME-6 through a Fostex desk onto cassette.
The basic overdrive was there, but unless shielded in a mix the distortion sounds needed some tweaking to get close to what I'd call a ‘real’ distorted guitar sound.
The Digital effects on the other hand behaved very well, and while limited in their scope I quickly achieved some very good results.
One thing I wasn't keen on was that the noise suppressor stayed on all the time.
Of course noise suppressors are a great idea, but clean sounds and those with light or medium distortion don't usually need suppression, so this can get in the way of the signal.
The obvious thing to consider before buying a unit such as this is how much the equivalent BOSS pedals would cost.
However, on top of its advantages in terms of programming and portability, the ME-6 costs under £250, so I think it would come out easily on top.
I have to say I don't think much of the distortion sounds here.
But I've said the same before, only to hear someone use the same gadget and get a monster sound.
I should also say that these are already selling like the proverbial hot cakes, so maybe I should move swiftly on to the ME-10…
ME-10
The ME-10 could safely be regarded as the start of the BOSS professional processor range.
Construction is very robust, with a full metal jacket and six heavy duty switches (four of which are for patch changes and the other two for swapping between banks).
The patch change switches all have status LEDs sunk into the top of the switch housing.
Like the ME-6, the top of the ME-10 offers all the programming information at a glance; plus, all the effects and their relevant parameters can be switched in and out just by pressing the corresponding label printed onto the membrane which covers the surface of the top.
It has to be said that, with this membrane idea, BOSS have come up with a brilliant way of programming the ME-10.
As each label is pressed a status LED within the label comes on; when another label is pressed the previous switch is cancelled and the new LED illuminates.
This method of programming applies to nearly all the functions, like effects switching, storing, manual or program mode (like that on the ME-6), and setting the onboard tuner.
The only control that isn't a membrane switch is the parameter change dial, which BOSS refer to as the ‘Shuttle Dial’.
By moving this semi-rotary control, parameters and levels can be increased or decreased.
The dial is sprung, rather like the pitch wheel on a keyboard, so it always returns to its ‘centre off’ position.
The ME-10 is, as you'd expect, MIDI compatible with other processors, controllers and pedal boards, and the rear panel contains both MIDI in and out sockets.
It also houses three footswitch sockets for ‘effect bypass’, manual mode ‘remote’ and tuner on/off.
When the onboard tuner is activated in this way the guitar signal is instantly muted, avoiding the need for the player to bend down to the tuner switch on the unit, or re-patch the guitar lead.
Two of BOSS's own expression pedals can be connected via a pair of sockets, with further sockets for headphones and the ME-10's external effects loop.
The remaining sockets are the stereo outputs (left for mono) and a single instrument input.
The mains switch is also found on this panel, along with the ME-10's hardwired mains lead.
IN USE
As with the ME-6, simplicity is the name of the game here.
Connecting up and getting started is easy, although this time there are 128 patches to try out before deciding which ones to modify.
The 128 are divided into four ‘groups’ of 32 patches, and each group is further divided into eight banks of four patches — which explains why the ME-10 only needs four patch change and two bank change pedals.
Each patch can contain up to ten effects, plus whatever's in the external effects loop.
Like the ME-6 the parameters can be selected and changed in seconds, and BOSS are to be congratulated on this.
Of course, to keep the programming simple, a factor which many will see as a major advantage, there are limitations as to exactly how much any one effect can be adjusted.
But for the majority of us there's enough to get the best out of most effects in most playing situations.
Soundwise the ME-10 kicks out some really usable sounds, and through a combo or power amp all the effects and processes (like compressor, distortion, noise suppressor, EQ, phaser, flanger, pitch shifter, delay, stereo chorus and reverb) can be adjusted to sound either fat and warm, thin and cutting, and to cover most points in between.
The pitch shifter is particularly impressive, offering a full octave above or below in semitone steps.
The reverb and delays are worth a mention too.
The chorus sound is sweet and clean and even the analogue distortion and overdrive, while sounding very much on the processed side, are very responsive to programming.
DI'd through a desk and recorded onto both DAT and cassette utilising the onboard amp simulator, the distortion couldn't be described as amazing, but I presume this must be what people expect to hear these days, although to me it doesn't sound too close to what you'd get from a guitar amp.
The same can be said for the ME-10's overdrive; again this sound is a matter of taste, although not really mine.
I could use it, of course, and it has to be said that there are a lot of solos being played out there with exactly the kind of sounds the ME-10 produces.
CONCLUSION
For everyday guitar sounds like chorus, reverb and delay I found there was little to choose between the ME-6 and ME-10, until it came to modifying them.
It was then that the ME-10 left the other unit standing.
It also offers superior distortion sounds, which leads me to my conclusion that if it's just a simple, workable sound processor you're looking for, with the least financial outlay, then the ME-6 will do the job.
If, however, you're after more sophistication in both sound and facilities, and if you occasionally like to wander on the wild side, then the ME-10 is the way to go.
Of course, these products have more to compete with now that there are units like DigiTech's new RP-1 about, but where the ME-10 scores highest is its ease of programming.
Both of these devices represent typical BOSS value for money.
I can see them appealing to players who want to change from a rack unit crammed with sounds that are hardly (if ever) used, back to something which is as simple as, or even simpler than a row of pedals.
And taking into account the prices of both the ME-6 and ME-10 they really are the best of both worlds.
For more information please contact 
COMPETITION Radio Ga Ga: WIN a Trantec S1000 Here's your chance to roam free with this superb Trantec S1000 guitar radio system.
Those generous people at Trantec have told us we can give away the very S1000 we reviewed a couple of months back, and we don't need telling twice…
Trantec's compact S1000 system comes complete with lightweight transmitter, receiver and mains adaptor — in fact, everything you need to show your audience just how stage diving should be done!
It's totally street legal, sounds as good as any cable and it could be yours for the price of a phone call.
All you have to do to win this super slinky system is pick up the phone and call the Guitarist Competition Hotline on 0891 100733.
Then leave your answers to the four easy, radio related questions, plus your name, address and daytime telephone number.
The first correct entry to be drawn at random will be notified by phone and the Guitarist carrier pigeon will do the rest.
Question 1:What to the initials VHF stand for?
Question 2:Complete the title of Charlie Dore's 1979 single Pilot Of The…
Question 3:Who had a Number 1 hit with Video Killed The Radio Star ?
Question 4:What word connects Oxford's most famous fictitious Police Inspector and Wireless Telegraphy?
Now, if you think you've got the answers, get dialling.
The Trantec S1000 is packed and waiting to go.
Good Luck.
the small print
The Editor's decision is final and no correspondence can be entered into.
All phone calls will be charged at 36p per minute (cheap rate) and 48p (at all other times).
This competition closes on 30th September 1992.
Heavy Leather A VISIT TO KLONDYKE TRADING We've looked at one-man strap making operations in the UK before, but the question remains, who's taking care of the big orders…?
By Eddie Allen.
The answer to that lies on the south coast of England, in Poole, Dorset to be precise.
Klondyke Trading Co are responsible for providing a variety of straps for both the home market and the world, but as I found out on a recent visit there's more to making one guitar strap than meets the eye, let alone producing thousands.
I'll miss out the obvious, ‘first, take your cow’ as that's about the only thing Klondyke don't get involved in.
Instead, for their range of leather straps, they buy in ready-cut hides, or ‘butts’, from the tannery.
These butts are pre-dyed, but I was curious as to why they only had colour on one side.
The reason, of course, is so that when the strap is being used the dye won't bleed onto the player's clothes — which is usually the case with straps dyed on both sides.
Obvious isn't it?
When the hides arrive at the Klondyke factory they're actually half butts, for no other reason than because they take up less room; a half butt is the side of the animal, not the shoulder or the rump, but the flank, which gives a more consistent quality of leather.
Depending on the shape and condition of the butt, Klondyke would expect to extract around seven 2″ straps from the average hide, allowing for nicks or marks from where an animal might have grazed or cut itself, when a scar will show on the leather.
While the tannery try to sort out the best hides before they're sent, these flaws cannot be helped, so Klondyke cut round them, since otherwise the scar might eventually open up and spoil or even split the strap.
The next task is to cut the hide to a more manageable size, and I assumed that the straps would be cut out at this stage, so looked around for someone sitting down with a steel rule and a knife.
Of course I hadn't bargained on technology, because once the hide is cut to size and checked for blemishes it's actually put on a cutting form and sent through a roller press.
The cutting form is a board with steel blades set into it in the desired shape.
These blades are horribly sharp, so sharp in fact that one form has not needed sharpening in eight years and has cut around 200,000 straps!
Keeping my hands firmly in my pockets I watched as the leather was laid on the blades and the form sent through the rollers.
When it emerged from the other side, there were the straps.
At this point the leather is again checked for scars and the operator for fingers.
A small amount of leather is left after cutting, and to my surprise this was also checked and the offcuts matched to the straps to produce the adjusting piece for two-piece leather straps, or the strap button fobs and end pieces on Klondyke's range of webbing and stretch straps.
The second piece for a two-piece leather strap is cut on a clicker press.
This is a hand press which works rather like a pastry cutter, with the cutting form on top.
When the second part of the strap is cut it's matched up with the main piece for colour.
With both sections of the strap cut and matched they can be left ‘au naturel’, decorated with a logo, studs, bullets, bolts, or they can even be printed with pictures.
One of the processes used to print on the straps is called ‘hot foil’ printing.
If you've ever bought a leather product with gold writing on it saying ‘real leather’ or ‘a present from Bognor’, and the writing has come off on your fingers it's been done by ‘cold foil’printing.
Cold foil printing pushes the gold into the leather in a simple embossing process.
The hardier hot foil printing burns the foil onto the leather so that it doesn't rub off.
I mustered the courage for a go at hot foil printing, and while it looked easy when done by a pro, I have a feeling Klondyke won't be offering me a job on the strength of my efforts.
The company also produce webbing and stretch neoprene straps.
The webbing is cut and the ends sealed to prevent fraying, and then the leather end pieces are glued and stitched to the webbing using either an automatic stitching machine or electric sewing machine.
The neoprene used for the stretch straps arrives in rolls and is cut into lengths, to be finished as per the webbing straps.
Quality control is, of course, the major concern, and Klondyke's approach is interesting, with everybody keeping a friendly eye on everyone else's work, so that any faults can be spotted early on and eradicated.
Klondyke reckon that if a customer anywhere in the world orders 100 straps they'll get 100 of the best quality, not 80 good ones and 20 with scars or other quality problems.
And they're sure it's this attitude that has made them so successful.
That's presumably why people like Rotosound, Picato and Dean Markley use them.
It's also good to see a British company doing well abroad, with exports as far afield as Europe, USA, Australia, Japan, Taiwan and even New Zealand.
The Kiwis know that British is best and have said Klondyke's quality is better than they can obtain in the far East.
So, next time you buy a guitar strap with ‘Klondyke’ on it, you'll know what's gone into making it the best, not just in the UK but all over the world.
For more information on Klondyke Straps contact their sole UK distributor Picato Ltd on  
Cutting to size
Roller and Clicker presses
Decorating with studs
Hot foil printing
Assembling stretch straps before stitching
A stitch in time
FRET BUZZ
CURVE Debbie and Alex: the unsung heroes of the nightmare noise machine.
Wethinks they goth protest too much!
Clad in nothing but black and sipping on her jar of Guinness, Debbie Smith, pint-sized guitarist with indie sensations Curve, is attempting to convince me she was never a goth.
Sadly she's failing miserably!
‘Even if you do find a photo,’ she insists, ‘it's not me!’
Sitting in Camden's World's End pub, Debbie and fellow Curve axe-wielder, Alex Mitchell are still recovering from their appearance at this year's Glastonbury festival.
An experience both would rather forget.
Quickly!
‘A disaster,’ is all Alex has to say about the matter.
We're discussing the touchy subject of musical pasts and Curve, more so than most, are a band with a history.
That most of it is embarrassing simply makes for better conversation.
Toni Halliday, the group's charismatic vocalist, absent today, is probably still recovering from the nightmare that was her first band, State Of Play.
Having run up a debt of over £100,000, they're unlikely to be forgotten by Virgin Records in a hurry.
Curve founding member Dean Garcia spent former days playing bass guitar on early Eurythmics albums and Alex, despite his tender years, admits to being ‘a sad old hippie at heart.’
As for Debbie…
Well, Debbie has just about given in.
‘Well I was never a serious goth,’ she claims.
‘I wasn't, honestly.
I had the hair up a bit and I liked Siouxsie & The Banshees — does that make me a goth?’
Gothic accusations aside, Curve are in the business of purveying some of the most exciting pop music to emerge in years.
Deep, dark and disturbing, the group's debut ‘Doppelgänger’ LP is irrefutably guitar-driven…
‘I think that's what makes Curve stand out from the rest of the pack,’ asserts Alex, ‘because all these other indie bands don't seem to be interested in guitar music.
They just make indie music because they're middle class teenagers who want to get rid of a bit of angst and I don't think that is what Curve are about.
We're more into pumping tunes that express some sort of emotion and intensity.
Curve haven't got time for apathy — there's got to be some attitude to your music.’
With little time for the dreamy guitar soundscapes of ‘the competition’, Alex is pessimistic about the current state of independence.
‘I don't think indie guitar music is at the musical forefront any more.
There's hardly anyone doing anything new and that's because the people who are making this music haven't got any emotion and drive to do anything.
These people are just content to be unhappy.
They want to be unhappy!
I mean, music's a great channel for releasing your emotions but if you're really that unhappy why don't you just do something about your life?
I much prefer to hear someone angry, almost sledgehammering you over the head with their guitar.
Give me that any day over bedroom music.’
Taking their inspiration from the likes of Can, Fred ‘Sonic’ Smith of proto-punk rockers MC5 and Dinosaur Jr's J Mascis, it was never really likely the pair would end up playing 18 minute ambient bliss-out Pink Floyd covers.
‘The first thing I wanted to do when I learned to play the guitar was to play just like the Banshees’ guitarists,’recalls Debbie, having moved on to her second pint of Ireland's finest.
‘On my fourteenth birthday I bought a really cheap guitar and chord book from Argos and sat in my room for about 6 months and learn't to play the entire Siouxsie & The Banshees first album.’
Now 22, Debbie's guitar collection has progressed on from that all-important first guitar.
She now has in her possession a Vox Standard 25, a Yamaha SG3000, two acoustics and two Fender Jaguars, a 1963 and a 1968 model.
‘I prefer to play the 1963 model because it just looks and plays better,’ she says.
‘I don't know what it is about the ‘68 but as a Fender Jag it's got a real thin sound.
But this just sounds too thin — as if it's going to cut your brain in half.
It's really incredible!
If you want a cheese wire guitar then this is it!’
Both live and in the studio, Alex will normally rely on his 1961 Fender Jazzmaster, ‘which has got a really nice neck on it.
The frets are quite thin as well and it doesn't seem to go out of tune that much.
For amplification I've got a Marshall 50 from 1979 which is nice but I was hoping to update it soon.
We did a John Peel radio session a while ago and me and Debbie both used these really early seventies Thin Lizzy amps and they were just the best.
They were Thin Lizzy's actual guitar amps from a hire firm, and they just sounded so good because they were just so beaten up you could just feel them when you played.’
So what do Curve look for in a new guitar?
‘I like a nice thin trebly sound,’ Debbie reveals.
‘The action can't be too high either.
I really like a very low action and it's just got to have a whammy bar.
I just love whammy bars at the moment!’
‘I think the problem with new guitars is that they haven't lived ,’ ponders Alex suddenly.
‘New guitars just haven't got any soul in them.
At least if you buy an old guitar there's bound to be something you just hate about it or something that just jumps out at you and says, ‘You can't do this!’
Then you've got something to work on.
With a new guitar it's like, ‘Well, it's a new guitar and it works.’
But it doesn't push you.’
Having openly expressed his dissatisfaction for the present lacklustre state of guitar music, doesn't Alex seem suprised that young people still look towards the guitar for their musical kicks?
Surely in 1992, wouldn't a sampler be a wiser purchase?
‘The guitar's got a personality and that's the whole reason why people still play them.
There's an amazing amount of feel that you can get out of a guitar that you could never get out of any other instrument.
The guitar is still the one that could never be replaced by anything digital because you would never be able to get the same sound and feel on a computer.
I've got nothing against keyboards, in fact I love keyboard music, but if you want to play guitar you should buy a guitar that was made to be played like a guitar.
It's the same with putting your guitar through loads and loads of effects.
If you use too many, what you're playing no longer sounds like a guitar, and if you don't want it to sound like a guitar why are you playing it?’
In complete contrast, Debbie's unique brew of distorted guitar noise, which she likes to refer to as ‘pure filth’, comes as the result of crashing everything through as many effects as possible.
‘I love ‘em,’ she says of her trusty collection of pedals.
‘The more processed it is, the better it sounds to me!
I usually go through a chorus, a BOSS analogue delay, a BOSS flanger, a Cry Baby wah and a compressor which I use to control the feedback from the wah.
I tend to play with the wah on the treble setting all the time which gives you an incredibly trebly sound and it's really hard to make that sound good because it distorts and feeds back all the time.
And it's not even a nice feedback, either; it's really screechy.’
Despite the layers of guitar feedback and pure white noise that swathe the haunting sound of Curve, both guitarists believe what they're making is good pop music.
Pop music that should be heard on Top Of The Pops.
‘It is good pop music,’ asserts Alex.
‘The great thing about pop music in the past is that it used to be about pushing everything.
It's all about getting a really good structured song together but still putting something in there to get you a hook, whether it be a strange noise or whatever.
It just makes it more interesting than a terrible pop song with a straight sequenced beat like a Kylie Minogue record.
That is not interesting music.
Curve is interesting music to listen to even if you don't really like it.
There is still something there to listen out for.’
PR 
JENNIFER BATTEN Michael Jackson's lead guitarist goes apian on her new solo album…
‘The weather is beautiful, the sky is blue and I can't wait to get out of town!’
Jennifer Batten told me when I made the typically British talk-about-the-weather opening gambit to our transatlantic ‘phone conversation.
A week away from leaving for the European leg of the current Michael Jackson tour, she was enjoying a two day break in what sounded like a hectic rehearsal schedule.
‘It's been gruelling.’
she said ‘We've been going for two months with very long hours.’
I wondered if, in view of the physical demands being placed on her by a tour on such a large scale, it was necessary to ‘work out’.
‘As a player, it's certainly more gruelling doing my own material than Michael's, because his is mainly rhythm parts with a few solos.
I always do warm-ups for at least an hour, doing scales and arpeggios — boring stuff like that.
I've also got a lot of equipment I'm taking out on the road to be able to write and play, improvise to tapes and so on.
‘As far as actually ‘working out’ is concerned, I've been doing a lot this year, but not since rehearsals began because it's just been so crazed.
I think every hotel we're at has a gym and so I'm planning to make use of that…before I fall apart!’
The last Jackson tour saw Jennifer doing a considerable amount of running around the stage…
‘Thank God they don't ask me to dance!
They've got proper dancers for that…but he makes me run.’
This is, of course, the second time she has accompanied Michael Jackson on the road.
When she spoke to Guitarist back in 1988, Jennifer described how landing the job as guitar player on one of the largest tours ever was a dream come true; how did it feel to be asked back this time?
‘Actually, it was a terribly hard decision to make, because my album just came out two months ago here and the only negative thing is that I can't be here to promote it.
But I'm looking forward to getting to Europe to promote it there.
‘It's a very different feeling from last time.
The first time I was just a mere kid!
I was living on adrenaline for the first couple of weeks.
This time it's a whole different trip; I'm a different person, I would say.
Also, having a record out, I have a whole different outlook and focus.’
The record Jennifer refers to is called ‘Above, Below And Beyond’ and is due for British release soon.
It's been a long time in the pipeline…
‘It's mostly instrumental rock — about 99,000 tracks of guitar!
I do things like Flight Of The Bumblebee and John Coltrane's Giant Steps .
I have a vocalist called Kali who sings the Aretha Franklin track Respect .
The record's gone through a lot of transformations and taken a hellaciously long time to get done.’
I had heard that in making a couple of videos to promote the album, Jennifer had suffered for her art…
‘I just did a couple of wild things for the videos: I covered myself with a hundred thousand bees for the Flight Of The Bumblebee and I also walked on hot coals!’
Fearful of upsetting those of a squeamish nature, I decided that an abrupt change of subject was in order and asked Jennifer about the guitars she was bringing with her to Europe: is she still an Ibanez 540S fan?
‘Yeah, I've got some really great artwork on ‘em.
The artist who did my album cover used an airbrush and I got him to do three guitars for me.
One of them has King Tut on it, Isis on another and bees all over one…’
Bees again…
Er, what about pickups, Jennifer?
‘I'm kinda partial to Seymour Duncan pickups.
I've got Hot Rails in all the bridges of all my guitars and either Hot Stacks or Fender Lace Sensors in the other positions.’
What about amplification?
‘I'm using Boogies.
I've just got hold of the Boogie TriAxis and I love it!
The only other thing I'm using right now is a Korg A2; it's got all the effects I need in it.
The last tour, I had so much stuff and I was always having trouble with it breaking down and having to troubleshoot.
I just want to go with the least amount of gear I can get away with, be able to troubleshoot it myself and keep it simple.
I'm also using Crown power amps and a MIDI controller called a Ground Control.’
Hoping we could keep off the subject of bees, I asked if any special gear was used in the production of her album.
‘I used mainly my green Ibanez that I had on the last tour, but for a Be-Bop solo on Giant Steps I used an Ibanez George Benson.
For one thing, I doubled one of the songs using a Gibson Chet Atkins model.
I used a lot of different sounds for the album.
I mainly used the Boogie amplifier but I used a bunch of stuff as well, like really terrible sounding digital distortion just to get different harmonics for rhythm tracks.
I even used a Rockman for some of it, and also a Digitech GSP 21.
I used the Digitech Whammy Pedal and just went crazy with it: it sounds just like a cat fight outside your bedroom window at three in the morning!’
So, looking beyond the current tour, what has Jennifer planned?
‘Well, hopefully my future will be as a band unit with this singer, Kali.
I hope to get a tour off ‘Above, Below And Beyond’.
My plans are to travel the entire world with my record.
It's just a matter of who's going to pay for it!’
Ah, details, details…
LEE ROCKER Double bass badinage with The Stray Cats' runaway boy…
One thing about those rockabilly boys — if you knock 'em down, they just get up again, and the Stray Cats probably know a bit more about the snakes and ladders of the music biz than most…
The early part of the band's career witnessed incredible international success, making them undoubtedly the best known exponents of rockabilly in the world — no mean feat for three guys just out of their teens.
Having left their native New York at the beginning of the eighties to christen their career in Britain, the Strays rose to fame alongside (or supporting) The Clash, The Pretenders and Madness.
1981 saw the release of their eponymous debut album, followed by ‘82's ‘Gonna Ball’.
End to end worldwide tours with some of the music industry's biggest names included an opening slot with The Stones in North America.
Then their third album, ‘Built For Speed’ hit top gear, and produced some of their best singles:Runaway Boys, Stray Cat Strut and Rock This Town .
The musicianship of the trio was always obscured by the immediate, easy catchiness of the songs; mainman Setzer had absorbed the essence of the rockabilly guitar style and fused it with pop and jazz colour.
His ability was complemented perfectly by bassist Lee Rocker, a dedicated ‘stand-up bass’ disciple and exponent of the big upright's unique slap sound.
The athletic Slim Jim Phantom opted for the essentially rockabilly/skiffle method of playing drums standing up.
In 1985, the Stray Cats split, unable to continue as a band, bludgeoned by business pressures and in-fighting.
‘We were really young, and were almost burnt out at 21 years old,’ explained Setzer.
Thankfully, 1992 has brought forth a rejuvenated Stray Cats, and a new LP which delves still further into their rockabilly roots.
‘Choo Choo Hot Fish’ also sees them reunited with longtime friend and producer, Dave Edmunds.
It's a combination of originals, standards (eg. ‘Mystery Train') and the classic 1959 instrumental, Santo and Johnny's enchanting ‘Sleepwalk’.
‘Dave Edmunds had a lot to do with the sound of the album coming over as both traditional and modern at the same time,’ says Lee Rocker.
‘He's been involved with us since producing our first album in 1980.
He plays great guitar which is inspirational, plus no-one seems to be able to get the sound of the upright bass down quite like he does…’
Lee has always had one of rockabilly's most consistent upright sounds.
Does it take a lot of effort to achieve?
‘It used to, but working with Dave over that period of time means we've mostly solved the problems.
I use an EMG active pickup, and a contact mic embedded underneath the fretboard to get the slap sound.
That's for live; in the studio we'll just use a good microphone in front of the f-hole!
But it's definitely a unique sound, with that percussive effect that can't be recreated on an electric bass — and I know that because I've been getting sampled a lot recently…
I think Jeff Beck used samples of my sound on his ‘Workshop’ album, plus Dave himself has been using samples of my sound — if he puts me out of work, he's in trouble…
Amplification wise, I use two Ampeg SVTs that were made for me in 1987 as part of the company's ‘Artist’ series, and there were only five hundred of those made.
Being tube amps they really complement my sound.
For me it's the bass amp.’
It seems that the material for ‘Choo Choo Hot Fish’ was far from thrown together.
‘The last album, ‘Blast Off’, was in 1988.
Since that, we'd been touring constantly and written about twenty-five songs.
But we wanted this album to be right, so we took our time, organised it all carefully, waited until Dave was available, and together we put a lot of thought and effort into it…’
So what about the King tribute,Elvis On Velvet ?
‘That song is about remembering Elvis as a rockabilly cat, the guy who changed music and popularised rock and roll, rather than the man who sang ‘Clambake’…’
Was it always rockabilly with the band members, even in younger days?
‘Pretty much…
I certainly never felt comfortable with stuff like Emerson, Lake and Palmer, or any Gothic rock which was going about when we were kids.
I originally studied classical cello from age seven until I was fourteen, then moved to the upright bass.
I really got into rockabilly through liking The Stones, and through them Chuck Berry, also The Beatles.
Then I read who'd done ‘Matchbox’ before and saw the name ‘C. Perkins’.
Who is this guy?
So I'd check him out, and that's how it went with him and all the others.
It seems that a lot of the new guitar players in bands don't seem to go back anymore to check who their idols were influenced by — like, they'll go as far back as Jimmy Page then stop, without finding out about his influences…
Enquiring about Lee's mastery of the percussive slap seems to bring back some painful memories…
‘Yeah,’ Lee winces.
‘When we started out, I must've practised twelve hours a day for three months, spending hours working on an open string to get those eighth notes, and the triplets shuffle effect — talk about your hands being a bloody mess.
I still have to wear gaffer tape on my hands when we're on tour because getting the bass to work with magnetic pickups means using steel strings.
I have three upright basses, and I take two on the road with me, plus an old ‘64 Precision which I use on a couple of numbers.’
Does Lee have his uprights made for him?
‘Actually, no; we just keep an eye out in shops or ads for uprights.
Often we don't even know the brand name of the bass we're using.
When we do find one, it takes me and my tech about a month to get it into shape for going out with the band.’
One of the songs on ‘Choo Choo Hot Fish’ was written by Randy Bachman.
How did he and the Stray Cats meet up?
‘Randy's a major collector of guitars; he and Brian dedicate most of their spare time to tracking down old Gretsches all over the country.
Each knew that the other collected guitars before they'd met; Randy called Brian up one day and said, ‘There's an old Gretsch White Falcon in this music store in Kentucky.
You'd better get yourself on a plane tomorrow morning and get it…!’
GK 
TIM RENWICK The chat show sideman and musical chameleon tells how a gondoliers' strike nearly sunk Pink Floyd…
Anyone wanting to make a successful career as a professional musician must have an eternal sense of optimism tinged with gilt-edged charm and a business sense which would put Richard Branson in the shade.
But how successful is ‘successful’?
Well, how about this for a scenario: twenty years of solid touring and recording for major names; a niche in the elite ‘who's who’ of session guitarists on both sides of the Atlantic; featured on television three times a week backing major artists live on a very hip chat show; going straight into production for another live prime-time show on Saturday nights; and work with Tom Jones, Al Jarreau, Stevie Wonder, Mica Paris, Cindi Lauper, Bob Geldof and Curtis Stigers, to name but a few.
This is all in the working week for Tim Renwick, who spared me some time just before he started work on ‘Tom Jones — The Right Time’…
I SEE A COMPARISON BETWEEN yourselves and ‘The Most Dangerous Band In The World’ on the Letterman Show in America, in that you have to be able to back anyone who comes on the show.
What are the rehearsals like?
Is it live as we see it?
‘Absolutely, warts and all; that's what makes it good fun.
We generally rehearse either the day before or the same day, so it's all very fresh.’
How much notice do you get as to who you're going to back?
‘Some people are booked quite a way in advance and others we don't get a lot of notice of at all…
It keeps you on your toes!’
I first knew you when you were with Quiver (formerly The Sutherland Brothers and Quiver ).
What did you do after that?
‘I freelanced for a while and ended up doing a lot of work for the Bee Gees in Florida, for Andy Gibb in particular.
I played on four albums for Barry Gibb; I worked for Dionne Warwick on the ‘Heartbreaker’ and some film music for ‘Staying Alive’.
Then I suddenly found I had quite a lot of projects going on, working for Kenny Rogers and Jimmy Ruffin…
‘In more recent years, doing the Pink Floyd tour was a great break.
I really enjoy touring, whereas a lot of musicians aren't interested; they'd rather concentrate on their session work.’
With these recording projects, do you miss the chemical interaction of playing with a bunch of like-minded band members?
‘There is a slight problem there, although with Barry Gibb we would do a lot of the playing live.
But I take your point that in the studio you tend to play by yourself, as opposed to with four other people.
There is obviously a great buzz in live performance, and live work during this period was more or less just a lengthy summer tour with Andy Gibb in America.
But I did a big tour with Elton John in 1980.
‘That was wonderful.
It was after ‘Single Man’, a stadium tour, 60,000 seaters, America, Australia, Europe.
I then played on ‘The Fox’, which was one of his least successful albums!
At that point the band broke up, even though we were supposed to be doing a lot more touring.
It was tremendous fun, though, and I really enjoyed working with him.
‘I also did a world tour with Mike Oldfield which lasted over a year.
That one I got five days’ notice for and it was quite nerve-wracking, as there was tons of complicated stuff to learn.
With Elton, the joy of it is that at least you're quite familiar with a lot of the stuff, and even if you haven't actually sat down and worked through it you know how the songs go.
The Mike Oldfield thing was the toughest in that respect.
Five days to learn two and a half hours of ‘Tubular Bells’ and other pretty involved stuff.
And I had to play several different instruments as well.
Whenever Mike had spectacular guitar things to do, I would play bass.
Then he would play bass and I would play guitars, recorders, mandolin…’
How did you end up graduating to Pink Floyd?
‘I had known David for quite a long time; we come from Cambridge and I knew him vaguely in the early days — I remember when he joined the Floyd in fact — and I'd seen him socially over the years.
But I didn't think they would put the band back together; David had mentioned it a couple of times but I hadn't really taken him that seriously.
Then suddenly I get a call saying, ‘We are going on the road,’ so I was in and it was fantastic.
‘David had been involved with a couple of things in the past, producing a couple of B-sides when I was in Quiver — we actually used his home studio for demos.
But David had always worked by himself, so I had got used to the idea that I would never play with him, much as I wanted to.
Then the tour came up and it was the perfect opportunity.’
How much freedom did you get, bearing in mind David was obviously playing the important parts and the majority of the solos?
‘I had four solos throughout the set, which is quite generous really.
Because he always recorded a basic part and then overdubbed lead parts and solos on the earlier Floyd material, I would play the basic part and David would be free to play over my part.
Plus, the majority of the numbers were rigged in such a way that, what with lighting effects and special effects, they had to be the same length.
There was no extemporisation; it was always in the same format.
There were a couple of numbers in the set where we could stretch out if we wanted to, but we did manage to keep a nice, loose feel in everything.’
Did you do the Venice concert?
‘Yeah, a staggering experience.
It was on the biggest floating pontoon that was available and they towed it out into the lagoon in Venice, stuck a couple of pirate flags on the top and it was like a floating city seething with roadies!
‘The Venetians got up to some tricks trying to extract as much money from the organisation as possible.
The gondoliers threatened to go on strike and all the floodlights on the night of the show were mysteriously switched off because someone hadn't had their palm greased.
It was all that sort of thing — quite funny.
‘It did rather trash the town.
We walked around the next day and it was rather upsetting.
They had laid on no facilities for the crowds and there were piles of rubbish everywhere.
‘After that, totally by chance, I was asked to go on the road with Mike and the Mechanics and it fitted around the 1989 work I was doing with the Floyd.
I did the tour, had five days off, then went off with the Floyd for three months, five days off and then back with Mike and the Mechanics!
Incredibly jammy!
So I was basically working soundly through 1989.’
What about writing and recording; have you got any solid plans?
‘It's something I would like to do but the big question is which direction to go in.
The great thing about library music is that it is fairly non-commital: you can go in all kinds of directions and you're asked to provide music in a certain style, which may not be the sort of thing you would do naturally, but it's still enjoyable to do.
It's a good outlet for original material.
With your own project, you really need a distinct avenue to go down and be prepared to stick to that no matter what.
That's the problem…
I suppose I like to do a variety of things too much.’
The demands that playing with Floyd, and Mike and the Mechanics and a the various sessions and TV dates make on your skills, must be echoed by the equipment you use…
‘Well, with Jonathan Ross I use a 60 watt Rivera combo with a Twin Reverb as a kind of satellite, and a Korg A3 for effects.
I like the Rivera because I can drive it quite hard at low level and it's got a nice warm sound.
I like Marshalls in the studio if a heavy sound is called for, but I find they vary quite a lot.
Generally speaking I try and use a fairly clean sound and overdrive it with effects, rather than overdrive the amp.’
And guitars?
‘I've always been a Strat man.
I've got a pewter-coloured Strat Plus which I've had for two years now.
I've fiddled around with it a bit, put a Wilkinson bridge/tremolo on it and a Wilkinson nut.
It was actually made by the Fender custom shop and it's very similar to the Eric Clapton model; Lace Sensors with the mid-boost which I can switch on and off and adjust.
Other than that it's fairly standard.
‘I've also got an old ‘57 brown sunburst which I don't take out on the road, as last time it got knocked over twice, and I don't want it to get battered any more.
There's also the problem that it might get nicked.
I also have a cream Elite Strat as my main spare.
The wang bars on the Elite series were pretty bad, but I managed to find one without a wang bar and it's actually a good guitar.’
When you were playing with the Floyd, did you use a similar sort of rig?
‘With the Floyd I used quite a different system: two Fender 150 watt heads and two pairs of Marshall 4x12s.
The stages were so enormous — about 60 feet across — that you had to poke out a bit of noise just to make yourself heard.
Plus my stuff was next to Dave's, which was double that!!’
Rob Burn 
Dr ROBERT Answers Your Queries Get your guitar's mystery ailment assessed by Guitarist ‘s very own agony uncle.
Write to ‘Dr Robert’, Guitarist,
This month's Dr Robert is dedicated to those who play the acoustic guitar.
Most players have a battered specimen lying around in a cupboard somewhere; a few sensible types even use one as their main instrument, and as a result will probably retain their hearing well into the next century.
As for me…could you repeat the question…?
Pardon…?
Speak up…
A QUESTION OF BALANCE
Dear Doctor
I have recently fitted a Shadow ‘undersaddle’ type transducer pickup to my Martin D-16.
My problem lies in the fact that I can ‘t get the same output volume for every string.
For example, the B string is about half the level of the top E, and the bottom E is louder than the rest put together!
I have tried everything I can think of to rectify the situation, but to no avail.
Is the pickup faulty?
Will a preamp help?
Anything you can suggest as a remedy to prevent me from parting with my few remaining strands of hair will be welcome.
In the meantime it ‘s back to my trusty old microphone.
→ Fitting an undersaddle pickup and obtaining the correct string to string volume balance is always tricky.
The pickup consists of six individual blocks of piezo cystal which convert mechanical energy into electrical energy.
These little blocks are positioned along the length of the pickup so that one lies directly under each string — or at least they should in theory.
The string spacing at the bridge can vary from make to make, so check before buying.
The Shadow pickup is correct for your Martin, so your problems are more likely to stem from incorrect fitting of the unit.
First, check to see that you have placed the pickup so that the piezo blocks are placed centrally, one under each string.
If not, reposition the unit before going any further.
Second, it is essential that the base of the bridge slot and the bottom of the saddle are flat and even.
The reason for this is that equal pressure is required on each block to obtain similar output levels.
If one of the piezo blocks is not touching the saddle, there will be little or no noticeable output from that particular string.
One way of improving the situation is to run a thin bead of clear silicone rubber sealant along the top of the pickup, then push the saddle firmly into place and leave for 24 hours before restringing.
The silicone rubber will fill up the gaps, creating a cushion between the saddle and the pickups and helping to even out the response — at the expense of a slight reduction in overall output.
Probably the best method is to cut the saddle into three sections, so that each section sits across two piezo blocks.
This will give the best possible contact between the individual piezo elements and the saddle.
To do this, mark the top of the saddle, between the B and G strings and also between the A and D strings.
Now remove the saddle and cut it into sections on the pencil marks.
The inner section will probably be slightly shorter than the outside sections, but this is due to the overall length of the saddle in relation to the size of the pickup and string spacing.
Next, smooth off any sharp edges with sandpaper, replace the saddle sections in the correct order and restring.
Your problems should now be solved.
Should you not wish to cut the original saddle, a new one can be ordered from any Martin dealer.
BUILDING BRIDGES
Dear Doctor
My cherished Höfner acoustic guitar recently tried to murder me for leaving it in the boot of the car on a hot sunny day.
As I opened the case I heard a groaning, splintering noise, which caused me to experience extreme pain as the bridge flew off and whacked me on the side of the head!
Help!
What do I do?
I'm not worried about my head, but how do I fix my guitar?
I am reasonably good with my hands and with your guidance I'm sure my lovely old guitar could be put right.
The bridge seems to have come off cleanly, as the top is not split or damaged.
But where the strings pass through the body, the holes have opened up, so it may need a new wooden bridge plate or something placed underneath the table.
Please sharpen your scalpel and prepare me and my guitar for surgery.
David McClean Reading 
→ A salutary lesson well learned, I hope!
Still, major surgery may not be necessary.
Regluing the bridge can be done fairly simply, even without specialist bridge clamps, thanks to modern glues.
Start by scraping off the existing glue residue from the underside of the bridge, and from the table, with a Stanley knife.
Check that the bridge fits snugly back into place and that nothing is preventing it from seating properly; small gaps at either end of the bridge are common, but the glue will fill these.
The bridge plate should only need replacing if it is split or lifting away from beneath the table; check for this by looking inside with a torch and a small mirror.
Check for loose or split struts at the same time.
The slightly over-sized holes you mention are no problem; this is simply where the strung ball-ends pulled up through the table as the bridge came off.
If any problems are found with the struts or bridge plate you will need to seek the help of a professional repairer.
If not, prepare to mix the glue…
Araldite epoxy resin, or similar (but not the Rapid variety), is the best stuff to use.
This is a very strong glue with filling properties which can hide small gaps etc.
Read the instructions carefully, then thoroughly mix the adhesive and hardener, making sure you have a sufficient quantity to carry out the job.
Use a small plastic spreader and apply a thin coat to the underside of the bridge and the part of the table where the bridge sits.
Carefully reposition the bridge and press firmly until a small bead of glue appears around the edge.
Hold the bridge in place with several strips of masking tape.
After 7–8 hours, carefully remove the tape and pare away the glue bead with a modeller ‘s scalpel.
Check that the bridge hasn ‘t moved, then leave in a warm place for a further 24 hours to allow the glue to harden fully.
Finally, drill out the bridgepin holes (select the correct size — no larger than the existing holes) to remove the excess glue.
You may have to adjust the truss rod and shave or sand the bottom of the saddle slightly to achieve a reasonable action, especially if the guitar has been left in the heat for a period of time.
Tighten the rod (clockwise) by half a turn to pull the neck backwards slightly.
If you experience fret buzz on the first few frets you have over-tightened things.
If this is the case, slacken the rod by small increments until the buzz goes.
Remember to ensure the instrument is tuned to concert pitch while making these adjustments.
BANANARAMA
Dear Doctor
The intonation and playing action on my Washburn acoustic are terrible.
I've had the guitar for six or seven years but have only recently started playing it again.
When it was new the intonation seemed fine, but now!!!
Are the action height and intonation related in some way?
Having read a few of your articles I tried sighting the neck by looking down from the headstock end (as you frequently suggest) and the neck appears to be very curved, almost banana shaped!
What can I do?
Short of selling the guitar to the local greengrocers!
Alan Douglas Edinburgh 
→ When the action of a guitar is really high, due to the neck pulling forwards, the intonation at the 12th fret becomes sharp.
If the resultant hollow in the neck is really severe it might require a form of heat treatment to rectify the situation.
This should only be carried out by a professional repairer as special equipment and experience in dealing with severely warped necks is required.
There is, however, remedial treatment that can be undertaken to assess more closely, or even cure the condition.
First, remove the strings, then slacken the truss rod completely and sight down the edge of the neck from the headstock end.
If the neck is still severely hollowed without string tension, try the following procedure…
Remove the truss rod nut completely and lubricate the thread with 3 in 1 oil.
Replace the nut and tighten by no more than two complete turns from the moment it bites.
Sight down the neck again, and with a bit of luck it should have moved to form a ‘crown’ or hump.
If so, store in a warm (airing) cupboard for a few days to allow the new neck position to settle.
After this period restring and tune to concert pitch.
If the guitar does not play, or buzzes severely along the first few frets from the nut, slacken the rod slightly to remove the crown.
Carry out another playing test to check for fret buzz and sight down the fingerboard again to see if the main body of the neck is straight.
Make incremental truss rod adjustments until the neck is as straight as possible (tighten the rod to pull the neck backwards — slacken it for forward movement).
If the table of the guitar has ‘bellied out’ you may also have to shave a few millimetres off the bottom of the saddle to achieve a lower playing action.
Unless you ‘ve overstated the case there is a strong possibility that your guitar is too far gone for this treatment, so that professional help may be required.
Should you find this to be the case after trying my simple remedy, take the instrument to your local repairer for assessment of repair costs
FeedBack Your Letters To The Editor These are your pages.
Make the most of them by writing to Feedback, Guitarist,
THE CRUNCH
Dear Guitarist
After saving up my hard-earned wages for the past four and a half years I managed to scrape the 1750 or so quid together and bought myself the most stunning quilted maple P.R.S. Custom you ever saw.
How we all laughed when I got it home and realised I can't play!
SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS
Dear Guitarist
Knowing how well you respond to suggestions for articles/series, I'd like to make a few of my own…
‘Rehearsals’: how to plan them in order to get the most out of them.
And what about the many ordinary players out there?
Would a series of articles concerning the kind of work we all do and the particuler skills needed, be a viable proposition?
I would suggest that interviews with ordinary, gigging musicians, carefully selected, might yield interesting source material.
Now, when reviewing amplifiers, could you also include their weight?
I'm looking very hard for a new amp as a 30th anniversary present to myself and would really like to own a quality (loud!) amp which I can carry in one hand.
Another thought occurs here too…
We all know that ‘watts’ is a measure of power consumption rather than loudness.
Is there any reason why the ‘decibel’ rating of an amp can't be given by the manufacturer and/or yourselves?(3–4 years ago I was in a band where we always had a decibal reading at the soundcheck.
It saved us loads of trouble!)
This would solve the problem choosing a new amp and getting to a gig only to find it to be a wimp.
→ Taking your points in reverse order, David, I think it would be difficult, if not impossible for us to give such data in a way that's meaningful to guitarists.
Because different amps achieve their maximum usable volume at different settings — ie. one at 5 and another at 8 — I'm not sure how you'd apply whatever criteria you came up with for the tests.
Obviously it could be done; I'm just saying you'd need a pretty controlled and sophisticated setup to achieve consistency and accuracy.
I agree that the SPL (sound pressure level) of speakers should be given by the manufacturer, and maybe some kind of SPL/dB/wattage equation could be thought up and listed, rather like the BHP reading for motor cars.
However, who's to say that this figure wouldn't be as open to exaggeration as amp output always used to be?
Anyone remember ‘Peak Music Power’, ‘American Watts’, ‘British Watts’ and all the other flanel that some manufacturers came up with to hide how feeble their amplifiers really were?
We will try and include the weights of amps, where appropriate.
But surely we're all aware enough of what it's like playing in pubs and clubs, in duos, trios or bands, and if anyone has some amazing revelation on this front they can always write and let us know.
The same for rehearsals — I think we've all been there and discovered the dos and don'ts, and they're pretty obvious anyway.
JAZZERCISE
Dear Guitarist
I have noticed a dearth of jazz players in your ‘10 Favourite Solos’ lists.
In an attempt to compensate for this and to represent what I can only assume is a minority interest for your readership, my entry consists of a substantial majority of jazzers.
I'm not claiming that these are the ‘best’(whatever that can mean in terms of music) solos I have ever heard, or even the best players — just the records that I've kept on coming back to over the years.
They are in no particular order and I will include little snippets in case anybody should want to hear any of the perhaps less familiar tracks…
1)
Dinette : Django Reinhardt 1948-ish.
Issued in this country on Vogue, EP and LP.
2)
Midnight At The Oasis : Amos Garrett on the Maria Muldaur album.
I've never heard anyone else even try this one.
(It would be in my own ‘Desert Island Discs’—Ed.)
3)
Tenderly : A 1953 jam session takes up the whole of one side.
The introduction by Johnny Smith, billed as ‘Sir Jonathan Gasser’ is a classic example of his block-chords style.
4)
Grooveyard : Billy Beall Trio.
‘Riverside’ album, recently reissued.
Much is talked about jazz guitar ‘sound’— Mr Beall has it.
1959?
5)
Last Minute Blues : Cedric West with Sandy Brown's jazz band, 1957.
Mr Brown was Britain's most authentic jazz clarinetist.
He made some lovely records in the '50s but Cedric West (still around and still playing) steals this one.
6)
Be Careful — It's My Heart : George Barnes with Ruby Brafl. 1973, from a tribute to Fred Astaire.
He makes it sound all so simple — and so melodic.
7)
The Very Thought Of You : Cal Collins with Scott Hamilton, 1979.
Concord jazz sampler.
If I was only allowed to have one jazz record this would have to be a contender, together with number 8.
8)
Body and Soul : Al Casey, Prestige Swingvine, 1961.
Apparently Mr Casey's own favourite solo.
Beautiful unamplified sound.
9)
Danny Boy : Ry Cooder, 1979.
Kicking Mule Records, from an album called ‘Search For The Floor’ featuring various guitarists.
10)
The Way You Look Tonight : Jim Hall, 1977, recorded in a Toronto club.
Album called ‘Jim Hall — Live’.
Mr Hall has pared down the bebop style and you are left with the spirit, minus the meaningless displays of technique.
AWRISTOCRAT
Dear Guitarist
I am amazed and saddened to find so many guitarists obsessed with technique.
While I would agree that it can only help your proficiency, it should not stifle creativity.
For instance, one aspect of technique that I find particularly difficult is very rapid alternate picking (across strings).
So, I turned to the devil's picking method — free-arm — and it sounds fine.
If the method works, why not use it?
In my opinion, the only technique a musician needs is to be able to translate emotions onto an instrument (a cliché, but very true).
If written music or AOR/MOR music is your thing, it helps to be able to stay in time.
However, free tempo soloing can sound great — just look at Frank and Dweezil Zappa.
So, basically, as long as your playing sounds good and this is not happening because of sequencing or other electronic jiggery-pokery, who cares how you achieve it?
Shut up and play your guitars!
Yours sincerely,
→ You don't need loads of technique to sound emotional — listen to Neil Young.
But technique in abundance will not always stifle feel: witness Gary Moore.
I've said before that Gary is not a great guitarist because he can play fast; he's a great guitarist and he can play fast.
IF V WAS A
Dear Guitarist
Having purchased the May ‘92 issue a little late, I'm now into June.
I still felt I had to write concerning the Flying ‘V’ Hendrix Signature model.
Now, being left-handed I'm well used to the pitfalls: reading reviews of great-looking and top quality guitars only to find at the end of the review, ‘No left-handers available’ or, more niggling, ‘10% extra’.
It's not your fault, I know, and of course there are exceptions, such as the Patrick Eggle and Gordon-Smith range of guitars.
Not only do they provide for lefties, they also keep the price the same as the right-handed models.
But the Hendrix ‘V’ was the final straw.
You said that his estate had given Gibson permission to use Jimi's signature.
Well fine, but I'm curious to wonder if the man himself would have endorsed a guitar that he couldn't then go out and buy!!
Unless of course he turned it upside down…!
→ I posed the same question at the end of the review.
SLIM PICKINGS
Dear Guitarist
I am in a band and we are still at school.
We have a problem that a lot of youngsters such as ourselves can relate to.
It is concerning PAs and speakers: they just cost too much.
To buy a brand new PA system costs a lot of money for a single person, and as a group it is a huge risk as we are still at school (lower 6th) and do not wish to spend that sort of money when we cannot guarantee we will still be together in a week, let alone a year's time.
To buy secondhand is a risk as we don't really know what we are purchasing.
We are also still dependent on parental transport.
I am writing to ask if you will do an article on the above problem and maybe enlighten us on what we're buying and how to get one cheap, etc.
PS.
Do you know if companies do discounts for students?
→ We ran a PA supplement in June 1990, giving details of various systems in the lower price bracket, and including an interview with Mike Franklin from Porky Pig PA Co talking about getting the most from a PA.
Unfortunately, companies are unlikely to do any financial favours just because you're young.
PICK MANIA
Dear Guitarist
This is great!
I'm among the 10 winners of your Pick Competition.
I have just received from Anne Jessel the 25 splendid custom picks, printed with my name and my own slogan.
Now, I only have to get a Fender ‘Eric Clapton’ signature, a Marshall 30th Anniversary Limited Edition amp and a Bob Bradshaw rack!
Thanks for your efforts in the guitar area.
Your magazine helps me a lot in my current (and future) activity of popularising guitar in Romania.
I anxiously await its next issues and wish you the best of luck.
By the way, my new slogan is: ‘Sometimes one day is better than a whole year!’
SLIDE GUITAR
Dear Guitarist
On the rare occasions when I feel moved to write to magazines, it's usually with my Angry-Of-West-Midlands hat on.
So it makes a refreshing change to able to write about something nice.
I recently took my beloved Washburn EA30 out of its case only to find that, somewhere between a local theatre and home, I'd managed to lose one of the plastic slide covers from the EQ; a tiny thing, I know, but unless you're Superman, totally unnoticeable from more than a foot away.
A pain, though, nevertheless.
So I ‘phoned Washburn, explained the problem and was put onto one Nick who, after a quick ferret around in various boxes, told me he'd stick one in the post.
Not only that, but there'd be no charge.
Touched and impressed, I was!
Had I been Victor Kiam, I would have flogged off the shavers and bought the company.
So I thought I'd tell you about this bit of niceness — and no, there's not a free Bettencourt signature model in it for me.
I just wanted to thank Washburn for their time, trouble and consideration.
→ No, John, you don't understand,I get the free guitar for printing your letter!
DOD/TRANTEC: THE ADMAN'S VIEW
Dear Guitarist
Interesting that there were two real whinges in July's Feedback .
First, if I may paraphrase, ‘Nuno is crap’ and second, also paraphrasing, ‘Trantec ads are crap’, sparked off by the correspondence on DOD ads.
Nuno's ability is a matter of opinion, but the point about the Trantec ads is a matter of fact, although not for the reason your correspondent quotes.
As both a guitarist and an adman, I can speak with a bit of authority.
(Okay, I'm a crap guitarist, but my ads are good.
You've seen them on TV, on the pictures and even in Guitarist .)
Complete the following: ‘a ? \ @*; £! % beats as it sweeps as it cleans’; ‘a  \ @*?; & a day helps you work rest and play’.
Now try ‘one man and his  \ @*?;’.
QED — whether you like it or not, DOD ads have made an impression.
It's reckoned that 80% of people only read the headline, so it's important that you put your name in it, or at least have your name strongly upfront.
Recall is a large part of brand awareness, even if you can't remember a specific promise.
Now take Trantec: ‘Do the solo from the bar’.
Great, but it works just as well for BOSS radio systems, Nady radio systems or a 150ft lead.
It's like an ad for a Ford Sierra that says, ‘Drive from A to B’.
As to good taste.
Stereotypes and sexism are all part of advertising, like it or not.
Madonna's a great case in point, after all, she's selling Madonna.
Again, you are on subjective grounds, but by just about any objective industry standard, Trantec are doing themselves a disservice paying for full pages for those ads.
And subjectivity doesn't enter into it.
JOHN BIRCH WRITES
Dear Guitarist
My enthusiastic return to the guitar business, to announce the greatest sensation in the history of the electric guitar, is being met with the most incredible barrage of libel and slander from various publications and potential customers — many of whom I counted among my friends.
Opening this month's Guitarist , any pleasure I was enjoying to find that my name still ranked highly in the opinion of guitar players and music dealers was destroyed totally by the allegation that — to quote from Tony Iommi's feature —‘unfortunately John ended up in jail and that was the end of that.’
This scurrilous character assassination cannot go unchallenged.
My subsequent business activities were to involve my old colleague Barry Kirby in , commencing January 1981 and ending in the mid-eighties when the premises came in for redevelopment.
Shortly before that, I had gone into business with Mrs Edna Kirby, trading as KB Enterprises (John Birch) Ltd., developing and producing a new type of UVA Sunbed.
This ceased in 1986, when I left the Midlands to return to the family home to help my sister in caring for our father, who died in 1988 at the age of 99.
Not content with claiming that I ended up in jail, many people have been led to believe that I murdered my wife, who, I can state categorically, is still living in Selly Oak, Birmingham.
Even though she is now my ex-wife, I'm sure she will be pleased to refute this myth!
I would be obliged to receive a full apology and explanation in the September issue, as these lies and allegations are seriously jeopardising my business activities.
I am also supposed to have died, according to the surprised traders to whom I have revealed my identity over the phone.
Yours indignantly,
→ Of course we apologise unreservedly for the error contained in Tony Iommi's interview.
Obviously Tony was under the impression that what he said was true, for there was certainly no malice intended in what he said.
I have to say, though, that everyone at Guitarist was aware of similar stories, as were many other people I have spoken to since receiving John's letter.
But where such stories originated, who can say.
One very reliable source recalled another John Birch who had indeed been sent to prison for the offence mentioned above, and my informant suspects that this is where the confusion initially stemmed from.
Again, our sincere apologies to John for our innocent complicity in this untruth, and let's hope that these stories are now well and truly quashed.
Of course we will be interested in seeing any products that the UK's undisputed Father of the Custom Guitar brings to our attention.
We wish him all the very best.
POSTSCRIPT
Do you have any guitar-related wisdom to impart, a bee in your bonnet or a wasp in your jam jar?
Steamed up about Satriani?
Vexed about Vai?
Narked by Norman out of the Teenage Fanclub?
What you need is catharsis: get it all down on paper and send it to the Freudian fret folk at Guitarist .
An exceptional letter (wielding wit or thought or a new stance on an ageing issue) will not only win that automatic free year's Letter Of The Month subscription, but an array of mystery merchandise at which to marvel.
Get writing
techniques
PHIL HILBORNE Solo Analysis TOMMY GUN — BLUES SARACENO
Scales
This solo uses mainly one scale type throughout:
E blues scale — with an added major 3rd and 2nd/9th…
As well as the above scale type there are also a few chordal/arpeggio ideas used.
These are found as follows:
1)
Dominant 7th chord tones (E7) in bars 8–9.
2)
Descending Esus4 — E arpeggio phrase in bar 9–10.
3)
Chromatically approached E7 chords in bars 20–21.
4)
Sweep-picked triad arpeggios of E, D and G in bars 26–27.
Performance Notes
1)
This solo was taken from the final track of 20 year-old Blues Saraceno's second album, ‘Plaid’, and is a good example of his playing style, which, to my ears, is an excellent combination of tasteful note selection, phrasing, vibrato and flashy fretboard gymnastics.
As a piece this was undoubtedly a composed solo, and although on the record quite a few of the phrases were ‘dropped in’, it is obviously possible to play through it in one pass.
2)
Throughout the solo we find many pinched harmonics.
These are best achieved by catching the string with the flesh of your r/h thumb immediately after the pick has struck the string.
Experimentation with the points where you make contact with the string is the best way of locating each harmonic…
3)
Another approach found in this solo is the use of tremolo arm slides (TAS).
To perform these correctly you should depress the tremolo arm before picking the string and then, upon picking, release it.
If done correctly this will result in an effect that is fairly similar to a left-hand slide.
4)
This solo was played on a Yamaha RGZ guitar through 50 watt Marshall amps/cabinets.
5)
Thanks for suggesting this month's solo go to Mr. J. Humphries from Maidstone, Kent.
A couple of sets of Scalar strings, courtesy of Clive Norris at Selectron U.K. will be on their way to you soon.
© 1992 Blues Tunes Inc.
(ASCAP) Cherry Lane Music Publishing Company, Inc.
(ASCAP).
Used by kind permission.
HILBORNE'S Rock Guitar CHORDAL BASED DOUBLE STOPS…
A common element of all rhythm and solo styles is the use of double stops.
Essentially a double stop (or diad, or interval) is any pair of differing notes played simultaneously.
In solos you often find them used to thicken up and to add depth to single note lines; in rhythm parts they are commonly used instead of large chord voicings to lighten up parts.
This dual usage makes them seem to fill the limbo-land that lies between rhythm and lead approaches, and therefore an ability to play them fluently is a more-or-less essential guitar skill.
There are two main approaches for deriving double stops: the first is chordal, where you break chords into their component intervals; the second is scalic, where you break scales down into as many intervals as you can.
In this month's article we will concentrate on some examples where the double stops are all derived from chords.
In fig 1 below we have two very standard voicings for A major and A7 chords…
Fig 1 Amaj A7
If you break these chords down into some of their usable component intervals you find ideas such as those shown in figs 2–5…
The idea behind playing chords such as those in figs 2–5 as double stops is that they are each played as a separate fingering.
In other words, you shouldn't just hold down the chord shape and pick the notes out as they lie under your hand; each double has its own fingering.
In these examples I have deliberately included the C£s on the 9th fret E string and the 4th fret A string so that you cannot play them while holding down a chord shape!
After playing through figs 2–5 you should continue by applying the same approach to as many different chord types/voicings as you can.
In the final five examples (figs 6–10) are some ideas for the application of double stops.
In fig 6 we can see a fairly typical rock'n'roll idea in which each of the double stops is approached from a semi-tone below.
(The possibilities for this sort of idea are endless, so remember to experiment!)
In figs 7–9 I have shown a rock/blues rhythm pattern which uses diads derived from the chords of A7, D7 and E7, and played off open string pedal tones.
After playing through each of these examples individually, combine them into a 12 bar sequence and use different double stops for each chord on each successive chorus.
Fig 10 is a brief soloing application (more on this next month), taken from Joe Satriani's Satch Boogie .
In this the double stops are played as individual notes and allowed to ring into each other, thus creating the implied harmony shown underneath the notation.
See you next month…
©Phil Hilborne 92
ADRIAN INGRAM From Rock To Jazz IMPROVISING THROUGH THE CHANGES III
When improvising through two adjacent chords some of the notes will be common to both, but their interval names (degrees) and functions (sound) will have a different relationship to each chord.
For example, the basic scales for the chords of Cmaj7 and Fmaj7 generate six common notes:
Because common notes occur in all adjacent chord changes, their recognition and handling is essential for the smooth connection of improvised lines.
In order to do this, you will need to familiarise yourself with the sound (quality) and function (number) of the intervals in any given chord and its successor, so that they may be used interchangeably.
This information will enable you to connect lines which flow freely and melodically between all chord changes.
The following phrases demonstrate how common notes from the previous example (Cmaj7 to Fmaj7) have been used to create improvisational lines which flow melodically through the chord change:
1.
In this phrase the common note is A: the 6th of C and the 3rd in F…
2.
There are two common notes in this phrase: A, the 6th in C and the 3rd in F, is used for the first change (bars 1 and 2); whilst E, the 3rd in C and maj7th in F, is used for the second (bars 2 and 3)…
3.
In this phrase the 3rd in C (E) becomes the maj7th in F, and the 9th in F (G) becomes the 5th in C…
A good way of familiarising yourself with the principle of intervallic interchange is to set yourself the following task, both on and away from your guitar.
1.
Choose two separate scales — for example G major and Eb major;
2.
Work your way through each degree of the G major scale, citing the designation of each interval as it occurs in both G and Eb.
The resulting intervallic interchange between Eb and G major will be as follows:
a)
The 1st of G becomes the 3rd of Eb
b)
The 2nd of G becomes the £4th (b5th) of Eb
c)
The 3rd of G becomes the £5th (b13th) of Eb
d)
The 4th of G becomes the 6th of Eb
e)
The 5th of G becomes the maj7th of Eb
f)
The 6th of G becomes the b9th of Eb
g)
The maj7th of G becomes the b3rd (£9th) of Eb
When you are able to do this with the major scales, try the various minors, modes and arpeggios, mixing them up as they might occur in a chord progression.
While this may seem like hard work, the benefits to be gained, in terms of opening up the fingerboard and greater harmonic awareness, are invaluable.
In my next column I will deal with the chromatic approach notes.
In the meantime try using the intervallic interchange technique over the chords to some ‘standard’ tunes.
JOHN CURRIE Bass Analysis WHITE FUNK
Many thanks to Michael Croucher of Milton Keynes for requesting a bass part by one of my all-time favourite players, Verdine White of Earth, Wind and Fire.
(One 5-string set of Elites are all yours, Michael.)
This track,Sing A Song , taken from the ‘Gratitude’ album, is a joyous mid-tempo dance groove, probably played by Verdine on his trusty Fender Jazz bass, using a funky finger style.
Notes
1)
This is a simple, virtually diatonic chord sequence in A major (with the exception of the G natural in the Dsus4 chord) and Verdine sticks very much to the A major scale (A Ionian mode)— A, B, C£, D, E, F£, G£ — with a couple of passing notes to fill out the phrases in bars 4, 12, 24, and 27.
2)
The intro and verse grooves are a nice combination of on- and off-beat eighth and quarter notes, with the occasional sixteenth note group for good measure.
The chorus section is more intense, with the downbeats on 1 and 3 in each bar emphasised.
3)
Play this one tight to the beat but keep the feel relaxed.
Give all notes their full value, and always pay attention to the rests.
Used by kind permission of Music Sales.
GERRY HOGAN Rockabilly'N'Country Licks BETTER THE DEVIL
After last month's Jim Sullivan/Chet Atkins partiality for the tremolo arm, you should be well versed in its use.
Which is good, because Cliff Gallup used it quite a bit, too, and this month and next, we're going to try his solos from Gene Vincent's Race With The Devil .
The song is a 12-bar about a man who has not lived a very good life, but reckons he can ‘outrun the Devil on Judgement Day’, in his hot-rod car!
The tune is in the key of E and the whole package is greatly enhanced by Cliff's innovative guitar playing.
Playing hints:
1)
To play the pull-offs at the start of the solo requires some practice.
You need to cover strings 1 and 2 with finger 1 at the 12th fret.
Once in position leave it there, then use fingers 4 and 3 (or 3 and 2) for the pull-offs on strings 1 and 2.
I've written the whole section as an identical pattern of pull-offs (with one note in parentheses, because I think that's what Cliff was aiming for, but missed getting the first lick on string 1 to sound out — there were no drop-ins on recording sessions in 1956!).
2)
Cliff used the tremolo arm to achieve the ‘dipped’ notes at the end of bar 3 (into bar 4) and end of bar 11 (into bar 12).
Press the arm down first and release it as you pick the note.
3)
For the dips at the end of bar 6 (into bar 7): press the arm down, pick the note and release — same as before; then press down and release again, whilst the note is sustaining.
It's a quick, subtle double press of the tremolo arm — the first one into the note, as usual.
4)
You may remember that Cliff wore a thumb pick and two National finger picks, hence the octaves section in bars 9 and 10 would have been easier for him to pick cleanly than if he'd used a flat pick and no fingerstyle.
If you took my recommendation of three years ago and developed a fingerstyle approach to your playing, you'll have no problems here!
5)
Bars 11 and 12 are easily played if you finger a 4-string E chord at the 12th fret.
Use finger 4 to get frets 14 and 15 on string 2 (E6 and E7, if you think about it).
With your thumb across string 6 you can strum away to your heart's content with this shape — if you happen to get other strings sounding out, it matters not a lot.
6)
Cliff was probably playing an E6 (9) as the final chord.
I can only hear the top three notes of it, though.
I've diagrammed the chord for you anyway.
Next month we'll attack Cliff's second solo, where he moves the song into the key of F. See you then.
MICHAEL FATH Technique As A Result Of Harmony THE THREE OCTAVE ARPEGGIO
Being a great fan of classical violin music, I always marvelled at how players such as Itzhak Perlman, Schlomo Mintz, Jascha Heifetz, Isaac Stern and others would play (with seemingly little effort) long and fast arpeggio passages.
The music of many composers, especially Niccolo Paganini, was very demanding and required an almost flawless technique.
Check out the beginning of Caprice £5 (Paganini) and you'll see what I mean!
There are many ways of playing 3 octave arpeggios, and this month I will show what I believe is the most effective approach.
Example £1 is the G major (GBD) and G minor (GBbD) starting from the root or 1st G. The technique is the same for both arpeggios.
Pay close attention to the sweep pattern and strokes, and this will eventually become second nature.
Also practise the position shift from low to high and back.
As you see, this technique requires only 2 left hand positions, so the movement is crucial to the smoothness of the entire phrase.
Example £2 is G major and minor starting from the 3rd (B), and minor 3rd (Bb).
Example £3 is the major and minor from the 5th (D).
Note the immediate move from the 6th to 5th strings here.
This technique is a favourite of mine and can be found in different songs I have recorded.
Recently Hal Leonard published 4 books of etudes of mine (Hardrock Series in cassette and CD) and this 3 octave technique is the basis for etude £9 in the arpeggio book.
Thanks again for reading.
Look for my record soon, and my tour in England.
TONY MUSCHAMP'S Bass Space MORE MINORS
Last month we looked at the Dorian, Aeolian, Locrian, Melodic and Harmonic Minor scales; today I'd like to look at other minor scales which are widely used in today's music.
The first of these is the Phrygian minor scale.
This has a very Spanish flavour to it.
It can be played over a m7b9 chord, or you could play it over, say, a Cm7 to Dbmaj7 chord vamp.
Try getting a guitarist to record the chords onto a backing tape; if you have a four-track, put the bass down too, then try improvising using this scale.
I think you'll agree it sounds really cool, and with some persistence you will start finding some interesting melodies and lines.
The construction of this scale is a little unusual, but with practice it shouldn't take long to get the hang of.
Example 1
The Minor Pentatonic scale is a five note scale and can be played over a m7 chord; on bass it is very easy to play because the notes lie right under the fingers…
Example 2
The Blues Scale is another popular scale, almost identical to the minor pentatonic scale but with the addition of an augmented fourth.
Use this scale when soloing over a blues, over a m7 chord or over a dominant chord.
Try recording a blues progression and use the blues scale for improvising.
I can guarantee hours of fun.
Example 3
I recommend you learn all the scales in two different octaves.
When it comes to improvising you should be able to see the whole scale over the entire neck of your instrument, thereby providing total freedom on your bass.
Good luck!
ALAN LIMBRICK Pentatonics FLUENCY CHECK-UP
This month I'd like to take the opportunity to look back at the current series of articles featuring the Pentatonic scale, taking stock of our command of the scale all over the fretboard.
It goes without saying that in order to use a device for improvising (such as scales, arpeggios, licks etc.) one has to develop the particular device to such a level of fluency that physically playing it in any key or position has become almost instinctive, or second nature.
Over the last six months or so I have attempted to present you with a series of practical objectives designed and constructed to help achieve a higher degree of thoroughness in your command of the Pentatonic scale.
The tasks I set out were as follows:
1)
Learning and memorising five different patterns or shapes that would cover the complete fretboard in any key.
After this lesson you should have known the five shapes plus the five associated chord shapes around which the scale fingerings lie.
The chord shapes are very important, as they give the visual reference to each scale fingering and make the job a lot easier.
Slide the chord shape up or down the fretboard into various keys and the scale goes with it, so to speak.
2)
Being able to play each of the five Pentatonic shapes in any key.
This assignment involved practising each shape chromatically up and down the entire fretboard so as to build confidence and technique in every position, starting on the highest note descending or starting on the lowest note ascending in each key.
This exercise was also intended to assure equal fluency with all five shapes and eliminate the potential hazard of having a ‘favourite’ shape.
3)
Knowing the five patterns as both Major or Minor Pentatonics.
This task involved learning each of the five scale shapes with a new root and a new associated chord shape for Major Pentatonics.
4)
Being able to find the Pentatonic scale fingering in any key in any position.
For this assignment the need for our five associated chord shapes became very clear.
Providing you had memorised the five scale patterns and the associated chord shape for each one, it was merely a question of finding the chord shape in whatever key/position was required, and the appropriate scale fingering would follow.
5)
Breaking down any physical or technical barriers within each shape.
This assignment introduced you to various sequences of notes played ascending and descending, within all five pentatonic scale shapes.
Sequences are an excellent means of building technique and are often musical devices in their own right when played up to tempo.
Another great way of ironing out any technical barriers in each scale pattern is to work out your favourite Pentatonic licks in all five patterns.
This also very good ear training and of course it multiplies the ways in which you can finger your licks.
6)
Moving up and down the fretboard, moving through each of the five scale shapes.
You should always be on the look out for extra long pentatonic licks that move horizontally along the fretboard, weaving right through and linking up two or more of the five pentatonic positions.
If you've kept up with all the above tasks you're well on your way to total fluency with pentatonics.
If not, then hopefully you'll work on the areas on this checklist that still need some practice.
We're about to move into more sophisticated harmonic applications for Pentatonics, hence my concern for your fluency with all five shapes.
So, until next month…
Bye for now.
ESMOND SELWYN Jazz Techniques C WITH ADDED MAJ7
This month we take look at the harmonised scale of C, with the added major 7th.
This has the effect of rounding the contours and losing some of the austerity of the unadorned triads.
Example 1 gives the scale in the low register; this can be very useful for accompaniment, voicing the chords with a rich, full sound; it also offers the chance to develop some double stop skills on the bass strings.
Example 2 takes the same scale across all the string sets and Example 3 shows how this information may be practically applied to start a cascade effect crossing all the string sets.
JOE HUBBARD'S Bass On Top DEVELOPMENT OF A GROOVE — PART IV
This month we need to break down and clearly define some of the different possibilities of the chameleon-like triplet groove.
All the music we listen to falls into two general rhythmic categories.
Duple time means anything that divides into 2.
So far, that's what we've been studying with the 8th note groove and the 16th note groove.
The second category is called triple time.
This is where we have anything that divides into multiples of three.
The following table breaks this down…
After studying this table it should now be apparent that any rhythmic groove is a combination of duple and triple time with added rests or ties.
The triplet groove can be specifically written as triplets or a triplet feel can be implied.
A typical example of this can be seen in a swing context.
Be-bop, sometimes called straight-ahead jazz, is written with eighth notes, but at particular tempos the eighth notes are felt with a lilt or bounce to them.
At extremely fast tempos this lilt is lost and they even out as they would in a funk or fusion context.
Two swing eighth notes resemble this triplet figure: *** Sometimes you might see this at the beginning of a chart: ***** In some texts, you might find the rhythm written as *** but it's not actually played like that.
It's more like the way the triplet figure sounds.
It is only an approximation of the swing eighth notes.
If we were to attempt to notate the rhythm of jazz, it would be something like this:
Because reading this would be an absolute nightmare, we can get close enough by writing the triplet figure.
The shuffle feel is also based on the triplet subdivision.
There are two general categories that shuffles seem to fall into.
The first is the eighth note triplet shuffle and the second is the sixteenth note triplet or the half-time shuffle feel.
Examples of these would be:Heathrow by Level 42 (8th note triplet shuffle) and Roseanna by Toto (16th note triplet shuffle).
You'll notice the drum grooves for both of these imply the rhythmic subdivision on the hi-hat.
Remember to use this as your internal reference point.
A lot of old-style Motown R&B also has the triplet groove.
These are mostly based on the 8th note triplet groove but are usually written as 12/8 grooves.
A good example of this is Your Precious Love by Marvin Gaye and Tammi Terrell.
Although it is written in 12/8, this is essentially the same as triplets in 4/4.
The following example explains how a bar of 12/8 translates into a bar of 4/4, a bar of 6/8 translates into a bar of 2/4 and a bar of 9/8 translates into a bar of 3/4:
One of the most commonly used Afro-Cuban grooves uses the triplet feel, but usually written in 6/8.
This is a great groove because you can superimpose the other stylistic feels we've talked about over the groove.
Next month we'll analyze some lines played by the greats exploring the different contexts of the ever-changing triplet groove.
I'm going to leave you with some rhythm combinations of the 8th note triplet and 16th note triplet subdivisions.
I'm also including the accompanying drum machine grooves.
Start by playing these combinations with one note then apply some of the melodic permutations I gave you in part 1 of this series.
Until next time…bass regards