

Out of the Box
Caroline Spry
Broadcasting's first open discussion of homosexuality crackled through the black and white fog of our TV sets in 1954.
The intervening years have seen the chip gradually replacing the cathode ray to provide us with the most pervasive and persuasive form of global mass communication.
The location of control over television is of crucial importance, and one that will become increasingly so in the volatile arena of broadcasting — terrestrial and satellite — in the next few years.
The participation of society as a whole — and specifically of disadvantaged groups — in the process of cultural production must be a cornerstone of a democratic society.
As a means of providing news, information and entertainment, television has an undoubtedly powerful role in both reflecting and reinforcing ideas.
So is there cause for concern for lesbians and gay men?
What images of homosexuality have appeared on television?
During the formative years of broadcasting it was cinema which produced the predominant images of lesbians and gay men.
Time and again it has been cinema which has pushed forward the bounds of public acceptability of controversial images and ideas, to be followed by television rather slowly.
The first televised discussion of homosexuality came in the 1954 BBC programme ‘In The News’, when Lord Boothby discussed  his call for a Royal Commission on the subject.
Since then broadcasting has gradually opened up to the continuing debate over the place of homosexuality in British society, albeit confining it to a number of fairly distinct genres of drama and factual television.
The most common area of representation in television has been in the broadcasting of feature films which have either explicit or implicit references to homosexuality.
One of the earliest to be shown was the 1950 film Caged , screened on ITV in 1968: this featured Hope Emerson as a mannish, sadistic matron in a women's prison.
Since then, most of the ‘gay’ movies, from Victim (1961, starring Dirk Bogarde) to Desert Hearts (1986, Donna Deitch) have — or soon will have — reached the small screen with little or no controversy.
The distinctive area of the single television play has produced a surprising number of allusions to homosexuality.
As early as 1957 the ITV adaptation of The Woman in White included oblique references to lesbianism, and in 1961 both male homosexuality (in ITV's ‘The Collection’) and butch lesbianism (in BBC's ‘A’ For Andromeda’) appeared on screen.
The appearance of an adventurous new channel, BBC2, brought a more overt portrayal of gay men in a 1967 play Boa Constrictor , which featured three couples including two gay men.
The late sixties and seventies saw the continued sporadic appearance of gay characters in television plays, most notably John Hurt's 1975 portrayal of Quentin Crisp in The Naked Civil Servant .
Long-running drama series as diverse as ‘Crown Court’, ‘Angels’, ‘Executive Suite’, ‘St Elsewhere’ and ‘Bergerac’have included gay characters, albeit obliquely and usually negatively.
But far more numerous have been depictions in light entertainment shows: often with regular ‘gay’ characters: the suggestion of a relationship between Hugh Lloyd and Terry Scott in ‘Hugh and I’(early sixties BBC1), and the John Inman character in ‘Are You Being Served?’
(BBC1, 1973).
Neither representation could be described as positive, however, and it was left to America to develop more progressive portrayals of gay men in the innovative ‘Soap’ and later ‘Brothers’.
A 1976 Granada television comedy project, ‘All The Queen's Men’, featured an all-gay Army unit but never came to fruition.
Appearances of lesbian characters have been extremely rare: notable exceptions include the US series ‘Golden Girls’ and ‘Kate And Allie’, both of which included positive, though slightly patronising.
portrayals of lesbian encounters.
In recent years the soap genre has hosted a number of gay characters.
Channel 4's ‘Brookside’ briefly flirted with a lesbian sub-plot based round a disorganised feminist printing collective which added spice to Heather and Nicholas's conjugal difficulties.
The gay theme was developed with the ‘coming out’ of Gordon Collins, which allowed discussion of attitudes to homosexuality (in particular those of Gordon's parents) and, of course, of AIDS.
Meanwhile Colin, played by Michael Cashman in BBC1's ‘EastEnders’, played a similar role, providing a peg on which to hang issues of sexuality.
At the time of writing, however, there are no regular appearances of gay characters in British soaps.
Since 1954 some factual output has examined the place of homosexuality in society.
The least coverage has been in the realm of news and current affairs, where until the recent AIDS and Clause 28 reportage gay stories have been given only very occasional attention.
Most impervious of all has been the news, making only brief reference to items such as the 1967 Sexual Offences Act or the more recent Local Government Act.
The occasional gay march has received mention, and the customs raid against Gays The Word bookshop drew brief comments, but little else has broken through.
In 1982 BBC1's ‘Nationwide’ covered Gay News ' tenth birthday, but in general the sharp end of factual programming has only given space to gay issues when they impinge on heterosexual concerns.
More attention has been paid to lesbians and gay men in regular feature slots.
In 1962 the BBC ‘Gallery’ programme discussed homosexuality, though with a very male bias, and focused on the debates which informed the 1967 Wolfenden Report.
This report, which culminated in the 1967 Sexual Offences Act, also gave rise to a two-part ‘Man Alive’ feature called ‘Consenting Adults’(BBC), which dealt in separate weeks with men and women.
A brief look at the content of the women's programme gives us a flavour of how homosexuality was represented: a good deal of time was devoted to an interview with Steve, a prospective female-to-male transsexual (displaying a common confusion with homosexuality and transsexuality).
This was followed by Julie and Cynthia talking in their comfortable Wandsworth home, indistinguishable from thousands of homes owned by married couples — so indistinguishable that the two women are faced with such questions as, ‘If you go out together for dinner, who pays the bill?’, and ‘How do you organise your domestic life together?
Is one of you a sort of dominant figure — like the man?’
The Wolfenden Report also opened television up to the first openly gay programme, Granada's 1957 ‘Homosexuality and the Law, A Prologue to the Wolfenden Report’.
This was followed years later by ATV's look at lesbians, ‘The Important Thing Is Love’(1971): bizarre and reactionary it may have been, but at that time the mere presence of ‘real lesbians’ on TV was a revelation and lifeline for many women.
Common to many of these programmes, though, was a stance of the heterosexual norm questioning the validity of homosexuality, and the representation of homosexuality as predominantly male.
This began to change by the late seventies, as liberalisation in definitions of sexuality began to show in programmes which questioned less the right to homosexual existence, preferring to concentrate on specific topics.
In 1978 ‘Brass Tacks’(BBC) looked at lesbian use of Artificial Insemination by Donor, while ‘Grapevine’(BBC) reported on a gay community centre in Birmingham, and the Gay Sweatshop Tour of Belfast.
A leap of imagination was made by London Weekend Television with the production of their ‘Gay Life’ series in 1980 and 1981.
These modest programmes were basically interviews in which gay men and lesbians discussed their lives and experiences.
The tone was worthy, but the programmes represented TV's first weekly series attempting to look at gay people.
One area of television where frequent reference has been made to homosexuality is in the arts programmes.
Biographies and interviews with artists such as Christopher Isherwood, David Hockney, Tennessee Williams and so on have not hesitated to name their sexuality.
Again, the spotlight has been on men — a reflection of the place of women in the arts as much as a marker of the unacceptability of lesbianism.
It is notable that a BBC programme about Colette, ‘The Gentle Libertine’(1967), was not transmitted.
Another area of factual programming is that of access television.
Born out of the sixties and seventies notion of a democratic broadcasting network, television responded with the BBC's ‘Open Door’ series from the Community Programme Unit.
Over the years a small number of programmes have come from lesbians and gay men: the Scottish Minorities Group's ‘Glad To Be Gay’ in 1976, and coverage of the Clause 28 debate.
Undeniably, though, the space allowed for lesbians and gays to represent themselves remains very small.
In the absence of access to television and mainstream cinema, and from the climate of political struggle among minority groups in the sixties and seventies, independent film and video have flourished.
Lesbians and gay men have worked to produce material reflecting their experience and culture, including films such as Word Is Out (US, Peter Adair et al ) and Nighthawk (Ron Peck and Paul Hallam).
Their audiences were found in independent cinemas and discussion groups: their relationship to broadcast television was at that time non-existent.
In many ways, then, we have made progress since the early fifties.
The social climate has changed, and with it  the limits of television courage, but there is still a great deal of implicit and overt censorship to be challenged.
As with many decisions in television, it is difficult to ascertain the reasons behind non-transmission, but, for the record, Thames Television's 1976 ‘Sex In Our Time: For Queer Read Gay’, and Southern Television's 1979/80 ‘Southern Report: Lesbians’, never reached our screens.
Possibly par for the course in television write-offs, but possibly not.
Are we better off now?
There is considerable dissatisfaction among lesbians and gays at their lack of representation, or misrepresentation, on television.
Evidence for their complaint was provided by the invaluable 1985 survey by the Gays and Broadcasting Project, the results of which were published in the pamphlet Are We Being Served?.
A group of lesbians and gay men monitored 688 hours of national television and radio during one week, and found a depressing picture.
The total time of lesbian and gay representation as a percentage of total television output was 3.38 per cent, plummeting to 0.32 per cent on radio.
Lesbian representation accounted for just 0.06 per cent of total television and radio output — 25 minutes out of 688 hours of broadcasting.
This small amount of coverage was overwhelmingly negative and stereotypical.
A depressing picture, but nevertheless I would argue that there has been a marginal improvement over the years.
One of the reasons for this improvement was the radical shift in the status quo of broadcasting that took place in November 1982, when the new fourth channel went on the air.
Established under the 1981 Broadcasting Act, Channel 4 had a statutory obligation to ‘contain a suitable proportion of matter calculated to appeal to tastes and interests not generally catered for by ITV.’
The lesbian and gay communities seized this opportunity to demand access to the airwaves, calling for more positive representation across the broad span of the schedule, and also for specific gay slots — in particular for a magazine-style programme.
It is worth pausing here to consider what the notion of gay broadcasting serving a lesbian and gay audience and community might mean.
The terms ‘audience’ and ‘community’suggest a  homogenous collective consciousness with clearly defined needs and demands.
But when we talk about the gay audience, do we mean the 50-year-old white male Tory voter living in Chelmsford, or the 21-year-old Asian dyke living in Hackney?
Clearly societal distinctions also operate in the lesbian and gay communities.
It is the imperatives of a coherent demand for representation together with common points of struggle that lead to the notion of a somehow definable gay audience.
What of gay broadcasting?
This seems to have two facets: firstly, an integration of gay issues, concerns and images within the totality of broadcasting; and secondly, specifically gay-orientated programmes.
Arguments have raged, both inside and outside television, about whether ‘ghetto’ slots further marginalise minority communities and prevent their integration into the mainstream.
These are powerful and important arguments, but they do not seem to translate into visible results.
So, whilst the perils of specialist slots are very real, they cannot be relinquished before the mainstream becomes fully representative.
These programmes should only be axed when they are redundant.
A further cause of marginalising such programmes is the problem of ghetto hours.
Late-night scheduling has been a consistent feature of lesbian and gay programming, exploiting the gay audience's motivation to watch these programmes while keeping them on the edges of broadcasting.
As one television executive put it: ‘We do a few gay programmes, and will carry on doing them.
They go out at carefully placed times, late in the evening when most people can easily avoid them.’
Some progress has been made in reducing negative stereotyping.
The Gays and Broadcasting research confirmed that fictionalised images of the effeminate man  and the predatory dyke are still common, as is the collapsing together of all forms of difference into the strange and the perverse.
But more recent material has presented lesbians and gay men as nice respectable citizens — just like anyone else.
Colin's role in ‘EastEnders’ followed this line, as has Gordon's in ‘Brookside’.
Welcome though it is to see such friendly typecasting, we should hope that the opening up of broadcasting to more gay representation will allow for greater diversity.
Channel 4 has gone some way to remedying this situation.
From its earliest days it has been the target of media vilification for its gay programming.
At New Year 1983 it screened the light-hearted ‘One In Five’: it has also shown the film My Beautiful Laundrette , the sitcom ‘Cornerhouse’, documentaries such as‘Veronica 4 Rose’, ‘Breaking The Silence’ and ‘Bright Eyes’, and the fictional ‘Domestic Bliss’.
This progress has a fraught history, however.
Mary Whitehouse, representing the National Viewers and Listeners Association, has repeatedly criticised Channel 4 for suggesting that gay is normal ‘in the light of…an AIDS epidemic.’
Although a planned gay film series (including Mädchen in Uniform ,Before Stonewall and The Life and Times of Harvey Milk ) went ahead, the series title ‘In The Pink’ was removed.
High ratings and positive viewer response, however, ensured that a second season was broadcast the following year, this time without controversy.
The success of these films enabled the early screening of the experimental gay magazine series ‘Out On Tuesday’, first broadcast at 11 p.m. on Valentine's Day, 1989.
The series, produced by a number of different production companies, was an important piece of television: unable to fulfil all expectations, nonetheless it covered a lot of ground in a thought-provoking and stylish manner.
High viewing figures allowed a second series to be shown at the earlier time of 9 p.m., and there are plans for a third series to follow.
Television coverage of homosexuality in recent years has increased considerably as a result of AIDS and, more recently, Clause 28.
Documentaries, news and current affairs programmes have produced a diversity of information and opinion about AIDS and its relationship to gay men: most of this occurred within the explosion of interest in AIDS in 1986/7, as a response to the growing concern about the threat of AIDS to heterosexuals.
It is arguable that the increased visibility of gay men in television drama was a reflection of their dramatic potential as ‘dangerous’ characters, and their function in raising discussion of AIDS.
Television's response to the struggle around Clause 28 reflected the status the campaign achieved in the political arena.
The involvement of influential people, including many heterosexuals, in all areas of public life; the high visibility of figures such as Ian McKellen and Michael Cashman; the size and nature of the demonstrations and direct actions made it great television material.
For probably the first time since 1967, homosexuality was at the forefront of public debate, resulting in moments of real visibility and intervention.
I recall one evening, during the early days of the campaign, when on three occasions on different channels (an arts programme and two awards ceremonies) public statements were made against the Clause.
No special programmes, no journalistic mediation — simply raw protest.
This was an indication of those gay people who work at all levels of broadcasting.
Most are still very much in the closet, however, and those who are more or less open about their sexuality rarely prioritise gay representation on their broadcasting agenda.
Overt lesbian presence, certainly at any level of decision-making or control, is almost non-existent, reflecting the general lack of women in positions of power within broadcasting.
Despite the equal opportunities policies of major broadcasters, there are no effective steps being taken by the industry to remedy this situation, nor possibly any significant recognition of a need to do so.
In a society where lesbians and gay men are a small but significant minority, and where individuals experience various forms of oppression and discrimination because of their sexuality, fair representation is only likely to take place within some form of public service broadcasting.
British television was created with this idea in its heart, and has continued to develop over the last fifty years with these ideals firmly at the forefront.
As we have seen, however, gays have not been well served within this tradition.
We now face a period of great change and uncertainty in broadcasting, and a considerable threat to its role as a public service.
The contradictory policies of the commercial deregulation of broadcasting and the greater regulation of programme content (as proposed in the Broadcasting Bill 1990) could have serious repercussions for the quality of programming, the range of representation, and the effectiveness of the unions.
The battle for ratings will undoubtedly become increasingly influential on programme form and content, as the number of channels proliferates with the spread of satellite and the probability of a fifth terrestrial channel.
The opening up of BBC and ITV to independent producers and the ending of closed shops is already undermining the power of those who work within broadcasting: this could affect their ability to influence content, and also the training and employment practices of the broadcasting institutions.
In contrast to this move to open up broadcasting to the free market, there is the desire to monitor and control output.
In 1989 a Private Member's Bill attempted to bring television under the Obscene Publications Act, while widening the legal definition of obscenity.
The Bill failed, but is likely to resurface as government legislation.
The fact that one of the Bill's triggers was the Channel 4 Screening of Derek Jarman's Sebastiane gives us some indication of the possible threats to homosexual images on television.
The extent of the powers of the Broadcasting Standards Council, headed by William Rees-Mogg, are still unclear, but with its target of ‘sex  and violence’ on television, homosexuality could well be the bull's-eye.
The outlook is not encouraging, although there are still some indicators of hope.
Television is very much a reflection and reinforcement of its society, and the history of gay representation on television is closely linked to events outside.
The opening up of broadcasting has developed across thirty years, but we are still left with huge room for improvement.
Demands for change will continue, but it is difficult to imagine substantial progress being made in the current climate, as broadcasting, and the media in general, becomes increasingly unaccountable to society as a whole.
Approximations: Image, Desire and Lesbian Identity
‘Fat’ as the Antithesis of ‘Erotic’
Heather Smith
‘You just want to push somebody
And a body won't let you
Just want to move somebody
And a body won't let you…
Who do you talk to…
When a body's in trouble?
You just want to run somebody
And a body won't let you
Want to let somebody and a body won't let
You want to kiss, feel, hear, ride
Stop, start somebody and a body won't let you
Who do you talk to…
Who?
Who do you talk to…
When a body's in trouble,
When a body's in trouble.’
‘The hardest part of being a fat person is that it's not just your imagination that tells you you don't count.
In some ways you really don't.
It Is an act of courage for a fat woman to even go out in public.
Every day you are told, ‘Go home.
This isn't for you, the world isn't for you’.’
Existing divisions amongst lesbian feminists have been emphasised by contemporary debates about pornography, sadomasochism censorship and identity politics.
Those socialist feminists whose contributions I find most  exciting and challenging have drawn back the curtains to expose the contradictions and complexity of desire.
Their resistance to essentialist and idealistic definitions of lesbian sex has led to an examination of the role power, pleasure and fantasy play in our sexual choices and practices.
Eroticism has been placed firmly on the feminist agenda, a challenge to the desexualisation of lesbianism which represented a significant strand of seventies' feminism.
Lesbian history has been re-evaluated, and butch femme images have been reclaimed as one of many possible ways to signify erotic identity.
Discussions about ‘dress sense’ have represented a move away from androgyny towards making more complex, overtly erotic fashion statements.
Emphasising the social construction of gender and sexuality, these writers question the biological determinism implicit in the automatic equation of woman as powerless and man as powerful, which leaves little room for change.
Similarly, they challenge the cultural imperialism of a politics which ignores the complex ways in which class and culture affect our sexualities.
They suggest that, by focusing on pornography and sadomasochism, many lesbian feminists avoid addressing more general problems and concerns about sexuality.
Sex resists simple definitions.
It is anarchic.
It cannot be prescribed and controlled.
Sexuality is open to intervention because it is socially constructed and located within ever-changing cultural and historical moments, but desire is a discourse which can be changed through exploration rather than by prohibition.
I welcome the space that has been created to discuss our sexual pleasures and problems, yet I feel that certain gaps remain.
While putting sex back into politics, there has been little recognition of how appearance affects the politics of sex.
Debates about sexism have included feminist critiques of sexual objectification and sexual stereotyping, but have largely excluded investigation of how women whose appearance contravenes cultural ‘norms’ are negated and abused.
Sex is assumed to be the property of a ‘physical elite’: our sexual possibilities are significantly affected by our appearance.
Desire is written across flesh which is eroticised in rigid and exclusive ways in Western cultures.
Women whose bodies are defined as ‘defective’ are pushed to the erotic margins of this society.
Eroticism is defined around absence — defined in relation to what can never be erotic — for the polarized, competitive structure of Western capitalism requires such division.
Feminists have not explored sufficiently how the cultural concept of ‘woman’ varies in cultural, class and aesthetic contexts.
The writing across a woman's body changes as that body becomes fat or scarred or old.
Images have multiple meanings and we play an active and unpredictable role in constructing and interpreting our cultural concepts and products.
No uniform or universal meaning of ‘erotic’ or ‘desirable’exists.
In twentieth-century Western cultures, however, there is some consensus concerning which bodies are ‘sexually attractive’ and central to concepts of desire, and which bodies are ‘repulsive’and marginal.
Many women are excluded by current definitions of ‘beauty’, but this article focuses on how being fat affects our sexual choices, particularly within the lesbian communities.
I hope to establish fat oppression and looksism as areas of concern for feminism.
Extracts From A Diary
SEXUAL ABSENCE 1
Nothing changes/feelings shift, move endlessly in circles/moths beating at glass endlessly/all that energy expended on nothing/no-one lets you in/desire and what can be desired are all fixed within strict parameters/ established as everything you're not/desire written against your body/encoded in all the spaces which are not you/contours which are not yours/you occupy the gap between desire and fulfilment/absence of choice/no  choice at all/why are moths nocturnal when so strongly attracted to light?
Why is the erasure of desire so difficult?
In moments of despair you hit hope on the head with a hammer, but she goes on breathing in dark, safe spaces, echoes and cobwebs/tatters of past desire, spent and perfect, swim through time towards you, reminding you of what was but is no more/splinters in the flesh/tiny mouths open and close and never get fed — not even scraps — nothing at all.
They ache and burn like a bleeding throat.
Appearance matters.
Images make complex statements about identity.
Such statements are culturally and historically specific, and while their meanings are not fixed or static, in the twentieth century they are the products of capitalism, imperialism, and patriarchy.
In many cultures women are the bearers of cultural myths and signifiers of status.
Our bodies are defined and controlled in the interests of power and profit.
We are taught to equate beauty with ‘success’, ‘social mobility’ and sexual desire.
Those women who do not conform to constructed aesthetic ideals are punished and excluded.
Western cultures, structured around polarity and hierarchy, promote competition and conformity.
Concepts of ‘superior’ and ‘inferior’are central to discourses on ‘beauty’.
Affirmation depends on negation: white is valued at the expense of black; youth acquires status through the devaluation of ageing.
The positive value attributed to thin bodies is dependent on definitions of fat as disgusting and diseased: fear and hatred of fat pervades contemporary Western cultures; fat women are excluded from many activities and possibilities because of our size.
Lesbian definitions of ‘beauty’ differ slightly from heterosexual ones, but the pressure to be thin remains.
‘Acceptable’ lesbian images may be slowly changing, but the ‘ideal’body stays the same.
We exist in a society in which ‘a woman must continually watch herself.
She is almost continually accompanied by her own image of herself’, and in which  ‘Men act.
Women appear.
Men look at women.
Women watch themselves being looked at’.
Furthermore, Western cultures prioritise the visual over other sensual impressions.
Consequently, a woman's sense of self-worth is very bound up with her image.
Women are encouraged to spend a lot of time and money attempting to reach impossible and ever-changing images of ‘perfection’.
We are expected to make seasonal adjustments to change our clothes, make-up and even our bodies in accordance with fashion.
The diet industry (via the media) sells the myth that a new body shape can be obtained as easily as a new haircut, provided you can afford their products and endure prolonged starvation.
The media promotes an obsession with fat and how to get rid of it; most women's magazines regularly feature diets and exercise regimes aimed at erasing all ‘spare’ flesh from a woman's body.
Yet 95 per cent of diets fail, and among the 5 per cent of women who do achieve permanent weight-loss, many have developed serious eating disorders such as anorexia nervosa and bulimia.
The price of ‘success’ may involve constant anxiety about potential weight-gain, may lead to serious damage to our health, even to death.
Most women never become replicas of their celluloid and paper dreams.
We remain always just approximations.
The diet industry thrives on the promise of transformation and perfection always held tantalizingly just out of reach.
Endless failure is linked to endless profit.
We punish ourselves for ‘failing’ and believe that we cannot be loved, desired or respected unless we get thin; and punishment is also linked to profit.
The penalties against fat women are so extreme that women continue to starve themselves and buy useless diet products rather than endure such humiliation and exclusion.
‘Making people look the way you want them to is an important part of the colonial process.
By taking away a people's culture and pride in their appearance, you literally change the way they see themselves.’
The fat-hatred embedded in Western cultures has massive international repercussions because of cultural imperialism.
Britain and the US export an increasingly ‘thin’ ideal.
Extremely profitable multinational companies sell size 10 clothes along with diets, cosmetics, ‘Dallas’, beauty contests, gyms and junk food to First Nation/Third World cultures, where fat has been considered beautiful and healthy.
The diet industry sells the medical myths and the promise of ‘perfection’(Western aesthetics with their associations of wealth, glamour and success).
This colonisation of the body is part of a general process of the worldwide imposition of Western values.
Cultural imperialism emphasises difference in a way which enables those with power to define the ‘ideal’.
While promoting the erasure of fat people, Western culture also requires our existence as ‘other’, to warn women everywhere that those who fail to subscribe to the cult of thinness will face exclusion and hatred.
The pressures of racism have led to black people using dangerous skin bleaches, and having plastic surgery to change their features; and to black children playing at miming peeling off their skin or pulling out their hair, in ‘what I like/don't like about myself games.
Now in the ‘beauty’ arena, the body as well as the skin is under attack, and women all over the world bear the burden of Western marketing strategies.
SEXUAL ABSENCE 2
Bad air and you go on breathing.
And desire is starving and its belly grows huge but its lungs continue to process air and it lights small fires everywhere.
The world is diseased and dying.
Desire flutters in an empty room.
Trapped in a cruel flesh joke, desire burns holes so deep they can never be repaired.
I'll be your friend but I'll never be your lover.
No matter how much you have to offer, the body is between.
Too much equals not enough.
Always the same equation.
Righteous in their lack of desire, the media-munching thin people dispose  of us like a dirty garment.
They keep us in jars like dead insects and fail to perceive the pulse of desire.
We're a dirty stain they don't want to be reminded of.
Fat and Sexuality
In many cultures, sexual relationships are regarded as a central source of support and pleasure.
In the West, the media constructs sex as something reserved for those who are considered ‘beautiful’.
Women who approximate to this still have lovers, but the further you move away from‘beauty’, the more inaccessible sex becomes.
Fat women are sexually taboo.
In sex the body is central, and although in the end it is more than the body that is loved, the body is the beginning and fat women just cannot get started.
Positive images of sexually active fat women are absent from both mainstream and alternative media.
Even pornography which explores marginalised and taboo sexualities, covers fat only in specialist issues which eroticise not the ‘beauty’ of fat but its ‘ugliness’.
This fetishisation of disgust encodes fat women in pornographic representation as desperate.
slobbering nymphomaniacs.
Fat women are defined as undesirable, asexual, maternal, sexually desperate, rampant or repressed.
We are misrepresented as dirty, ugly, stupid, irresponsible, out of control, weak-willed and greedy.
The stigma attached to fat means that we are low-status as lovers, thus people who are attracted to fat women may repress their desire because they risk ridicule and pity if they choose such a low-status lover.
Those people who do transgress social and sexual boundaries in loving fat women may punish their fat lover with ambivalence (for example, by wanting to be with them privately but not in public ).
Some fat women have lovers who desire and respect them, but for many more sex means the absence of, or the scraps.
Some fat women are positive about their bodies and  consider themselves powerful, beautiful, sexual, voluptuous and juicy, but many more of us internalise all the negative messages we receive about fat (clumsy.
defective, inferior) and hate our bodies.
Whenever we move down a street, enter a pub, club or restaurant we risk being laughed at, sworn at, spat at.
Such extreme abuse contributes to our feeling that we do not deserve to exist, let alone be sexually assertive.
Some fat women do not define themselves sexually because they do not consider themselves sexually viable, and see no point in labelling themselves in a vacuum.
Those of us who are sexually assertive still find that our confidence crumbles when we are ridiculed in public spaces.
SEXUAL ABSENCE 3
The language of desire is rich and complex.
It excludes you.
For you, desire is a mobile flung in all directions and getting nowhere.
If only desire were a plum-stone. all dried and hard, but it is soft and juicy and luscious.
It gets bruised but the fruit remains.
Persistent clinging flesh and juices that stain.
Sexuality is an area of our lives which involves risk, vulnerability and exposure.
It requires trust.
Fat women risk so much more than thin women when starting a sexual relationship, because we are taught that we are not capable of inspiring love or lust: we have forfeited the right to be sexual because our bodies are incompatible with desire.
Consequently, we may lack confidence and feel less able to risk rejection.
Non-monogamy may be less possible for us, and we may stay in relationships longer than we should because we are scared of not being able to find a replacement.
We are never presented as sexual subjects or objects, so we are less likely to trigger desire, and if we do not believe that we are desirable we will project this and create further obstacles.
When we are not in a sexual relationship this can confirm our own negativity.
SEXUAL ABSENCE 4
Your mum is thirty.
She thinks she looks like Deanna Durbin.
She sets her hair every night — it is black and shines like the moon on a wet pavement.
She has smooth, soft skin which glows softly as though a candle were just below the surface.
She makes herself beautiful clothes — she's fat, so she has to.
She works in a factory, hard, repetitive work.
‘Good’ money.
She lives with your Grandma, whom she supports financially and in other ways.
They are immigrants and in a town full of bigots they keep themselves to themselves.
Sometimes women at work call her a fat Irish pig.
She is friendly towards them, but they are not people she can count on.
She and her Mum go to the pictures often, and on Saturday nights they fry steak and listen to the radio, and talk until the last embers have faded to ash.
She has no women friends in England, she doesn't go to dances, but there is one special dance organised by the factory that she decides to go to.
She makes a special suit of blue and silver and buys blue shoes.
Her Mum says she looks beautiful and this is how she feels.
She goes to the dance alone.
Women line the walls.
Like rows of tulips in buckets waiting to be bought.
No-one asks her to dance.
She sits there all evening and no-one even talks to her.
They don't notice her new suit, she can't feel attention on her face like fingers.
They don't see her at all.
She is the funniest person you know, she is warm, generous and intelligent, her smile could melt ice.
But she sits there all night flat as a shadow on the wall and there is music and celebration and other people dancing.
Always other people.
When she goes home she cries and cannot be comforted.
She went to a dance alone with hope and a new set of clothes, but all they saw was a fat woman and no-one asked her to dance.
Still she wears corsets and girdles, tight and uncomfortable.
She says they keep her back warm.
She tells you being fat ruined her life — nobody likes you if you're fat, they're not attracted to you.
She got a man  nobody else wanted and so she knows what she's talking about.
And you feel excluded by the lesbian communities.
You've learned the same lessons in different ways, which are somehow the same.
Most women are involved in the never-ending struggle against ‘excess’ flesh.
Fat lesbians and fat heterosexual women may experience fat oppression in different ways, but it is present for both.
Feminist lesbians may question sexual objectification and rigid ‘beauty norms’ more than many heterosexual men do.
However, lesbians are more likely than men to feel ambivalent about their own bodies and may feel it especially difficult to desire a fat woman who embodies their own fears.
As part of a sexual minority, lesbians have a restricted choice of lovers, but the number of available lovers for fat women shrinks further.
Some fat women are so grateful to be desired that they will take whatever sex is offered; others have very specific criteria for lovers, and even less choice.
In a recent ‘Out On Tuesday’ programme on Channel 4, Susan Hemmings observed how, in Britain, feminist lesbians in the seventies were expected to be attracted to a woman on the basis of her ideas rather than her appearance.
This ethos contributed to the desexualisation of lesbianism and also ignored a whole range of inequalities which erode some lesbians' choice of lovers.
No matter how‘good’ the ideas of a fat or old or disabled woman, our sexual choices are limited.
If a woman feels inspired by us, she can become our friend, but this is a particular problem for fat lesbians who can have any number of intense, close relationships which inevitably stop just short of sex.
Women are not only attracted to ideas or a sense of humour.
Desire is played out across flesh.
The map of desire is flat and smooth, it does not get dirty or sick or old, it is a neat, hard bourgeois space resistant to transgression.
Being a lesbian requires some shifting away from sexual conformity, but this does not mean we necessarily question other ‘sexual norms’.
Women  ‘police’ other women's bodies because we know how important our appearance is in a society which objectifies us.
Feminist lesbians reject the ideology but continue the practice, for fat women are excluded from current ‘acceptable’ images within the lesbian communities.
A sporty, ‘boyish’ dyke image prevails, so lean hard bodies are preferred to abundant soft flesh, compelling many feminist lesbians to diet, weight train and jog obsessively in order to attain this ‘athletic ideal’.
This lean, sporty, androgynous image is as limiting and as difficult to achieve as more conventional beauty ideals.
The pressure to develop an ‘acceptable’ dyke image devalues diversity and negates other possible lesbian images, such as the much despised femme of seventies and early eighties feminism.
Neither lesbian ‘clone’ nor femme-y images are easily available to fat lesbians, who are often stereotyped as ‘earth mothers’or ‘diesel dykes’.
We are assumed to be failed heterosexuals, feeding into the myth that the lesbian communities accommodate fat more easily than their straight equivalents.
There are many fat lesbians, but very few on ‘the scene’, because those fat women who do go to lesbian clubs and bars are always in a minority and thus feel noticeable.
Considerable pressure to conform exists within the lesbian feminist communities, and those of us who conspicuously deviate from the norm either get stared at or are ignored.
Within the lesbian communities, appearance as a signifier of sexual roles/practices can be very problematic.
‘Your sexy persona does not necessarily indicate what you imagine your sexy being doing in bed, nor does it indicate who you're attracted to.’
For fat women, there are additional problems.
Some feminist psychotherapists have interpreted fat as a ‘protection’ against sexuality, such theories relying on definitions of fat as undesirable, contributing to the myth that fat people are asexual.
Lesbian feminists may, therefore, interpret a fat body as making a ‘don't touch me’ statement.
There is considerable pressure within our community  to have a lover, or to be in the process of finding one.
There is no overt recognition that fat women do not have equal access to sexual relationships: however, if a fat woman's friends never ask her whether she is attracted to someone, they assume that she is single because she is fat and that she is likely to remain without a lover.
This is negation, not support.
When a fat lesbian's friends discuss diets or the bits of their (thin) bodies they dislike for being too big, they negate her.
Current debates on lesbian ‘dress sense’ are opening up more possibilities for experiment with image.
For many lesbians the opportunity to wear ‘feminine’ clothes is a relief ‘after all these years of dressing like men who dress badly’.
Increasing recognition of how oppositional images get incorporated and redefined in ‘mainstream’ fashion, coupled with an awareness that images do not have fixed meanings and can be subverted, has led to a re-evaluation of traditionally ‘erotic’clothes.
‘Mightn't a lacy bra or sheer stockings have erotic appeal less because they are symbols of female powerlessness and more because they are familiar symbols of female sexuality?’
The popularity of lesbian Balls and Fancy-dress parties suggests that many of us enjoy playing with images and moving away from conformity, but there are gaps in this debate.
Women do not all have equal control over their image: poor, working-class women cannot afford designer jeans, leather jackets and other symbols of urban lesbian chic.
Black and working-class women are often stereotyped as sexually available and promiscuous: old women, women with disabilities and fat women are perceived as asexual.
When making erotic statements with clothes we have to be aware of existing stereotypes.
Fat women have to travel miles to buy underwear, and our choice of erotic, indeed all, clothing is minimal.
Most clothes shops sell nothing we can wear, and specialist shops are expensive and offer a very limited range of images.
The message we receive is that we are not attractive and will not be provided with props to make us  so.
Fat women may not feel confident about exposing their bodies in those ways traditionally associated with eroticism.
Moreover, as fat is defined as the antithesis of erotic, ‘erotic’ clothes on a fat body may be interpreted as contradictory or ridiculous.
The image of the lesbian and gay communities presented by the Stop The Clause campaign and by the ‘Out On Tuesday’ series was predominantly young, white, English middle-class, urban, able-bodied and ‘conventionally attractive’.
Many of the participants in ‘OOT’ were London-based, ‘trendy’and intellectual.
Such images obscure the diversity of our communities.
We must work towards a wider range of ‘acceptable’ lesbian and gay images, and stop colluding with restrictive definitions.
We need a positive-images campaign which is positive about all our images.
SEXUAL ABSENCE 5
Wings beating against glass/a bleeding that never ends/desire is endless corridors leading nowhere.
A plant you don't water, it droops but it does not die/your collection of erotic images is considerable but it's always happening to someone else.
Desire is played across ‘perfect’ flesh in ‘perfect’rooms/you lie in your perfect room alone/all around you night throbs with desire/people connecting in new and old ways emphasise your disconnection.
You are a bulb in scorched fabric/an invisible flame/a perfume without scent.
You grow and decay in this sexual solitude.
Possibilities for Change
Sexuality is a difficult area in which to achieve change.
Fat women can work on developing sexual confidence.
and on believing that they deserve, and are capable of inspiring, love and lust, but such self-esteem is difficult to achieve and maintain in a sexual void.
We can demand respect and an end to abuse.
but we cannot demand to be  desired, for desire operates in complex, often unconscious ways.
Centuries of promotion of a thin ideal inscribe it deep within individual and collective unconsciousness.
However, erotic symbols and fantasies are socially constructed and alterable, and by examining how conscious we are of how and why we suppress or express desire, we will be able to establish how fixed our impulses and fantasies are.
Eroticism is open to feminist intervention, but change cannot be achieved easily where the unconscious is concerned.
We cannot decide to alter our psyches in the way we might decide not to wear high heels, just because they damage us and make us vulnerable.
We can explore how and why certain symbols, clothing, body shapes and parts are eroticised, and whether new erotic symbols can be introduced.
We can analyse the role of image and status in the choice of lovers.
We cannot force desire to take a shape it resists, but perhaps we can slowly remould it.
‘... there is a resistance to identity which lies at the very heart of psychic life.’
'The unconscious constantly reveals the ‘'failure’ of identity.
Because there is no continuity of psychic life, so there is no stability of sexual identity — no position for women (or men) which is ever simply achieved.’
We have unstable social and sexual identities.
Our unconscious reveals many contradictions, dislocations and gaps through dreams, slips of the tongue and ‘taboo’ desires, so that we are never completely socialised into dominant ways of thinking and feeling.
There is always the possibility of disruption.
As lesbians we bear testimony to this resistance to socialisation.
We have refused to repress our desires, in spite of enormous pressure to conform to heterosexual norms.
We can use psychoanalytic theories to explore fat and sexuality.
Some women do resist the pressure to loathe fat, and we should consider why they refuse to collude with widely accepted definitions of sexual attractiveness.
We can also explore the meaning of taboo for those of us  (lesbians) who are already defined as taboo.
Perhaps some positive aspects are contained within fat's designation as taboo; for instance, some people find fat attractive because it is forbidden and marginal: ‘It may be that the forbidden is exciting because it is forbidden.
But, as Freud pointed out, things are taboo precisely because they are exciting, otherwise they need not be prohibited.’
SEXUAL ABSENCE 6
Trapped on the edges of desire.
I'm sitting on a bus without a destination.
It's been parked in the depot for years.
Sexual absence.
The sadness of a closing-off of part of myself.
The loss of deep pleasure, of pushing intensity to its furthest edges.
Long hours of physical exploration/emotional connection so deep like moving through layers of sea.
An underwater world, new and exciting and richer than surface communication.
Intense excitement/deep relaxation/kisses/caresses/ laughter/explosions.
Such knowing like reaching through deep snow to the land beneath.
Curled up to keep warm but still breathing.
Missing the intimacy/the emotional expansion/the pushing against the edges of friendship/merging and pushing away of barriers/the freedom of sexual contact/the extension of knowing and being known/the growth and strengthening of trust.
Sexual relationships can be liberating and affirming, they can offer intimacy and support, an outlet for emotional intensity not permitted in most other close relationships.
You can kiss a friend on the lips, but if you put your tongue in her mouth it becomes something else.
Sex is about transgressing boundaries and revealing more of yourself than you would usually dare.
While celebrating the pleasures of sex, we need to explore those ways in which sex can be problematic.
We should question the centrality of sex, as this has an adverse and marginalising effect on other relationships.
Such revision could increase the value of friendships, autonomy and other forms of creativity, and open up discussion on the pleasures of celibacy, masturbation, shared sex.
We should also question the pressure to be constantly seeking a lover, and the all-consuming, obsessive nature of much passionate love.
Whilst ever sexual relationships are foregrounded and idealised, those of us without a lover will be made to feel inferior and excluded.
‘Big women can be extremely imposing.
A large woman who is not apologising for her size is certainly not a figure to invite the dominant meanings which our culture attaches to femininity.
She is impressive in ways that our culture cannot tolerate.’
As fat women we are punished for not conforming to conventional feminine ideals.
As fat lesbians we are negated for deviating from alternative womanly ideals.
We must continue to intervene in contemporary feminist debates on desire, pleasure, power and image.
We must emphasise how and why existing ‘erotic’ and aesthetic criteria exclude us.
We can argue for a redefinition of concepts such as‘sexually attractive’ to include all those women currently negated.
We can continue to expose the artificiality of masculinity and femininity.
If we stop shaving we can demonstrate the fallacy of the equation of woman and hairlessness; if we stop dieting we can show that woman equals big as well as small.
Most women are dissatisfied with their bodies and feel that they are only approximations.
No-one belongs to the physical elite for long.
Our intervention can create more erotic possibilities for all women.
Western cultures market desire.
Under capitalism, anything can become a commodity.
We should resist the manipulation of our desires and form a coalition with women internationally to resist the colonisation of our bodies.
We should question the centrality of appearance to sex and suggest that lesbians no longer make snap assessments of each other on the basis of how we look.
While urging for a change in the terms of the debate, in  the short-term fat women must argue that to be both fat and beautiful is not a contradiction in terms, as part of the process of beginning to celebrate our sexuality.
Fat women are campaigning against all forms of discrimination currently experienced.
We are challenging the fashion industry to improve its provision, so that we can experiment with images and make more erotic statements with clothes.
Fat lesbians are planning to stop hiding away and to make a big impression on the scene.
We must all assert that fat is not the antithesis of erotic.
We must redefine fat.
have confidence and take pleasure in our bodies.
Forced to exist on the social and sexual margins of a society which hates us, we can break through this confinement and move centre-stage.
It is our turn for a bite of the apple.
The Limits of Tolerance?— Lesbian and gay rights and local government in the 1980s
Bob Cant
No-one ever thought it would be easy to achieve equality for lesbians and gays.
Centuries of oppression could not just be wiped out by a legislative dictate.
Attempts by some Labour-led councils in the 1980s to respond to the demands of the lesbian and gay movement and to reduce the impact of that oppression, led to one of those great hypocritical moral panics which are so characteristic of British public life.
Now that the shouting is over and the most homophobic piece of legislation for over a century is on the statute books, lesbians and gays are picking themselves up and asking if our involvement with local government was really worth the effort.
Local government had been a much under-estimated sector since 1945.
Voter turnout in local elections was frequently as low as 25 per cent, in contrast with over 70 per cent in national elections.
Before 1945, however, local government had been a crucially contested political arena and major initiatives had taken place in relation to social policies, often in opposition to the government of the day.
The London County Council had, for example, been innovative in its approach to the public provision of both education and housing for working-class people.
While the election of an authoritarian central government in  1979 resulted in cut-backs for local councils, it also provided a further stimulus for more community-oriented municipal projects.
Many Labour councils recognized that the victory of the Conservative Party in 1979 reflected a loss of faith in the way that both the economy and the welfare state had been managed by successive governments since 1945.
They endeavoured, on a number of levels, to make themselves more accountable than previous Labour councils had been.
They looked to ways of organizing cheap, safe public transport, of generating socially useful employment and, particularly after the 1981 riots, of improving the quality of urban life.
Their vision of society was collectivist, grass-roots oriented and utterly antithetical to the privatised and mortgaged paradise of Thatcherism.
One of the most controversial areas of intervention by these new-style Labour councils was Equal Opportunities.
The 1960s and 1970s had seen the emergence of a number of social movements among oppressed groups.
The issues that they raised about the institutionalized nature of their oppression could not be resolved by any one local council.
But some councils acknowledged that their procedures contributed to the oppression and undertook to make changes in an attempt to improve the material conditions of people in those oppressed groups.
Their approaches differed — they consulted with organizations from the oppressed groups; they set up new committee structures; they funded voluntary groups and made space available to them; they arranged awareness-training for their staff.
They raised enormous expectations.
While progressive Labour councils declared their intentions to address the expectations of women, of black people and disabled people, it was by no means clear that they would do so in relation to lesbians and gays.
The public invisibility and the self-policing that are so central to lesbian and gay oppression place us in quite a different position, socially and economically, from each of these  other groups.
But was this political climate of friendliness towards the oppressed one that lesbians and gays could afford to ignore?
Would we ever again have such an opportunity?
By the early 1980s the euphoria of early Gay Liberation politics had worn off.
There were those — particularly gay men — who argued that there was no need for any gay politics at all.
Their lifestyles focused on the social networks around the pubs and clubs that had emerged in the wake of Gay Liberation.
The politically active were divided among themselves — most lesbians were then working in women-only organizations: some groups continued to campaign for law reforms; some groups sought alliances as part of the process of bringing about revolutionary change.
One feature, common to this diversity, was visibility.
While not all individuals felt able to be out and visible all the time, the invisibility that had isolated lesbians and gays for decades and stifled their creativity had, to some extent, been lifted.
There were now, albeit only for a minority, alternatives to invisibility.
Visibility was not without its problems.
While there were more opportunities for lesbians and gays to meet one another, to make friendships, to form relationships, to have sex, this attracted a number of forms of hostility.
The largest gay national publication,Gay News , was dragged through the courts in 1977–78 on a charge of blasphemy, for publishing a homoerotic poem about Christ.
Lesbians who wished to become parents by artificial insemination found themselves pilloried by the media.
A survey by London Gay Switchboard in 1980 of people looking for accommodation found that one in four was homeless on account of their sexuality.
The employment protection legislation of the 1970s was of no assistance to lesbians and gays.
John Warburton, a teacher for the progressive Inner London Education Authority, refused to lie to his pupils and was sacked; Louise Boychuk, sacked for wearing a ‘Lesbians Ignite’ badge at her work as an insurance clerk, found that the Employment Appeal Tribunal agreed with her  employers' right to sack her; John Saunders, who had never wished to tell anyone at work that he was gay, found that the E.A.T.
and the Scottish Court of Session agreed that his employers' prejudice justified their sacking of him; Susan Shell was sacked from her job as a care assistant by Barking's Labour council, when it was discovered that she was lesbian and she refused to resign.
The movement may have been divided in this period, but these attacks did not take place without resistance and the value of collective action was learned.
The Gay News Defence Campaign may not have won the case for the paper, but it helped the community maintain a sense of strength and it led to the setting up of the Gay Activists Alliance.
The victimized workers may not have won their jobs back, but they and other workers learned about the value of self-organization at work as well as about strategies for relating to trade unions.
Lesbian and gay trade union groups became increasingly common from 1974 onwards, and the Gay Rights At Work campaign played a prominent part in a number of defence campaigns for dismissed workers.
Many public-sector trade union conferences, such as NALGO, NUPE, NATFHE and CPSA passed resolutions in support of the employment rights of lesbians and gay men, and their journals carried articles and correspondence on the issue.
The Scottish Trades Union Congress in 1981 passed a resolution after debate on the John Saunders case, and it included the following section:
Congress recognizes that discrimination in employment is part of a wider pattern of discrimination against homosexual men and women in society as a whole, and that a campaign to achieve the objects (listed above in the resolution) will be more effective if this is taken into account and is conducted in association with gay rights and civil liberty organizations.
It further calls for discussion within the trade union movement on this question, with a view to dispelling the myths that surround homosexuality.
It is a mistake to imagine that resolutions passed at trade  union conferences represent the most deeply held feelings of the entire membership.
But these resolutions represent an important public statement by trade union activists about the nature of discrimination experienced by lesbians and gays at work.
They also contributed to a growing consciousness of the value of collectivism and of alliances among sections of the lesbian and gay trade movement.
They represent a considerable achievement on the part of the lesbian and gay trade union groups.
The Labour movement might not be a home for lesbians and gays, but it was certainly no longer enemy territory.
A turning point in the relationship between the movements came in August 1981, when Ken Livingstone, the newly elected leader of the Greater London Council, accepted an invitation to speak at Harrow Gay Unity.
He told a packed meeting that he was opposed to discrimination against lesbians and gay men, and, further, that he wanted to see homosexuality regarded as being equally as valid as heterosexuality.
He has described the press response in the next few days as a ‘lunatic uproar’.
He was, it seems, familiar enough with the nature of lesbians and gay oppression not to be surprised or swayed by this, but many of his colleagues in the Labour Party were horrified.
It was one thing to be opposed to discrimination (and many of them now began for the first time to say that they did, indeed, oppose it), but it was quite another thing to talk openly about equal validity of sexuality.
This very outrageousness on Livingstone's part, however, struck a chord in the lesbian and gay communities.
At last, there was a national politician who listened to lesbians and gays and spoke out for us in a way that was without fear, shame or embarrassment.
The traditional wings of the Labour movement were afraid that Livingstone had unleashed a torrent — and they were right.
The GLC was not, in fact, the first council to give support to lesbian and gay projects.
In the late 1970s both Islington and Manchester Councils had given funding to voluntary groups, such as Friend and  Switchboard.
These councils' low-key approach had saved them from widespread media hostility, but it also meant that awareness of the funded projects was limited to those who were already, to some extent, part of lesbian and gay networks.
The visibility issue was not part of those councils' briefs.
Some argued and some still argue that a low profile was more effective in meeting existing.
clearly identified needs than utopian declarations about equality.
The strategy decided by the GLC for lesbian and gay anti-discrimination work was to give support to existing groups and projects.
London being traditionally a magnet for exiles of all kinds, had a large openly lesbian and gay population with a diversity of interest.
Funding was given to groups such as Lesbian and Gay Employment Rights and the Stonewall Housing Association, both of which were engaged in the kind of work that most people in the Labour movement could easily identify with.
The GLC also agreed to give funding to the Gay London Policing group (GALOP), a monitoring project, in keeping with their overall concern about police accountability; and to the September In The Pink Festival, in keeping with their policy of generating cheap, enjoyable cultural activities.
(It was during this festival that Jimi Somerville emerged into the public eye.)
They were also concerned that their Equal Opportunities policies should apply to all funded groups, and their awareness of the multi-faceted discrimination experienced by black lesbians and gays led them to fund the Black Lesbian and Gay Centre Project.
One of the most controversial areas of GLC activity (and this was picked up by the Tories in a party political broadcast as early as 1984), was the Gay Teenage Group which had been set up by gay young men in 1976.
GLC funding made it possible for them to conduct a research project into the lives of young lesbians and gays.
Widely attacked by homophobes as a threat to family life, the report, in places, makes chilling reading — 12 per cent beaten up at school because of their sexuality; 10 per cent sacked from work; 19 per cent admitting to attempted  suicide.
Despite all this, and very probably contributing to it, schools had very largely not taken on board the issue of homosexuality, and 60 per cent of the sample said it had never been mentioned at all.
It can only be deduced that most young people learn about homosexuality from the negative and misinformed images in the mainstream media.
While an enormous amount of energy and enthusiasm was expended on GLC-related projects, it would be a mistake to think that they were greeted with uncritical acclaim by all lesbians and gays.
Many who belonged to the GLC traditions could see no reason to trust any institution of the local state, or to risk becoming dependent on it; they argued that independent self-organization was the only way to effect changes in our lives.
London Lesbian and Gay Switchboard, for example, only applied for relatively small equipment grants, as opposed to paid workers, and has continued to flourish independently.
Some lesbian feminists saw the GLC as just another patriarchal institution whose Equal Opportunities policies would entrap women in another form of male domination.
Another argument was that the payment of lesbian and gay workers would create further divisions and hierarchies within the communities, and would place the workers in situations where they had to choose between their loyalty to the community and their loyalty to their funding body.
And working-class dykes and queens whose whole identity is often a conscious political expression, continued to get on with their lives.
While the GLC recognized that lesbians and gays were not one homogenous community, these differences testified to our political heterogeneity.
The London Lesbian and Gay Centre was to prove to be the focus of a major set-piece battle between different groups of lesbians and gays.
The GLC had given high priority to funding this community centre as a space where lesbians and gays could manage their own social activities.
Even before the doors were opened in the spring of 1985, an almighty row had developed over the  usage of the centre by SM (sadomasochism) groups.
Lesbians Against Sado Masochism claimed that the dress codes and imagery of members of the SM groups were offensive to black people, to Jews, to gypsies, as well as to many lesbians and gays.
They also argued that the normalization of such images by SM groups acclimatized people to brutality and made them less percipient about the advent of ‘real fascism’.
A group called Sexual Fringe.
who saw themselves as sexual outlaws, rose to defend the rights of people with proscribed sexualities to seek self-determination for their bodies.
They protested that the labelling of SM as fascist trivialized the real fight against fascism, and condemned what they saw as the policing of sexual identity by LASM.
In the end an Extraordinary General Meeting of the LLGC decided that SM groups could use the centre.
In retrospect, it is not in the least surprising that the provision of this space generated all kinds of questions about the nature of the ‘lesbian and gay community’.
Further questions about the rights of paedophiles, transsexuals and bisexuals in relation to the centre were mooted, but full-scale debates never materialized.
The fact that such debates about sex could even be envisaged at all testifies to the growing strength of sexual politics.
But it seems unlikely that many GLC councillors had foreseen such a public debate between different lesbian and gay ‘communities of interest’, when they approved the funding for the centre.
Municipal socialism in Britain had always had a puritanical element to it, and debates about sexual choice were no part of this tradition.
Such debates, it was feared, would lead to ‘Sex on the Rates’ headlines and could threaten Labour's electoral prospects.
The traditionalists in the Labour Party, already concerned at the loss of some ‘respectable’ working-class voters over the Tory council-house purchase policy, were alarmed that even more of them would desert Labour over such close associations with homosexuality.
One of the concepts which gained new prominence in the mid-1980s, and which was to be of concern to Labour  traditionalists, was that of ‘heterosexism’.
It had been popularized in lesbian feminist circles by the American writer, Adrienne Rich, and was taken up as a way of understanding the common ground between the very different oppressions experienced by lesbians and gay men of different classes, different ages, different races, etc.
A group of officers at the GLC's Industry and Employment Branch produced a booklet called Danger: Heterosexism At Work , which defined heterosexism as:
‘a system of ideas and practices based on a set of beliefs about heterosexuality being the normal and natural sexuality for both women and men, and all other sexual practices, in particular homosexuality, being deviant.
Heterosexism lays down the rules and conditions under which all sexualities are valued or devalued in our society and penalties/benefits accordingly awarded.
Under heterosexism, lesbians and gay men are particularly penalized.'
This theoretical attempt to explain the ideological, institutional and material aspects of our oppression rejected the biological/Third Sex/'born that way’ view of homosexuality, and located it firmly within society's structures.
It highlighted how there would be limits on the ‘sexual choices’ available to people according to their class, race, gender, etc.
If, as the theory of heterosexism suggested, the origins of homosexual oppression are social, then the solution to that oppression will also be social.
Lesbian and gay rights is not, therefore, a matter of winning tolerance for a permanent minority; it is a matter of making structural changes in society.
Heterosexism was a theory that was increasingly attractive to lesbian and gay socialists, but in the mid-1980s it still carried little clout in the lesbian and gay communities as a whole.
The GLC's lesbian and gay anti-discrimination policies provided inspiration not just in London, but all over the rest of the country as well.
Lesbian and gay activists learned from the GLC experience about the benefits and dangers of working with local councils; heterosexual  members of the Labour Party and councillors became less afraid of lesbian and gay issues; lesbian and gay rights increasingly became part of the package offered by the new social-movement oriented, urban Left.
The leader of the Islington Council, Margaret Hodge, questioned the direction of some of this development and, in London Labour Briefing No.37, said ‘the class nature of gay politics is much more ambiguous [than black politics and anti-racism]…activists in gay and lesbian politics come from a group whose social, occupational, educational and cultural background bears little resemblance to the population of the Inner City.’
Ignoring the whole question of invisibility, which is particularly oppressive to working-class lesbians and gays, she nonetheless raised matters which were on the minds of many other heterosexual politicians.
None of them showed any interest, however, in debating the matter with her or with us.
As well as the changing climate in local government, 1984 also saw the pioneering work of Lesbians And Gays Support The Miners.
It seemed like a sea change.
The GLC's strategy of funding voluntary groups was less appropriate in smaller cities, where the visible lesbian and gay communities were proportionally much smaller.
Manchester City Council was, in 1984, the first council to appoint workers to deal specifically with lesbian and gay issues as part of their Equal Opportunities Unit.
This new unit also had responsibility for issues relating to race, gender, disability.
Would it be possible for any such unit of paid council employees to negotiate with the local state the demands and needs of the oppressed?
Val Stephens, the Chair of the Equal Opportunities Committee, and the late Margaret Roff, the lesbian Vice-Chair, shared the concern of local activists about the dangers of bureaucratizing the struggle against oppression.
They laid great emphasis on the value of a high level of participation by members of the lesbian and gay communities.
Lesbian and Gay-Men's Sub-Committees were set up in such a way as to give a high level of representation to people from outside the council's  structure, and to ensure that their voices could be heard.
Their outreach programme went beyond this and held meetings in gay clubs where scores of gay men, including working-class gay men, were able to hear about the council's Equal Opportunities policies on their own ground, and to express their viewpoint about their experiences of service provision by the council.
The aspirations of lesbians and gay men were often different, and lesbians campaigned for space that was free not only of heterosexism, but also of gay men; funding for a Lesbian Centre was eventually provided in 1989.
There have also been ongoing tensions in relation to the council's bureaucracy, the expectations attached to the activists-turned-officers, and the question of prioritizing the needs of different oppressed groups.
But, on the whole, the Manchester experiment has been an important breakthrough in the campaign to make the local state more accessible to its lesbian and gay citizens.
Councils in other parts of the country also adopted the Manchester approach and appointed workers or set up a unit.
Nottingham City Council appointed a lesbian and a gay man on a job-share to assist the implementation of their policy.
Some months before the 1983 council elections the Labour Campaign for Gay Rights group in Nottingham initiated a debate among the lesbian and gay groups in the city, resulting in the publication of a charter, ‘A Fair Deal For Gays’, which included proposals for council action around employment practices, housing, leisure services, etc.
One of the members of the campaign, Richard McCance, stood as an openly gay candidate for Labour, winning with a 13 per cent swing a seat which the Tories had held for forty years.
The strength of the local campaign was an important factor in the council's decision to commit funding to this area of work.
A number of Scottish councils adopted the kind of policies proposed by the 1981 STUC resolution, but none of them has set up a unit or appointed specific anti-discrimination workers.
Some Scots activists argue that this is more effective in the context of the more  collectivist Scottish political culture.
It is certainly the case that Stirling Council has what is probably one of the most progressive same-sex-sharing tenancy policies in the country.
In Scotland, the only way of gauging the effectiveness of this approach would be through a survey of the lesbian and gay community, but there, as in the rest of Britain, such expensive research is no longer a priority for hard-pressed local councils.
The lesbian and gay issue featured prominently in the Tory propaganda war against the GLC, although more on the level of rumour and innuendo than on the public level.
As the date of abolition (April 1986) drew nearer, activists in London were determined that the momentum should not be lost in this area of local government work.
Many more lesbians and gays were openly involved in their local Labour parties than would have been the case even five years previously, and they ensured that the Labour manifestos in the 1986 council elections included commitments to lesbian and gay work.
The smaller size of the boroughs made the GLC-style financing of voluntary groups more difficult.
A number of borough councils agreed to appoint workers with specific lesbian and gay responsibilities and, after long periods of consultation, Camden and Haringey agreed to set up their own lesbian and gay units.
The Camden Unit had four workers and the Lesbian and Gay Committee was chaired by Sandra Plummer, a lesbian councillor: the Haringey Unit had six workers and the Sub-Committee was chaired by Vince Gillespie, a gay councillor.
Activists in Haringey persuaded the council to suspend their commitment to go to full committee status, because a sub-committee could have a majority of non-councillors; this would facilitate greater participation by members of the lesbian and gay communities, particularly those who were black, disabled or unemployed.
The Haringey Lesbian and Gay Unit was established weeks before the 1986 council elections, and it featured prominently in the campaign.
The Labour manifesto included many policy developments of the kind outlined  in the GLC's Charter for Gay and Lesbian Rights in relation to housing, social services, education, community facilities, staff training and the needs of black lesbians and gays.
It acknowledged the deep-rooted nature of heterosexism and made a commitment to fight that.
It was a manifesto for change, and although it was given greater publicity by the Tories and the local press than by the Labour Party, it was with this manifesto that Labour increased its majority in Haringey.
One particularly significant result, against the trend in the rest of the borough, was the Tory capture of a predominantly white working-class ward in North Tottenham.
Many of the voters there were the council-house tenants/potential home buyers who had been so important to Thatcher's electoral successes in southern England.
The Tory campaign in this ward had begun by placing emphasis on everything that was deemed a threat to the mortgaged bliss of privatised nuclear family-life — gypsies, black muggers, Bernie Grant, the Lesbian and Gay Unit.
As the campaign wore on, greater emphasis was placed on the lesbian and gay issue and the threat that Labour's policies posed to everything that was ‘normal’ and ‘natural’.
The Labour policy of ‘ensuring that lesbianism and gayness are treated positively in the curriculum’ was raised in such a way as to play on parents' fears for the safety of their children.
Against the backdrop of the media's homophobic and moralistic coverage of AIDS, a panic was generated to suggest that the positive-images policy would lead to AIDS.
The Labour Women's Manifesto was subject to constant attack and deliberate confusion created between the terms ‘heterosexism’ and ‘heterosexuality’.
Labour, we were assured, would abolish heterosexuality!
Such was the potency of this issue that the Tories took the unprecedented step of having their leaflets on heterosexism translated into Greek, to appeal to the Labour-voting Cypriot voters.
They had realized that we were saying that lesbian and gay sexual relationships  were as good as heterosexual relationships: they had realized the panic that this issue could generate.
No-one in their right minds would have believed that Labour wanted to abolish heterosexuality or promote AIDS, but such was the level of fear and ignorance about homosexuality that these ideas could be aired.
This election campaign was, apart from anything else, a good advertisement for the need for a positive-images policy to dispel, maybe not the hatred, but certainly the fear and the ignorance about homosexuality.
In the wake of the election in Haringey, an allegedly independent campaign, the Parents' Rights Group, was set up and led largely by working-class women.
Their primary aim was to oppose positive images of lesbians and gays in education, and they soon had a high profile throughout Haringey.
Petitions were circulated; schools were picketed; demonstrations were organized; books were burned.
They claimed to speak for traditional family values and found support from various fundamentalists — Orthodox Jewish, Roman Catholic, Baptist — in an attempt both to broaden their appeal among Haringey's multiracial population and to strengthen their message that homosexuality was ‘unnatural’ in all cultures.
Their allegations about what they called ‘gay lessons’ were reported in the national media and debated in Parliament.
The New Right had been showing an interest in Labour's support for lesbian and gay rights for some time, and a number of organizations such as the National Front, the New Patriotic Movement.
the Moonies and the Campaign for a Free Britain, offered support to the PRG's campaign.
More important than these political links, however, was the shift which the PRG campaign managed to generate in the public discourse about what was ‘normal’ and ‘natural’in the family.
The fact that educational policies, such as positive images, might attempt to reflect the social reality of an increasingly diverse society and to address the needs of individual children, was greatly undermined by this whole campaign.
Patriarchal power in education was coming  back in a big way, and was endorsed in the 1986 Education Act's stipulation that sex education should be taught within a moral framework and with due regard to family life.
As far as the New Right was concerned, that was only a beginning.
The main resistance to the Parents' Rights Group campaign did not come from the council, where the Labour group effectively factionalized themselves — and their Public Relations Department — into silence.
Council leaflets explaining their lesbian and gay education policies appeared months after the initial uproar, by which time opinions were more firmly set.
A more immediate and effective resistance was organized by Positive Images, a local group set up by lesbian and gay activists and members of most of the Left groups.
A mixed group, many of whose members showed little respect for the principle of lesbian and gay self-organization, it soon became a sectarian battlefield and did little to organize lesbians and gays with no previous political experience.
But whatever their short-comings, Positive Images was the only group of people who were prepared to speak out and take action in the face of this backlash.
In the short term it did sterling work in organizing petitions, counter-demonstrations and, most significantly, a mass lobby of Haringey Council in October, 1986, when the Labour councillors reaffirmed their commitment to all aspects of their lesbian and gay rights policy.
In a way that is all too typical of both the English Left and the English lesbian and gay movement, Positive Images failed to draw on the parallel developments around local government funding of lesbian and gay projects in the USA.
Both San Francisco and New York had seen similar coalitions of inner-city white working-class groups in this scenario.
The Labour Party in Haringey was terrified of the electoral implications of splits in the black communities, and made no statement at all about the increasing intimidation experienced by black lesbians and gays in this period.
These fears were  exacerbated when the Haringey West Indian Leadership Council passed a resolution which referred to homosexuality's ‘roots in a morally decadent white and European society.’
Haringey Black Action was then set up to oppose such reactionary politics, and, together with Positive Images, organized a successful demonstration through the centre of Haringey and through North Tottenham in defence of black lesbians and gays, and against racism and bigotry.
In retrospect, the Positive Images campaign succeeded to the extent that Haringey Council did not abandon its lesbian and gay rights policies, or disband its Lesbian and Gay Unit.
In that year, Haringey's Labour councillors learned more about heterosexism than they would ever have believed possible, and they have become far more articulate in their defence of lesbian and gay rights than they were at the time of their election.
The council's curriculum working-party on lesbian and gay issues in education produced a thoughtful and well-researched document,Mirrors Round The Walls — Reflecting Diversity , which received none of the media interest experienced by the earlier misinformation.
But what Positive Images might have done, but did not do, was to generate any Left consensus on the family and relationships.
The Left had discovered that more was being expected of them than tolerance, but while the PRG had succeeded in setting an agenda based on fear, hatred and ignorance, Positive Images failed to popularize our own agenda of equality, choice and resistance to oppression.
It never really got to grips with the issues of childhood, innocence and learning about sexuality.
It never made any links with the next ‘sex and local government’ moral panic about child abuse in Cleveland in the late eighties.
The implications of both Haringey and Cleveland as indicators of the meaning of family life and sexual choice at that time have yet to be explored.
Easy though it is to criticize Positive Images' theoretical short-comings, the fact is that this was almost the only group in the country that was addressing these  issues at all.
The rest of the Labour Left was certainly silent.
The fascistic overtones of the PRG's campaign and the attack on Councillor Vince Gillespie went largely unreported in the Left media.
Publications such as Marxism Today, New Statesman.
New Socialist or Tribune hardly commented at all on the local government funding of lesbian and gay projects, the Haringey backlash or the debate around heterosexism.
The only sources of information were tabloid hysteria, diatribes from the New Right in the ‘quality’ press and.
most important of all, rumour.
When in the spring of 1987 Lord Halsbury introduced a bill in the House of Lords to ban the promotion of homosexuality by local authorities, that too went unreported and undiscussed.
Silence can be very powerful.
The public silence was broken early in 1987 by Marxism Today , who can seldom resist a bandwagon, even if they often fall under the wheels in the process; and the particular bandwagon they joined on this occasion was the one about what the Tories had labelled ‘Loony Left’ councils.
They now proceeded to criticize a number of left-wing Labour councils for their management of particular policies.
The hidden agenda — and there always seems to be one when the Left discusses lesbian and gay rights — was Marxism Today 's distrust of the ‘Trots’ who controlled these councils.
There was no reason at all why these councils should have been regarded as above criticism, but in the context of that period when local government was under renewed attack from Thatcherism, the publication of sectarian, ill-researched articles in the magazine that likes to see itself as a broad-based forum of progressive ideas, was nothing less than destructive.
Statements to the effect that, in relation to lesbian and gay rights, there had been no ‘public work in the civil society’ were simply mendacious.
Within the next few months the silence in the Left media was further broken by articles criticizing councils such as Haringey for ‘moralism’, suggesting that  anti-heterosexist policies were undermining Labour's traditional family-based support, and advocating psychoanalytic theory as the road to lesbian and gay liberation.
All of these are interesting concepts.
worthy of discussion, but the context in which articles are published can be as important as the content of the articles themselves.
None of these articles referred to the activities of the Parents' Rights Group, to the joblessness and homelessness that had caused lesbians and gays to seek support from councils in the first place, to the findings of the Gay Teenage Group survey about the intimidation and isolation of lesbian and gay teenagers in state schools, to the menace of fundamentalism — or to any other feature of our oppression.
Any backlash problem which there might be seemed to relate not to the nature of our oppression, but to problems of management and presentation by these left-wing councils.
The fact that there was no sense of any history of lesbian and gay struggle in any of these articles made it seem incomprehensible why any council would have adopted any policy or set up any unit to serve the needs of lesbians and gays.
I thought about writing a science fiction short story entitled ‘Haringey Lesbian And Gay Unit: It Came From Outer Space’.
Shortly after the appearance of the article in Marxism Today , Labour lost a by-election in Greenwich.
Those of us who had been drawn towards Labour as a party of change now received a sharp reminder that whatever else it was at local level, it was at national level still essentially an electoral machine.
We were reminded that before he became party leader, Neil Kinnock had said, in relation to Peter Tatchell, ‘I am not in favour of witch-hunts but I do not mistake bloody witches for fairies.’
The inquest into the Greenwich defeat was not to be a debate about the future direction of socialism in multi-cultural inner-city areas; it was to be an appeal to homophobia.
A letter was leaked from Neil Kinnock's press office which said, among other things, ‘The ‘Loony Labour Left’ is taking its toll, the gays and lesbian issue  is costing us dear among the pensioners; and fear of extremism is particularly prominent in the GLC area.’
The author of this missive was Patricia Hewitt, who seemed determined to take on the mantle of Sara Barker, a notorious fixer and manipulator from the Labour Party of the fifties.
The word had now gone out — the ‘Loony Left’ was to be bashed for the sake of the Party.
To attack their anti-racist policies would have exposed Labour to (more) accusations of racism; far easier to attack the much less extensive lesbian and gay policies; and if that meant abandoning lesbians and gays to isolation and intimidation, so be it.
Isolated pockets of Labour support for lesbians and gays continued, but the rest of 1987 saw Labour silent in the face of renewed homophobic attacks by the Tories — the reference to the Positive Images issue in the 1987 election propaganda, the advocacy of traditional family values in the Department of Education and Science circular on sex education.
When the Clause banning the promotion of homosexuality by local authorities was introduced into the Local Government Bill in December 1987, the Tories must have been confident of no Labour resistance; and with the honourable exception of Bernie Grant, now a Haringey MP, they were right.
The resistance began when lesbians and gays organized themselves and made their voices heard throughout the country.
We may not have been able to stop the legislation (although we did succeed in reducing its scope), but we let the world know that we remained strong and proud and shameless.
Inevitably, there has been an increased distrust of party politics in the lesbian and gay communities since the Clause debacle.
Some have argued that by becoming involved in local government we had brought the whole disaster upon ourselves.
Lesbian and gay activists are, once again, placing greater emphasis on independent self-organization, and the 1989 Gay Pride march, free of the possible taint of any local government subsidies, was the biggest ever.
In their different ways, Neil Bartlett, Clyde Unity Theatre and Square Peg are all heightening our awareness of the history of lesbian and gay lifestyles in Britain — whether it is in the nineteenth-century underworld networks, during 1930s Scotland, or at the Gateways Club.
Politics, as an organized activity, is definitely out of favour and we can all gain from learning about the traditions of humour, resilience and survival of our own communities.
Any community with a sense of its own history is stronger for that.
But is that enough?
During the summer of 1988, just about the time when the Clause was becoming law, an English gay novel was published to widespread acclaim.
The Swimming Pool Library by Alan Hollinghurst is a beautifully written, homoerotic novel set in the pre-AIDS gay male sub-culture of London in the early 1980s.
Its central character is a rich young patrician gay man who becomes increasingly aware of previous generations of homosexual men in his class.
His lovers and those of his antecedents are not themselves patricians — they are poor, they are working class, they are black, they lack his privileges; they are young and once their looks have gone they are expendable.
A curious feature of the novel is the absence of women — particularly curious since family life and the inheritance principle are essential features of the central character's privilege.
Women, even heterosexual women in his family, are given no real voice at all.
The lifestyles in The Swimming Pool Library do not represent the entirety of the gay scene, but by locating the gay male scene so firmly within the traditional English class structure, Hollinghurst reminds us why the gay scene alone is not enough.
One of the things that those of us who were involved in local government campaigns were trying to do was to achieve some measure of redistribution in favour of all those lesbians and gays who do not belong to the charmed circles of The Swimming Pool Library — people who have no private income; people who depend on their jobs and would welcome job security; people who want council tenancies free of harassment, with friends and  lovers of their choice; people who want to meet others at venues which have disabled access, which are not commercially exploitative and which are run for the benefit of the community; people who want to display affection or consensual desire publicly without fear of violence or arrest; people who want to bring up children without intimidation from the courts or social workers; people who have survived the indoctrination of the education system but do not want to see the next generation of lesbians and gays subjected to the same process; people who wanted themselves and their lifestyles to be treated with respect by the health services.
We did not believe that any of these should be the subject of charity or whim on the part of people more privileged than ourselves in this society.
Since many of these services and facilities are, or were, wholly or partially within the remit of local government, it was only a matter of time before we focused our attention on local government for enhancement of such provision.
In an article in Capital Gay in February 1988, Paul Davies argued that lesbians and gays had made a mistake in allowing our politics ‘to be colonized by the Left’.
Although Neil Kinnock might disagree about who had colonized whom, the fact was that between 1984 and 1987 relations between left-wing urban Labour councils and the lesbian and gay movement became very close.
Even without the Tory attacks on local government at that time, there are people who consider such close contact with any one political party a mistake.
But what are the alternatives?
The Gay Business Association is probably the nearest that there is to a group holding a free-market-to-liberation point of view.
Venues and services staffed by lesbians and gays are invaluable in maintaining a sense of community.
Their involvement with parts of the Stop The Clause campaign, their support for AIDS-related benefits, their meetings with the Metropolitan Police, their re-vitalization of the financially flagging London Lesbian and Gay Centre, all testify to some commitment to the community.
Their commitment, however, does not really extend as far as promotion of Equal Opportunities; men-only nights greatly outnumber women-only nights in most venues; most lack disabled access; there is no policy of supporting anti-racist initiatives in either employment practices or customer relations.
Prices are often excessively high and the lack of union bargaining rights at most venues does not lead one to believe that the profits are being re-distributed among the workforce.
They may well claim that such commitments would result in bankruptcy, but if that were the case (and it seems unlikely), the case for a lesbian and gay politics that addresses problems in our social structures remains a strong one.
In the wake of the Clause, the Stonewall Trust was set up.
It will be a lobbying organization and it deliberately eschews any party political association.
It seems to aspire to the kind of role that the Child Poverty Action Group has — well-informed, articulate, independent.
Its clean-cut image, it is hoped, may help it to make advances where the scruffier tendencies in lesbian and gay politics have failed.
Any body which, by providing information and arguments to parliamentarians, can help to effect changes in our homophobic legal system is to be welcomed.
But changes in legislation — like changes in local government provision — will only be as effective as society permits them to be.
The Sex Disqualification (Removal) Act of 1919 paved the way for changes in women's employment rights, but the weakness of the Women's Movement in that period meant that the Act remained a dead letter.
The conservatism of central and local government bureaucracy is only likely to be overcome if there is a strong, independent political movement keeping up the pressure for the legislation to be made meaningful.
Independent lesbian and gay self-organization remains central to any wider project that we become involved in.
Issues relating to lesbians and gays may well arise in future campaigns relating to the environment, constitutional change, consumer protection, housing, fundamentalism, and many other aspects of modern life.
Involvement is one thing, but we should never make the mistake which we may have done in relation to local government, of appearing to focus all our energies in one direction.
We need to be more tactical and not put all our eggs in one political basket.
The increasingly pluralistic nature of our society means that politics are, in any case, undergoing fundamental transformation.
Long-standing traditions and alliances in the Labour movement, in the Tory establishment and in the political centre have already undergone profound changes, and that process is not at an end.
The long-term impact of the poll tax on the nature of local government itself is still unclear.
The politics of nationalism in Scotland and Wales, as well as in Ireland, poses questions about the future of the United Kingdom.
The Salman Rushdie affair has given a whole new meaning to both anti-racist and black community politics.
The consensus politics of the post-1945 period in which so many of our demands were rooted is no more.
During a televised discussion of the Clause, Digby Anderson, one of the ideologues of the New Right, claimed that homosexuals had ‘broken’ some sort of unwritten agreement that homosexuality would be tolerated if family values were affirmed.
By breaking that agreement, homosexuals ‘got the backlash they asked for.’
It is true that this ‘agreement’, or settlement as I would prefer to call it, had only been viable when lesbians and gays tolerated their own oppression, tolerated homophobic behaviour, tolerated heterosexist indoctrination, tolerated liberal tolerance.
The upsurge in our activity and in our public demands in the mid-1980s represented a declaration that our tolerance was running out.
It was time to re-draw the boundaries.
While political organization among lesbians and gays may be taking a low profile, it is not true to say that the clocks have been turned back.
Lesbians and gays are expressing themselves differently from the way they were before the Clause, but they are still saying as openly and as proudly as ever that they want the boundaries changed.
Lesbians and gays have never been and are not now a static, homogenous minority group to whom a finite set of civil rights can be ‘granted’.
Any future attempt to end our oppression or to re-draw the boundaries will, if it is to be more than tokenistic, have to touch on the question of how we learn our sexuality — or, as some of us see it, how we experience heterosexist socialization.
We could do worse than try to reach some understanding in the lesbian and gay communities of what we mean by this question.
We are unlikely to reach any definite agreement, but the debates will strengthen us for the next time, and weaken the impact of tangential arguments about policy presentation.
The next time lesbians and gays are involved in any attempt to effect major change, we will be better served not by fitting on to the agenda of others, but by organizing independently and making alliances with other groups seeking progressive, structural, social changes.
The local government campaign was one necessary part of the process of struggling to redistribute wealth and power, and to re-draw the boundaries of love.
Labour and the Natural Order — Intentionally Promoting Heterosexuality
Sarah Roelofs
The Labour Party's initial official support for what became Section 28 of the 1988 Local Government Act, provoked fury and left a permanent residue of bitterness amongst lesbians and gay men.
It took Labour nearly eight weeks to publicly oppose the Section in its entirety.
When it did so, it was clearly only because of the enormous pressure of a mass lesbian and gay Stop The Clause campaign that involved soap-opera and Shakespearian actors.
Even then there were sour comments from Labour's HQ that other important parts of the Local Government Bill were not receiving due attention because the Clause was hogging all the headlines.
Lesbian and gay bitterness was the more acute for a sense of betrayal, given the trail-blazing work of the Labour Greater London Council (GLC), subsequent lesbian and gay equality policies by a number of Labour local authorities, and the breakthroughs achieved by the Labour Campaign for Lesbian and Gay Rights — notably the 1985 Labour Annual Conference policy which was reaffirmed at the 1986 Annual Conference by a 79 per cent majority.
To dismiss what happened as the Labour Party merely showing its true colours, does not explain why Labour  actually supported legislation which was immediately condemned by many who were considerably to the right of Labour's quite-right-enough Deputy Leader, Roy Hattersley.
On 9th December 1987, the day after Labour first supported the Clause (when it was debated in Committee),The Guardian published an editorial that slammed Labour for its position.
It said that ‘there are fundamental issues of principle involved’, but by December 1987 the only issue of principle for Labour was its electoral viability.
Nine months earlier, in March 1987 (just after the Greenwich by-election watershed),The Sun had published the infamous Hewitt letter.
Highly confidential, but somewhat easily (deliberately?) leaked, this took the form of a memorandum from Labour Leader Neil Kinnock's Press Secretary, Patricia Hewitt, to London Labour MPs' Chair Frank Dobson.
Commenting on the results of some private opinion polls commissioned by Labour, Ms Hewitt's letter contained the following historic comments: ‘…the ‘'London effect'’ is now very noticeable.
The ‘Loony Labour Left'’ is taking its toll, the gays and lesbian issue is costing us dear amongst the pensioners; and fear of extremism…is particularly prominent in the GLC area.’
A clean-up campaign which would have put Domestos to shame was immediately launched in that supposed harbinger of the Rainbow revolution, the London Labour Party.
By the autumn of 1987 a seminal document,A Plan To Win , had been produced and endorsed by London's Labour Executive.
The document was signed by the Chair Glenys Thornton, the Secretary Terry Ashton, and the Treasurer Brian Nicholson.
At the bottom of page one, at the end of paragraph 1.6, the last two sentences were divided by a crucial preposition —‘But’: ‘We have to reject completely any suggestion that we ditch or dilute any of our concerns about racial disadvantage, discrimination against women, against lesbians or gay men, or against people with disabilities.
But at the same time we must never lose sight of our over-riding duty to  win elections ’(emphasis added).
The ‘duty to win’ is not the whole story, however, neither is it a recently acquired motto.
In the last decade of the nineteenth century, as various socialist groups were moving towards establishing a Labour Party, an illuminating exchange took place between two Labour Movement figures.
Edward Carpenter, a homosexual socialist radical, had recently published his book Love's Coming Of Age , which included discussion of homosexuality.
The book caused Robert Blatchford, editor of the socialist newspaper The Clarion , to write to Mr Carpenter in some concern: economic change had to come first, said Mr Blatchford, and it would therefore be better not to mention sex until after socialism had been achieved.
Mr Blatchford was especially concerned about the family — by which he meant the heterosexual, patriarchal family which he regarded as sacred in Labour's pantheon.
This is the crux of the matter.
Opinion polls are taken as evidence of electoral viability; and winning elections — not lesbian and gay rights, or even socialism — is Labour's primary purpose.
The Livingstonian GLC, even with its espousal of lesbian and gay rights, was electorally viable until Thatcher & Co., in the face of Labour defensiveness, managed to move the ideological goalposts.
Post-GLC and with Third Term Thatcherism staring it in the face, Labour did, in a sense, revert to type.
But that ‘type’ was not so much anti-lesbian and gay as pro-family.
The Family, the bourgeois white, patriarchal, heterosexual family, wins elections — or so Labour believes — because Labour believes in The Family the way night follows day.
It's ‘natural’.
When The Sun says lesbian mothers are unnatural, Labour instinctively agrees: would Labour back a lesbian mother standing as such to be an MP?
Never — it would be electoral suicide.
Labour opposes discrimination against lesbian mothers and has Annual Conference policy in support of lesbian mothers' custody rights, but this is quite separate from winning elections — which is what matters most.
By December 1987, having lost three successive general elections, plus some by-elections it thought it should have won, Labour was quite desperate.
There were, it felt, lessons to be learnt, and by this stage it was somewhat obsessed with learning those lessons.
It had knee-jerk reactions to the very mention of the words lesbian and gay.
Faced with arguably the most reactionary piece of legislation this century, with its major implications for basic civil liberties and education, not to mention lesbians and gay men, Labour reduced it to being for or against the ‘promotion’ of homosexuality.
No problem here — Labour was sure of the answer, and Front Bench spokesperson Dr John Cunningham was so pleased and relieved that this time Labour was going to get it right, that when he rose to speak on 8th December in Standing Committee A, he repeated Labour's position several times.
Or maybe Dr Cunningham was feeling defensive — probably he was both pleased and defensive.
Certainly he believed his action was right for the opinion polls.
He said:
‘I speak on behalf of the Labour Party when I say that it is not, and never has been, the duty or responsibility of either a local or education authority to promote homosexuality...
The Labour Party does not believe that councils or schools should promote homosexuality, and I hope that no-one in the Committee has any doubt about that...
I have made the position of –the Labour Party clear.
I repeat that it is not, and never has been, our policy to encourage local authorities or education authorities to promote homosexuality...
I shall vote for the amendment and I hope and expect that my honourable friends will do likewise.'
Dr Cunningham added, by way of a postscript:
‘We may move an amendment on Report.
But that amendment will do nothing to change the first part of the Clause...
We do not wish to change that in any way, shape or form, but we are anxious about the word ‘acceptability’ later in the Clause' [A local authority shall not promote the teaching in any maintained school of the acceptability of homosexuality as a pretended family relationship].
And that was that.
There were also some comments about homosexual authors and a few feeble attempts to refute allegations about Labour authorities —not that Labour authorities had not promoted homosexuality, but that only a few had and they had not spent millions of pounds doing it.
Dr Cunningham's views can be compared to those of Simon Hughes, delivering a swansong on behalf of the Liberal Party.
Mr Hughes was also confident that he had it right — not for opinion polls necessarily, but right per se .
This allowed him to go on the offensive, including on issues that Dr Cunningham devoutly wished would evaporate, like that cause célèbre .
positive images of lesbians and gay men in education.
Mr Hughes summarily dealt with opposition to such proposals: ‘It is often necessary to counter negative images with positive images.
That does not mean one is promoting that group's lifestyle, orientation or activity.’
Simple.
Simon Hughes continued his dismissal with a swirl of dictionary arguments concerning the unacceptability of homosexual relationships as families.
He had looked up ‘family’ in his dictionary before coming to the debate, and he reminded the Committee that it came from familia .
meaning ‘household’, regardless of what the Government or the proposers of the new Clause might wish it to mean.
Mr Hughes further argued that, ‘Teaching that homosexuality is acceptable is perfectly proper….
If people say that it is wrong that teachers should be allowed, even encouraged, to tell pupils that it is acceptable to live in a household in a particular form of sexual relationship, that goes beyond what is a proper and a responsible training for life in society.’
He accused the Government of outright discrimination and added that the ‘banning of grant funding is highly undesirable’.
His conclusion on behalf of the Liberal Party was that the new Clause was ‘substantially defective’, that if it was limited to ‘prohibition on promoting homosexuality by teaching or by publishing material I would support it, but it is not, so I shall not support it.’
Dr Cunningham was Labour's official spokesperson, but he had a deputy, MP Allan Roberts, who was also on the Front Bench.
Dr Cunningham was fixated on the potent effect of sex and socialism on Patricia Hewitt's homophobic pensioners, who were yet still ignorant of their imminent deliverance by Glenys Thornton's ‘Plan To Win’: Mr Roberts, though extremely mindful of Labour's Duty To Win, had had close working experience with the Labour Campaign for Lesbian and Gay Rights.
He therefore tried to ride two horses, attempting to pad out Labour's newly acquired eleventh commandment, ‘Thou shalt not promote homosexuality’, with some points of principle.
The effect, unfortunately, was a mite confused.
If this is what the new Clause meant, then Mr Roberts said he would support it; if it meant something else, he would not.
The Clause was wrong if it meant schools could not have proper and adequate discussion, but if it meant that local authorities should not promote homosexuality then Mr Roberts would support it.
What would matter was how the Clause was interpreted.
‘It does not necessarily mean that people should not be told the truth in school about what happens in reality.’
Accepting the reality of homosexuality does not promote it.
Together with this unequivocal equivocation Mr Roberts did argue support for positive images, for freedom of the individual, for a wide definition of what constitutes a family, for civilised society; and he opposed discrimination in schools, the promotion of any kind of sexuality, and the introduction of paedophilia into the debate.
He questioned the new Clause's sponsors' understanding of what was ‘normal’, and for good measure said that when he had visited the Soviet Union he had not liked it — there were no sex shops, a lot of censorship, and they denied that homosexuals existed.
It was during this discourse, however, that The Family made a fleeting, but telling, appearance.
Mr Roberts, having been around lesbians and gay men, was aware of the million-dollar underlying issue: is the Heterosexual  Family ‘natural’?
If heterosexuals are natural and normal, what are lesbians and gay men?
Are lesbians and gay men born or made?
These are crucial, fundamental questions.
The Tories, Simon Hughes and Dr Cunningham simply ignored them, accepting the naturalness of the Heterosexual Family as read — though for different reasons.
Allan Roberts raised the issue because he realised its importance for lesbian and gay liberation, but he then tried to dismiss it because he also realised that even to articulate the question ran counter to Labour's ‘duty to win’.
Becoming increasingly incoherent under the strain, he said:
‘I do not know whether homosexuals are born homosexuals or acquire that trait because of the way in which they are brought up...
I do not know, but I do know that many homosexuals have not chosen to be homosexual but simply are that way.
They exist, and society should not discriminate against them...
I do not believe that it is possible to make a heterosexual into a homosexual...
It is not a disease to be caught, and it cannot be taught...
All the evidence suggests that for 99.9 per cent of the population over the age of seven or eight homosexuality is determined.'
Interestingly, Parliament's only out-gay MP, Labour's Chris Smith, also raised the issue when the new Clause was first debated on the floor of the House of Commons a week later, on 15th December.
He avoided Allan Roberts’ fumblings, and simply stated his belief as fact:
‘... encouraging people to be homosexual... is an absurd notion in any case.
We are what we are.
It is impossible to force or encourage someone into a different sexuality from that which pertains to them.'
What both Mr Roberts and Mr Smith were actually trying to do was get Labour off the ‘promotion’ hook.
If people are born heterosexual or homosexual then the concept of ‘promotion’ is irrelevant.
If, however, human beings are born with the capacity to be sexual — with a sexuality — but the manner in which that sexuality is expressed is socially constructed, then ‘promotion’ is possible.
Moreover, if within society one sexuality (i.e. heterosexuality) is presented, even promoted, as the single, normal, best sexuality, then the positive representation of another sexuality (i.e. homosexuality) as equally valid is problematic, to say the least.
But does positive representation equal promotion?
Can a positive image of lesbianism promote it?
If all representations of lesbianism are negative (in line with society's presentation of heterosexuality as the only positive sexuality), then conceivably a positive image of lesbianism could have a promotional effect.
It is this conundrum that lies at the very heart of the Section 28 debate — not to mention Labour's problems with it.
Of even more interest is the Tories' perception of all this.
It would appear that they — unlike Labour — have an understanding that sexuality is socially constructed.
Capitalism, being patriarchal, socially constructs sexuality within a heterosexual framework (the inter-relationship between capitalism, patriarchy and heterosexuality is outside the scope of this chapter, unfortunately, but is overdue for socialist analysis).
It hardly needs to be said that Tories are capitalists, and therefore to a woman (Tory women playing a significant role in this) subscribe to the view that the dominance of heterosexuality, notably the White Heterosexual Family, is to be preserved come hell or high water.
Tories know on which side their bread is buttered — the heterosexual side.
At the very least, heterosexual appearances must, and will, be maintained.
And so they are.
Back to Standing Committee A, considering new Clause 14 of the Local Government Bill on 8th December 1987.
Far-right Tory MP David Wilshire proposed his amendment with arguments that, while miles wide of reality, were traditional and consistent with Law and Order Families.
Nothing in the new Clause, he said, had anything to do with homosexuals.
The activities singled out were to do with the use of ratepayers' money to promote certain ideas.
These ideas were the ‘promotion of homosexuality and its portrayal as a pretend family  relationship’, which ‘seek to alter fundamentally the society in which we live.’
Ealing Council had a policy of positive images of lesbians and gay men in the community and, Mr Wilshire stated, ‘I contend that that is the promotion of homosexuality.’
Given that in Mr Wilshire's view the promoters were seeking fundamental change in society by their actions, it was logical that he aimed to prohibit local authorities from teaching children ‘about homosexual relationships as acceptable family relationships.’
Mr Wilshire continued:
‘The new clause Is not anti-homosexuals.
I bel–eve that society needs to understand homosexuals and that homosexuals must not be discriminated against.
Nevertheless I am certain that society has the right to prevent homosexuals encouraging others to be homosexual.'
Lesbian feminists have researched and analysed our society's intentional promotion of heterosexuality and described it as ‘compulsory heterosexuality’.
No-one gets any ‘choice’— it's Jack and Jill (and in that order, too) from start till death do us part.
Since the victory of the Labour Campaign for Lesbian and Gay Rights at the Annual Labour Conference in the autumn of 1985, there had been some signposts to Labour's instincts on these matters.
One, of course, was the Hewitt letter, but there were others that had occurred earlier.
For example, in the spring of 1986 there was the Family Snaps Affair.
In that April Labour won a by-election in Fulham, West London, with an ideal candidate in Nick Raynsford — he was white, heterosexual, middle-class, moderate, and he had a very nice family.
Labour was euphoric.
Criticism was made of his publicity leaflet, which featured a photograph not only of the candidate, but a Family Ensemble complete with children.
The Executive's Lesbian and Gay Working Party made a number of points, primary of which was that a candidate's family — if indeed they had one — was irrelevant to an election campaign which ought to be about the candidate's political platform.
Images are  powerful and subliminal, and this one was quite discriminatory as it projected precisely that Family of which society so approves.
What of single parents, black families, lesbian mothers, lesbian and gay couples, or those with no families?
What about politics?
An unintended but fascinating postscript to this was the New Statesman editorial of 29th May 1987 — midway through the general election campaign.
The opening sentence, beside the photograph of Husband and Wife Neil and Glenys Kinnock, stated: ‘The Family is now a dominant, if implicit, theme in the election campaign.’
The editorial continued: ‘The family has been used, with spectacular success it seems, by the Labour Party for electoral purposes.’
It was referring primarily to ‘The Video’, Labour's first party political broadcast of the campaign.
Entitled ‘Neil Kinnock — The Complete Picture’, this was an extremely explicit projection of Neil Kinnock as the Happy Heterosexual Family Man.
Extraordinarily, it ended not with the usual ‘Vote Labour’ or even ‘Vote Kinnock’, but merely ‘Kinnock’.
The editorial also made reference to the use of ‘infidelity’ problems by the media against other politicians, namely David Steele and Roy Hattersley.
It could also have mentioned another aspect of Labour's election advertising which, though more implicit than subliminal, was not at all lost on lesbians and gay men — or anybody not actively engaged in Happy Heterosexuality.
This appeared in the press on 22nd May 1987 as a full-page photograph of a schoolboy (Jack?) and schoolgirl (Jill?), with him saying to her, ‘Can I carry your books home from school?’, and her replying glumly, ‘No, I haven't got any.’
— education cuts!
Aside from the fact that Jill is quite capable of carrying her own books, her glumness could easily be due to being a young lesbian forced to suppress it and wishing Jack would take his stupid pick-up lines elsewhere.
The New Statesman editorial made an interesting comment: ‘Labour's image-makers clearly thought family values had to be stressed to counteract…alleged  broadsides against heterosexism’(sic ).
The editorial made a number of remarkably pertinent points that were vindicatory for London Labour's Lesbian and Gay Working Party.
It said that there was ‘no empirical evidence for correlating a politician's effectiveness in office with his or her sexual orientation’; it was critical of ‘a large reason for electing a party being because its leader is fortunate in his [sic ]marriage’; it claimed that the family had been ‘elevated into the status of party policy.
If we are to vote for the family because it is good, warm and loving, what are we to do if it turns cold?’; it well-nigh accused Labour of giving ‘a sharp twist to a competitive spiral of wholesome image making’; and it stated that the Tory Government must be defeated by ‘the issues’.
However, the editorial's interpretation of this situation was that private life was being ‘nationalised’, and that there was an ‘irrelevant and intrusive public discussion of personal matters.’
The New Statesman was not saying that familial and sexual issues should not be discussed under any circumstances, but that the discussion had gone too far.
It had become an ‘invasion of privacy’(creation in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries of ‘bedrooms’ was an important move in the development of sexual privacy, itself part of the development of a stable home unit appropriate to capitalism).
At a glance this seems eminently reasonable — not least if it protects us from Family videos.
Deeper analysis, however, shows that flagging up ‘Private — No Entry’ neatly forecloses any discussion of causes as opposed to symptoms.
The net result is that discussion of heterosexism — society's deliberate promotion of heterosexuality as the norm and superior — is prevented.
Public debate of discrimination against lesbians and gay men is allowed, but not of its causes.
Labour has become trapped in this dynamic.
Championing the symptoms, the rights of lesbians and gay men against discrimination, has led inexorably to demands that tackle the causes, for example positive  images and assertions of homosexuality as equally valid with heterosexuality.
However, strategies to tackle the causes have, even implicitly, to confront the injustice and inequality of the supremacy of the Heterosexual Family.
It is an essential component of Labour's historical role of organising the working-class in the interests of capital, to ride tandem with the Tories on the issue of The Family.
On the one hand this is easy, not to say natural, but the ride can become fraught with contradictions and potholes, such as what to do about Section 28.
These contradictions are not recent phenomena but are at least as old as the Labour Party itself.
The seeds of Dr Cunningham's initial, somewhat grovelling support for Section 28, can be found in the early trade unions', and then the Labour Party leadership's, approach to family policy and women's rights.
The contradictions are reflected in the political arguments — and political rows — between socialist feminists and the fledgling labour movement bureaucracy.
And it did not take long for it all to boil down to that maxim — the Duty To Win.
When the trade unions established the Labour Party as a parliamentary voice for organised labour, they likewise established the ‘duty to win’— to achieve power in Parliament and then to hang on to that power come what may, or put more bluntly, regardless of socialist principle.
The specific reasons for this are to do with the development of the English Labour movement in relation to the development of British capitalism in the latter half of the nineteenth century.
How feminism and sexual radicalism became increasingly a minority current in a labour movement dominated by economism, can be explained by examining the effect of the inter-relationship between patriarchy and British imperialism on the working class, but cannot be fully detailed here.
Suffice it to say that a Labour bureaucracy developed that accepted some basic tenets of bourgeois ideology more wholly than the bourgeoisie itself.
Socialism, then, was concerned with protecting and increasing working-class living standards, and not at all to do with fundamental change.
Labour's socialism was therefore inherently hostile to sexual radicalism.
The exchange referred to earlier, between Robert Blatchford and Edward Carpenter, is an excellent illustration of Labour's early contradictions on these issues.
In letters to Edward Carpenter written in December 1893 and January 1894, Robert Blatchford said: ‘Perhaps I'm a prejudiced old Tory; but the whole subject is ‘'nasty'’ to me…if Socialists identify themselves with any sweeping changes in sexual relations the Industrial Change will be seriously retarded.
The time is not ripe for Socialists, as Socialists, to meddle with the sexual question….’
Patricia Hewitt could have appended the letters to her own, although hers was written some ninety years later.
Robert Blatchford's socialism became codified in Labour's founding policy statements and has become known as Labourism.
The Labour Party as we know it was established in 1918.
A new constitution was adopted transforming a loose federation of affiliated organisations into a centralised national political party.
As well as the new constitution, the 1918 conference supported a policy manifesto, ‘Labour and the New Order’.
This document's vision was ‘new’ only insofar as it proposed rearrangements to the current ‘social order’.
It was less a programme for socialism than a commitment to social reform.
The refounded Labour Party advocated State action to humanise private enterprise — welfare capitalism (or its modern term, market socialism).
Central to this was an affirmation of the traditional family with its concept of the ‘family wage’ and the dependent wife.
Subsequently there developed ‘welfare feminism’ as opposed to the earlier ‘equality feminism’.
(This can be compared with the later debate between the anti-discriminatory lesbian and gay policy and that of homosexuality as an equally valid form of sexuality.)
Welfare feminists were concerned with the health and welfare of working-class women, especially the relief of their poverty, rather than with pressing for changes in  the role of women in the family.
One of the welfare feminists' main demands was for family endowment (later called family allowances).
The Labour Party initially opposed such schemes as a weakening of family responsibilities and a threat to the family wage.
However, it was then thought that additional family payments could remove most married women from the labour market, thus protecting men's jobs and strengthening the traditional family.
Another major example of early Labour's basic perception of The Family was its attitude to protective legislation for women.
Welfare feminists vociferously supported protective legislation, and equality feminists vehemently opposed it.
Labour.
needless to say, was with the welfare feminists, viewing women workers as a threat to men's jobs and the male family wage — not to mention the sexual division of labour under capitalism.
Labour's illustrious memorial, the Welfare State, was — and is — fundamentally underpinned by these beliefs and attitudes.
For Labour the traditional family has always been a moral absolute and not at all a changing social relationship, statistics on single-parent families notwithstanding — not to mention ‘pretended families’.
It is a mistake, however, to view the Labour Party or the trade unions as ideologically homogenous.
Just as many equality feminists opposed shoring up the traditional family at the beginning of the century, so present-day Labour has been challenged internally time and time again — and externally by the women's and lesbians and gay liberation movements — on its sexual politics.
Even within the Parliamentary Labour Party in December 1987, faced with Section 28 many Labour MPs spoke immediately and forcefully against it.
While Labour's official opposition to Section 28 — when it developed — was primarily based on civil liberties and tolerance, several MPs went further in their opposition.
Bernie Grant, representing Tottenham in the borough of Haringey and one of the first black MPs, was unequivocal and unambiguous in his opposition from the  very start.
He was the only MP to so oppose the new Clause in Standing Committee A on 8th December 1987.
As ex-Leader of Haringey Council, and active in black politics for many years, Mr Grant was well acquainted with all the arguments about the alleged ‘Loony Left’ and threats to society as we know it.
Blithely unworried by the implications of whether lesbians and gay men are born or bred, by whether one can or cannot promote, and by accusations of Labour promoting, Mr Grant boldly went where no labour leadership representative had dared to go.
Using the wealth of material produced by Haringey Council to explain the whys and wherefores of lesbian and gay equality, Mr Grant stripped the new Clause bare of any respectable pretensions.
Completely lacking in defensiveness, Mr Grant was able to make his view of the matter crystal clear:
‘I oppose the amendments and I will vote against them irrespective of whether they come from the Government or from the honourable members whose names appear on the amendment paper, although a glance at these names makes my blood run cold...
The Government are being stampeded by a bunch of loony, rabid, right-wing fanatics.
I recall a Tory councillor saying that all homosexuals should be exterminated...
The new Clause is dangerous.
It covers the first item that I can think of to be prohibited from schools...
What else will they ban from schools?
What else will local authorities be stopped from talking about?...
If the new Clause is accepted, it will be a signal to every fascist and everyone opposed to homosexuality that the Government are on their side.'
Bernie Grant also raised a pertinent point with regard to lesbian and gay equality with heterosexuals.
If heterosexuality and homosexuality are equally valid, the one cannot stand in judgement on the other.
He said:
‘My difficulty is who will judge ‘promotion’ and the ‘acceptability of homosexuality as a pretended family relationship’.
The people who will decide will all be heterosexuals.
They will have a totally different interpretation of family life and of the so-called moral nature of the matter.
Heterosexuals will decide what is the promotion of homosexuality and what a family is.'
When the new Clause was debated in the House of Commons on 5th December, Joan Ruddock was the only MP to attempt an amendment to delete it in its entirety.
She also referred to ‘the all-persuasive and all-pervasive culture of heterosexuality.’
Mildred Gordon MP, formerly a teacher, said in her speech that ‘far too often young children are presented, in schoolbooks and in pictures in school with the vision of the normal, acceptable, happy family as comprising a married, white middle-class man and woman, with two prissy children who are clean, neat and tidy, and yet the majority of children find that this does not relate to their households.’
When the Clause was debated in the House of Lords early in 1988, one Labour peer ‘came out’ as having been brought up by a ‘pretended family’.
Lord Rea revealed that his mother and her woman lover had brought him up.
He was accused by the Tories of confusing friendship with a sexual relationship, which he strongly denied.
Baroness Blackstone said, ‘Families can take many forms.
Young people know this.
They live in many different forms of family.
It is a  pretence to set up a model of mother, father and children as the only acceptable form.’
Lord Willis, who put several amendments to try and defeat the Clause, said in one of his speeches that ‘It is curious that we do not hear too much about the heterosexuals and the way they flaunt themselves.
I was recently at a film festival and you should have seen the heterosexuals flaunting themselves.’
On the other hand, Labour fundamentalism was eloquently put by Lord Mason, formally Roy Mason and a Secretary of State for Northern Ireland.
He said:
‘There is great national concern that homosexuality is being financially promoted to the detriment of normal family relationships...
I am totally opposed to spending public money on promoting and encouraging homosexual and lesbian relationships, particularly as happy family units, thereby in the eyes of our young people making our proper established family institution look odd or queer.'
While a few Labour MPs mentioned the born-or-bred question (Chris Smith, Ken Livingstone), it was always in relation to whether one can — and therefore whether Labour authorities could —‘promote’ homosexuality.
Allan Roberts repeated his prevarication of 8th December in his summing-up speech for Labour at the conclusion of the 9th March 1988 Parliamentary debate.
No Labour MP matched the Tories' views as put by, for example, Tory peeress Baroness Strange, or Tory MP Nicholas Bennett.
Baroness Strange said during the Lords' debate in February:
‘I do not share Freud's belief that sexuality is fixed at birth... circumstances and teaching have much to do with it.
I speak for parents everywhere.
We want our children to have the best possible chance of happiness... the least possible chance of catching AIDS and dying prematurely...
We hope they will have children...
A human being is created by the love of a father and mother of a different sex.
The basic principle is the family, on which all life and civilisation depend.
we owe it to our forebears, to ourselves, to our children, and to God who created us, to keep it so.'
Nicholas Bennett, speaking in the final Commons debate in March, said:
‘we want to encourage our young people wherever possible to be heterosexual...
That is the acceptable and proper way for our society to be preserved and maintained.'
Clearly the society, the life, and the civilisation referred to by Baroness Strange and Mr Bennett is synonymous with that of capitalist patriarchy.
Labour hardly disagrees.
Labour promotes heterosexuality.
Labour believes in heterosexuality, in the heterosexual family, as natural and normal.
If some individuals happen to be homosexual then that is natural and normal too — for them.
Labour does not believe in discrimination.
But it is tied to the capitalist social order and therefore it cannot strategically deal with the causes of discrimination (this is as true of discrimination against women, against black  people, against those with disabilities).
It will attempt to tackle discrimination against lesbians and gay men, but it cannot tackle, can barely conceive of, the supremacist power relationship between heterosexuality and lesbians and gay men which causes the discrimination.
Moreover, Labour has a vocational mission.
It has a ‘duty to win’.
As the presenter of a recent television programme analysing the Labour Party put it, ‘Nothing is more sacred than getting Labour into power’(Fred Emery, ‘Panorama’, 5th September 1988).
And nothing must threaten this sacred duty.
Lesbian and gay liberation is perceived as doing so, because liberation.
as opposed to rights, threatens the position of the heterosexual family.
Section 28 hoisted Labour on the petard of its own contradictions.
Living With HIV
Ian Fraser
In 1982 I had sex with three people, one of whom was an American.
Two are still known to me and are not HIV & plus , as far as I know.
By early 1983 my lymph glands were enlarged as a result of HIV, so it seems that the probable date of infection was October 1982.
I asked the VD clinic about the glands while on a routine checkup.
They thought that it might be leukaemia.
No test was available for HTLV3 (as it was then called), but an immunologist established that my immune system had abnormalities.
The doctor wished to remove a lymph gland for examination, to verify HTLV3, but I refused to allow this despite considerable pressure and went instead to see a homeopath.
She changed my entire perspective of the infection and it is to her, I believe, that I owe my current good health.
She began by assuring me that no disease is 100 per cent fatal.
‘There are always survivors,’ she said, and told me about cancer patients given six months to live by conventional doctors, whom she had sustained over several years.
She spent time on finding out what sort of character I had, my history and any past diseases.
This process in itself made me feel better, her calm reassurance so different from the doctor at the clinic, with his formal, polite and economical manner.
Her credibility increased when she advised me that it did not really matter whether I believed in homeopathy or not.
It might  help if I did, but would still be effective if I did not.
She explained its scientific basis and her whole approach was candid and open.
The overall effect of this encounter was dramatic, because it was reassuring and put things in perspective.
While I was on holiday the clinic tested a blood sample without my permission and established that it was HIV positive.
The young doctor in charge of my case insisted on telling my GP and wrote to him, but the letter was later withdrawn and suppressed by his superior at my request.
Since that time HIV has come to dominate gay life in this country.
Organisations dealing with the infection include: Action Against AIDS, ACT-UP (AIDS Coalition To Unleash Power), Body Positive, Frontliners, Health Education Authorities, LAGER (Lesbian And Gay Employment Rights), Lambeth Lesbian and Gay Group, NALGO, Positively Healthy.
and the Terrence Higgins Trust (THT).
I have never actually used these for help or advice myself, as I was aware of my infection before they were formed and had by then come to terms with it.
I once used Body Positive to put someone recently diagnosed in touch, and I once went to a THT Safe Sex talk out of interest, but the latter was like going to a CHE (Campaign for Homosexual Equality) meeting for the first time and did not tell me anything I did not already know.
I found the format patronising and alienating, and felt that I did not belong.
They were too ‘posh’ and refined, and not sufficiently down-to-earth for me.
I was a member of NALGO from 1979 until the GLC was abolished, when I ceased to be a member for a number of reasons: 1 could not afford it, and because the company for whom I worked was not a Local Authority.
union membership was considered unacceptable.
Efforts of NALGO's membership to develop policies for dealing with HIV infection and employment, and getting these converted into policy, have, however, led me to believe that NALGO membership is important not simply because of the wider political issues involved, but because HIV  threatens employment security.
Trades Unions have the expertise to deal with this, and to tackle employers in the event of such a case arising.
I have felt considerable moral pressure to take part in organisations helping people with AIDS/HIV, especially when I meet those apparently unaffected by the disease giving so much time and effort to those who are.
I have avoided getting involved, however, because I believe the subject would become obsessive and I would become introspective.
It is important that this does not happen.
Also I dislike bureaucratic organisation, perhaps because of my early experience with CHE.
Some people like committees and organising, others don't, and I am one of the latter.
I would take part in a group which was run in a businesslike way, and which had realistic aims.
However, so much that needs to be done requires professional lobbying and political change, and I question whether a well-meaning group of amateurs can do much beyond counselling and sharing information.
A good example of this is the Lambeth Lesbian and Gay Group which was set up a few years ago and whose meetings I attended three or four times.
The initial meeting attracted more than a hundred local lesbians and gays full of enthusiasm and curiosity.
Those with experience of Local Authority procedure, who perhaps enjoy it or enjoy showing off their knowledge of it, then started calling ‘points of order’ or complaining about issues not being on the agenda, of being taken out of sequence.
The result was that the vast majority of those attending the initial meeting went home and stayed home, and the Group, as far as I am aware, achieved little.
The most constructive move was when Linda Bellos stood up and announced that she thought that the group was a complete waste of time unless it had power, and to have power it would have to be a Council Committee with the right to interfere in all other committees.
I would never discourage someone from trying to start a group.
Sometimes such initiatives lead to great things.
I always donate to these organisations and have  benefited to the extent that organisations like THT, Body Positive and LAGER have made the general public aware of the infection and have made some employers take it into account.
NALGO in particular has adopted very good policies, which makes my own employment more secure, and of all the organisations listed I would suggest that NALGO's contribution has probably been the greatest.
LAGER, too, is trying to change the rules which govern employment, and I believe help would be available if I had to take action against an employer.
It is not inconceivable that other organisations would become relevant in the future if I fell ill, but I like to assume that I am not going to fall seriously ill.
In the early seventies I canvassed for a Labour candidate, who, when elected, turned out to be anti-gay.
It was the beginning of my disillusionment with the Labour Party.
Now, I believe that a Labour Government holds more promise of greatly improving the lot of people with HIV/AIDS.
It could mean legislation to prevent discrimination, dismissal, and also help with housing in the event of illness.
The fundamental need is for statutory change involving protection by law.
ACT-UP is the organisation I should most like to be part of.
High-profile action is the quickest way to force change.
Their abseiling action involving condoms used as balloons over Wormwood Scrubs was another brilliant gesture.
There is no such thing as bad publicity, and sometimes the only way to force change is to be anti-social and become a problem which eventually the authorities have to deal with.
I know it is true, because I have to respond to public pressure daily in my job, and that is how issues become prominent and how spending priorities are established.
If someone shouts loud enough, long enough, about an issue, money will eventually be found.
This is the way in which Britain is run.
My main concern is what will happen if the worst takes place?
While I have friends who would probably help me a great deal, there is no legal arrangement to deal with someone who has declining health because of AIDS.
The worst scenario is: illness, debilitation, absence from work, loss of job and income, loss of home, total dependency on friends, institutionalisation or homelessness.
Ideally, someone with a terminal illness should at least have the right to work part-time as long as they are able.
I view employment positively, because for me it is a routine which I enjoy and which keeps me going.
I have one of the best jobs I could possibly hope for — a Landscape Architect involved in establishing wild-life habitats, public open spaces, playgrounds, planting areas and gardens, and in planning and urban design.
Building Societies, too, should be forced to address the problem of terminally ill mortgagees.
They are strongly placed to agree a Code of Practice to protect those with HIV infection.
The problem is going to get much larger, and it is not good enough simply to make money out of the rush to home ownership.
Although a homeowner myself, I have always believed that communal ownership on a small scale would solve many problems associated with terminal illness or permanent disablement.
When I was at the GLC, Ken Livingstone was in charge and I thought it was the beginning of Utopia, so many wonderful things were happening at last.
The way he has been treated by Kinnock has infuriated me, and Labour's failure to adopt strong gay policies is disastrous.
I wrote to Neil Kinnock during the last election, asking him to withdraw the remark that gays and lesbians were losing votes on the doorsteps of the pensioners.
I didn't get a reply before election day, so I voted Green; it arrived two days after the election, reassuring me that the Labour Party was committed to improving gay rights.
Over the last few years I have also complained to the Press Council on a number of occasions, about various newspapers using such terms as ‘Gay Plague’, or saying that the disease was spread by whispered conversations, or for exaggerating the amount of money spent by local authorities on gay issues.
All adjudications took several months and none was successful.
I reported the whole lot in a letter to the Guardian when the Press Council  became a prominent issue, but it was never published.
I have written several further letters to the Independent and the Guardian without success, one letter criticising the Guardian 's AIDS information which has always been about two years out of date.
The Guardian did publish an article about Insurance Assessors who thought that AIDS would have little effect on the heterosexual population.
I pointed out that there was already a huge reservoir of infection amongst the 18 to 25-year-olds here and in the United States, simply because straight youths were not changing their habits.
Anything from 70 to 90 per cent would not use condoms.
My letter was ignored, yet an article (between 7th and 10th October 1989) said that there was a sudden alarming increase in heterosexual youth AIDS cases in the States!
More recently there have been letters and articles predicting a world population of 15 billion, but no account has been taken of the fact that between 10 and 25 per cent could die of AIDS in the next twenty years, as is already happening in parts of Africa.
A couple of years ago ex-Bishop Montefiore suggested in the Guardian that spending money on AZT was wasteful, and that it should be spent on hip replacements instead.
I was so angry that I wrote a furious letter to him accusing him of being un-Christian and ignorant, and also wrote to the Archbishop of Canterbury, whom I also regard as ineffectual.
It led to a dialogue with Montefiore, with my telling him about my friend who has had AIDS now for six years and who, thanks to AZT, is still alive.
I said that someone in Montefiore's position should check his facts before sounding off, and advised him to campaign for more resources all round instead of trying to trade one disadvantaged group off against another.
I also suggested that he go and live in San Francisco for six months, where he might see for himself and in practice the ideal which Jesus Christ was talking about, which is far removed from anything the Church of England ever practises in this country.
His reply was in part denial of the criticisms, and in part an attempt to change the issue  or confuse the matter.
The irritating thing was that he seemed to be unaware of the beneficial effects of AZT, or the creative potential of AIDS sufferers.
I have also written to various television channels about their coverage of AIDS, saying either ‘thank you’ because it was good, or criticising them if it was bad.
Unlike newspapers they always acknowledge letters.
I was even invited to appear on a TV programme, but declined because of the rough time friends had received, and because of the sloppy way previous programmes in that particular series had been presented.
I complained to the BBC about Jonathan Dimbleby's failure to mention AIDS in his ‘Review of the Year 1988’.
They didn't bother to reply, so I wrote again.
This was also ignored, so I wrote to Marmaduke Hussey and Sue Lawley, who had been inviting us, the viewers, to express our views about TV.
That correspondence got no further and I have come to the conclusion that either they all recognise my name, or else there is a conspiracy!
I wrote to the Sunday Correspondent criticising a claim in their first issue that the recent flattening in the rise of the monthly AIDS figures is due to the Government's propaganda campaign of 1986.
I pointed out that AIDS has an incubation period of 7–10 years, and that the results of the Government's efforts, if any.
will not appear until 1993.
I also suggested that any flattening in the rise in the AIDS figures is probably due to statistical methods, the way in which cause of death is defined, or political whims, rather than to any real changes.
I wrote to the Health Education Authority telling them that I didn't think their advertisements would affect lifestyles much, if at all.
It seems that young heterosexuals still think the disease is something that happens to others.
The only thing that will make them change their attitudes will be knowing someone with AIDS and watching them decline.
I don't think gay men changed their habits because of advertisements; we did so, some of us, because we saw our friends dying of it and  the horrible effect that it has.
There was a time when we naively believed that it was caused by Immune Overload — too many stimulants and not enough rest and nutrition.
It took a while to realise that it is a virus.
I have come to the same conclusion as many people who find that they have a potentially fatal disease.
You value each day and each experience, and you don't put off projects which you want to tackle.
Time may be short, so the quality of life goes up.
I also realise the importance of having some sort of discipline and routine to hold on to.
For some people this may be self-imposed; for me, my work forms part of it — it is something which I enjoy and from which I get considerable satisfaction.
I have seen people deteriorate quickly when they give up a routine, believing that this is the right thing to do.
I have seen it happen, for instance, to people at retirement.
Faced with a major risk to your health you become more assertive about your needs.
You are not going to sacrifice sleep pretending you can catch up later.
It may mean being anti-social at times, but that is too bad.
I insist on eating properly and will not skimp, even if it means altering the social calendar to suit.
Many may interpret such a self-centred approach as selfish or stand-offish — that is too bad.
It is a question of survival.
Caring, Campaigning and the Dehomosexualisation of AIDS
Christopher Scott
The history of AIDS campaigning is a short one.
When ‘Gay Related Immune Deficiency’ first started decimating our community early in the 1980s, we reacted with fear and bewilderment.
In the face of societal indifference — followed by outright hostility — we were forced into a frantic effort to meet the needs of those who were ill.
In 1984 the Terrence Higgins Trust started its Safer Sex campaign — a year before the Health Education Authority took notice — and the gay community embarked on a process of rapid self-education.
In the few short years since AIDS came to dominate our lives, we have created a network of caring, service-providing charities, pioneered imaginative public health campaigns and pushed the government and medical profession to take the threat of AIDS seriously.
And yet I am not happy.
It seems to me that this explosion of energy has been drained of its radical potential, diverted into areas of service provision which should be the State's concern.
We have swallowed our anger, presented a respectable front, in our bid to gain public support.
In return, we have been allowed the role of ‘mother's little helper’, and our services are being relied upon to support the public.
Dehomosexualisation of AIDS has cost us dear, in both our caring and our campaigning.
Caring
Those who doubt the existence of a ‘gay community’ should note the extraordinary — and entirely voluntary — wave of health education undertaken in gay pubs and clubs, newsletters and social groups.
Gay Switchboards have passed on information to every man who phoned in, self-help groups and caring services were set up, and — when there was time to breathe — attempts were made to persuade a reluctant government that the deaths of so many gay men was an issue worthy of their attention.
In the face of an epidemic which was sweeping away our friends and lovers, we sought help where we could.
Political scruples about voluntary action subverting the role of the statutory sector suddenly seemed a luxury: we were in need, now.
Inevitably, many organisations have been created which effectively avoided confronting the government.
Services which ideally should be provided by the statutory sector are instead being provided by voluntary agencies which are heavily dependent on fundraising and/or State aid.
To be sure.
this has enabled us to be more creative, flexible and sensitive in our caring than any statutory provision could be, but the contemporary role of the voluntary sector as a consistent challenger of government ethics is considerably limited: by tied funding or charity law, most voluntary groups are not allowed the luxury of political activity.
Have we contributed to our own marginalisation?
Has increased public sympathy cost us too dear?
This need to attract statutory funding and support has necessitated many compromises, one of which has been to ‘straighten’ our image.
Many of those organisations which were dependent in their early days on the passion and commitment of lesbians and gay men are now run by heterosexual ‘professionals’.
Although gays continue to be present in these organisations in large numbers, it is interesting to see what price has been paid for continued government funding.
HIV and AIDS organisations have  been effectively dehomosexualised: many devoted workers have been left feeling devalued and exploited.
They have seen their work taken on by people with different motivations and agendas. and fear that such disparity must weaken both impact and cohesion of purpose.
Connected with this has been a false  glamorisation of AIDS work, and a masking of fear with macho posturing.
People have wanted to prove they are not scared of AIDS work and have put themselves under enormous pressure to provide what may well be an impossible service.
Campaigning
Despite the flowering of services.
the increasing activities of local authorities and the creation of many new and sympathetic organisations, public misconceptions about HIV and AIDS remain high.
Rights to insurance, housing and employment remain limited, and the severe discrimination endured by PWAs (People With Aids) is as real as ever.
Gay energy has been taken up with service provision and public education: little has been left for meaningful activism, and our anger, fear and grief has been kept strictly privatised, so as not to exacerbate the hostility we face in the outside world, and so as not to risk funding.
We are the victims of a societal ethic that voluntary service provision should not be tainted by association with political activism.
We are the inheritors of a political culture that does not have a history of mass street action: civil disobedience, yes, but never on the scale of the American civil rights movement.
This has combined with a poor record on coalition building and activist management, a public perception of lesbian and gay politics as party political and a preserve of the Left, and a high level of internalised oppression expressed as apathy.
This has resulted in an AIDS activism which is limited and inaccessible, centred around those who are directly  involved in caring for PWAs, those who gain prestige from that involvement.
Inevitably, this is an environment of intense emotional conflicts: outsiders watch helplessly on the margins, excluded by the climate of anger.
despair and jealousy.
Accusations fly about the relevance of different forms of treatment, the value of colluding with the medical profession, the spectre of ‘AIDS professionals’ lining their nests, profiting from the miseries of others.
Much AIDS activism has been initiated by those groups trying to concurrently provide a caring service.
With the risk of public anger being taken out on the dying, frontline activism is simply a luxury we cannot afford.
This uneasy coexistence of agendas is highlighted by the position of women within AIDS culture.
Although some lesbians exploited the opportunity to distance themselves from dirty, dangerous male sexuality, a vastly disproportionate number devoted themselves to AIDS work.
Most of these women came from a political background of feminism, which has achieved far greater levels of activity than gay men ever managed.
AIDS may well have taught gay men how to work with, as well as benefit from, the services of lesbians.
But with all the right-on posturing and good intentions in the world, AIDS service provision has been reactive.
and so flawed.
The needs of women with HIV and AIDS, and women carers, were not fully anticipated.
have not been met.
Despite the hard work invested in service provision for men, women have had to struggle every bit as hard as gay men a few years earlier, to carve out services for themselves.
Another illustration of the same lesson: caring for others must not detract from caring for ourselves.
The Dehomosexualisation of AIDS
AIDS may be everybody's problem, but in Europe and North America it is still mainly a gay problem.
We must demand the same level of statutory care as  any other citizen, but that must not be bought with our anger and integrity.
Who else will fight for our liberation?
Who else will forge and strengthen links with the multiplicity of others with whom some creative collaboration could yield fruitful results — those affected by disability, chronic sickness, inadequate welfare provision, NHS reforms, prejudice?
There is room for organising in a non-party political way, and for the creation of umbrella organisations which bring together gay men or people with AIDS, representing not any attempt at service delivery, but a demand for government action.
The political activity around Clause 28 was one of the few occasions when lesbians and gay men have worked together and successfully expressed their anger.
Whilst AIDS was not well included as an issue in the campaign, it was clearly at the back of every civil servant's mind as the details of the Clause were worked out.
This campaign may have definitively proved that HIV and AIDS is not a specifically gay issue.
The experience of the last decade has demanded that we all talk openly about sexuality, disease and death, in order to curtail further unnecessary transmission of HIV.
The challenge of AIDS involves more than individual sexual behaviour: it represents an opportunity to work through our commonest societal fears–and taboos, to reach new understanding and evolve compassionate action.
How to do that on the issue of AIDS, and with the efforts and talents of lesbians and gay men, is the question which must not now be avoided.
Pulpits, Courts and Scandal
Savitri Hensman
Churchgoing Anglicans are a small minority of England's population.
However, what happens in the Church of England can have a major impact on people outside it, as well as on regular church attenders, for a number of reasons.
It is the religious body most closely linked with the State, which appoints its senior clergy and has representatives in the House of Lords.
Tens of millions of people take part in its ceremonies from time to time, or have neighbours who do, and many of them rely on it to uphold and promote traditional English values.
It has a sizable workforce.
It is wealthy and owns numerous buildings, often made use of by other organisations (for instance for meetings, jumble sales or offices).
The human rights and relationships of lesbians and gays were recently the subject of heated debate — and legal action — in the Church of England.
There was widespread interest.
Newspaper headlines announced that ‘pulpit poofs’ could stay, but later ‘Church ‘'gays’' were ‘forced out of HQ’.
How did the furore start?
What really happened?
What are the immediate and long-term consequences?
Vacuum
In 1987 the Church of England's position on sexuality  was confused.
Some members still believed that the only rightful form of sex was between a dominant husband and obedient wife in a lifelong heterosexual marriage.
But this had been increasingly called into question: women campaigned for equality, divorced people and unmarried parents became more assertive, and theologians showed that what had been claimed as universal truths often arose from particular cultures and societies.
In the 1950s the Church of England had called for reform of the law under which gay sex was illegal under all circumstances, though it still held the position that such acts were immoral.
Few members dared to dissent in public.
However, the joy and fulfilment which many had found in lesbian and gay relationships did not seem to fit the official pronouncements about sin!
Over the next three decades, many theologians took a fresh look at the whole subject of human sexuality.
It has been argued persuasively that passages from the Bible which had been taken as prohibiting gay sex were either mistranslated or taken out of context; that, in any case, the Bible could not be read as a set of rules to be unthinkingly obeyed; that love and justice in sexual relationships mattered more than gender; and that homophobia itself was sinful.
It has also been shown that blessings of lesbian and gay relationships have been celebrated by the Christian community since ancient times.
A working party of the Church of England's Board for Social Responsibility stated in 1979:
‘We do not think it is possible to deny that there are circumstances in which individuals may justifiably choose to enter into a homosexual relationship...[although]such a relationship could not be regarded as the moral or social equivalent of marriage.'
The Board refused to endorse this.
The chairman at the time, Graham Leonard, was later to become the Bishop of London.
Lesbians and gays — an increasing number of whom  were at least halfway out of the closet — continued to take part in church activities.
Gay clergy helped to keep congregations alive in areas where class snobbery and racism had alienated much of the population from the Church of England, and where many other ministers refused to work.
Faith In The City .
a report published by the Church of England in 1985, pointed out that there were:
‘proportionately many more single clergy and Church workers in Urban Priority Areas than in other areas, and this has implications for pastoral support.
Homosexual clergy also need appropriate pastoral support, even though in evidence to us they said that they often prefer to work in Urban Priority Areas because of the greater degree of acceptance and diversity of life-styles.
Support needs to be given to them, not least In their ministry to other homosexuals, who tend to be drawn to the inner cities.'
The nature of this ‘support’ was soon to become clear.
Many other Anglicans were feeling confused.
The simple guidelines on sexual morality which, when they were children, the Church of England and society as a whole had appeared to accept, were being challenged.
Some council employees were forbidden to treat unmarried mothers, lesbians and gays less favourably than ‘respectable’ people.
Partners in same-sex couples and remarried divorcees were accepted in positions of church leadership.
Many people had struggled to adhere to a strict moral code for years (while others had worked hard at least to keep up appearances): some may have felt that their efforts were no longer appreciated.
Moreover, the so-called ‘permissive society’ was not protecting women from being treated as sex-objects: far from it; pornography flourished, kerb-crawlers harassed passers-by on the streets.
Regulating what adolescents knew about sex, and preventing them from going to bed with their girlfriends or boyfriends, had become difficult.
Many mothers were upset because they feared for the safety of their children  — and because, for numerous women, control over young people had been one of the few ways to exercise power in society.
The safety of women and children in their own homes could not, of course, be guaranteed.
Women's organisations had publicised the fact that wives were often assaulted (sometimes raped) by their husbands, and that numerous children were severely beaten or sexually abused by men in their families.
Writers and broadcasters increasingly took up these issues.
Many Anglicans had been brought up to revere ‘the family’, and felt that this publicity was damaging to the ideas they cherished; a number of men also had reason to fear that their own behaviour would be exposed.
Some church people fought hard to defend patriarchal values.
Feminist and other Christian thinkers had written thought-provoking articles and books on sexuality.
However, these were frequently in technical language and sold in only a few outlets; and many clergy were not concerned with encouraging the laity to grapple with complex issues.
For a number of reasons, then, there were numerous Anglicans ready to respond to the message of moral crusaders who campaigned on a range of issues, from telephone chatlines to abortion.
Meanwhile the Church of England was proving to be a nuisance to the government.
With various motives — from the fear that the worst excesses of Thatcherism were making the existing social order less stable, to the belief that God was on the side of oppressed people seeking justice — its leaders spoke out against particularly inhumane State policies.
The growing gap between rich and poor and the splitting up of black families through racist immigration laws and practices, for instance, were criticised.
Values such as avarice and callousness were denounced.
MPs called on the Church to turn her attention to sexual morality rather than Tory politics, calls which seemed, at first, to have little success.
However, the right-wing Christian Church was becoming increasingly  active: for instance, the president of the National Council for Christian Standards in Society, the Earl of Halsbury, tried to make the ‘promoting’ of homosexuality in schools unlawful, but failed.
Falling Short of Ideals
In November 1987 Tony Higton, the rector of Hawkwell in Essex, put forward a motion to General Synod which reaffirmed the
‘biblical standard, given for the well-being of society...[that]fornication, adultery and homosexual acts are sinful in all circumstances...[and that]Christian leaders are called on to be exemplary in all spheres of morality, including sexual morality, as a condition of being appointed to or remaining in office.
[Those who had]fallen into sexual sin [should]repent and receive absolution.'
The private members’ motions with the most signatures were discussed, including Higton's proposal that ministers in gay relationships should be sacked.
and that lesbian and gay theological students who were not celibate and refused to fake heterosexuality should be denied ordination.
The Lesbian and Gay Christian Movement (LGCM), among others, took an active interest.
LGCM had been set up in the 1970s; it rented a room in St Botolph's, Aldgate, a church well-known for work with single homeless people in London.
The Movement brought together gays, lesbians and heterosexuals from various denominations (Anglicans, Methodists, Roman Catholics and others).
who believed that ‘human sexuality in all its richness is a gift of God gladly to be accepted, enjoyed and honoured, as a way of both expressing and growing in love, in accordance with the life and teaching of Jesus Christ.’
It provided counselling, held meetings and conferences.
coordinated local groups and distributed literature.
LGCM urged support for an amendment moved by  Malcolm Johnson (the rector of St Botolph's), which deleted almost all of Higton's wording and instead affirmed ‘the essential of the biblical message that human love is a reflection of divine love and should be characterised by the permanency and commitment of relationships.’
Stability and permanence were to be encouraged, young people and parents warned of ‘the dangers, both spiritual and physical, of sexual promiscuity whether heterosexual or homosexual’.
Shortly before the debate, a sensational attack on lesbian and gay Christians was published by a national newspaper.
Some clergymen had been approached by a journalist masquerading as a man in distress about his sexuality.
They had tried to help him and, as a result, had lurid stories about their own sex-lives splashed across the newspaper's pages.
Synod members were under pressure to crack down on gay clergy, who were portrayed as leading lives of wild abandon!
On 11th November, 1987, Synod was tense as Higton proposed his motion.
He was appalled, he said, by clergy who ‘blatantly’ exhibited their homosexuality, for instance by going to gay pubs.
He told of theological colleges where men were at risk of sexual advances, and expressed his scepticism about ‘so-called’ faithful and committed relationships between homosexuals.
Synod, he argued, should speak clearly to nation and church.
‘People who call themselves gay Christians’ were undermining the gospel.
Johnson was one of the handful in the debate who spoke positively about lesbian and gay relationships.
He pointed out that his amendment avoided being divisive, and criticised Higton's motion as a cowardly attack on gay clergy working courageously and effectively in inner cities.
The amendment was defeated.
Among those who voted against it were some closeted gays: if there was to be a purge, they did not wish to be among the victims.
However, the bishops (both heterosexual and gay) were not keen on being forced to harass priests, deacons and layworkers whom they liked and respected, and on  whom they relied.
Several spoke out against the harshly self-righteous tone of the original motion.
The Bishop of Chester proposed an amendment which still condemned lesbian and gay sex but put no obligation on bishops to punish in any way people who took part in it.
‘Fornication and adultery’ were sins against the ideal that sex should only take place in ‘a permanent married relationship’, ‘homosexual genital acts also fall short of this ideal’, Christians were ‘called to be exemplary in all spheres of morality, including sexual morality’, and ‘holiness of life is particularly required of Christian leaders’.
The wording was strange.
What, for instance, is the difference between sinning and falling short?
Christians are used to confessing their sins against God and against other humans, but is it really possible to sin against an ideal?
Nevertheless, the amendment won a majority of votes.
After the debate, a number of bishops hastened to assure the mass media that they would not knowingly employ gay clergy, although one or two spoke out against homophobia.
Higton had not succeeded completely, but Synod had indeed spoken clearly to the nation.
Lesbians and gays, it had been implied, were irresponsible predators who did not deserve to be employed; those who insisted on equality were a threat.
By allowing innuendo, fear and bigotry to determine policy.
Christians had managed to set a moral example to their neighbours.
The following month, a new version of Halsbury's bill was introduced with government backing, obtained by MPs Jill Knight, a sponsor of the Conservative Family Campaign, and David Wilshire, also part of the increasingly influential Christian right-wing.
This became Section 28.
Other unpleasant surprises were in store for lesbians and gays in the Church of England.
Law and Disgrace
Over the centuries the Church of England has developed a complex set of laws to deal with internal matters, and deals with them in its own courts.
Those at a diocesan level are known as Consistory Courts; ‘chancellors’ act as judges.
When consecrated ground is used for anything other than worship (and similar things), formal permission — a ‘faculty’— should be obtained, according to ecclesiastical law.
This was not widely known among Anglicans.
Before LGCM took up its office in the tower of St Botolph's, Malcolm Johnson should have applied for a faculty.
When he found out, he contacted the Diocese of London's lawyers, who helped to prepare the paperwork: getting a licence seemed to be just a formality — in modern times it was practically unheard-of for a faculty to be refused.
Johnson was therefore taken aback when the strongly homophobic Chancellor of London asked the new Archdeacon to intervene.
The Archdeacon of London, George Cassidy, who came from the Ulster Loyalist community, was not keen on compromise.
Johnson wrote to him in December 1987, pleading with him for a meeting to settle the matter quietly to avoid lurid publicity in the mass media, and prevent damage to the church's work with homeless people.
Cassidy did not respond.
Legal proceedings went ahead.
Cassidy came up with a number of objections to the granting of a faculty.
Among these he claimed that LGCM, by displaying a flyer for the Gay Guide to London in the office, encouraged promiscuity; that, by publishing a leaflet arguing for positive images in schools, it was promoting paedophilia; and that, by advertising the GLC booklets entitled Changing the World and Tackling Heterosexism , it was in opposition to the criminal law of England!
More seriously, he quoted Synod's resolution on sexuality, and argued that an organisation whose beliefs and aims contradicted this should not be allowed to use  church premises.
Johnson was told by his lawyers that he, the churchwardens, the Parochial Church Council and LGCM (all of whom had applied for the faculty) were likely to lose the case.
They were facing a mounting legal bill, whereas Cassidy had behind him the huge resources of the diocese — much of it contributed by gays and lesbians, Moreover, the Chancellor's opinion was clear.
In spring 1988 Johnson asked for the case to be adjourned so that LGCM could move its office without appearing to have been thrown out.
This was refused.
In the end he, the churchwardens and the PCC applied to withdraw from the case, and LGCM reluctantly agreed to leave.
At first it seemed that LGCM might be forced to pay the Archdeacon's legal costs as well as its own, which might leave it bankrupt.
However.
its barrister showed that it was not liable.
During the dispute, numerous people wrote letters protesting against the Diocese of London's behaviour.
One of the Church of England's most eminent theologians criticised the Diocese for actions which suggested ‘a positive eagerness to humiliate and exclude those whom the parish and LGCM seek to help’, and ‘a readiness to follow secular fashion in harassing and rejecting homosexuals.’
Another wrote of ‘a new resurgence of idolatrous religion’ in which ‘the church is valued, if it is valued at all, to the extent that it helps to shore up the values and culture of Thatcherism.’
Even among Anglicans who disagreed with LGCM's aims, some were shocked by what had happened.
Seventy clergy in the Diocese publicly criticised the way it had handled the case.
In turn, Cassidy enlisted the help of the Mail on Sunday to justify his behaviour.
The newspaper published an article alleging that material distributed from St Botolph's has included ‘the kind of stuff you would expect to find in a San Francisco bath-house, not a Church of England’, and, more broadly, that ‘militant clerical homosexuality has now spread to a point where many of the ancient City churches are open  pick-up joints.’
Tony Higton sent a copy of the article to every member of General Synod.
On the one hand, the Church of England had managed to insult and harass its lesbian and gay members (it is not known how many left in disgust), and had helped to justify to the public the upsurge in homophobic discrimination and violence which was taking place at the time.
On the other hand, many heterosexual Christians had become less ignorant about the issues around sexuality, and lesbians and gays in the church had received an unprecedented show of solidarity.
LGCM survived and settled down in an office in Bethnal Green.
‘To grow and develop in relationships'
Meanwhile rumours were circulating about a secret Church of England report on lesbians and gays.
In February 1990 this was leaked, stirring up further controversy.
The report had been prepared by a working party set up in 1986 by the House of Bishops and chaired by Reverend June Osborne.
As in the 1979 report, despite developments in Biblical scholarship, it asserted that throughout the Bible there was strong disapproval for homosexual practice but sinful human beings still have to make moral sense of their lives:
‘Thus it might be argued that loving, committed and trusting relationships between homosexual people.
whilst in some respects they are considered sinful and falling short of the pattern for our life as revealed in the Scripture, make the best moral sense of a situation which is, of itself, flawed.
It is better for people to be able to grow and develop in relationships than to suffer the burdens of isolation and constant temptation and the threat of seeking relief through clandestine and casual relationships.'
The Osborne report went further, arguing that the  Church of England should not consider lesbian issues ‘without considering its own social culture of male/female power relationships.’
It was also tentatively suggested that services of blessing for lesbian and gay couples could be helpful.
Anti-discriminatory teaching in schools was endorsed:
‘We need to take seriously the strength of argument that education opportunities should be used to undermine the power of homophobia in our society.'
The issue of discrimination in employment, too, was raised, and the practice of keeping secret files on lesbians and gays:
‘Thus bodies like the Church exercise power over the individual on the basis of the knowledge they possess of that person.
It is hard to justify such a relationship from a moral perspective.'
The bishops refused to comment on the leaked report.
A Matter of Time
By mid-1990 the Church of England's position on lesbian and gay sexuality was thoroughly confused.
A new Archbishop of Canterbury was selected who took a public stance against clergy in gay and lesbian relationships, but who was persuaded to adopt a more flexible position, at least for the time being.
Inevitably, the Church of England will sooner or later announce officially that it is acceptable to express love and commitment to another woman or another man in a sexual relationship.
Meanwhile, the church will continue to encourage in some of its members ignorance and prejudice against their ‘brothers and sisters in Christ’, while sowing fear and self-distrust in others.
It Couldn't Happen Here — A European Perspective
Robert and Gerard
The Stop The Clause campaign received support throughout Europe, most visibly and actively in Amsterdam.
Significant because of its gay culture and tradition of liberalism, Amsterdam also has a sense of recent history which is lacking in Britain.
Witness its monuments to the dead of the Second World War: old synagogues are preserved, public buildings stand as memorials, and — unique in the world — Amsterdam has its own Homomonument, which commemorates and mourns the homosexual victims of fascism.
The Homomonument is both a sacred memorial and a place for celebration: during one weekend in early 1990 it was the setting for a Jewish memorial to the dead (the kaddish service) and a celebration of the Dutch Queen's birthday.
This sense of a future and a past for homosexuality contrasts unfavourably with the British sense of history — it would be unfortunate if the only way for a society to learn from its own history was for it to be occupied by fascists!
That point is explored elsewhere in this book.
Amsterdam is not typical, of course: most European countries treat their lesbian and gay citizens more harshly, and Britain is one of the worst.
The opportunities of 1992, however, could lead to a progressive  harmonisation of anti-discriminatory legislation, and the changes in Eastern Europe provide further cause for us to extend our solidarity to lesbians and gays all over Europe, as they did for us.
The following two pieces illustrate the way in which European involvement in the Stop The Clause campaign was necessitated both by horror of what appeared to be happening in Britain, and by a concern about what was also happening in Europe.
Interview with Robert G.
Robert G. is a Dutch gay activist who has lived in Amsterdam, England, Canada and Sweden.
His employers consider homosexuality a ‘security threat’, and so he is interviewed here under a pseudonym.
How did you get involved with the European Stop The Clause Campaign?
R : I was living in a legalised communal squat in Amsterdam with a lesbian, a transsexual and two bisexual women.
When the news of the British Clause 28 broke, a number of groups formed a campaign against it, but the main one was LAMBDA — later called DAQUA (Dykes and Queens United in Action).
Our transsexual flatmate was one of the main organisers of the campaign, and we were all active supporters — not least by paying the rent for LAMBDA to set up an office in our squat.
What did the Campaign do?
R : LAMBDA was very active, very effective.
Dutch activists started visiting England very early in 1988.
They attended some of the London Stop The Clause meetings in order to gain information and strengthen communication — unfortunately, they often came away frustrated and unsuccessful because of internal difficulties within the London campaign.
We didn't let that stop us, though — almost overnight, it seemed, Amsterdam was covered with Stop The Clause graffiti, especially along the canal banks.
I took a boat trip round the canals in August 1988 and was amazed and touched by all the graffiti.
It was unmissable, even the tourists couldn't ignore it.
R : Especially the tourists couldn't miss it — we made sure of that.
I think Amsterdam dykes and queers deserve a lot of credit for spreading awareness of the Clause throughout Europe and the world.
All our actions gained very widespread publicity.
Our 16th April demo, for example, was attended by 7,000 people and attracted an incredibly positive response from passers-by.
Ordinary Dutch citizens were lining the streets, smiling and clapping.
I thought at the time, this simply couldn't happen in England.
It was very pleasing, very liberating.
Even better was our 5th July ‘Kiss The Queens’ demo.
Queen Elizabeth of England was visiting Amsterdam for the William and Mary celebrations — three-hundred years of English-Dutch friendship — so us Dutch queens planned our own reception for her.
A few days before her arrival, I went with two friends to the Royal Palace, dressed up as the Three Musketeers.
In broad daylight, and playing a trumpet fanfare, we ceremoniously lowered the British flag and hoisted in its place the International Flag of Lesbian and Gay Liberation.
Nobody stopped us, our only witnesses were dozens of American tourists, all solemnly taking photos of this ethnic curiosity.
Incidentally, I cycled past the Royal Palace at 2 a.m. the next morning and saw that all the flags had been taken down except ours — a gesture of regal solidarity, perhaps?!
Anyway, we desecrated the British flag — sewed on a pink triangle and painted on slogans — and took it along to the demo, which was very well attended.
We got lots of international media coverage, far more than the Queen would have got without us, and again we were very well supported by the Dutch people.
In fact, something amazing happened when Elizabeth arrived: the offices of  the liberal newspaper NRC Handelsblad are next to the Royal Palace.
With the cooperation of their management, staff unfurled a banner from the windows saying something like ‘Liz, leave your queens alone’.
This was actually rather brave considering the police marksmen lining the roofs!
I think in Britain we were all rather amazed at how much solidarity was extended to us from Europe.
We were grateful, of course, but also rather ashamed.
doubting that we would ever have put ourselves out so much for you….
R : It's true that the British seem very lacking European solidarity, but you know our activity wasn't just about altruism, far from it.
There was real fear that this English homophobia would spread, especially with European harmonisation.
We needed to make a statement to Dutch society, a warning that we wouldn't take similar attacks lying down.
There was another factor, identified in a recent Dutch gay magazine as ‘The Woolly Society’— woolly in the sense of cushioned, I think.
This described Dutch society as one in which liberal consensus has smothered over expressions of homophobia, while leaving the underlying heterosexism intact.
A good example of this has been the recent discussion over anti-discriminatory legislation.
Our only area of difficulty was that the Christian Democrats initially argued against extending this policy to cover religious schools — but they have now given way.
From the outside it can seem like the Netherlands is a gay paradise, and compared to Britain it probably is.
But that doesn't mean we have no homophobia here — just that it is rather more amorphous, more difficult to pinpoint.
I hate to say it, but Clause 28 was greeted with a high degree of elation and excitement mixed with horror, a feeling of yes it was terrible news but at least we have an obvious enemy figure, as last an easy target to mobilise against.
The Dutch campaign was at least as much on our own behalf as on yours.
What was the feeling when the Clause became law, then — frustration, anticlimax, anger perhaps with the British campaign?
R : Everyone felt that the campaign had been worthwhile, but there had been a lot of tensions and problems to deal with and so that affected how we all felt at the end.
Within the Dutch campaign, or between British and Dutch activists?
R : Both.
We had all the usual internal strife, including leadership problems, and the difficulties of working with volunteers.
Then again there were a lot more women than men involved (comme toujours ), and some of the men reacted very negatively to that.
And major differences emerged very early on between the English and European movements.
England is of course an island, and has evolved its own brand of gay activism which — this is a generalisation but I think quite a valuable one — is far advanced of European politics in anti-racist and disability matters.
but less radical, less sophisticated, on issues of sexuality.
Two incidents caused particular problems, both connected with the Stop The Clause European Tour.
This tour was a roving busload of activists who went all over Europe in the late summer of 1988, mobilising support and raising funds for the campaign.
But even before the tour started there was a big row over its publicity poster, which was produced in Amsterdam.
It was a very arty photo-montage of five naked people: two women, two men, and one transsexual holding a globe.
The English delegation objected violently to this poster, saying it couldn't possibly be distributed, especially in the UK.
There were three reasons for their protest.
Firstly, that all the figures represented were white, young, thin and able-bodied.
As I said before, this kind of political analysis has simply not advanced in Europe as it has in Britain.
Secondly, they were scared that images of nudity would confirm society's view of homosexuality as being essentially to do with sexual activity: the Dutch thought this ridiculous, and it  confirmed their view of the British gay scene as far too conservative artistically, politically and sexually.
Finally, the UK contingent were adamant that transsexuality was not acceptable, and this really created a lot of bad feeling, as the transsexual in question was one of the main organisers of the campaign.
Some of the Dutch took this very personally, feeling that the British were not willing to show reciprocal support for a hardworking ally, that their stance showed no respect or gratitude.
The Dutch scene is far more libertarian, you know, it tends to embrace bisexuals, transsexuals and other ‘sexual outlaws’ in a way which you don't find in Britain.
The tour itself ran into bad trouble when it reached Stockholm.
They arrived at the Pride Club tired and dusty after the long drive from Copenhagen, to find no refreshments or hospitality laid on.
So there was bad feeling from the start: the tourists resentful of the Swedes, who looked down on them as a bunch of grubby anarchists.
During the evening disco a British lesbian stole a half-empty bottle of whisky from behind the bar, and was caught.
She finally settled the row by offering to pay for a new bottle, but then the police turned up and a scuffle ensued.
Three British women were thrown through the bookshop window, arrested, taken into custody and treated rather badly.
The tour went on without them, but all the heart had gone out of it.
Although the European lesbian and gay community were angry at the police brutality, there was a widespread feeling that the women had behaved very stupidly, jeopardising themselves, their hosts, and the tour.
Indeed, when I visited the Pride Club recently, I got talking to a gay man who had been present that night and remembered it with anger and disgust.
‘They got what they deserved,’ he told me, and that, I'm afraid, is what will be remembered of the European Tour.
To sum up, what was the legacy of Clause 28 for Dutch society?
R : Our initial fear that the Clause would spread proved to  be unfounded.
Now there is a general consensus in the Netherlands that Britain is an economic backwater, and that Thatcher really can't be taken seriously — due in no small part to her resistance to British assimilation into the European Community.
In fact, I would go so far as to say that there is almost a feeling of relief here that Clause 28 is associated with someone so widely discredited.
I hope that the international outcry over Clause 28 will make the British reactionaries think twice before making any new attacks on you.
Certainly we were delighted at the public support we gained in Amsterdam, which really established as accepted fact that Clause 28 could not happen here.
The general population has no stomach for such blatant bigotry, and the lesbian and gay communities would fight all the way to protect the limited freedoms we enjoy here.
Friends Over the Water
Gerard V.
(Gerard V. is the pseudonym of a Dutch gay activist.)
Despite years of gay struggle, not all West European governments have a positive regard for homosexuality.
There are anti-discrimination laws –n France and Germany, and discriminatory laws in Austria and Finland.
Some countries, like Italy, have no explicit mention of homosexuality in their legislature, while others, like Germany and Ireland, do not acknowledge lesbian sexuality.
Governmental response to AIDS has also been varied, with some countries depicting the illness as a ‘gay disease’.
In a number of countries (like the Netherlands and Denmark) this tendency is modified by the emphasis on ‘risk groups’, including heterosexuals and drug addicts in prevention policy.
In Sweden, government prevention policy has been directed to heterosexuals, so that the gay movement has had to look for its own information.
The quality of advice on prevention also varies enormously: from the recommendation of safer sex and condom use (the Netherlands, Denmark), to the promotion of a monogamous lifestyle and the erosion of hard-won freedoms (Belgium, Italy).
Societal mentality is also an important factor in the quality of life experienced by lesbians and gay men, determining their ability to find work, accommodation and education.
In many countries the majority of the population is intolerant of homosexuality.
Even the recognised ‘tolerant’ societies of Denmark, Sweden, France and the Netherlands have not eradicated discrimination and violence against homosexual women and men.
In 1988 there were regional and national organisations promoting the interests of homosexual women and men in every country in Western Europe.
After a period of blossoming in the 1970s, during which time homosexuals came into the public eye and fought militantly for their rights, the majority of gay organisations became institutionalised.
Their main aim was acceptance and the assimilation of homosexuality into heterosexual society: their main tool was negotiation with the government.
Dependent on governmental funding and reluctant to lose establishment goodwill, these groups often came to rely on governments with extremely negative attitudes to homosexuality.
Their acceptance of financial dependency and political negotiation led to constant adaptation and concession-making, delaying yet further the achievement of equality by an active homosexual movement.
Even among lesbian and gay groups which resisted such institutionalisation, spirited resistance has been drained by lack of perspective, in-fighting, and exhaustion of energy, money and inspiration.
From the moment that Clause 28 appeared for discussion in the British Parliament, there was massive protest against this new law.
Activists, artists and politicians  joined forces in opposition: a conference in Sheffield planned a Stop The Clause European Benefit Tour, to promote the organisation, co-operation and solidarity of lesbian and gay movements in Europe, and direct action protests were widespread.
But despite the strength and size of the protest, the campaign against Clause 28 has certainly failed.
There are a number of reasons for this failure.
In the first place, the British homosexual movement was badly organised and severely divided when Clause 28 appeared: there was no national organisation for lesbians and gays in England at the time.
Another reason was that Stop The Clause was a single-issue campaign, while Thatcherite policy pushed through a series of oppressive laws on a number of fronts, attacking homosexual women and men, but also black people, the unemployed, working women, disabled people and so on.
Conservative legal reforms form an accurate mapped-out policy, designed to make the rich richer, remove from society those who are not economically useful, and idealise law, order and the family.
The struggle against Clause 28 could only be effective seen within this context, and in alliance with other groups struggling against Thatcherism.
The situation in Britain appears miserable at this moment.
Section 28 is a fact; but violence against homosexual women and men is getting out of hand.
The fact that London gay bar owners and police officials are now cooperating on how to protect clients expresses the extent of this.
Section 28 must hold a warning for lesbians and gays elsewhere in Europe, particularly with an eye to 1992.
We must prepare ourselves for the possibility that the situation for homosexual women and men will also worsen in our own countries.
Section 28 is a warning of such a worsening, and we should lay the foundation of our defence now.
We must fight for greater tolerance, and for legislation that protects against anti-gay discrimination, to ensure that something like Section 28  will never be brought into the rest of Europe.
We must be careful that the harmonisation of individual legislatures is not achieved at the expense of those groups with little economic power.
An example of this has already appeared in Holland, where the Minister of Justice refused to approve policy allowing lesbians and gays to adopt children, arguing that Holland should not deviate so far from general European policy.
While doing this we can learn from the struggle in Britain, and from the mistakes which have been made there.
You simply cannot begin to talk about cooperation with other oppressed groups if the European gay movements are themselves badly organised.
We should remember that homosexuals form part of society, and they can exert their influence on the prevailing norms and values and therefore also on legislation.
As long as they themselves take cover through fear of current laws and ‘decent’ norms, and lead, as it were, a double life, they allow society the option of discrimination and adherence to accepted morality.
Those countries where public attitudes are most tolerant are those where homosexuals are most visible, and gay groups most active.
All over Europe homosexuals are on the retreat from public activity: it is important that homosexual women and men do not let go of their responsibility for their own lives, as is now the case in England.
They must strengthen themselves, show themselves, so that the prevailing morality is broken, so that good anti-discriminatory legislation can come to exist, so that there is no basis for the kind of developments that have occurred in Britain.
Homosexuals will have to put their struggle for tolerance and against heterosexist norms and morals in an international perspective.
We need a gay movement with international contacts, so that we can inform, stimulate and support each other.
This network must not be slowed down by bureaucracy, or allowed to become a ‘gay elite’ willing to make deals and compromises.
We have only two years in which to change the  ‘survival of the fittest’ ideology into a social attitude which is tolerant of ethnic, political and other minority groups, and individuals who are threatened by the ruling moral standards.
Porn Again
Colin Richardson
Pornography is the vice whose name we dare not speak.
Every gay man I know owns something pornographic — a book, some postcards, a video — but none would ever say so.
We would rather talk about art or literature.
A friend of mine, should he find himself in a gay sex shop.
will readily leaf through the glossy magazines, but he always puts them back on the shelf and leaves empty-handed.
To buy one would be an admission of guilt.
We know we should find porn utterly repellent but we cannot help finding it endlessly fascinating.
We are so ashamed of ourselves that we keep quiet about the whole sorry business.
It is an ominous silence; it must be broken.
Porn has never been so loved or so hated as it is now.
In the United States, 1500 porn titles were released on video in 1988 compared to an annual total of around 100 in the 1970s.
The American gay magazine The Advocate reckons that US sales of gay porn videos have more than doubled in recent years.
It is not so easy to produce figures for Britain as so much porn is consumed illegally, but the trend is sure to mirror that of the States.
In my experience, gay porn, most of it produced abroad, is increasingly widely available.
In 1989, porn produced by and for lesbians in Britain appeared above ground with Sheba's publication of an anthology of ‘lesbian erotic stories and poetry’,Serious Pleasure .
and the launch of the lesbian sex magazine Quim .
At the same time, anti-pornography forces are on the move again, demanding new laws.
Their chances of success are looking good, because these days sex is out while law-and-order is in.
A New Brutalist Conservative government has brought the moral Right in from the cold of post-60s permissive liberalism and has given it its head.
Section 28 was one of the more noxious consequences of moralism's new-found influence and respectability.
The Left is divided and confused in the face of such moral certitude.
The Labour leadership at first welcomed Section 28, then opposed it.
A number of Labour backbenchers are active in anti-pornography campaigns and are attempting to persuade the party to commit itself to new legislation.
A prospective Labour government is unlikely to oppose such moves for fear of being dubbed ‘the pornographer's friend’.
(‘We are not going to go to the wall for Escort and Parade ’, an ‘associate’ of Roy Hattersley told The Observer , 6th May 1990.)
Outside Parliament the pressure is being stepped up.
In early 1989 the Campaign Against Pornography And Censorship (CPC) was formed.
It scored a quick success in April that year, when Liberty (the National Council for Civil Liberties) voted at its AGM in favour of a CPC-sponsored motion which calls for new anti-porn legislation.
Late in 1989, the Off The Shelf campaign was launched with support that ranges across the political divide.
This direct action campaign aims to persuade newsagents, notably W.H. Smith, to stop stocking ‘top shelf porn magazines.
I take this personally.
The top shelf is where Gay Times is traditionally to be found, nestling coyly next to Penthouse .
Experience tells me that attacks on pornography quickly become attacks on the whole of lesbian and gay culture because the two are seen as one and the same.
That is why we must oppose anti-porn forces in whatever guise they appear; which means being prepared to face up to pornography, to understand why we like it and why we find that so shameful.
Porn embarrasses us in part because of what we use it for.
Porn's main function is to arouse.
It's an aid to masturbation, hence all those jokes about the pages being stuck together.
But we do not like to admit that we masturbate, because people might think that we cannot get ourselves a man or a woman of our own.
To admit to using porn is to admit failure.
We have a seedy image of people who use porn; men in raincoats, sleazy, pathetic inadequates who cannot get ‘the real thing’.
And we do not like to be associated with them.
Yet, if we are honest, we know that wanking is an integral part of our sex lives.
It is not a substitute for sex, it is a kind of sex, ‘sex with someone you love’, as Woody Allen once said.
At last, thanks to safer sex, it is almost trendy to admit to self-abuse so long as porn had nothing to do with it.
Pornography was invented by the Victorians.
They were so fascinated by sex that they elevated its study from the status of a hobby to that of a science.
They invented most of the formal sex words we are now so familiar with, the better to study sex and the better to control it.
The word ‘pornography’ was first coined in 1864 from the Greek root porne , meaning ‘prostitute’.
The Oxford English Dictionary gives the original definition:
Pornography 1864.
Description of the life, manners, etc., of prostitutes and their patrons; hence, the expression or suggestion of obscene or unchaste subjects in literature or art.
From the start, the meaning of the word was loaded.
Because of the connection with prostitutes, pornography means more than just the graphic depiction in words or pictures of sexual activity.
The sex in porn is a particular kind of sex, that which the prostitute symbolises: sex outside marriage or the bounds of romantic love; sex as a transaction; sex with no other context than desire or reward.
This was not the official Victorian view of sex nor, indeed, is it the modern line.
As a result, the Victorians attempted to ban both prostitution and  pornography.
Both were seen as sources of disease, bodily or spiritual, moral corruptions which were spreading throughout the land.
Homosexuality, which was invented in 1869 also from a Greek root (homo , meaning ‘same’), was seen in the same light and its male variety was banned in 1885.
Pornography, prostitution and homosexuality continue to be seen as variations on a theme to this day, something we implicitly acknowledged when we adopted the word ‘gay’ as our own.
For, as Neil Bartlett points out, that nice little word was corrupted long before we got our sticky fingers on it.
He quotes the New English Dictionary of 1897–1900, a forerunner of the OED:
Gay addicted to social pleasures and dissipations.
Often euphemistically: of loose or immoral life.
hence in slang use of a woman leading an immoral life, living by prostitution.
Because it makes public that which should stay hidden, pornography is widely considered to be a form of sexual propaganda.
And because it seeks to arouse, porn eroticises immorality which makes it especially dangerous to those who worry about these things.
The fleshly temptations of porn pose a threat to public morality and so the law steps in.
British law in this area is roughly based on the liberal precept that immorality may only be tolerated so long as it remains a wholly private matter.
Ever since the ‘permissive’ sixties, the moral Right has been concerned that the distinctions between public and private morality have become blurred.
The Conservative government has been sympathetic to these concerns and has launched a fierce rhetorical offensive against social liberalism, initiating or supporting measures designed to police the moral boundaries.
Section 28 was thus in perfect tune with the times.
By equating our culture with pornography it threw a cordon sanitaire around us and all our works so as to safeguard the public, of whom we are not considered part, from our  corrupting influence.
It is remarkable how similarly the law treats both homosexuality and pornography.
Just as it is not illegal to own porn, nor is it illegal to be lesbian or gay (unless you are a man under 21): but the rights of both porn and lesbian and gay people to exist are strictly limited.
A number of laws, many of them based on principles of ‘obscenity’, ‘indecency’ and ‘offence’are designed to prevent the distribution or display of homosexuality in the same way as porn is constrained.
To make one's homosexuality public is to risk accusations of ‘flaunting’, of ‘behaviour likely to cause a breach of the peace’, of intent to corrupt, ‘persistent importuning’ or of ‘gross indecency’.
Since the late 1970s there has been a marked tightening of the laws which regulate public order, public morality and porn in particular.
Child porn was outlawed in 1978.
Between 1981 and 1982 three Acts were passed which, taken together, give local authorities powers to license and control the siting of sex shops and cinemas.
Indecent material may only be displayed in licensed sex shops which have no window display and cannot be seen into from the street, do not admit people under 18 years of age and which carry a warning sign to this effect over the door.
If ordinary newsagents want to display such material, they may only do so in a specially marked-off section of the shop, according to the Indecent Displays (Control) Act 1981.
This suggests that the likes of Playboy ,Mayfair and so on are not considered indecent by the law (or, at least, their covers are not, for only that part of the material which is ‘exposed to view’ is covered by this particular law).
The existence of the ‘top shelf, however, implies a certain uneasiness about this.
Licensing thus gives some ‘protection’ to the general public but it offers no immunity to the retailer.
Zipper, a gay sex shop in North London, has a licence but has been raided on numerous occasions by the Obscene Publications Squad.
The Video Recordings Act 1984 was intended to  outlaw the ‘video nasties’ which were causing such a panic at the time, by making it illegal to distribute films on video which have not received a certificate from the British Board of Film Classification.
Most of the video nasties which gave rise to the Act have passed this test with flying colours, whilst most porn fails.
The year after this Act was passed, Tory MP Winston Churchill tried to extend the scope of the Obscene Publications Act so that it would apply to television.
The chief effect of his Bill would have been the banning of almost all images of homosexuality from the small screen.
Though his Bill failed, the government has found another means to the same end.
The ‘taste and decency’ clauses of the BBC and ITA charters are considered to be too weak by the moral tendency of the Conservative Party.
Channel 4 has been a constant provocation with its film seasons, Gordon in ‘Brookside’, and ‘Out On Tuesday’, a whole series devoted to showing the world what respectable and cultured citizens we are.
The BBC has let the side down too, what with ‘EastEnders’, ‘Oranges Are Not The Only Fruit’, and all.
So, as part of its deregulation of television, the government has established a new TV watchdog, the Broadcasting Standards Council (BSC), to assume custodianship of the nation's morals.
The BSC will retrospectively censor the output of all mainland TV stations, but will have no jurisdiction over programmes beamed in by satellite from abroad.
I call it retrospective censorship because the BSC will not preview programmes and has no powers to ban programmes.
Instead, it will watch programmes as they are broadcast, along with the rest of us, and then pronounce on their suitability (or lack of it).
It is clever because it effectively means that the broadcasters will have to censor themselves.
With Sir William Rees-Mogg, who is on record as abjuring both pornography and homosexuality, at its head, the priorities of the BSC are already clear.
Not all the recent demands for new laws to deal with pornography have come from the moral Right.
Feminist writings on sex and sexuality since the sixties have  developed a powerful indictment of porn for its depiction of men's oppression of women.
Because it portrays male dominance and, on occasion, male violence in a sexual context, porn, in this view, is far from being harmless smut.
To some feminists, such as Andrea Dworkin, pornography is a major cause of women's oppression; it is violence against women or, as the old slogan has it, ‘porn is the theory, rape is the practice.’
Other feminists, Rosalind Coward for instance, oppose such a brutal cause-and-effect view of pornography.
Rather, they argue that pornography has established the conventions by which we understand sexualised images of women as images of submission, images which invite violence.
This pornographic genre is not confined to porn itself, but spreads through our culture from advertising through bodice-ripping fictions to soap operas.
Porn, in other words, plays a part in conditioning our view of sexual roles and their relative importance.
Despite their differences, both views tend to support a tightening of the law on pornography.
This raised a problem of definition: what exactly is porn for the purposes of any law?
Some argue for a distinction between soft and hard porn; others for a distinction between erotica and pornography.
Many dispense with such niceties, arguing that porn is porn however you look at it.
Even those who attempt to split the difference are not too fussy about where the line is drawn.
Take this from a Spare Rib interview with Catherine Itzin, founding member of the Campaign Against Pornography And Censorship (CPC), which prides itself on a definition of pornography which would leave ‘erotica’ untouched by any new law.
Asked by Shaila Shah, ‘Would the political approach you have outlined to what is largely heterosexual pornography apply to gay male or lesbian pornography?’,
Itzin replied:
‘I actually don't know; I am not familiar with it.
However, it's a very important issue and must be addressed properly.
At the moment, we do not have the resources, knowledge or understanding with which to do so.
But  from what little I do know of it, my understanding is that it basically dramatises the same power relationships, and so seems to appeal to the same inequalities.
And it can't by definition be about sexual liberation simply because it duplicates and exploits those same power relationships.’
In opposition to such worrying and cavalier approaches to the subject of pornography, a new group was launched towards the end of 1989.
Feminists Against Censorship (FAC), in the words of group member Mary McIntosh, rejects the view:
‘that somehow pornography is the root cause of oppression and that if you eliminated it, you would reduce the amount of violence against women.
Pornographic images of women reflect the pattern of social relationships in which men are dominant and privileged, so that is what you really need to attack, not the images.'
Linda Semple of FAC makes another important point:
‘we think these campaigns (against porn) are forgetting one of the main points of the women s liberation movement, which is the right of women to make their own sexual definition...
We feel there is a very important place for sexually explicit material in women's lives.
One of the main themes of lesbian feminism of the last years has been trying to create a forum in which women can talk about sex, feel happy about sex, and consume sexually explicit material without guilt.’
Sexual images can be about liberation, which is why the moral Right wants to ban them.
But it is almost impossible to produce such images without someone raising the cry, ‘pornography’.
Opposing censorship therefore leads us into the position of defending pornography.
This is such a horrifying thought that most of us would rather not think about it.
However, I believe that it is unavoidable if we are to have any hope of defending what is ours.
So let us look at what pornography means to us.
Pornography tells the story of our lives.
The language it uses seems very familiar, but it has other meanings.
We  have had to rethink sex, and our porn — however imperfectly — reflects this.
Our sex is sex between people of the same gender, which automatically removes the actual or symbolic inequalities deriving from gender difference.
The principle that sex is about masculine and feminine, fucker and fuckee, does not necessarily apply.
And when it does we make it explicit that this is a matter of choice and consent.
We ritualise it, make a game out of it and name it: butch and femme: top and bottom.
We are used to seeing things differently.
We grew up in a heterosexual culture which banishes positive images of homosexuality.
So we read between the lines, take our own meanings from the books and films we are allowed access to and call it camp.
Our first images of sex are heterosexual images, but we can still enjoy them.
I remember when I first saw simulated sex on TV, putting myself in the place of the woman, the man on top of me.
Lesbian and gay porn frees our imagination from such trickery.
When I watch a gay video I can imagine myself as any or all of the participants, or just sit back and enjoy being a voyeur.
When I look at a picture of a naked man, I can think like Richard Dyer: ‘I'd like to feel that man and I'd like to be that man.’
Lesbian and gay sex porn demands to be looked at differently.
It repays the compliment.
Pornography is the only place we can create our own images of lesbian and gay sex which celebrate its joy and beauty.
As John Preston, the American gay porn writer, puts it, for gay men:
‘The first step toward personal and communal liberation is unlearning those lessons of socialisation which made our cocks and asses dirty.
The acceptance of our bodies.
the unhindered celebration of our sexuality and the act of loving other men spiritually, romantically, and physically is the necessary first step toward liberation.
Anything that helps to free our repressed selves — including pornography — has a positive value.’
Our porn challenges the received myths about our love-making, as Gillian Rodgerson pointed out when she argued that lesbians need to produce their own because  ‘then the myth that all lesbian sex is two women lounging around waiting for a man to join them, might finally be exploded.’
In this way, our porn helps us to come out.
My own experience was much like that described by Gregg Blachford:
‘I remember the very exciting feeling I got when I first saw one of these magazines before I came out.
There I saw men kissing and holding and loving each other; something that I never thought possible as the mainstream culture manifests itself in overwhelmingly heterosexual and macho terms.
It was proof of a homosexual community and it was through porn that I learned of its existence.'
Porn can teach us about the simple mechanics of lesbian and gay sex.
It allows us to explore our fantasies and to accept our sex as natural.
It enables us to produce images of sex that would otherwise be absent.
In the end, porn matters to us because sex matters to us so much.
As Preston says:
‘One of the reasons we constantly return to sex is — I think — that we are always needing to know if this is enough to justify what we go through because of It.
Often that's an emotional issue; are these emotions worth it?
But because the repercussions are so enormous it becomes a political and social issue as well.'
Now, in the age of AIDS, porn means more to us than ever before.
Pornographic imagery has been crucial to the success of safer-sex campaigns.
Simon Watney refers to the effects of videos produced by Gay Men's Health Crisis in New York, which eroticise the use of condoms as a form of ‘pornographic healing’.
It is no accident that Watney cites an American example, because the self-same videos are illegal here.
To import them is to take a huge risk.
A friend of mine found this out when he brought a video back with him after a long weekend in Amsterdam.
Naturally, he was stopped by British Customs; what gay men returning from Amsterdam (or San Francisco, or…) is not?
Although he had removed all  trace of labelling from the cassette the Duty Men were not fooled.
They keep a video cassette player nearby for just such an eventuality.
They declared the video to be obscene, confiscated it and imposed an on-the-spot fine on my friend.
When he protested they threatened to tell his employers.
As a gay teacher, he had too much to lose, so he paid up.
Even without the threat to his job, he had little choice.
Had he contested the Customs Officers' decision, who would have supported him?
It is the same with printed material: questions have even been asked in Parliament.
A Tory MP called on the government to ‘take steps to cease the distribution by the Citizens’ Advice Bureau in Wimbledon of the pamphlet Sex , published by the Terrence Higgins Trust, in view of its explicit promotion of exclusively homosexual activities.’
The Vice Squad have taken their cue and there have been reports of seizures of safer-sex literature on the grounds that it is obscene: e.g. ‘Vice Squad rejects ‘crude’ AIDS leaflet' (The Guardian .
15th April 1986).
They do things differently abroad.
Gay bars show porn videos, many of which carry an explicit safer-sex message.
In some countries, such as the Netherlands, the government has funded such videos.
Explicit printed material, which makes what is available here look tame, is also widely available.
In Britain, the government has yet to place its safer-sex advertising aimed at ‘men who have sex with men’ in non-gay publications, thus by-passing those men who do not identify as gay and so are least likely to be well-informed because of their minimal contact with the gay scene.
It remains the case in this country that safer-sex adverts which use pornographic imagery are largely produced by gay organisations and are confined to the gay press.
Mainstream newspapers, many of which refuse to recognise that AIDS affects heterosexuals, will not touch them.
This is a tragedy because the evidence suggests that ‘pornographic healing’ works.
Certainly, the iceberg-and-tombstone approach, which relies on fear to get the message across, has proved to be a disastrous  failure.
The boom in the production and consumption of porn has a lot to do with AIDS.
In the United States, the porn industry has started to come to terms with its new responsibilities.
So many porn stars have died from AIDS that producers now insist on safer-sex techniques in the making of videos.
A number of commercially produced porn videos now make the use of condoms explicit although, as The Advocate reported, some producers argue that there is still a place for fantasy, a release from the demands of real life.
In this view, people do not directly act out what they see on screen, but treat porn as a means of wish fulfilment.
Both approaches have their place.
Writers of porn in the States have also been quick to acknowledge their role in helping us to face the epidemic.
In 1985 Alyson Publications published Hot Living , a book of ‘Erotic Stories about Safer Sex’ edited by John Preston.
This was the first book to explore in graphic terms the erotic possibilities of safer sex.
Alyson followed this up with two books by Max Exander,Safestud and Lovesex .
Although badly written and fairly unimaginative, they pass the ‘wet test’ in their descriptions of safer sex.
This is why porn is uniquely placed to promote safer-sex messages, by giving the reader/viewer instant feedback.
Preston again:
‘Writing about sex is one of the best ways to inform the gay world about itself, including issues with which it should be concerned and potential problems it might face.'
Lesbian and gay porn of any sort, let alone that which deals with safer sex, is not easy to obtain here.
Very little of it is home-produced; it is nearly all imported, which is illegal.
British law already places strong restrictions on pornography.
Pornography is not defined as such by law, instead it applies standards of ‘obscenity’ and ‘indecency’.
Obscenity is the narrower test, referring to material which would tend to ‘deprave and corrupt’ those who actually seek it out and use it.
The material must  also be judged as a whole and in context.
Indecency is a much broader and more widely used category of offence.
It defines material which ‘any reasonable person’(a judge, for example) would find ‘shocking, disgusting and revolting’, as Lord Denning the then Master of the Rolls defined it in 1976.
The law allows enormous scope for interpretation and those who interpret are not friends of ours.
Generally speaking, it is not illegal to possess pornography (except child porn) for personal use.
But it is illegal to import it, send it through the post or display it to the general public.
In Scotland, actual distribution or display must be shown to have occurred, whereas in England and Wales it is enough merely to establish ‘intent’.
Censorship of pornography is already here.
We have seen the future and we know how it will work.
Because so little lesbian or gay pornography is produced in this country, HM Customs & Excise play a large part in the policing of our lives.
The same powers which took my friend's video away from him at the airport and threatened his livelihood into the bargain, have routinely been used against our whole culture.
The raid on Gay's The Word bookshop in 1984 was merely the largest and best publicised exercise in State censorship this decade.
In the same year, other bookshops.
mail order firms (one of which went bust as a result) and the International Feminist Book Fair were affected too, as lesbian and gay literature was seized en masse.
Although the charges against Gay's The Word were eventually dropped, Customs' raids and seizures continue in smaller ways; Gay's The Word was able to win through because of its prestige as a well respected and established bookshop.
The liberal literary establishment came to its aid.
The individual gay man, arrested because of his video collection, is on his own.
In the same way, it is possible to screen explicit safer-sex videos from abroad at the Institute for Contemporary Arts (ICA) as part of a one-off cultural event, but not on a routine basis to punters in gay bars.
I know one gay bar in London which used  occasionally to screen porn videos, including safer-sex videos, but that has stopped after discreet pressure from the local nick.
Even Art is losing its protective powers.
Gay artist Philip Core died whilst fighting in court the Customs seizure of materials he had sent to his London home during a trip to America.
The materials included a book on sale in this country,Tom of Finland: A Retrospective .
personally inscribed to Core by the author.
Core's defence relied on the claim that the materials were for artistic purposes, a defence recognised in British law.
However, in a judgement with frightening implications, the magistrate rejected pleas to consider the materials in context or to take into account their intended purpose as artistic source material.
Instead, he applied a narrow dictionary definition of the term obscene as that which is ‘lewd, filthy and loathsome’, and ordered the materials to be destroyed.
Unless we are prepared to defend it ourselves we will stay forever at the mercy of the moralists, their inquisitions and their laws.
It is easy to keep quiet — who wants to be thought of as someone with dirty habits or as a woman-hater?
It is easy to get angry at some of the images produced in the name of sexual gratification and to imagine that the answer to our rage is to ban these images.
To do so is to forget our history too easily.
Moralist and anti-porn campaigns are nothing new.
In late Victorian Britain, the law-makers were gripped by a clean-up fervour, not unlike what is happening today, which sought to make the country safe for women, children and the family.
The result was the total criminalisation of male homosexuality and the trial of Oscar Wilde.
Obscenity laws were used in the 1920s to ban Radclyffe Hall's book,The Well of Loneliness .
In the 1950s, anti-Communism and the ideology of the nuclear family combined to put women back in the kitchen and to launch a series of prosecutions of gay men which amounted to mass persecution.
Evidence suggests that the fifties are back with a  vengeance.
Recent research by GALOP (the Gay London Policing Group),Him magazine,Capital Gay and Gay Times shows that in 1989, police in England and Wales arrested more men for consensual sex ('indecency between males') than in any other year this century save for 1954 and 1955.
This is no accident; it seems likely that it results from a deliberate policy decision taken somewhere on high.
Lives have been ruined because people have read the wrong books or looked at the wrong pictures.
As I write.
Gay Times reports:
Eighteen homes raided In nationwide Customs clampdown.
Customs & Excise officers launched a dramatic series of raids last month on the homes of gay men throughout Britain after finding their names and addresses in a Dutch contact magazine.
A number of men have already been charged with a range of offences and at least two men received heavy fines when they appeared in court last month, charged with ‘importing obscene material’.
Other men will appear in court this month.
One of the arrested men subsequently committed Suicide.
Now we need more than ever to remind ourselves of what Ellen Willis has written:
The basic purpose of obscenity laws is and always has been to reinforce cultural taboos on sexuality and suppress feminism, homosexuality and other forms of sexual dissidence.
No pornographer has ever been punished for being a woman-hater. but not too long ago information about female sexuality, contraception and abortion was assumed to be obscene.
In a male supremacist society the only obscenity law that will not be used against women is no law at all.
Pornography serves to divide and contain us.
Because we define ourselves by our sexuality we are automatically considered ‘immoral’ and ‘obscene’by the rest of society.
But precisely because of that, sex and sexual representations are important to us, and so we cannot allow a simple-minded anti-pornography consensus to  stifle us.
Pornography means more than most people would have us believe, but the word has become so weighed down with negative associations that we tend to shy away from it.
We try to talk about what we like as erotica, but no-one can agree, one person's erotica being another's porn.
We try to pretend that sex isn't so important, that we are just like everyone else, just as we sought to distance ourselves from books like The Milkman's On His Way during the Section 28 debates.
It didn't wash, and we lost.
We cannot tell our stories without talking dirty or without shocking or offending someone.
So I think, like Ellen Willis, that ‘it would be clearer and more logical simply to acknowledge that some sexual images are offensive and some are not.’
We should recognise that sexual imagery can challenge as much as uphold prevailing sexual orthodoxies and that the law has no place in deciding what is good and what is bad, because it will always get it wrong.
By allowing the open production and distribution of explicit sexual imagery, we are taking the risk that some of the images produced will be unacceptable.
But only by allowing such openness can we effectively establish any kind of good practice.
We need to be able to show that being explicit about sex is not inherently bad or damaging, that the pornographic view of sex is not the only one.
Censorship merely confirms the view that sex is dirty and must be hidden away, out of sight and — cross fingers — out of mind.
But it doesn't work like that: we live in a society where pornography takes most of the burden of talking about sex and where talking about sex is considered pornographic.
So sex education becomes crucially important, but while the 1986 Education Act and Section 28 remain in place, sex education in Britain will consist of little more than a hymn to family life, largely devoid of any education about sex.
Only with the repeal of these measures, the abolition of all laws based upon precepts of ‘obscenity’ and ‘indecency’, and the opening up of the narrow, prescriptive sexual teachings insisted upon by  the moralists, can we get on and live our lives, talk about our desires and argue about them without feeling ashamed or guilty.
The fight against censorship starts in our own heads.
Postscript
Since I started to work on this chapter somewhere back in early 1989 a lot has happened.
My original purpose in writing this was to warn of the dangers of censorship and to provoke debate in the lesbian and gay communities.
Debate is now starting to take place in both the lesbian and gay and the straight press; the advocates of censorship are not going unchallenged.
Significantly, following lobbying by Feminists Against Censorship amongst others, Liberty narrowly voted at its 1990 AGM to reverse the position adopted a year earlier in favour of anti-pornography legislation.
Lesbian and gay speakers played an important part in the debate.
There will undoubtedly be more battles like this in the coming years, whether or not the Conservatives hold on to power.
Censorship will continue to threaten Britain's lesbian and gay communities from within as well as from without.
But I hope that the debate will not rest there.
We have spent so long fighting against a political tide which is pushing us ever backwards that it is a victory just to stand still.
The nineties have yet to prove themselves a kinder and gentler decade, but that should not stop us from looking forward again.
It is time to promote ourselves and if that makes us pornographers, too bad.