

Hoffman/Burns/Terminal
I was my very own would-be killer.
FOLLOWING THE FIRST day of The Subject Was Roses rehearsals, Dustin went over to a girlfriend's apartment for dinner brimming with enthusiasm and confidence.
Things looked rosy.
The rehearsal had gone well, and it seemed as though he had successfully jumped the chasm between off- and on-Broadway.
He had promised to cook his hostess a speciality of his — beef fondue.
Then, after a few glasses of wine and dessert, who knows, he might be able to have his way with her.
But when he tossed the beef into the sizzling oil, it somehow exploded out of the pot ‘like a canister of napalm’, splashing over his arms and starting a kitchen fire, which Dustin promptly and stupidly tried to put out with his hands.
The fire finally doused with water, a young doctor across the hall was called and he advised Dustin to go immediately to the hospital.
The putting out of the fire had not only dampened any prospects of seduction, it could seriously jeopardise his chances of performing on Broadway in an award-winning show.
There was no way Dustin was going to hospital.
What if they kept him there?
What if he couldn't get to rehearsal next morning?
So hungry was he for the role that, instead of going for treatment, he went home to bed.
Despite being in extreme pain and feeling ill, he turned up the following day at rehearsals with long sleeves disguising his burns.
He continued to hide this condition for almost a week, until he collapsed during a break in rehearsals, and was rushed to hospital.
His injuries were far more serious than he had imagined; he had incurred third-degree burns on his hands and a serious infection had spread into his bloodstream.
An urgent operation was necessary to save his life.
In fact, doctors listed his chances as ‘touch and go’.
Because Dustin had eaten a few hours previously, the anaesthetist had to insert a tube in his mouth to stop him choking on his own vomit.
‘How will I know when it's in the right place?’ he asked.
‘You won't be able to talk,’ said the man.
The anaesthetist tried three times to insert it.
The fourth time, he said, ‘That's it.’
‘No it isn't,’ said Dustin.
‘I can still talk.’
Owing to fears of the anaesthetist's incompetence, Dustin insisted on having the  operation the following morning.
Despite being told he might die, he decided to take the risk.
By ‘willing myself to do so’, Dustin survived the night and the operation.
When he came to, the doctor who performed it admitted to Dustin that he might have choked to death had he undergone it the night before.
Dustin later discovered that his admission card read: Hoffman/Burns/Terminal.
While in hospital, in order to stem the agonising pain, he was given three or four shots of Demerol a day.
‘Every morning I'd get a beaut before they changed my bandages.
And every few hours I'd get more shots.
I felt I knew what addicts' lives are like and what they think they're getting from dope.
My euphoria was complete.
I had no sex drive, of course, because drugs take its place.
In a sense, taking drugs is very sexual.
Perhaps what I mean is you have a powerful feeling of love, and while you're on drugs, you experience no hate or fear.’
He left the hospital weighing 110 lb, 30 less than when he came in.
‘My life was unbearable.
I didn't feel pain from the burns any more, but that had been replaced by a pain a thousand times worse.
I felt as if hordes of people were constantly shaking me, shaking my whole insides, shaking me until I'd cry in anguish.
But gradually I beat my craving for the drug.’
The experience was later dredged out of his subconscious when he played drug addict Lenny Bruce.
Dustin always had the consolation that any painful period he lived through could be used to inject reality into a role.
Thanks to proper medical care, the infection was cured, but he needed a convalescence of four weeks under medical guidance, a time which cost him the part of Timmy Cleary that he craved.
Going down to the Royale Theater with his hands still lightly wrapped in gauze bandages, Dustin found out that Walter McGinn, who would have been his understudy, now had the role.
When Gilroy explained the commercial necessities of having to recast, and offered him the job of understudy and assistant stage manager, he stormed out of the theatre in a rage.
But after he had simmered down and contemplated his parlous financial situation, he returned a few hours later to accept Gilroy's offer.
For the next month or so, Dustin sat backstage ambivalently waiting for Walter McGinn to break a leg.
However, when McGinn heard that Harry and Lillian, on a short visit to New York, were coming to see the show, he feigned illness to allow Dustin a chance to perform in front of his parents.
Despite his one night on Broadway, Dustin felt bitter, betrayed and disappointed.
He contemplated becoming a teacher and giving up acting, except he could not shake off the desire.
He continued to go to auditions weekly, yet failed to meet the directors' requirements.
Though in a  vulnerable position, Dustin was never afraid to speak his mind in a forceful manner, often having an alienating effect on directors.
One of them was British director John Dexter, who was casting Peter Shaffer's The Royal Hunt of the Sun , to be performed at ANTA in October 1965.
Dustin managed to get a part, but then the brittle Dexter, not known to suffer actors gladly, told him to kindly leave the stage.
Then he landed the role of Sparky in John Arden's Sergeant Musgrave's Dance (produced in London seven years previously in 1959) for Peter Cook's company at the Theater-de-Lys in Christopher Street, Greenwich Village.
Sparky, the youngest of three deserters from the Victorian army, flees his comrades when he falls in love, but is killed in a fight.
Dustin kept changing his concept of the part, and in addition he threw several temper tantrums, none of which pleased the generally unflappable Stuart Burge, another distinguished British director.
On the sixth day of rehearsal, Burge decided that Dustin would never ‘find’ the role, and asked him to make way for another actor.
The now-famous Dustin Hoffman has this advice for a young actor: ‘Don't be afraid to be fired.
Fuck it!
Why be bad?
The director wants you to do it a certain way, and either you don't feel that he's right or you feel that he's right but he's forcing you to be a square peg in a round hole.
You can't fit in.
Quit.
Better to be fired than to look bad.
It's very hard to get work, but it's a very small community and if you're bad word gets around.
It's easy for me to say that now.
I never felt I had the choice.
I couldn't help it.
Unfortunately, there are not a lot of good directors around.
There are more good actors.
Actors have to learn acting and study it.
I'm not sure directors have the same kind of background always.
I never understand why they haven't tried acting.
Why aren't they closer to what it is to be an actor?
It's very easy to tell an actor that it's no good.
It's a terrible thing to be told that and then to do what the director says and it feels like shit.
I'm not taking it away from directors.
They're on a life raft, where the thing isn't going to float if it doesn't get good notices.
‘Are you going to be able to do it?
Because if you don't do it, they'll replace me.’
And the actor is going around saying, ‘I'm going to find this thing.
I don't want to fake it.
Because it's going to taint it.
It's going to screw it up.’'
Being fired by two British directors in two British plays did not put Dustin off the British.
As will be seen, a British play was to be the making of him.
Angry as he was at the directors for failing to appreciate his talents and not understanding what he was driving at, Dustin was angrier with himself for losing jobs.
He felt he needed professional help, and entered into analysis that would continue for many years to come.
‘I went into  analysis because I realised I was a dangerous character — I mean this suicidal, self-destructive instinct I had.
It was suicidal trying to put out that fire…
I couldn't control myself…
I kept losing jobs.’
As the agent in Tootsie tells Michael Dorsey/Dustin Hoffman, ‘You're a wonderful actor, but you're too much trouble.
Get some therapy.’
The analysis helped him work through his anguish and temper his ego to the point that, when he heard of auditions for another play by Ronald Ribman, he felt ready to try for it.
But he was almost canned again, this time because the director Larry Arrick thought Dustin was not giving enough of himself at rehearsals.
‘Where is the character?’
Arrick asked.
‘I haven't found him yet,’ replied Dustin.
The Journey of the Fifth Horse , partially adapted from a Turgenev short story called Diary of a Superfluous Man , was staged by the American Place Theater at St Clement's Church off-Broadway on 21 April 1966.
The play portrayed the life and fantasies of Zoditch, a crusty, lonely old publishing clerk (played by Dustin in a high-pitched nasally projected voice), responsible for reading the diary of Chulkaturin, a nineteenth-century Russian landowner who died young.
The theme of the drama — that timid people are apt to lead empty lives — must have appealed to Dustin, who was determined to overcome an inherent timidity and lead a fuller existence.
The critics were more enthusiastic about Dustin's performance as the eccentric clerk than about the play, which limped through eleven performances, although it and Dustin won Obie awards — off-Broadway's equivalent of the Tony.
Stanley Kauffmann in The New York Times thought, ‘Dustin Hoffman's performance of Zoditch has the vitality of the born actor and the fine control of the skilful one.
With sharp comedy techniques, he makes this unattractive man both funny and pathetic.
Mr Hoffman is only in his twenties.
Perhaps — the insanities of the theatre world permitting — we will be allowed to watch an extraordinary career develop.’
Eh?
Dustin Who?
As soon as things are really good, I always have a feeling the rug is about to be pulled out from under me.
IT COULD BE argued that Dustin owes his great fame, in part, to the Lancashire playwright Henry Livings.
Having just lost out to Alan Alda in 1966 for the forthcoming Broadway comedy The Apple Tree , directed by Mike Nichols, but nonetheless now confirmed as a top off-Broadway character actor, Dustin landed the lead in Livings' Eh?, which had had a great success at the Aldwych Theatre, London, in Peter Hall's Royal Shakespeare Company production exactly two years previously.
It was the 37-year-old writer's fifth play after Stop It, Whoever You Are ;Big Soft Nellie ;Nil Carborundum and Kelly's Eye , none of them making the voyage across the Atlantic.
Eh?seemed just as unlikely to find itself transported to America.
The title alone would give Americans some trouble.
Why did it have a question mark?
Eh! meant ugh!, not, as in England, hey? or ay?
(In France it was called Hein?)
There was fear that their indifference to the play might be expressed as ‘Eh!
Who cares?’
But a few months before its off-Broadway opening,Eh?had had its successful American premiere at the Playhouse in the Park in Cincinnati, Ohio, in which 26-year-old Sam Waterston played the lead to the author's supreme satisfaction.
However, Livings was not in the USA to see Dustin and a cast which included Dana Elcar, Elizabeth Wilson (who would play Dustin's mother in The Graduate ) and Carl Gabler when it opened at Circle-In-The-Square at Bleeker Street on 16 October 1966.
Again it was touch and go whether Dustin would be fired before the first night.
Theodore Mann, co-founder and producer of Circle-In-The-Square since 1951, had seen Dustin on stage and wanted him badly enough to have dismissed two directors instead of the actor.
Melvin Bernhardt, who had directed the show in Cincinnati, was sacked after differences of opinion with Dustin.
The conflict with the second director derived from his wanting Dustin to play the role of Valentine Brose just as David Warner had done in the London production.
Dustin refused, not only because he had not seen the very different Warner, which the director had, but he justifiably felt he had to find his own direction, even if he had to  make a number of detours on the way.
(Some years later Dustin would work with Warner on Straw Dogs , and they were able to compare notes.)
Enter Alan Arkin.
Although Arkin, who had created the role of Harry Berlin in Murray Schisgal's Luv in 1964 (in Mike Nichols's production), had directed sketches in revue, he had never directed a legitimate play before.
Because of his inexperience and the firing of the two previous directors, he asked to do it under another name, not wanting to take the rap for a flop.
So he called himself Roger Short.
Dustin was a jazz enthusiast and found out that Arkin was too.
‘So I went up to him.
It was the first time we made a connection.
And I said, ‘I know why you picked the name Roger Short, because Shorty Rogers did an album once on a label he wasn't supposed to, and changed his name from Shorty Rogers to Roger Short.’
[Rogers was to provide the music for Dustin's very first film.]
We had the same sense of humour.
We had a lot in common and we liked each other and he was one of the best directors I ever had.’
Arkin allowed Dustin time to find the character himself.
‘There are two kinds of difficult people in the theatre,’ Arkin pronounced.
‘Those who are passionate about their work, and those who are passionate about themselves.
Dustin is passionate about his work.’
In order to try and get a ‘Northern English accent’, Dustin went to see the Beatles in A Hard Day's Night about a dozen times determined to ‘sound like those guys’.
No matter that his approximation to Liverpudlian was not what Livings had in mind for the character: it made no difference to American audiences who were not well up on the variations of British speech patterns.
Actually, Dustin, although masterful in changing the timbre of his voice to suit different parts, only rarely attempts to put on anything other than an American accent.
Henry Livings describes the character of Valentine Brose as ‘pale and totally lacking in human fire.
He behaves excitedly on occasion, even frenetically, and he wears gaudy cheap clothes with some dash…
It's as if he were giving a performance of some character he's dreamed up, and his pale eyes wander in search of effect even in his apparently wildest moments.‘
The play revolves around Brose, a harebrained nonentity machine-operator, who runs a boiler room of a semi-automated antiseptic dye factory, having taken the job because it was easy work and non-union, and who manages to annoy everybody except his fiancée.
He has brought with him some psychedelic mushrooms to grow at work.
When his superior comes across the boxes clearly marked ‘Mushrooms’, Brose replies that this actually means M. U. Shrooms (Mervyn Ulrich Shrooms), seed merchant.
By the end, people have ‘turned on’ and the boiler room blows up.
Eliot Fremont-Smith, normally the book critic of The New York Times , wrote that, ‘All involved deserve laurels.
But because it is essentially Brose's show, the biggest should go to Mr Hoffman, who must be reckoned one of the most agile and subtly controlled comedians around.
He carries the show and even if Eh?still doesn't sound enticing, he should be seen.’
On the Sunday morning after the opening, Dustin spread out The New York Times on the sidewalk, and saw a half-page picture of himself illustrating a long article by Walter Kerr, the most esteemed American critic of the day, then only doing weekend pieces.
In glowing terms, Kerr equated Dustin with Buster Keaton.
Stunned, Dustin felt it was ‘the single greatest moment I had as an actor.’
Dustin, who had barely seen Keaton, tried to catch some of his films.
Fortunately, it was the period when Keaton was just being rediscovered.
(There are some moments in Dustin's films that could be called Keatonesque — the blankness of his face at the beginning of The Graduate , some of the comedy in Little Big Man , and the office party scene in Kramer vs Kramer — without his face ever resembling Keaton's handsome ‘stone-face’ features.)
British playwright John Arden (he of Sergeant Musgrave's Dance ) accepted the Obie on Henry Livings's behalf, though, commented Livings, ‘In his mild way John hinted I might well not have enjoyed the way it was done in New York, but I never argue with box-office returns.’
Livings thought it might have lacked the English music-hall style of comedy he wished to capture.
One adverse critic of Dustin's performance was the young and eccentric English actor Victor Henry, who, on seeing Dustin in a bar after the show, emptied a glass of beer over his head.
Henry was a great friend of the playwright and decided that Dustin had misread a line.
(Tragically, Victor Henry died in 1985 aged 42, his last fourteen years spent in silence after a street accident.)
Dustin never forgot the importance of Henry Livings's play in his career, and many years later, when he was making Agatha in England, he sought the modest playwright out and took him to lunch at a smart restaurant.
Dustin introduced Livings to his business manager, the London boxing promoter Jarvis Astaire, ‘who took me into his offices,’ recalled Livings, ‘and en passant introduced me to a chap standing at a window ledge in a corridor, typing: ‘This is one of our writers’, says he.
It seemed a good time to make my excuses and leave, and I did both.’
Almost immediately following the opening of Eh?,
Dustin was given his first chance to be in pictures.
‘I got there at ten a.m. and was done by one p. m.
Then I phoned everybody and said, ‘Well, I just finished my first movie.’’
The Tiger Makes Out was a fleshed-out version of Murray  Schisgal's one-act play,The Tiger , about a sexually repressed New York mailman, played by Eli Wallach, who attempts to kidnap a ‘sexy swinger’ only to end up capturing Anne Jackson (Mrs Wallach), a socially repressed Long Island housewife.
Wallach and Jackson repeated their stage roles, while cameos were taken by stars and friends of the writer.
Filmed on location in Manhattan, this shoestring Columbia Picture comedy provided a modicum of wacky New York humour.
It was released on 19 September 1967, with a nineteenth-billed Dustin Hoffman.
As long-haired ‘Hap’, one of a pair of beatnik lovers, wearing a polo-neck sweater and a raincoat, Dustin's 45-second moment comes when he is seen breaking up with his girlfriend (Mariclare Costello) before she wanders off to be almost grabbed by the preying Wallach.
‘It's no good any more, Rosie,’ Dustin moans.
‘You mope around the house.’
‘I'm not going to any more,’ she pleads.
‘It's just no good, Rosie,’ he continues.
‘You fill me with guilt.’
‘I'm not asking you to marry me,’ she insists.
‘I'm perfectly content to go on living with you under the original terms.
We split all the expenses and live together.
What's so terrible about that?’
‘What's so terrible?’
Dustin protests.
‘I'm the one who has to carry the guilt around.
I'm the guilty one.
Goodbye, Rosie Kriger.’
The film's director, Arthur Hiller, had previously seen Dustin in Journey of the Fifth Horse , and ‘was bowled over by how convincing and skilful he was playing an elderly man.
Needless to say, he showed those special talents again playing a young man in his twenties in our film.
Indeed, I remember Murray Schisgal saying to me, ‘That man will be a major star.’’
Dustin and Schisgal had met earlier in August 1966 at the Berkshire Theater Festival in Stockbridge, Massachusetts, where Dustin acted in a number of Schisgal plays — the Old Jew in the play of that name, Max in Reverberations (changed later to The Basement ) and Jax in Fragments .
(Gene Hackman was to feature in the plays when they got to New York.)
It was the start of a beautiful friendship — Schisgal was to become godfather to two of Dustin's children (Jacob and Rebecca) some years hence — and they would also form a long-standing working relationship.
Murray Schisgal was born in Brooklyn in November 1926.
After serving in the navy during World War II, he performed as a musician with small jazz groups, practised law for several years, then taught in public and private schools.
His career as a playwright began with three one-act plays,The Typists ,The Postman (later changed to The Tiger ) and A Simple Kind of Love Story , which was first produced by expatriate American Charles Marowitz at his tiny Open Space Theatre in London and then off-Broadway.
When Luv opened at the Booth Theater in 1964 (with Wallach, Jackson and Arkin), Walter Kerr over-enthusiastically claimed it was better than Waiting for Godot .
During the theatre festival, the author liked to take early-morning walks, and every day when he left his hotel Dustin would be waiting for him.
‘He'd have the script and a million questions to ask: ‘What's your thought here?
What's your thought there?’
I had never worked with an actor like that.
He is eternally dissatisfied with what he has achieved.’
While Eh?was still running, Dustin signed to star in the low-budget Italian-Spanish Madigan's Millions (El Testamento de Madigan/Un Dollaro per 7 Vigliacchi)to be shot in Rome from April 1967, for which he would receive $5000.
George Raft, originally set to take the non-speaking title role, turned down the offer before shooting, reportedly because of ill health, and was replaced by Cesar Romero, in what was barely a cameo.
Dustin played Jason Fister, a bumbling undercover Treasury agent sent to Italy to locate gangster Madigan's ill-gotten millions, thereby becoming embroiled in a series of slapstick mishaps.
Amidst the unhilarious mayhem, a bespectacled and wide-eyed Dustin managed to time a few gags well, but became swamped by the strained and desperate elements of the ridiculous plot.
The draggy love interest was provided by Elsa Martinelli, who plays Romero's daughter, although Dustin thinks she was his lover.
This schlocky international movie, photographed in eye-straining colour, cashing in (figuratively speaking) on the craze for James Bond pictures, was shot in three languages with a different director credited for each version — Stanley Prager (English), Dan Ash (Italian) and Giorgio Gentil (Spanish).
Prager (who died aged 54 in 1972) had been an actor in Fox films in the forties, directed Neil Simon's first Broadway play,Come Blow Your Horn , and had helmed the popular TV comedy Car 54, Where Are You?
Who the other two directors were and whether they were justifiably hiding behind pseudonyms is a matter for conjecture.
Madigan's Millions was held back from release until American International Pictures decided to take advantage of the success of Midnight Cowboy by foisting it on to the public in 1969 in a double bill with Jon Voight's early indiscretion,Fearless Frank , also made in 1967.
Shamelessly, AIP publicised it as ‘The Two Most Incredible New Comedies Ever Laughed At!’
Voight came off the better of the two, because Fearless Frank (originally called Frank's Greatest Adventure ) was the more interesting in being Phil Kaufman's debut as director, and having the author Nelson (The Man with the Golden Arm ) Algren playing a gangster called Needles.
Variety commented on Madigan's Millions that, ‘had it been released earlier, it might have finished him…
Hoffman plays the part like an Occidental version of Charlie Chan's number one son.’
Dustin then returned to the play in New York, and to the woman he was living with.
Dustin had first met nineteen-year-old ballet dancer Anne Byrne in 1963.
‘I was playing piano, for free, at the Premise Club in Greenwich Village.
She had a date with my roommate and he brought her there.
He went to the bathroom and I said, ‘So, you're a dancer?’ and she said ‘So, you're an actor?’and we both looked at the salt shaker and that's how it started.
I said to my friend, I really like that girl.
He said, ‘Tell you what.
Give me the week to score.
If I don't score I'll turn her over to you.’
He didn't like to spend more than a week at it.
That was the limit of his patience.
He didn't score so he turned her over to me.’
Presuming, of course, that Anne had no say in the matter.
She was five feet nine inches, some three inches taller than Dustin, who was especially attracted to ‘long-legged, intelligent, artistically ambitious women’.
Anne certainly fitted the bill.
Wanting to impress her, Dustin bought a suit for their first date and, on the second date, they went to the beach.
They were dozing happily side by side on the sands, when a jet plane roared overhead, waking them with a start.
as if in a corny love story, they found themselves in each other 's arms.
They both liked it, and began going out together for about a month until he left to do summer stock in Fishkill, NY, and she went to Philadelphia where she was chosen as a principal dancer with the Pennsylvania Ballet.
The short romantic idyll was over.
It was revived four years later when they ran into each other again in the unromantic setting of a Greenwich Village laundromat.
Her first reaction on seeing the tousle-haired bejeaned actor was that he looked like a slob, but ‘I thought he was very sexy.’
To the background of chugging washing-machines, Dustin discovered that Anne had been with the ballet company for three years, had married and divorced financier Winfried Schlote, and had a small three-month-old daughter, Karina.
Born in New York City in 1944, Anne, the daughter of a schoolteacher mother and a father who was an assistant librarian in the business section at Columbia University, was raised in Chappaqua, NY, where she attended the Horace Greeley School.
She seemed a typical product of her upper-middle-class background in Westchester County.
But her desire to be a ballerina was more than just an adolescent fancy and she returned to New York to study at the American School of Ballet.
‘It was understood that women dated, went to college and married.
My dates used to ask me why I was always hanging out with faggots.’
Her first professional appearance was in Montreal with Les Grands Ballets Canadiens, with whom she stayed for two years before returning home to use her classically trained talents in summer stock productions of  Bye, Bye, Birdie ;Fiorello ; and Blossom Time .
She also danced with the Frankfurt Ballet and the New Jersey Ballet.
When she and Dustin were reunited in the laundromat, he was beginning to be noticed off-Broadway and she was an established dancer.
They began a three-year love affair, but were not to marry until he had enjoyed the full fruits of the fame that was just around the corner.
My Son, the Movie Star
Looking back on The Graduate , I have no sense of achievement.
WHEN CHARLES WEBB'S novel The Graduate was first published in 1963, Lawrence Turman, a 37-year-old independent producer with a couple of films to his name —The Young Doctors and I Could Go On Singing — read it, liked it and managed to acquire the rights in 1964 for $20,000 from the ingenuous author.
The book, written when Webb was only 24, crystallised many of the emotions of sixties youth, something Turman was smart enough to recognise.
Having just produced the film of Gore Vidal's political play The Best Man , Turman started to consider making the movie from Webb's book.
Some of its humour happened to remind him of his friend Mike Nichols, who had just begun making a career directing plays on Broadway with the hit Neil Simon comedy Barefoot in the Park and Murray Schisgal's Luv .
Turman sent a copy of the book to the former comedian for his opinion on its filmic possibilities.
The next day, Nichols awakened Turman with an early morning call.
‘I like the book.
Let's talk,’ he stated.
They soon talked and agreed that the shortish novel had the potential to make a good movie.
At that stage, Nichols had yet to direct a film.
The Graduate looked all set to be his first, but Ernest Lehman, who was producing and adapting Edward Albee's acid drama of marital non-bliss,Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?, persuaded Warner Bros to hire the untried Nichols.
It was a baptism of fire for the 35-year-old, who had to control the monstrously sacred couple, Elizabeth Taylor and Richard Burton.
After the three less-than-convincing films they had previously made together,Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?brilliantly restored their credibility as performers, and Nichols's essentially theatrical but competent direction was nominated for an Oscar.
In his satirical cabaret days, Nichols used to do a sketch with Elaine May about a Jewish mother's shock at her son's choice of profession: ‘Can you imagine me saying, ‘There goes my son the nurse’?’
Now Nichols's mother could say, ‘There goes my son the movie director.’
Born Michael Igor Peschowsky in Berlin in 1931, Nichols arrived in the USA at the age of seven with his family after fleeing the Nazis.
When he  was twelve, his doctor-father, a Russian-born Jew who had changed his name to Dr Paul Nichols, died of leukaemia, leaving the family financially destitute.
A bright and ambitious lad, Mike was able to continue his studies due to scholarships and almost as many odd jobs as Dustin would later have.
While at the University of Chicago (where he met Ulu Grosbard), he made his living as a night janitor, hotel desk clerk and delivery truck driver.
It was at university that he first began to perform, and he later went to New York to study acting with Lee Strasberg.
After some years in theatrical revue and improvisational comedy in the Second City troupe in Chicago, he gained wide fame when he teamed up for a double act with Elaine May from 1957 to 1961, before becoming a successful Broadway director.
Turman, having finished producing the entertaining but flimsy The Flim Flam Man , was now ready to embark on The Graduate with Nichols as director, and Calder Willingham writing the screenplay.
Because the novel is written mainly in dialogue, a spurious impression was given that it would be easy to adapt.
But Willingham had delivered an unacceptable script which was then completely reworked by Buck Henry.
Nevertheless, the 45-year-old Willingham, co-writer on Stanley Kubrick's Paths of Glory , who made his name with his 1947 novel End as a Man (filmed as The Strange One ), was later asked to do the screenplay of Little Big Man .
Henry (born Buck Henry Zuckerman) who, like Nichols, had been a performer in an improvisational theatre group in Chicago, had written only one film, the offbeat and unsuccessful The Troublemaker , three years previously.
The Graduate would be financed and released by Embassy Pictures, the company Joseph E. Levine had formed in the late fifties to exploit cheap European spectacles such as the Hercules films with muscle-man Steve Reeves, which brought in millions of dollars.
Levine later went upmarket by helping to finance De Sica's Two Women (1961) and Fellini's 8 1/2 (1963), but with Mel Brooks's The Producers , and The Graduate , he was taking a chance on relatively new film talent.
Casting for The Graduate began in late 1966.
The role of Elaine Robinson went to the pretty, auburn-haired, hazel-eyed 25-year-old Katharine Ross, an up-and-coming star.
She had made four previous films:Shenandoah (1965),The Singing Nun (1966),Mr Buddwing (1966) and Games (1967), but only the first of these had any merit.
Dustin's buddy, the little-known Gene Hackman, who had appeared briefly in three previous films, was cast as her father, and William Daniels and Elizabeth Wilson were to play Mr and Mrs Braddock, the graduate's parents.
Others chosen were Brian Avery, Norman Fell, Elisabeth Fraser, Alice Ghostley and Buck Henry in the small part of the suspicious hotel clerk.
(‘Are you here for an affair, sir?’)
Momentarily glimpsed would be nineteen-year-old  Richard Dreyfuss appearing in his first movie as a Berkeley student, with one line: ‘Shall I get the cops?
I'll get the cops!’
For the role of Elaine's mother, known only as Mrs Robinson, the sexy older woman who seduces the young hero, Nichols wanted the semi-retired 48-year-old Susan Hayward.
According to her biographers, Robert Laguardia and Gene Arceri, however, Hayward ‘wasn't anxious to do with her career what now had to be done: modify her image away from the old-guard glamour to fit the concepts of new directors like Mike Nichols…repulsed at the semi-nude hotel-room sex scenes she would have to play, she did not consider it.
’ It might have revived her career, as it certainly would have done for the 42-year-old Doris Day.
It was an inspired idea to offer the part to the ‘eternal virgin' of the fifties and early sixties, but Day, nearing the end of her career, turned it down because, ‘It offended my sense of values.’
Hayward and Day were obviously actresses who still clung to a perception of Hollywood stardom that no longer existed.
The contrasting Jeanne Moreau, once the darling of the then exhausted French nouvelle vague , was also considered, but Nichols and his team decided, after some thought, that her European quality might unbalance such an essentially American story.
They finally came down on the side of 36-year-old Anne Bancroft, although she had seldom played comedy, having made her name in such powerful dramas as The Miracle Worker and The Pumpkin Eater .
Born Anna Maria Louisa Italiano, the daughter of Italian immigrants, she had two Hollywood careers.
The first — from 1952 to 1957 — was so undistinguished that it was difficult for filmgoers to believe that she was the same actress who returned to movies after five years on Broadway.
The main difficulty was in finding the right actor to play the title role of the 21-year-old Benjamin Braddock.
While Dustin was doing eight shows a week in Eh?,
Mike Nichols and Lawrence Turman, who were still struggling after six months to find their leading man, took in the show one night.
They had read the reviews, and they wanted to see this new Buster Keaton for themselves.
In fact, Dustin was not unknown to Nichols, who had seen him in Journey of the Fifth Horse and had auditioned him for the Broadway musical The Apple Tree .
After the performance, they felt they might have found someone who could fit the part.
Nichols went to see the play a second time, then a call went out to Dustin's agent, and arrangements were made to fly the actor out to his home town for a screen test.
Originally Nichols and Turman were going to cast Benjamin Braddock  to type — a tall, sun-bronzed Californian — although the hero is never described in the novel.
Nichols got Robert Redford to read the script and take a screen test, but it was agreed that, because most of the story concerns Benjamin's hesitancy with women, Redford was too dishy to be convincing.
Redford had previously turned down Nichols's offer to play Nick (eventually taken by George Segal) in Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?the year before.
So Nichols began to think that it might be more interesting to cast against the ‘walking surfboard’ kind of guy that Dustin had always envied.
But Dustin was racked with doubts about himself and the part.
When he was approached, he said, ‘I don't think I'm right for the role.
He's a kind of Anglo-Saxon, tall, slender, good-looking chap.
I'm short and Jewish.
I'm getting scripts now, I'm doing better than I've ever done in my life, Kerr says I'm as funny in Eh?as Buster Keaton.’
‘Believe me, Benjamin is Jewish inside,’ replied Nichols persuasively.
Dustin flew to LA in late February 1967 (being replaced by MacIntyre Dixon in Eh?) in a state of anxiety and self-doubt.
He arrived jet-lagged, tired and jumpy.
‘I felt people were nudging each other and pointing at me and saying, ‘Him, the juvenile lead?’
I was sitting in the make-up chair and I felt like the ugliest piece of shit there ever was.
I mean, I always felt like that but this time was worse.
And Nichols kept saying, ‘What are we going to do about his nose?’
He wanted me to look as good as I could.
He'd seen me read.
He knew I could act.
He wanted me.’
Dustin was one of a long line of candidates being screen-tested in a ten-minute scene with Katharine Ross.
Of Dustin, Ross said, ‘He looked about three feet tall, so dead serious, so humourless, so unkempt.
I thought the screen test was going to be a disaster.’
At one point Dustin reached out and grabbed her behind.
‘Don't you ever touch me again!’ she yelled, rather inauspiciously if they were to be cast as lovers.
‘I was so nervous and fatigued that I couldn't concentrate.
I blew lines repeatedly and did a terrible job, and I knew I wouldn't get the part.’
Dustin was doing so badly that Nichols decided to allow the actor time to learn his lines and then redo the test.
When Dustin returned, he fluffed more lines than before.
‘I can't figure it,’ Nichols sighed.
‘You study the lines, and then you're worse !’
After the screen test, Dustin approached the director.
‘Well, you've seen me at my worst.’
'God, I hope so!’ came the reply.
As he dejectedly left the huge shed-like building that housed the sound stage, he slipped and a New York subway token fell out of his pocket.
A crew member picked it up.
‘Here, kid,’ he said.
‘You're gonna need this.’
He returned to New York under a cloud of gloom and despair, though  relieved in another way.
‘I went back to Eh?after the screen test and said, ‘Don't worry about nothin', folks.
I'll be here.
I ain't getting that job.’'
A day or two later, when Dustin was wending his way home over West 11th Street, he bumped into his neighbour Mel Brooks.
They had often crossed paths until Dustin decided to introduce himself, having regained his confidence since his put-down by Zero Mostel.
Dustin admired Brooks, who had yet to make a movie, for his TV work.
Brooks, soon to marry Anne Bancroft, talked about a film he was planning called The Producers , for which he wanted Dustin to play the crazy Nazi playwright.
When Dustin told Brooks that he was up for the part in The Graduate , Mel said, ‘But you're an ugly little rat.
You're not going to get it.’
It was not long after the test that Nichols called Dustin from Hollywood to say, ‘I've seen the rushes.
They're not so bad.’
Dustin replied, ‘I'm not right for the part physically.’
'Yes, there is the nose.
But we'll let you know very soon.’
True to his word, Nichols was on the phone to Dustin again to tell him he had got the part.
Nichols had seen, beneath Dustin's nervousness, the exact kind of confused, panicky character he wanted.
He thought Dustin would understand the sufferings of Ben.
‘It didn't seem good when we were making the test.
He didn't know his lines terribly well and he was nervous.
But it was good on film.
It was special — he made us laugh.
He had a kind of pole-axed quality with life, but great vitality underneath.
On screen he appeared to be simply living his life without pretending.’
‘I later saw the screen test,’ commented Dustin.
‘I was terrible.
I always thought I got cast in The Graduate because I was one of the last ones to be seen.
I mean, Nichols was very pressured.
In those days I don't think there was an average looking or homely looking person playing romantic leads.
I mean, Alan Arkin had done The Russians Are Coming but that wasn't the romantic lead.
No other director would have cast me, no other.’
Curiously, Larry Turman told Arthur Hiller that the thing that finally swayed them towards Dustin was his 45-second spot in The Tiger Makes Out .
Thus can a minuscule particle tip the scales one way or another.
Certainly, Joseph E. Levine would not have considered him.
When Nichols brought Dustin along to be introduced to the mogul in his imposing New York office, Levine, after greeting Nichols, turned to Dustin and said, ‘The windows are over there.’
'What do you mean?’ asked a nervous Dustin, suspecting the producer was suggesting suicide.
‘Aren't you here to clean the windows?’
Apparently he had mistaken the small man in jeans for the window cleaner he had sent for.
It had rained very hard the night before and the windows of the office were extremely dirty.
Dustin, realising the error, decided to play along.
He just smiled, took a handkerchief out of his pocket and started cleaning them.
Nichols, watching this pantomime, quickly explained that this was the guy he had picked for the lead in The Graduate .
‘Him !’ shrieked Levine.
‘You picked him ?’
Then the producer studied the actor more closely.
Dustin became the ‘incredible shrinking man’.
After a long pause, Levine said, ‘I'm beginning to see it.
Yeah, I see why you picked him!’
Yet, Levine, who died in July 1987, aged 81, could not have realised that he was making one of the best investments of his life.
The screenplay of The Graduate followed the novel in most of its essentials.
Benjamin Braddock, who has just graduated with honours, flies back to his wealthy family in Southern California suburbia.
On his first night back, his parents give him a party, to which they invite their circle of middle-class, middle-aged friends.
Ben escapes to his room, but he is observed and followed by Mrs Robinson, the wife of his father's partner in a law firm.
She asks Ben to drive her home.
She explains that her husband is away for the evening and she doesn't want to return to an empty house.
Once there, the woman starts to make a play for the young man but, before a seduction can take place, Mr Robinson returns.
Ben and Mrs Robinson arrange an assignation a few days later at the swanky Taft Hotel, where, after initial naivety and clumsiness almost make the occasion a farcical disaster, they end up satisfactorily in bed with one another.
‘You're the most attractive of my parent's friends,’ he confesses to her.
They drift into an affair until the Robinsons' daughter, Elaine, returns home from Berkeley.
Ben, at his parent's insistence, takes her out.
Mrs Robinson warns Ben against seeing Elaine again, but he is now in love with her daughter.
When Elaine returns to college, Ben follows her, taking a room there.
However, he learns to his anger and dismay that she is to be married.
On the day of the marriage, Ben arrives just as the couple are pronounced man and wife, taking the unreluctant Elaine away with him.
They jump on a passing bus and head towards a new life.
Charles Webb, the author of the novel, who was not much more than Benjamin's age at the time of writing, had fashioned a different ending.
In the book, Benjamin arrived at the church in time to stop the wedding and there was no further ‘moral transgression’.
Webb was disturbed by the changed ending.
In a letter to The New Republic , complaining about critic Stanley Kauffman's view of the film's ‘moral stance’, Webb wrote:
‘As a moral person, he [Benjamin]does not disrespect the institution of marriage.
In the book the strength of the climax is that his moral attitudes make it necessary for him to reach the girl before she becomes the wife of someone else, which he does.
In the film version it makes no difference  whether he gets there in time or not.
As such, there is little difference between his relationship to Mrs Robinson and his relationship to Elaine, both of them being essentially immoral.’
But Webb's strict ethical judgement that, once the couple had been pronounced man and wife, Benjamin was not entitled to put them asunder, disregards the fact that Benjamin has rescued Elaine from a loveless marriage before it is consummated.
In contrast, Mrs Robinson is trapped in an unhappy marriage.
‘It's too late,’ she screams at her daughter, at which Elaine cries, ‘Not for me .’
More importantly, the ending escapes the cliché in countless films of a marriage being halted in the nick of time although it most resembles the climax of a 1928 Harold Lloyd comedy,Speedy .
Nichols claimed unconvincingly that, ‘I think Benjamin and Elaine will end up exactly like their parents; that's what I was trying to say in that last scene.’
What we see, however, is nothing of the kind.
It is a happy but open ending, as the young couple, like most others, face an uncertain future.
Some adverse criticisms of the film's content came from The National Catholic Office for Motion Pictures, which gave the film an A-4 rating for Catholics as ‘morally objectionable for adults, with reservations’.
Another hostile group was Americans of Italian Descent (AID), which objected to the use of the word ‘wop’ in the movie.
Nothing came of AID's protest, however: the film still contains the word ‘wop’, although you have to listen very hard for it.
Dustin made dubious reparation to the Italian community by playing the slimy Enrico ‘Ratso’ Rizzo in his next movie,Midnight Cowboy , an adulterous Italian bank clerk in Alfredo Alfredo , and Vito, a thief of Italian extraction, in Family Business .
Just as for a play, Nichols had the luxury of three weeks' rehearsal on The Graduate before shooting began on location in Los Angeles, Berkeley and San Francisco.
During filming in LA, Harry and Lillian would go down to the set and watch their son perform.
(Dustin was not prepared to stay with his parents and had rented an apartment.)
When on a shoot at the Taft Hotel, Dustin warned the Hoffmans, who were standing behind the ropes, to keep behind the barrier and also, knowing of his father's blighted ambitions to be a director, not to say anything.
Nevertheless, after the day's filming, Harry introduced himself to Nichols.
‘How do you do, I'm Dusty's father.
’ He then went on to congratulate Nichols on the job he was doing.
‘That's a good shot you got there, but, you know, on the next one, I'd shoot it like this…
’ Needless to say, Nichols was unappreciative of the advice.
It rained on days when they needed sun and it blazed when Nichols  wanted a rain sequence.
Dustin had to drive a convertible in the pouring rain on a sunny day, rain being supplied by a water-spray truck driving along behind.
Benjamin's parent's home was created by Richard Sylbert on a sound stage, but the underwater sequences, which Dustin practised for a week, were shot in a real outside pool with a glass wall for photographic purposes.
For the opening party, Nichols and Turman rounded up some of Hollywood's partygoers.
Given Nichols's theatrical background it is not surprising that some of the best things in the film came out of improvisation.
‘He makes you feel kind of like a kite.
He lets you go ahead, and you do your thing.
And then when you're finished he pulls you in by the string.
But at least you've had the enjoyment of the wind.
It was Mike Nichols's point of view that you should always be close to yourself in the most personal way to convey not only truth but humour.
Real humour perhaps is the purest truth when it works.’
For the scene when Benjamin is trying to get a room key, Nichols suggested that Dustin find in his life what was the most painful thing for him to do that had a sexual connotation, in a public way.
For some reason.
Dustin could never go to a chemist and ask for condoms, although he had no difficulty in buying women's contraceptives.
‘Although I had not had a sexual experience when I was at high school, I thought I should be ready, if and when it came, and so I thought I should stock up.
I would always plan on a day when I felt brave and I would walk into the drugstore and see who was behind the counter.
This was very important — if it was a woman I would walk right out again — I wanted someone young — a kind of ‘big brother’ image.
I would ask for some Kleenex, some razor blades and I would get to that word and I couldn't do it.’
So when he rehearsed the scene he based it on his experience at the chemist's, an example of his always having to make contact with a real, lived emotion.
‘Everyone seemed to think Benjamin was a virgin, but I never thought of him as that, but that it was the first time he was making love to a woman who was old enough to be his mother, and who was his mother's friend.’
The fact that Dustin was only six years younger than Bancroft never seemed to bother anyone.
‘Actually, it wasn't hard for me to play a man ten years my junior, because I was not only physically younger but I've always been emotionally immature.’
The respected Broadway actress Elizabeth Wilson, who was playing his mother, was twelve years his senior.
They lived in the same apartment block and often dined together, creating unfounded rumours that they were having an affair.
In fact, they had already become good friends when she had played Mrs Murray in Eh?with him at Circle-In-The-Square, and she had also been in The Tiger Makes Out .
During the third week of rehearsal, Gene Hackman was fired and replaced by the extremely different Murray Hamilton.
‘We were urinating together, and Gene looked at me and said, ‘I think I'm going to get fired today.’'
‘That was a painful experience…
I think it was my fault,’ said Gene.
‘I just wasn't capable then of giving the director what he wanted.’
Ironically, the sacking proved to be the turning point in Hackman's career.
A week later, Warren Beatty grabbed him for the role of Clyde's brother Buck in Bonnie and Clyde , for which he would gain an Oscar nomination.
Beatty remembered him from three years before, when Hackman had a small but impressive scene in Lilith , Robert Rossen's final film, which starred Beatty.
After Hackman's departure, Dustin felt even more insecure, remembering that he had himself been fired a few times for not satisfying the director.
Dustin never had the feeling that Nichols was pleased with his performance.
Once the director took Dustin aside and said, ‘This is the only day we're ever going to shoot this scene and, no matter how exhausted or lousy you feel, I want you to remember that what you give me is going to be on celluloid for people to see for ever and ever.
I know you're tired, but when you go to see this film, if you don't like your work in this scene, just remember always that this was the day you screwed up.
‘A somewhat sadistic variation on Warner Baxter's famous speech to Ruby Keeler in 42nd Street : ‘You're going out there a youngster, but you've got to come back a star.’
Whereas on Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?the first-time director had been constricted by the wishes of the starry couple and the confines of the Albee play, Nichols now had far more power to exercise.
He used it more on the unknown Hoffman than on the others.
‘I hated making that film.
I thought, if this is what movies are like in Hollywood, I never want to make another one.
I never felt so inadequate.
If there is any victory in this film it's not mine.
It has nothing to do with me.
The film belongs to Mike Nichols.
At the beginning everyone said it would get better as filming progressed.
It got worse.
Nichols knew every colour, texture and nuance he wanted and worked like hell to get it.
Of course I resented it.’
It is difficult to tell how much of Dustin's discomfiture during the making of the film seeped through into his portrayal, but it might have added something uneasy to the character of Benjamin.
‘All through The Graduate Nichols thought he'd made a mistake in casting me.
I wasn't allowed to see the rushes.
No one was.
You're no judge of your own work.
If you can't look at the rushes, you come in every day  wondering.
They look at you and you know they've seen the work the day before.
I asked Ulu Grosbard, who knew Nichols, to ask him what he felt about me: ‘I think he feels he has made a mistake.
I can feel it.’
Grosbard told me, ‘You're not paranoid.
Nichols does feel he has made a mistake.’
‘This was hardly reassuring.
Lawrence Turman, years later, admitted that when there were screenings at his house people would come up to him and say, ‘It's a shame.
You have a great movie here if only you hadn't miscast the lead.’
As it turned out, it was Dustin's performance that was the film's greatest coup.
‘Movies Aren't Made For Tuxedos'
I'd wake up in the morning and.find a line of girls outside my front door.
AFTER The Graduate finished shooting, Dustin returned to New York to live quietly with Anne and her daughter Karina in his small Greenwich Village apartment on West 11th Street, having absolutely no conception of how his performance or the film would be received and not fully realising that the long days of anonymity would soon be over for ever.
Because the $17,000 Dustin received for the picture was not enough to ensure any real security for himself, let alone Anne and the child, he was still not prepared to get married.
In fact, when all his debts were paid off, the money was quickly spent and he soon found himself waiting to collect his $55 a week on the unemployment line at 75 East 13th Street, where he happened to be caught by an eagle-eyed Life photographer before the film's release.
As for work, he had auditioned for the role of the Dauphin in Anouilh's The Lark at the Lincoln Center, but he did not get the part.
It seemed that nothing had changed.
One day, in Times Square, Dustin looked up and saw his face for the first time on a billboard.
‘I looked up and saw this person — I didn't think of it as me.
My first thought was, ‘That person up there is more successful than me.
He's working, and I'm not.’‘
During the promotion of The Graduate , Anne and Dustin had visited Hollywood, and she made the rounds of studios and talk shows with him.
‘I was intimidated by the extravagance,’ said Anne, who had never even contemplated the possibility of Dustin's becoming a movie star, an occupation she then professed to despise.
‘Everyone had their own hairdresser and make-up artist.
As a dancer, I was used to making $125 a week.
We had to wash our own hair and mend our own clothes.
I was sure that everyone in Hollywood knew I had holes in my shoes and my underwear.
I felt like Plain Jane, and Dustin felt they had made a mistake in choosing him for the film in the first place.
We were both nervous wrecks and we started fighting with each other.’
The first inkling Dustin had of the film's effect on audiences was when it was previewed before the general public.
It was in a cinema on 86th Street where he sat in the balcony, wearing an old sports jacket and open-necked shirt.
He was recognised by only a few, including columnist Sheilah  Graham.
She wrote that he went into the theatre as an ‘unknown boy beatnik’, and came out ‘mobbed by the crowd’.
Miss Graham, who was taught fiction by F. Scott Fitzgerald, got it wrong.
Dustin was neither a boy nor a beatnik, nor was he mobbed.
‘It was the first time I'd ever seen myself on screen.
And the audience really went with it.
There were laughs and cheers at the end when the character I was playing is running to the church.
Then a few days later we had opening night, and I was in my first tuxedo.
It was rented.
I never returned it either.
And the women were in their formals and they all sat down and there was not a laugh in the entire show.
And all the openings nights since then have been the same.
Movies aren't made for tuxedos.’
But it did not matter one iota what the stuffed shirts, or even that first audience of regular people, thought.
It was the critics that counted.
Never before had Dustin been so exposed or felt such trepidation while awaiting their verdict on him.
as if realising that these were the last days of his anonymity, he took to walking the New York streets at night, staring into people's faces.
He got some kind of perverse pleasure out of this, thinking at the back of his mind that when The Graduate opened in the movie houses around Manhattan, the face would be seen magnified on a big screen and imprinted on audiences' minds.
In March 1812, the 24-year-old Lord Byron woke up the morning after the publication of his poem Childe Harold's Pilgrimage to find himself famous.
The rather un-Byronic 30-year-old Dustin Hoffman must have had a similar experience on the morning of 22 December 1967 when he opened the newspapers.
‘An amazing new young star’, wrote the veteran Bosley Crowther in his final review for The New York Times.
‘He gets a wonderfully compassionate sense of the ironic and pathetic immaturity of a mere baccalaureate scholar turned loose in an immature society.’
‘He is the best American comedian since Jack Lemmon,’ raved New Republic .
The New York Daily News proclaimed Dustin a new star but stated, ‘He is rather plain-looking, resembling both Sonny and Cher,’ and, missing the point entirely, ‘In addition, he'll never threaten Rock Hudson's image.’
More perceptively, Lloyd Shearer in Parade wrote, ‘With his short stature, hook nose, beady eyes, unkempt hair, he looks like a loser, and it is precisely because of that loser image that the younger generation have made him their winner.’
There is actually nothing ‘unkempt’ about the squeaky-clean Benjamin in the movie.
So ‘kempt’ is he, in fact, that he is thought to be a guest at a formal reception held at the  Taft Hotel on his first visit.
The New Yorker thought The Graduate merited 26 pages, and it provided a springboard for endless discussions about modern youth.
Whatever the views of the predominantly middle-aged critics had been — and they were mostly favourable — audiences in their teens and early twenties would still have found the film out and responded to it.
From the opening, during the cold New York winter of 1967, the queues extending round the block outside Manhattan cinemas consisted mostly of young people hugging themselves and each other, and stamping their feet to keep warm, full of the expectation of seeing a movie that addressed them and their problems.
Audiences grew when older people went to see what was attracting these young, mostly middle-class, college kids.
It is significant that, at the height of the student protests in America, Benjamin neither joins nor identifies with the draft dodgers, hippies or Yippies (the movement started by.another more radical Hoffmann Abbie).
Why didn't Benjamin demonstrate against the Vietnam War instead of just Lying around in his parents' swimming pool?
For all his seeming rebellion against middle-class values, he remains essentially middle-class.
He is just a confused young man going through a postgraduate crisis; a rebel without claws.
Richard Corliss in Time magazine recognised that, ‘The most reactionary middle-American could sit back comfortably and think that, if marrying a pretty girl is all my subversive son wants, maybe the kid isn't so bad after all.’
Pauline Kael in The New Yorker felt that if Ben, who had nothing to communicate, had ‘said anything or had any ideas, the audience would probably hate him…
It's almost painful to tell kids who have gone to see The Graduate eight times that once was enough for you because you've already seen it eighty times with Charles Ray and Robert Harron and Richard Barthlemess and Richard Cromwell and Charles Farrell…
What's interesting about the success of The Graduate is sociological: the revelation of how emotionally accessible modern youth is to the same old manipulation.‘
Only in a Hollywood context could the film be called daring in its sexual attitudes and moral position.
The older woman is the villainess of the piece and true love triumphs in the end.
Compared with the anarchy of Bonnie and Clyde of the same year,The Graduate was rather cosy.
Six years after the film's first run, Andrew Sarris in the Village Voice of December 1973 took another look at it.
‘Nichols and his writers wanted it both ways.
They wanted Benjamin to be fuzzy enough as a fantasy figure so that everyone in America could identify with him without joining the Movement.
On the other hand the Movement itself is placated by incidental  jabs at square right-wing America, an easy target for Dustin Hoffman's off-Broadway theatre timing.
Without putting down the West Coast loonies in so many specific words, Hoffman seemed to be putting them on with his canny deadpan expressions.
They scrupulously avoid jabs at hippies, junkies, minorities, militants and any other sacred cows of the Counter Culture.
With nothing but The Graduate to go on, one would think, for example, that Berkeley was ideologically indistinguishable from Pasadena and that California was one vast, overflowing, suburban swimming pool…
Some movies age and some movies date.
I would hazard the guess that The Graduate belongs in the second category.’
With the deradicalising of students in the Reagan years, Sarris's criticisms seem less relevant, and the film is less dated now than those made at the same time or a little later that did reflect the Counter Culture, such as Alice's Restaurant, The Strawberry Statement, Getting Straight and Zabriskie Point .
Nearly a quarter of a century on, the philosophy of The Graduate now seems as touchingly  ingenuous as its hero, but the situations are still delightfully humorous in the best traditions of romantic comedy, tinged with a certain sadness.
The seduction scenes are beautifully timed by Dustin and a super-cool Bancroft, but they have enough ambivalence to suggest his guilt and her loneliness, and the emptiness that brings them together.
It is also rather moving today to see Dustin easily managing, with some help from adept make-up, to look far younger than his years, at the dawn of stardom.
The director plunges into the movie immediately with a huge close-up of the unknown Hoffman, as if to say, ‘This is the new face of the movies.
Look at it.
Get used to it.
This face belongs to a great movie star, although you don't know it yet.
It will be around for a long time.
Future movie stars will resemble him more than those you have been used to.’
Dustin's face stares wide-eyed, unblinking, unemotionally ahead of him while on the soundtrack Simon and Garfunkel's ‘Sounds of Silence’ takes up the theme: ‘People talking without speaking.
People hearing without listening.’
The use of songs, including ‘Mrs Robinson’ and the irrelevant ‘Scarborough Fair’, instead of the usual music score, added to the film's attraction for young people, and started a never-ending and much-abused spate of movies which are virtual illustrations to albums of pop songs.
(Simon and Garfunkel were used as models for the untalented couple of nerds played by Dustin and Warren Beatty in Ishtar twenty years later.)
Although Dustin as the glum insecure centre of the film is amusing — looking rather like Eddie Cantor on tranquillisers — he is directed to within an inch of his life.
Only rarely does one feel Dustin's personality breaking through the rigid mask Nichols has constructed for him.
The face is  continually seen hiding behind dark glasses, underwater goggles, and through a goldfish bowl, cutting himself off from those around him.
Mike Nichols stated that one of his ambitions behind the movie was ‘to stop the Los Angelesisation of America’, although it only added to the Los Angelesisation of American movies.
Yet, the unambitious satiric intentions are fulfilled, the most successful sequences coming in the first fifteen minutes.
The most widely remembered is the pithy and witty exchange that plays on Ben's alienation from the materialistic world of his parents and their friends.
‘Ben.’
'Mr McGuire.’ 'Ben.’'Mr McGuire.’'I just want to say one word to you.’
'Yes sir?’ 'Are you listening?’'Yes, I am.’'Plastics.
Think about it.
There's a great future in plastics.’
The most telling symbol of the young man's alienation, which Nichols lightens and makes funny, is Benjamin standing awkwardly in the rubber underwater suit his father has bought him.
A subjective camera, filming through goggles, picks out the inane faces and soundless mouths of his elders as he descends to the bottom of the pool where he stands silently and alone, away from the pestering people above.
Skilful and creative editing enables Nichols to show a time-passing sequence as Benjamin moves smoothly from his bed to Mrs Robinson's, from stretching out on a raft in the pool to stretching out on top of her.
Unlike his hero and Dustin, Charles Webb and his wife Eva (nicknamed Fred), protested against the Vietnam War and rebelled against their affluent background.
Webb's father was a wealthy LA doctor who was outraged by the novel, which he considered mocked his lifestyle.
Who was the model for Mrs Robinson?
‘That bit was not autobiographical, but a lot of the rest was based upon my own experiences,’ Webb stated.
Absent from the screenplay was an exchange between Benjamin and his father in which the former expresses his desire to live among ‘ordinary people who don't have big houses.
Who don't have swimming pools.’
The film was made some months before the establishment of the Gay Liberation Front, and the passage in the novel where Ben describes his adventures on the road to shock his dad was omitted from the screenplay.
‘What kind of people stopped to give you rides?’ 'Queers.’'What?’'Queers usually stopped,’Ben says.
‘I averaged about five queers a day.
One queer I had to slug in the face and jump out of his car.‘
Webb had sold the film rights for only $20,000, but the movie made his book a bestseller and, over the next fifteen years, five more novels brought him $150,000.
But Charles and Fred were flower children who never wilted.
Sickened by the sterile goals of the middle-class life into which they were born, they gave up everything and took off in a mobile home, fighting to be entitled to educate their two sons themselves.
‘Fred and I were never interested in money,’ the writer explained.
They twice tried owning houses but found it too expensive so they gave them away, and Charles refused to accept any of his estranged father's estate.
When money became scarce, he tried to go on welfare, but the woman official said, ‘What's your problem, Mr Webb?
You're a famous author — the writer of The Graduate , for goodness sake, a book I love — how can you possibly be broke?’
So, for many years, the couple made their living as hired help, and were doing so at the time of the film's success.
On 19 February 1968, the nominations for the Academy Awards were announced.
The Graduate was up for Best Picture, Best Director, Best Actor, Best Actress (Bancroft), Best Supporting Actress (Ross), Best Screenplay (based on material from another medium), and Best Cinematography (Robert Surtees).
Dustin commented: ‘I hope to God I don't win an Oscar tomorrow night.
It would really depress me if I did.
I really don't deserve it.
It wasn't that important a part anyhow.’
The Oscar ceremony on 10 April was held under unusually sombre circumstances.
The assassination of Martin Luther King six days before, only one of a tragic series in recent American history, had caused the event to be postponed for two days.
The funeral had in fact been held only the day before.
For the same reason, the annual post-Oscar ball sponsored by Pat Brown, the Governor of California, was cancelled altogether.
Oscar night did not seem particularly relevant to those uncertain days of vague social unease, political upheaval and, of course, the Vietnam War rumbling away inconclusively on the other side of the globe, yet brought home with a vengeance to the American people on nightly TV news broadcasts; and accordingly the attendant razzmatazz of the movie industry's Night of Nights was reduced to what was considered a decent minimum.
Despite his later expressed views about the distastefulness of holding the ceremony so close to the death of the Reverend King, and his saying that ‘movies aren't made for tuxedos’, Dustin, in hired white tie and tails, was there to present the best cinematography award with Katharine Ross.
He retained his liberal credentials by escorting Mary Abigail McCarthy, the daughter of the anti-war Senator Eugene McCarthy, to the shindig, despite being warned by the Hollywood imagemakers not to ruin his box-office potential.
(Anne was in New York with Karina.)
McCarthy's bid to become the Democratic nominee for president was getting up steam, and his following included the liberal Hollywood establishment, among them Paul Newman, Joanne Woodward, Robert Redford and Warren Beatty.
On the other hand, John Wayne was enthusiastically campaigning for George Wallace, the segregationist governor of Alabama.
‘The Duke’ had  sent Wallace three $10,000 cheques, the last one inscribed ‘Sock it to ‘em, George!’
It was the time when many stars started to come out of the political closet and openly voiced their support for one candidate or another.
This was nothing new, as movie stars had supported John F. Kennedy when he ran for the White House.
Nor is it very daring in the monolithic two-party system of the USA, where the narrow choice is between two rich, conservative (in a wide sense) white men, to offer allegiance to one or the other.
Bob Hope, the master of ceremonies for the umpteenth time, unfunnily and inaccurately joked about Dustin's youthfulness, saying, ‘They nominated a kid like Dustin Hoffman — he made a picture he can't get in to see.
‘The winners were In the Heat of the Night and Rod Steiger for his performance in it, Katharine Hepburn (Guess Who's Coming to Dinner?),
George Kennedy (Cool Hand Luke ) and Estelle Parsons (Bonnie and Clyde ).
Mike Nichols grabbed the film's sole award as Best Director (he was also similarly awarded by the New York Film Critics and the Golden Globe).
Among the Best Actor losers, Dustin was in the prestigious company of Paul Newman (Cool Hand Luke ), Warren Beatty (Bonnie and Clyde ).
Spencer Tracy, who was also nominated, for Guess Who's Coming to Dinner?, had died the year before.
After the ceremony, at around one in the morning, Dustin rang his friend, actor Stanley Beck (who would later appear in John and Mary and Lenny , and co-produce Straight Time ), telling him he had nowhere to stay the night.
Dustin asked if he could sleep at Beck's apartment, and if he would come and pick him up at the hall.
Beck, who had been woken up by the Oscar-nominee, offered him a bed in the living room but told him to take a cab over.
As Beck recalled, ‘He came, he slept, he left without making the bed and I never saw him.’
Dustin's parents were thrilled by the reception and the money the film was making.
After years of subsidising their son, they were enjoying his fame.
‘I never earned more than $3000 a year before I was thirty-one.
If my parents hadn't sent me money every week, I couldn't have survived.’
Harry and Lillian subscribed to the movie trade papers and began tracing the film's grosses as it climbed upward towards an eventual $40 million.
Harry would often call his son in New York to tell him how much money the film was making in various cities, while Lillian phoned local LA cinemas to see how long the ticket queues were.
Dustin seemed to behave towards fame with a certain cynicism, rather like Ben Braddock at the party thrown for him by his parents to celebrate his graduation.
But he was, in Alexander Pope's words, ‘nor yet a fool to fame’.
There were disadvantages he had to get used to.
He found that the plastic namebar on his mailbox kept being pinched by fans, so he bought a hand label machine to replace it daily.
He also read all his fan mail each evening, and answered all of the letters, by hand, except the cranky ones.
One was a brief note from a girl in Duluth who wrote: ‘Please come and share Passover with me and my family.
P. S. If you're not Jewish tear this up.’
Only a day or two after The Graduate opened, someone came up to him in the street and said, ‘You know something?
You look just like Dustin Hoffman!’
It was just a step away from the immediate public recognition that he had to learn to live with.
‘If I passed a group of people on the street, I could usually count three before I heard it —‘Eeeeee!’
Wham!
All of a sudden you're on everyone's brain.
You're offered everything.
A clothing company (Petrocelli Suits) want to give me $2000 in clothes.
Me, a stump of a man and they wanted to make me Cesar Romero.
I said no…
My biggest pitfall would be to grab the fat movie contracts, do commercials and go on talk shows and be a pompous ass who pretends he knows everything about sex, religion, philosophy, you name it.’
It was obvious that Anne had adjustments to make in accommodating his success in her life.
She had since left the New York City Ballet, and was working as a counsellor for the blind at both the Lighthouse and the Jewish Guild.
‘The enormity [sic ]of it scared us both.
I wasn't ready for people to shove me aside.
I was terrified I'd lose him to a starlet.’
Her fears were justified and, initially, Dustin's relationship with Anne did suffer.
They therefore decided to break up for a while because, Dustin said, ‘I wanted my fling.
I discovered that being a celebrity meant I had acquired power over women.’
As well as being a revenge on others and on mortality, fame is equally an aphrodisiac, not only for the possessor of it, but for those in contact with it.
The fact that many more men resembled Dustin than ever resembled film stars like Cary Grant or Gary Cooper was irrelevant.
The cities of America were full of Dustin Hoffmans — just as every young woman seemed to bear a likeness to Barbara Streisand around the same time.
In May 1968, a young man registered at the Las Vegas Sahara Hotel under the name of Dustin Hoffman.
He was given VIP treatment and was besieged by the media.
He told the press that he attributed his sudden success in the movies to his parents for their unwavering support throughout the years.
The interviews were already published when it was discovered that he was an impostor.
His real name was Harvey Pepper, a 23-year-old native of Montreal, who was a dead ringer for Dustin.
Pepper  explained in an interview, ‘When I came to the hotel I was sort of looking for work.
Then everybody said they saw The Graduate and I said I was Dustin Hoffman.
So I let them think it and played the game.’
He was arrested and spent twelve hours in Clark County jail.
His sentence was terminated when Sahara officials bailed him out and said they would pick up the tab for the room but he would have to pay for his food and drink himself.
Perhaps, when people have expressed negative views of Dustin's behaviour and personality, we can charitably assume that his  Döppelgänger , Harvey Pepper, has been at work again.
A few years later, a homosexual friend of Anne's said that he had come across a man who looked like Dustin, who hung out in gay bars, telling everyone he was Dustin Hoffman.
Meanwhile the real Dustin Hoffman was waiting for a role to prove that he would have a post- Graduate career.
Dustbin Hoffman
Some people are waiting to see me fall on my ass.
F. SCOTT FITZGERALD, in the notes to his Hollywood novel,The Last Tycoon , wrote, ‘There are no second acts in American lives.’
Dustin was determined to prove that he was no seven-day wonder whose promise would remain unfulfilled: the history of American culture is already littered with enough of these.
Although he now had the potential earning power of any major movie star, he nevertheless remained on unemployment benefit while waiting for his agent to find the right new vehicle for him.
Not that he was short of offers, but most of them, before the banal fashion for numbered sequels, were on the lines of After the Graduate, Another Graduate, Shadow of the Graduate, The Graduate Comes Home and Song of the Graduate , leading inevitably to Son of the Graduate .
Unsurprisingly, there was talk that Dustin was being considered for the title role of Portnoy's Complaint , the film version of Philip Roth's novel of a Jewish mother-dominated boy with masturbation problems.
The joke around at the time was that it would be filmed with a hand-held camera.
(It took another four years before it limply reached the screen with Richard Benjamin.)
Instead, after the first flaring of fame had died down to a steady glow, and he had enjoyed the sexual fruits that it offered, he stayed in his two-room West 11th Street apartment, together with Anne and Karina again, dressed in the faded jeans and threadbare leather jackets he had always worn.
Every time Dustin saw his name in block letters on the marquee of a movie house, he was assailed with thoughts of his own mortality, a subject that constantly obsessed him, especially as he had already seen into the abyss.
‘It was like death-with my children already grown up, tired of watching my movies at my own request, with my ex-wife at my side and my faithful dog.’
Dustin seemed to need his shrink sessions more than ever.
He had first gone to a psychotherapist because he felt he was a failure, and now he was going to help him cope with success.
All actors should be so lucky!
He went five times a week at $200 a session.
‘I find analysis essential to get me through the day.
It helps to break down tension and get everything into  proper perspective,’ he explained later.
‘It also helps me to make the right decisions…
When I'm working, I'm very hard to live with.
I don't drink and it's very difficult to shut out the stresses of the day.
I work hard, it's sheer panic.’
While his mind was being massaged on the couch, he continued to keep his body in good shape by working out strenuously every morning.
As could be seen in The Graduate , Dustin had a compact and well-built body.
He may not have been too keen on his height or his face, but he was proud of his physique.
He also took ballet lessons to improve his posture and balance, and singing lessons to aid his breath control with a view to being called upon to star in a musical.
He knew that the more strings an actor had to his bow, the wider the possibilities there were open to him.
He would soon use these newly acquired talents in the play Jimmy Shine , but the only time in which he has attempted to sing on film were in his two biggest turkeys —Who Is Harry Kellerman and Why Is He Saying Those Terrible Things About Me?and Ishtar .
If in the latter one could not tell whether his voice was as bad as it was supposed to be, the former gave ample proof.
(As the autistic Raymond/Rain Man, he also manages a few unharmonious bars.)
However, neither a good physique, nor ballet or singing skills, would be particularly evident or useful in his next film role.
As far back as August 1965, when James Leo Herlihy's novel Midnight Cowboy was first published, it had done the rounds of every major studio, all of which turned it down.
UA reported, with a certain amount of acuity, that the action ‘goes steadily downhill’.
In October 1966, however, one year after the decision not to take up the option on the book, David V. Picker at UA bought the movie rights.
It took another two years before Picker offered it to English director John Schlesinger.
The former actor and TV documentary director had made his feature film debut with A Kind of Loving (1962) followed by Billy Liar (1963), two modest pictures set in accurate British working-class surroundings, which introduced fresh, young players such as Alan Bates, Tom Courtenay and Julie Christie.
As the ‘kitchen sink’ was replaced by ‘Swinging London’, Schlesinger moved into the upper echelons with Darling (1965), an attempt at a cynical morality tale about the society its director and writer (Frederic Raphael) seemed to relish.
It gained three Oscars (Julie Christie, Raphael and the costume designer Julie Harris) and brought Schlesinger a nomination.
Although Far from the Madding Crowd (1967), which seldom got beyond being a plodding, picturesque illustration of Thomas Hardy's novel, failed to make an impact in the USA, Picker somehow had confidence that the cultured, softly-spoken, bald 42-year-old Englishman  would be able to make a good job of the essentially New York story of Midnight Cowboy .
‘I thought I could do it as an outsider, as an Englishman coming in,’ Schlesinger claimed.
Schlesinger's agent tried to dissuade him from taking it on, advising him rather to direct Jack Lemmon in The April Fools .
This put him in a quandary.
He was anxious to make the right choice with his first American movie, and Lemmon was his favourite actor.
‘I'd had a flop, which unnerved me a bit.
You're expected to have smash hits all the time in America.
Frankly, that old adage about only being as good as your last picture was totally the attitude, I'm afraid.
I half-believed things people were saying and yet I also knew that Midnight Cowboy was a damn good project.’
(Schlesinger had made the right decision, because The April Fools , finally directed by Stuart Rosenberg, was a real failure.)
Waldo Salt, who wrote the completed screenplay of Midnight Cowboy , had been blacklisted in 1951 after refusing to testify on Communist affiliations before the HUAC.
His best writing credits were the sentimental Shopworn Angel (1938), the romantic comedy-drama Rachel and the Stranger (1948), and the tongue-in-the-cheek Burt Lancaster swashbuckler The Flame and the Arrow (1950).
It was not until the early sixties that he was able to resume his film career, but his post-blacklist work had been undistinguished by two top-heavy Yul Brynner spectacles,Taras Bulba (1962) and Flight from Ashiya (1964).
Midnight Cowboy was to give him his first chance in over fifteen years to regain respect in the business.
The screenplay focuses on the incongruous and interdependent friendship between a dimwitted stud and a petty con man.
Joe Buck, a handsome hick from Texas, comes to New York dressed in leather cowboy gear, hoping to make a living by servicing wealthy Park Avenue ladies.
However, he is reduced to sleazy encounters with both men and women in 42nd Street grindhouses and hotels.
His only friend is the tubercular and crippled Ratso Rizzo, who dreams of getting to the sunshine of Florida one day.
Joe steals two bus tickets to Miami, but Ratso dies just as they reach the place of his dreams.
Dustin was the first actor to receive the script, and he immediately accepted the role of the miserable gammy-legged sleazeball Rizzo, against the advice of friends and agents.
They did not consider it good for his image.
An image is to the movie star, as distinct from an actor, what a brand name and logo are to merchandise.
One film had already given the industry the right to talk about Dustin's image, which they defined as a slightly anti-Establishment romantic young man.
There was also still a feeling in the Hollywood colony that as he had established himself as a star he should not play an unattractive character, and, what is more, he would  only be the second lead and not appear for the first twenty minutes.
(He was to keep audiences waiting almost the same period in Rain Man many years hence.)
But to Dustin's credit he recognised it as a role in which he could immediately dissociate himself from the whole ‘image’ concept of acting, as well as prove that, ‘I was a character actor, not just this nebbish kid that Nichols found.
People have me in a little pocket of their minds in that role [Ben Braddock]and they don't want to see me get out of it.
’ The magazine Harvard Lampoon , in fact, presented Dustin with The Wilde Oscar: ‘to that performer who has been willing to flout convention and risk worldly reputation in order to pursue artistic fulfilment’.
Andrew Sarris accepted that, ‘By following up the glamorous Graduate with the dreggiest drop-out imaginable, Dustin Hoffman has achieved his aim of not becoming the Andy Hardy of the sixties and seventies.’
The producer Jerome Hellman had seen Dustin in Eh?and had thought of him for the part way back then.
Schlesinger first thought him wrong for Ratso, but changed his mind when they met in New York.
After spending some time in an all-night diner on 42nd Street, a calculatedly unshaven Dustin just melted into the atmosphere.
‘Dustin made extraordinary sense the first time he ever read the script.
He also seemed to have the right physical image to play Ratso.
Jerry Hellman felt the same.
Now I can't imagine anyone else playing Ratso,’ said Schlesinger.
‘It was not so much of a stretch for me to do that role as people might think,’ Dustin explained.
‘It was a character that I felt to be a very basic part of me and when I read it I had that immediate connection with him.
I had for many years had this feeling about myself-that I looked like that — not literally, but in an inner way I felt I did.
I felt a combination of unattractive and anonymous and I felt that the way to play that part was to forget about what he was and to think about what he wanted.
I feel that we are all partly Ratso and partly J. F. Kennedy if you like-a most successful, attractive person.
It always strikes me when you see meths drinkers and imagine those people as children — they were all beautiful then, and it is simply an inexplicable phenomenon which makes me sit here and that other person is out there on the street.
Much of it has very little to do with what you are, and that is an emotion I have always felt and will always feel.
I'd always been fascinated by the people who live on the skid rows of our cities — the ones we regard as the scum of the earth.
They're really no different from us…only their circumstances.
I wanted to get inside one of the those people.‘
Typical of the kind of pain Dustin would put himself through, in order to get ‘inside’ a character, was the way in which he developed Ratso's limp  by placing stones in one shoe and then walking on them for a day.
He remained unshaven for days and wore brown and rotting snap-on teeth.
He also spent a great deal of time strolling around New York's back streets observing down-and-outs to see if he could steal anything from them — for the role, that is.
Fortunately, his fame had not yet reached the gutters so the winos were not aware that they were providing material for a movie star's performance.
In order to seep up the fetid atmosphere of the New York streets, a hidden camera was used to track Dustin's peregrinations.
At one moment, a taxi cab almost hit him as he was crossing the street.
Remaining in the character of Ratso, Dustin yelled to the driver, ‘I'm walkin' here!
I'm walkin' here!’
It was kept for the finished film.
Dustin has always believed that some of the cinema's best moments have come out of improvisation.
One of his favourite instances is the scene in On the Waterfront when Brando, thinking he was between takes, idly tried on the glove that Eva Marie Saint had dropped.
Elia Kazan kept the cameras rolling and caught it for posterity.
Four actors were initially tested for the lead role of Joe Buck, among whom Michael Sarrazin was first choice.
The gangling, boyish 28-year-old Canadian actor had made some impression as an innocent in The Flim Flam Man (1967) and as a Malibu beach bum in The Sweet Ride (1968), and seemed to have promise.
But he was under exclusive contract to Universal, and they wanted a prohibitive amount of money to loan him out.
Instead, he was put into Sydney Pollack's They Shoot Horses, Don't They?, in which he played one of the many self-pitying characters struggling through a marathon dance contest.
It did not do as much for his career as Midnight Cowboy did for Jon Voight.
The blond, six-foot-two, eyes-of-blue actor, born on 29 December, 1938 in Yonkers, New York, had made three films previously (all in 1967)—Hour of the Gun (a bit-part), and two low-budget movies,Fearless Frank and Out of It .
In Fearless Frank , Phil Kaufman's first solo feature, Voight played a country bumpkin who comes to Chicago, gets shot by mobsters, and wakes up to find he has the powers of a superman.
In Out of It , he portrayed a stupid high-school football hero.
There was an element of Buck in both roles, and Voight already had experience in the wearing of Western gear because he had also been featured in the TV cowboy series Cimarron Strip and Gunsmoke .
Many of Voight's films have cast him as a none-too-bright but likeable hunk.
In contrast, his stage work included a role in The Sound of Music on Broadway in 1961, in which the baby-faced 22-year-old sang ‘Sixteen Going On Seventeen’ to Laurie Peters, who was to become his wife, and  Romeo and Ariel at the California National Shakespeare Festival.
He also won a Theatre World award for his performance opposite Irene Papas in That Summer, That Fall in March 1967 (directed by Ulu Grosbard).
Voight first got to know Dustin well when he was playing Rudolpho in A View from the Bridge in January 1965, on which Dustin had been assistant director.
Their friendship had always been tinged with rivalry, something which helped each to bounce off the other's character in the movie.
‘It wasn't a case of upstaging one another, but it was let's see who can really act better in this scene,’ commented Dustin.
There was a moment during the shooting of Midnight Cowboy when Dustin gave so much energy to the character's cough that he fell down in the street vomiting.
Voight commented that there was no way he could ‘upstage vomit’.
The supporting cast was made up of Sylvia Miles, Brenda Vaccaro, John McGiver, Barnard Hughes (film debut), Ruth White and Jennifer Salt (the screenwriter's 25-year-old daughter with whom the divorced Voight was living at the time).
Filming began on location in New York in April 1968 with a budget originally set around $2 million.
Dustin was offered $250,000 — fifteen times more than he earned on The Graduate .
This tidy sum enabled him and Anne to move from the tiny Village apartment which they rented for $125 a month to a much larger air-conditioned place for $400 a month, a brownstone directly across the road from 16 West 11th Street, just off Fifth Avenue.
‘It gives me the willies to even think about the rent,’ Dustin averred.
At the same time, Dustin hired a business manager.
‘The idea is to save as much as you can and not let it go to the government.
I don't need yachts and mansions but you do have to live.’
The first object he bought with his Midnight Cowboy money was a $700 antique desk, declaring: ‘It's the most important thing I ever bought.
It's a lifetime item.’
(Later events would prove otherwise.)
He also hired himself a cook-housekeeper-secretary, Cathy Allen, the wife of an actor friend.
If he began to live more in keeping with his stature as a movie star, there were some indications that fame was going to his head.
In the past, he had always been particularly solicitous towards any small-part player or struggling actor.
Donahue Silvis, an exact contemporary of Dustin's at Pasadena Playhouse, had a bit-part in Midnight Cowboy when the team moved to Florida.
‘After a few days of production I had the opportunity to approach Dustin,’ Silvis remembered.
‘He was sitting by the water of Biscayne Bay just a short distance from the set.
I walked over to say ‘Hi’.
He pretended he didn't know me or didn't want to.
He asked the director  to get me away from him.
It was very embarrassing and I was shocked at this behaviour from a person I had thought of as kind of shy and introverted.’
Meanwhile, the shooting and budget on the movie were starting to go over schedule, forcing UA seriously to contemplate not sinking any more money into the production.
UA officials had a conference at which doubts were expressed about the possibility of the film's being able to recoup its investment if the budget was extended.
The issue was resolved when they agreed that filming should continue.
The movie was completed at the final cost of $3 million.
David Picker recalled, ‘When we first saw the film one afternoon, we were stunned by its magic and the magic of Hoffman and Voight together.
So we decided on a special release pattern — an opening in New York a couple of months before any place else, play-off in small theatres with long engagements, letting word of mouth build an audience.’
There certainly was an audience, and they paid $16.3 million to see it in the USA alone.
So popular was the film that, a month after its opening, AIP decided to release Madigan's Millions , two years after it was made, to cash in on Dustin's name, double-billing it in the USA with Fearless Frank , films both actors rather hoped had been dead and buried.
The Oscar nominations Midnight Cowboy received were Best Picture, Best Supporting Actress (Sylvia Miles), Best Director, Best Screenplay adaptation, and both Voight and Dustin for Best Actor, forcing each of them to practise their smiles for the possibility of losing out to the other.
In the event, the award went to the veteran midday cowboy John Wayne for his performance in True Grit and/or for never having won an Oscar before.
Life magazine ran an article entitled ‘Dusty and the Duke’ in which they contrasted the poles-apart stars with photos of Wayne in colour and Dustin in black-and-white.
Later, both Dustin and Voight avowed they were rooting for Wayne, despite the wide political divergence between them and the older star.
(The same year, Wayne had acted in and directed the gung-ho Green Berets , which supported US military involvement in Vietnam.)
‘I thought Dusty and I would cancel each other out, anyway,’ remarked Voight.
Given the propensity of the Academy jury over the years to equate serious acting with stars' willingness to make themselves unattractive, it is surprising that Dustin did not win hands down.
Didn't Grace Kelly win an Oscar for The Country Girl for having the courage not to wear elegant clothes or much make-up?
Many years later, in the mid-eighties, John Malkovich, who was rehearsing Death of a Salesman with Dustin, remarked, ‘One night we were playing Trivial Pursuit.
There was a question, ‘Who won the Best Actor  Oscar the year of Midnight Cowboy ?’
Well, the answer was John Wayne in True Grit !
The next day, I'm in rehearsal, Dustin whispers, ‘Why don't you try this?’
I said, ‘Why should I listen to an actor who lost the Oscar to John Wayne in True Grit ?’
He screamed, ‘A lie!
A lie!
Voight and I split the vote.
I was so depressed, I went to Europe for three months.’'
Midnight Cowboy won Best Film, Director and Screenplay.
(The other screenplay award was given to another ‘buddy-buddy’ movie,Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid , written by William Goldman, who was to write two of Dustin's future movies.)
The film was a significant Oscar-winner because it was the first X-rated film to do so.
It was a belated acknowledgement from the Academy that the ‘permissive society’ had arrived.
Variety trumpeted: ‘It's a new ballgame; the artists and scientists of the world's cinema center are unhesitant about saying to all the world that there's to be no hesitation about subject matter.
As a matter of fact there's pride, pride in that a picture can get away from the lollipops and still be inoffensive and commercially pleasing.
Midnight Cowboy ... deals, among other things, with male whoredom.
The voting majority of the Academy said yes, this is the legitimate victory.’
Actually, for all the film's surface modernity, sexual frankness and jaundiced eye, it is essentially an old-fashioned movie about an innocent coming from the sticks to the big city and not finding the sidewalks paved with gold.
Had it been made in the 1930s, Jimmy Stewart would have played Buck and Margaret Sullavan would have taken the Hoffman role, dying in the arms of the man she loves just as she reaches Miami.
(Remember Waldo Salt had written the Sullavan-Stewart weepie,Shopworn Angel .)
On the way to the East coast by Greyhound bus, Buck passes typical and very carefully selected places like ‘The Biggest Hot Dog in the World’ and ‘Jesus Saves’signs.
Then Schlesinger, through his foreign eyes, sees New York as a rotten Big Apple, over-emphatically capturing the city's brashness and indifference.
A man lies on the sidewalk outside Tiffany's, passers-by just stepping over him.
This is the director's immediate and obvious way of telling us (and Buck) that New York is a dog-eat-dog society.
Everything and everybody in the city is depressing and vulgar.
When Buck goes to a diner, he sits at a table opposite a creepy woman with a nervous tic who keeps running a grey rubber mouse over her face.
When Buck and Ratso go to another greasy spoon, a crazy is ranting in the background.
While watching TV, Buck sees a show in which a poodle is made to wear a wig, false eyelashes and panties.
Despite Schlesinger's claims  that ‘there wasn't anything in the movie that I hadn't seen in some way somewhere’ and ‘one was always confronted by something worse on the streets than one was putting into the film’, they were attention-getting elements, unabsorbed into the texture of the film.
There is not one person (including extras) in the movie who is not a ‘character’.
Ratso gets Buck an introduction to a man (John McGiver) who is supposed to put him in touch with some rich ladies, but he begs Buck to get down on his knees and pray with him under a kitschy lit-up Jesus on the bathroom door of his hotel room.
Buck's other contacts include an ageing hooker whom he mistakes for a society woman (‘I'm one gorgeous chick,’ says the ungorgeous non-chicken Sylvia Miles); two weak and whining homosexual pick-ups; and a couple of weirdos who invite him to an ‘underground’party.
His main companion is the pathetic dreg of society, Ratso Rizzo.
Dustin starts by playing Timothy Mouse to Voight's Dumbo, although his voice seems to be dubbed by Mel Blanc, first as Daffy Duck (whom he resembles somewhat with his beak and slicked-down black hair), then as a consumptive Bugs Bunny.
When people cough in the movies, it is usually a sure sign they are going to die.
In a number from Funny Girl , Barbra Streisand sings ‘As Camille I just feel, I've so much to offer.
I know I'd be divine, because I'm a natural cougher.’
More chameleon than Camille, Dustin proves himself just as natural a cougher.
But the heart-of-gold whore and the con man are sentimentally conceived.
Ratso takes Buck to visit his father's grave, and a series of frenetic flashbacks and nightmares reveal Buck's past in a superficial attempt to explain his character.
‘You're gonna be the best lookin' cowboy in the whole parade,’ his bible-bashing granny tells him when he is a child.
These flashbacks to his past in Texas show him making love to a girl whose family seems to object to him, then (in an obliquely filmed sequence) he is gang-raped by a group of yobs.
There are occasions when the relationship between Voight's big, blond, likeable dimwit, ludicrously decked out in cowboy gear, and Dustin's small, greasy-haired, pallid, crippled down-and-outer is touchingly and humorously portrayed, particularly the moment when Buck's face lights up on seeing an unshaven Ratso eating alone in a diner.
Although he has been looking for the little creep to beat him up for having steered him wrong, he realises that it is better to be with someone, even someone like Ratso, than to be alone.
Actually, Voight is rather too old for the role, and overdoes the wide-eyed innocence, especially in the last twenty minutes when the movie gets as soft as an overripe Florida plum.
As in The Big Street (1942), in which a soppy busboy Henry Fonda gets money to take a crippled Lucy Ball to Florida, Voight manages to take his friend to Miami, a place already glimpsed in Ratso's (and Schlesinger's) sub-Fellini-esque dreams.
Again, as in The Graduate , it was a hit song on the soundtrack, in this case, Fred Neil's ‘Everybody's Talkin’, that gave the film a contemporary resonance, lodging itself more in the ear than in the eye or mind.
The critic David Thomson thought Schlesinger, ‘too sloppy an artist to let Ratso emerge as less than adorable, but Hoffman was probably capable of nastiness had he been trusted.’
Although Dustin is perfectly able to portray nastiness, he has never allowed himself to be other than sympathetic to audiences in whatever he has done.
(He has come closest to an antipathetic character as the ex-con in Straight Time , and as a crook in Family Business , two of his biggest commercial failures.)
The New York Times 's Vincent Canby wrote: ‘There is nothing obviously glossy in Midnight Cowboy , but it contains a lot of superior laughter that has the same softening effect,’ yet he found the central relationship was ‘as honest and affecting as anything you're likely to see in a movie, and more than compensates for those moments when the film seems to be exploiting its cheap, gaudy locale as might the director of a sight-seeing bus cruising through West 42nd Street and Greenwich Village’.
Wim Wenders, when a 24-year-old film student, thought, ‘Schlesinger misses the opportunity to make a film about America.
He makes a tortured film about European visions of America; he wants to demonstrate the ‘melting pot’ in the film, plaster it with psychology and try not to miss any aspects of it.
It gets more and more embarrassing to watch Dustin Hoffman coughing and limping as if he'd come straight to the film from a Broadway theatre.’
For the party scene Schlesinger got Paul Morrissey, the film director in Andy Warhol's Factory, to round up a number of Warhol's friends and stars, including Viva, Ultra Violet, International Violet, Taylor Meade and William Door.
Morrissey made a short, silent movie that was shown in the background, along with the obligatory psychedelic projections on the wall.
(There would be a similar scene in Dustin's next picture,John and Mary .)
Warhol had been asked to play himself but he was still in hospital recovering from the attempt on his life.
The involvement of members of the Factory enraged Warhol's gay militant friend Ondine who confronted Morrissey: ‘How dare you accept the $25 a day in blood money to go and make fun of Andy?
He's the reason why you're even here!
Don't you have any feelings?’
She might also have been incensed by the negative portrayal  of homosexuality in the movie.
The Factory, which had some influence on Midnight Cowboy , then decided to make their own picture about a male hustler.
Flesh , starring the hunky Joe Dalessandro, was shot over two weekends at a cost of $4000, and is arguably the better film.
John and Mary; Dusty and Anne
I knew that if I got married and concentrated on that, I could kiss my career goodbye.
WITH Midnight Cowboy in the can, Dustin was given the opportunity to return to the stage in the title role of Jimmy Shine , a Broadway-bound play by his friend Murray Schisgal.
Some months previously, in London, a small film called John and Mary , based on a novella by Mervyn Jones, was being set up to be directed by Anthony Harvey, whose first film.
the modest but impressive Dutchman , had just opened.
Glenda Jackson had already been approached for the female lead.
However, when Harvey went on to direct A Lion in Winter , Mia Farrow, fresh from Rosemary's Baby , was sent the screenplay, written by John Mortimer.
At the time, Farrow shared an agent with Peter Yates, who was now to direct it.
She liked the script about a young couple in the then fashionable Swinging London, but did not feel it was quite right for her.
When Yates suggested transferring the action to America, she agreed to become involved.
The producer Ben Kadish thought that if he could get the ‘hot’ Hoffman to play opposite her, he would be able to convince Twentieth Century-Fox to put up the money and release it.
Yates was happy with the possible casting.
‘I knew John Schlesinger very well and he told me Dustin could play almost anything.’
Dustin knew he was coming in to Broadway with Jimmy Shine and did not relish the idea of making a film and simultaneously appearing in a play, especially as the production was having problems on the road.
In order to cajole him into accepting the role, the British tandem of Peter Yates and John Mortimer were asked to fly out from London to Philadelphia, where the play was trying out.
After the performance of Jimmy Shine , the two of them made their way from the theatre to the hotel where Dustin was staying.
Zev Bufman, the Israeli-born producer of the play, had had a pool table hoisted up the side of the hotel and installed in a room adjoining Dustin's suite, to help him relax.
‘You want to please these people,’ Bufman commented.
‘Limos, aides, redecorating dressing-rooms, flowers and champagne go without saying.
It pays off in the end.‘
Mortimer, who was still a practising barrister, was due back in court in London the following day.
Therefore, he had to get a connection to New York in order to catch his 6 a. m. plane.
It was already past midnight when they got to see Dustin, who was playing pool by himself, while a huge party for the cast was going on in another suite.
With the noise of jollity in the background, Dustin talked endlessly about everything except the film, while Mortimer watched the clock ticking away.
Dustin then started asking Mortimer and Yates what they thought of the play.
In a rather tentative manner, they made some suggestions on how they thought it could be improved.
It was not long before Mortimer was drawing diagrams with the cue chalk.
Whereupon, Dustin, at around 3 a. m., phoned Murray Schisgal's room to tell him to come down to hear what the Englishmen had to say about his play.
A very tired and dishevelled Schisgal appeared and they spent an hour discussing the problems with him.
‘I didn't think we helped much on Jimmy Shine ,’ said Yates.
‘Coming down in the middle of the night like that probably muddled the hell out of them.
Schisgal was terrific, perhaps because he was so beaten into the ground by that time, I don't know.
But Mortimer said that if it had been him he would have hit the roof.’
Finally, when Schisgal had returned to his interrupted slumbers, Mortimer and Yates brought up the subject of the purpose of their visit.
‘I was hysterical,’ recalled Mortimer.
‘I still had to get to New York where my plane was due to leave in about two hours.’
After what seemed ages, Dustin thought he might be willing to co-star in John and Mary if only in gratitude for the bit of play-doctoring the two visitors had done.
Mortimer left in a hurry, caught his plane, and was standing bewigged at the Old Bailey the next day.
There were further archetypal all-night sessions, rewriting the play in smoke-filled hotel rooms.
Yates, who was busy setting up John and Mary in New York, went down to Baltimore two or three times to participate in the nocturnal meetings.
According to Dustin, Yates ‘made some excellent suggestions.
He seemed more involved in helping the play than with planning his movie, and I thought, ‘This is a really genuine guy.’'
Dustin declared that he had accepted the part, not because of the screenplay nor the $425,000 he would receive, but as a favour to Peter Yates.
‘It was not the script.
I'm not even sure I understand the character.
I mean, his life is ordered, he's a good cook, he's aware of clothes, he has a neat apartment.
I never lived that way.
But when I saw Bullitt , I thought, ‘This wasn't the script either, it was all in the director's head.’
With a play, it seems to me you go for the text, with a film you go for the director.’
The 40-year-old British-born Peter Yates had gone to Hollywood the  year before to direct Steve McQueen in Bullitt , the movie with ‘the car chase to end all car chases’.
(It didn't; it only began a spate of them.)
He had been a motor-racing driver and team manager, and his best films have been concerned with cars, bikes and heists, rather than boy meets girl.
John and Mary , his second American film, did not satisfy his love of action, nor did it provide him with the opportunity to demonstrate his fine sense of place.
The interior filming of John and Mary took place at the old and dilapidated Biograph Studios which were at 174th Street in the Bronx.
On the sound stage, the production designer John Robert Lloyd built a huge apartment containing a workable kitchen to represent John's ‘pad’.
Yates wanted it realistically built ‘because I wanted the duplex feeling without faking a big place like this.’
In fact, it was copied almost entirely from an apartment in the Dakota building, outside which John Lennon was shot some years later and where Yates himself would live.
Meanwhile Dustin was  concentrating on Jimmy Shine , a whimsical episodic comedy about the reveries of an unsuccessful 30-year-old Greenwich Village artist who maintains his essentially sunny disposition despite life's vicissitudes.
Using a flashback technique, Schisgal's Jimmy moves back to his school and college days, allowing Dustin to play younger again.
At one stage, he is told, ‘The main thing is that you have innate ability, talent, genius, something that's born inside you; it has nothing to do with studying.
Some people got it; some don't.
’ Schisgal obviously had Dustin in mind when he wrote this.
The role gave Dustin plenty of scope to demonstrate his versatility, even allowing him to warble a few songs, including a vaudeville fish ditty, and to dance with beer cans strapped to the soles of his feet.
His enormous vitality energised what was a less than satisfying piece.
Also in the cast were Rose Gregorio (Ulu Grosbard's wife), Pamela Payton-Wright, Rue McClanahan (much later Blanche in TV's Golden Girls ) and Cleavon Little, who would play the role of the French-influenced director in John and Mary .
In one scene Dustin had to tear into one of his canvases with a palette knife.
For the opening night in Baltimore, the prop man had oversharpened the knife so that Dustin cut his right index finger rather severely during the performance.
Nevertheless, he continued with his finger covered in blood, keeping his hand in his pocket.
After the final curtain he went to the local hospital to have the wound attended to.
But Dustin's confidence in the play was so shaky that he insisted that the stage manager announce to the audience every night that, ‘Mr Hoffman is appearing with a cut finger’, even after it had healed.
It was ‘a blatant bid for public  sympathy’, according to the director Donald Driver, who had walked out on the production in protest at the way Dustin had taken over.
When Jimmy Shine opened on Broadway on Thursday, 5 December 1968, at the Brooks Atkinson Theater, the New York critics showed little sympathy.
Newsweek called it ‘the baddest bad play possible to conceive…a mess, an incredibly hackneyed, shamelessly exploitative farrago…
The play itself is a monster.’
Of Dustin's performance, though, Clive Barnes in The New York Times wrote, ‘He has the strange ability to be himself on the stage.
Or, at least, if that is not himself he is playing, then some aspect of himself.
He must be so unnaturally talented that he is practically monstrous.’
For John Simon, it was ‘so puny a play that if it were not extended in all directions by Dustin Hoffman's life-giving performance, it would barely be discernible to the naked eye.
Mr Schisgal, whose fame rests on his ability to infuse bloodless old contrivances with the plasma of pseudo-modernism, specialises in the portrayal of loveable failures…
Of course, the whole (apart from not being a play but a series of more or less laboured skits) is a huge lie.
If Jimmy Shine were so loveable and bright, he could not be such an ecumenical failure at everything from school to girls, from New York to San Francisco, from painting to living.
And if he were propelled by such categorical imperative to fail, he could not reek loveableness out of every pore…
As Jimmy, Hoffman elaborates the film role that made him famous, Benjamin in The Graduate , and he is a thoroughly charming actor with sufficient off-beat  idiosyncrasies to make him a spiny delight.
He has his own truth, but the role is merely a Jewish fantasy figure: the successful failure, the yearned for anti-self of all dissatisfied successes, a figure to cosset as well as patronise.’
Favourable reviews came from Women's Wear Daily , who considered it ‘a funny, lovely, painfully gentle play that manages — without being fake-sensitive or psychedelically souped up — to understand just the thinking of today's young people’.
It reminded Frank Marcus in London's The Sunday Telegraph of Molnar, Saroyan, Fellini and the paintings of Chagall.
Thanks to astute advice from his business manager, apart from $4500 a week and ten per cent of the gross box-office receipts, Dustin also received half of the profits from every souvenir programme sold.
At one dollar a programme, he was reaping in as much as an extra $S100 a week.
This pleasant perk was gained from Zev Bufman because the Broadway company had not been given Dustin's permission to use certain material on him in the programme.
While Dustin was appearing in his first lead role on Broadway, he was filming at the Biograph Studios in darkest Bronx, thirty minutes by limo  (laid on nightly by Twentieth Century-Fox) from the Great White Way.
This committed him to a punishing schedule for the next eight months, from the time the play went into rehearsal until it closed on 26 April 1969 after 161 consecutive performances.
Each night, behind the peeling facade of the studio where D. W. Griffith worked before World War I, filming would go on until early in the morning.
In order that Dustin could sleep late and rest during the day, Fox bought him out of Wednesday matinees of the play.
There were rumours that stimulants or ‘poppers’ were the only things that kept Dustin going.
Yates discounts this.
‘I read somewhere of how Steve McQueen had been on drugs the whole time we were shooting Bullitt .
I must say I never saw any sign of it at all.
I feel exactly the same way about Dustin.
I think he was working far too hard.
He was going to the analyst every morning.
I don't see how you could do a show, go to an analyst, work on a film and take ‘poppers’ or ‘coke’or anything like it the whole time.’
Dustin relied mostly on coffee and aspirins while shuttling between the theatre and the studio.
Although he felt under pressure — Dustin is an actor who always commits himself totally to what he is doing — he enjoyed having to make the adjustment from Jimmy to John and back again.
His role in the film was one of his most difficult because there was nowhere to hide — neither behind make-up nor behind a character younger or older than himself.
‘The tough thing for me is not to have a particular voice or gait for a part, to have to play a guy like John, who is close to me physically and in age and so on.
I have this strong fear that if I am just myself, I'm going to be dull.
I don't have the leading man's charisma.
I mean, I've always felt that I had better do a helluva lot of acting.
’ Yates felt that, ‘Dustin didn't relate to the character because I don't think Dustin likes to be thought of as nice and charming.
Playing a character role is often more interesting for an actor, secondly you've got something to hide behind and thirdly you're not exposing anything about yourself.’
The teaming of ‘Benjamin Braddock’ and ‘Rosemary’seemed to make perfect box-office sense.
In 1968, the boyish 31-year-old Hoffman and the girlish 23-year-old sixties flower child Farrow were two of the most talked-about ‘young’ stars.
She had recently emerged from a much-publicised divorce from Frank Sinatra and a month's transcendental meditation with the guru Maharishi Mahesh Yogi in India.
The down-to-earth Hoffman and the ethereal Farrow got on reasonably well during the shooting.
‘Mia's fine,’ said Dustin, ‘except that she talks a lot about meditation.
I tend to avoid those conversations.’
One day, much to Dustin's irritation, she asked the driver of the limo  that was taking the two of them back to Manhattan to stop because she saw a wishing star in the sky.
‘I can't pass up a wishing star,’ she chirped, bouncing out of the car.
After standing silently looking up at the Brooklyn sky for a few minutes, and reciting a poem, she then jumped back into the car.
Dustin, who, according to Yates, had ‘the biggest supply of dirty stories that I've ever known’, was in the habit of trying to shock everyone.
‘This stream of obscene language was all the more strange coming from such a seemingly innocent-looking person.’
The even more innocent-looking Mia, however, was unshockable.
On the set, Dustin cast himself as the sensible person, whereas Mia was busy ‘talking to the  spirit of Mozart’, perhaps under the influence of André Previn (still married to Dory Previn), the conductor of the London Symphony Orchestra, with whom she had recently fallen in love.
(They would marry two years later, some months after she had given birth to twin boys.
) Not wanting to be away from Previn for long periods, Mia crossed the Atlantic on a few weekends during the shooting.
Sometimes, when it snowed heavily, the filmmakers were terrified lest she would not get back from London in time.
But she always made it.
Yates used the off-camera relationship of the two stars to establish a rapport between them on screen.
For example, in the scene where John first meets Mary, ‘I didn't have the attitude right, and Peter said, ‘Do you remember how you were when I first brought Mia backstage to meet you?’
I was very nervous, and I found myself coming on very strong and direct with her, and saying, ‘I liked Rosemary's Baby , but the picture bothered me for this reason…
’ Peter said, ‘Use it.
’ It worked perfectly.‘
The setting of the original novel by Mervyn Jones was shifted from London to New York because, says Yates, ‘I didn't want any of this dreadful, clichéd Swinging London business creeping in.
I had never believed in Swinging London in any way, and always felt it was a figment of Time magazine's imagination.’
Other considerations were his wanting to make another American film and because the project had got off the ground due to its big Hollywood stars.
In order to make sure the dialogue had the authentic American tone, Mortimer had two American actors read it aloud and make comments before the script was given to the two leads.
Mervyn Jones, in an article in The New Statesman in October 1969, commented on how the short novel he wrote during four months in 1965 became a Hollywood movie outside his control.
‘It is a trivial little book, the product neither of serious thinking nor of deep feeling.
My purpose was to see if I could write a novel with only two characters, preserving the unities of time, place and action (it all happens in one day in John's London flat), without any cheating through long flashbacks or such devices.
For  what it is worth, I brought off this trick — something of interest, I should suppose, only to other writers…
In 1966, soon after the book appeared, my agent told me that someone wanted to make a film out of it.
This amazed me.
I thought and still think that John and Mary is the least film-like of novels; most of the wordage is devoted to the thoughts of the characters, and the most dramatic piece of action is the accidental breaking of a glass…
I asked if I could see the screenplay on which the film was now based.
My agent explained that it was a highly secret document, but that he had a friend in the London office who might be able to sneak out a copy.
. Orienting myself through a large cast of characters, several long flashbacks, and a variety of thrilling events in New York and Jamaica, I came across occasional reminders of the novel…
The shooting of the film began early this year.
Mr Hoffman or Miss Farrow or both were the subjects of long articles in the American press, of the cover story in Time , and then of another cover story in The Observer 's colour section.
They also gave interviews.
Miss Farrow was fairly reticent, especially about John and Mary .
Mr Hoffman made it clear that the subject did not interest him and that he wanted to work with Mr Yates.’
The refashioned story relates how two young people, both just over affairs, pick each other up on a Friday night at a swinging Manhattan singles bar, the then modish Maxwell's Plum.
John has been brought to the bar, ‘a paradise for bachelors’, by his randy friend Ernest (played by Dustin's real friend Stanley Beck).
She goes back to his four-room bachelor apartment at 52 Riverside Drive.
They go to bed as strangers and then spend the weekend alternately insulting each other and making up, trying to find out if they are fond of each other.
We learn with them that he designs furniture (as Harry Hoffman did) and she works in a gallery of primitive art on Madison Avenue, but only in the end do they reveal their names to each other.
When they first meet at the bar, he says to her, ‘What did you say your name was?’ 'I didn't say.
What's yours?’
But they are interrupted and they do not bother to ask the question again during the whole weekend.
Obviously, unlike the bar in TV's Cheers , Maxwell's Plum was not a place ‘where everybody knows your name’.
The idea that two people could spend two days in such intimate proximity and not know each other 's names is impossible to swallow, even though it is meant as a metaphor for their relationship.
Although it is too fanciful to believe that the later Last Tango in Paris could have been influenced by John and Mary , there are nonetheless similarities between the two seemingly worlds-apart movies.
In the 1972 Bernardo Bertolucci film, Marlon Brando and Maria Schneider as Paul and Jeanne embark on a series of erotic encounters in an apartment, agreeing never to reveal their names to  each other, in order to keep their relationship anonymous and exclusively physical.
There also happens to be a young TV filmmaker (Jean-Pierre Léaud, the nouvelle vague 's fetish actor) similar to the one played by Cleavon Little in Yates's picture.
To show how adult even a major Fox movie could be in the late sixties, the credit sequence has the two lovebirds in bed together, cutely sleeping side by side and back to back.
Dustin's neat Beatle cut is slightly tousled and there is a close-up of a mole on his right shoulder.
Mia, waking up to find her companion still sleeping, hardly gives the impression that she has spent a passionate night.
Her hair, slightly shorter than his, earrings, make-up and false eyelashes are all perfectly in place.
He, however, looks rough before he shaves and dresses, demonstrating the still prevailing differences between the way men and women are treated aesthetically on screen.
His scrupulously tidy, chic apartment, a converted artist's studio, contains furniture of his own design, pop art on the walls, a bookshelf prominently displaying the very latest Tom Wolfe volume,The Electric Kook-Aid Acid Test , and, on the coffee table, a copy of the prestigious British film magazine Sight and Sound .
This is contrasted with her noisy, untidy, ‘funky four-storey walk-up’ on the East Side which she shares with two other girls, one of them being Tyne Daly, the future Mary Beth Lacey of TV's Cagney And Lacey .
The couple's recent past is filled in by a series of ‘flash-ins’, influenced by the French nouvelle vague .
This influence is acknowledged when Dustin meets Mia at the bar and overhears her discussing what is obviously (though it is coyly not named), Jean-Luc Godard's Weekend of 1967.
One of the men in her party considers it was made by a madman.
‘I like a film to have a beginning, a middle and an ending, preferably in that order, so I can follow it,’ he says, Mortimer's screenplay knowingly making him paraphrase Godard's view that a ‘film must have a beginning, a middle and an ending, not necessarily in that order.’
Although Yates freely admits he was happy to pinch from the French New Wave — voice-over, jump cuts, freeze frames and a certain improvisatory quality — the techniques as used here are too self-regarding.
The director also seems to be trying to satirise the fashionable filmmaking of the day by having Cleavon Little play a French-speaking director with a hand-held camera.
As he films Mia, she tells him, ‘Cinéma vérité is just an excuse to follow little girls into the ladies' room.’
The slick editing and second-hand New Wave tricks cannot save the film from being too thin and too contrived, and rarely amusing or touching enough.
‘What happens now?’
Mia asks at one stage.
‘What a day it's been and we haven't really done anything at all.
Nothing at all.’
Unlike  Godard's intellectual young couples in a confined space, these two people spend the weekend together communicating on as superficial a level as the movie itself.
Yates is almost desperately aware that ‘there's a whole world outside this little egg box you inhabit’, as Mia tells Dustin.
He feels so restricted by the screenplay that he has to break away from the apartment at every opportunity.
Even a slight anecdote of her as a sixteen-year-old girl guide being seduced in a tent by a boy scout is illustrated.
The voice-over device (their spoken thoughts) only works intermittently because much of what they are thinking could be spoken.
Their visualised thoughts, however, communicate far more to the audience.
We learn that John has had an affair with a fashion model (Sunny Griffin), who moves in with her dresses, wigs and dog, but decides to leave after she has made a mess of the kitchen by boiling the spaghetti over.
Mary has had a relationship with a married US senator (Michael Tolan).
Because her life is a little more vividly described than his, Mia's character exists less in a vacuum than Dustin's, and as a result her performance is more satisfactory.
It has to be said that when Dustin has co-starred in a movie with as big a star as he — McQueen, Redford, Beatty or Connery — he has come off second best.
He works much better when he has plenty of space around him, and when his name is, metaphorically or literally, the only one above the title.
Here, Dustin generates a little warmth, but not much passion or conviction, and his celebrated off-and-on smile gives the impression that he is not exactly sure what to do with his mouth.
‘With it’ as the film pretends to be, it is curiously reactionary.
The political references seem no more than accoutrements, just another part of the decor of the period.
Seemingly irrelevant is the scene in which Mary's liberal Eugene McCarthyite senator lover addresses the University Political Science Club, which makes reference to student protests, sit-ins, Vietnam and black rights.
He calms the whole student audience by concluding, ‘In my opinion you have coined the great motto of our time: ‘Make Love, Not War’,’ and they all give the peace sign.
The very real issues of the day are trivialised and the senator, who is cheating on his wife, is seen as a hypocrite.
There is also implicit criticism of John's politically committed mother Rosalie (Olympia Dukakis), so busy demonstrating for human rights that she shamefully neglects her son and fails to fill the fridge with enough food for him.
As a result, the adult John is obsessed with food, has an overstocked fridge and is a good cook.
When he discovers that Mary helps people, collects for Biafra and has protested against the Vietnam War, he is not happy because she suddenly reminds him of his mother.
(Flash-in of her leading a march in his mother's place.)
The message of the film seems to be, ‘All you need is love and cheese soufflés.
’ As well as its rather old-fashioned view of a woman's place, the film represents gays as ‘men who walk poodles’.
One of them is approached by Dustin, who asks if he knows where three girls live.
‘Girls!!!’ shrieks the man in horror.
Nevertheless,John and Mary is an interesting record of its time, in which Dustin again represents, as in The Graduate , the blander side of sixties youth.
Hemlines have since come down, and so have many of the buildings.
Maxwell's Plum has finally closed its doors.
The film was responsible at the time for the tremendous popularity of the bar and, whenever Yates or Dustin went into it, they were sent over a bottle of champagne by the management.
John and Mary opened in Hollywood on 25 November 1969, starting off sluggishly, but ending up making $1.2 million profit.
The icons of the period drew the worshippers to the shrine, despite the sacrilegious critics.
‘Hoffman, who is so fine in Midnight Cowboy ,’ wrote Vincent Canby in The New York Times , ‘is here upstaged by interior scenery.
He gives a performance by combining his mannerisms, including a smile turned tentatively on and off like a light bulb and the stooped strut of an over-age Holden Caulfield.
‘Judith Crist commented that, ‘despite all the ‘now’ sets and surfaces, it's like an old comedy of the thirties — minus the comedy'.
Pauline Kael admitted in The New Yorker that, ‘reviewing this perfect nothing of a movie is rather degrading: it's like giving consumer hints on the latest expensive worthless gift for the person who has everything’.
David Thomson felt that, ‘Hoffman seemed at a loss…in one of his few concessions to the big-salary syndrome.’
Dustin's salary had certainly gone up in leaps and bounds, from $17,000 for The Graduate , to $250,000 for Midnight Cowboy , to $425,000 for John and Mary .
Before John and Mary came into being, Dustin and Anne were the subject of many an article.
When a reporter, visiting the couple, asked Anne if she and Dustin would marry, Anne showed her crossed fingers behind Dustin's back.
Dustin's macho response seemed to indicate that he would not want his wife to work.
‘It's a wonderful thing when you can share a life.
I want a wife who can make me laugh, and I would always want her near me.’
It was this proprietorial attitude that was later to be one of the elements that would alienate Anne, who wanted to pursue her own career in parallel with her husband's.
(The education of Dustin towards some understanding of feminism, even though mainly in theory rather than in practice, was only to come after his divorce, the making of Kramer vs Kramer and Tootsie , and marriage to a woman who did not put his ideas to the test.)
One could easily imagine that a visit by Dustin to Anne's parents in Westchester would be similar to the scene in Annie Hall when Woody Allen has Easter dinner with his girlfriend's cold and formal WASP family, who he imagines see him as a rabbi.
However, despite being raised a Catholic, Anne had no qualms about a Jewish marriage, nor did her open-minded librarian father and schoolteacher mother.
Therefore, after the stint on Broadway, Dustin married the woman whom he called ‘my shiksa goddess’ on 8 May 1969 at Temple Beth El Reform synagogue at Chappaqua, New York.
About thirty-five close friends and relatives attended the wedding and the reception in Anne's home town of Mount Kisco in northern Westchester, NY.
After the celebrations were over, the couple took off for a honeymoon retreat in Asia.
One of the first stops on the way was London, where The Graduate was yet to become a hit, so Dustin was able to walk the streets in peace.
Not for long, though.
One Little Indian
The key to the character was that he hadn't had a decent bowel movement in forty-six years.
IF ONE HAD been going to cast anyone in the title role of a movie called Little Big Man , there would not have been many actors in Hollywood one could have thought of besides Dustin Hoffman.
(This was a few years before little actors such as Al Pacino, Richard Dreyfuss or Dudley Moore became big.)
The Western was in its dying throes, but Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid in 1969 kept it hanging on by a thread.
Director Arthur Penn had bought the rights to the Thomas Berger novel Little Big Man in 1965, and MGM had originally planned to produce it as a multimillion-dollar epic before the deal fell through.
In June 1969, Cinema Center Films agreed to finance the film, and Jack Richardson, who had started to write the screenplay, was replaced by Calder Willingham (who co-wrote The Graduate ).
It was inevitable that the actor that seemed to epitomise the new Hollywood of the late sixties should work with one of the most fashionable filmmakers attuned to young audiences.
Arthur Penn's strong sympathy with the outsider and an anti-Establishment stance made an impact on the anti-draft, anti-Vietnam, middle-class college students of that tumultuous period.
His first feature had been a Western,The Left-Handed Gun (1958), in which Paul Newman played a crazy mixed-up Billy the Kid with Method mannerisms.
Bonnie and Clyde (1967) was one of the most influential American movies of the last decades in its amoral attitude to ‘the outlaw’, seen from a modern psychological and social viewpoint.
Another of his significant outsiders was the blind, deaf and dumb Helen Keller in The Miracle Worker (1962), and The Chase (1966) was linked in a plodding way with the law/outlaw theme of Bonnie and Clyde .
Alice's Restaurant (1969) had an obvious appeal for those who could identify with a communal haven for hippies, and Little Big Man would continue to reveal his preoccupation with the outsider by seeing the Cheyenne as ‘ethnic’ hippies who contrasted favourably with white civilisation.
Curiously, it was Penn's last success to date.
From there it has been downhill all the way.
Penn described the anti-hero of his Western as ‘a man who gets rid of his  history like a snake sheds his skin…
A man who is essentially passive in an activist's role, a man willing to let the tides of history dictate his actions.’
This man, played by Dustin, was Jack Crabb, a 121-year-old survivor of Custer's Last Stand, who reminisces over his long and eventful life.
In 1859, as a ten-year-old abandoned orphan, he is found and adopted by the Cheyenne, and is made a brave called Little Big Man by Chief Old Lodge Skins (Chief Dan George).
Aged sixteen, he rides into battle against white soldiers but is captured, and taken in by Reverend Silas Pendrake (Thayer David) and his wife (Faye Dunaway).
He soon learns that the latter is not as pure as she makes out.
In his mid-twenties, he joins Custer (Richard Mulligan), but during an attack on an Indian village he meets Sunshine (Amy Eccles) who becomes his wife.
Shifting loyalties once more, he determines to kill Custer, but cannot do the deed when he has the chance, and becomes a vagrant.
One day, just as he is about to throw himself off a cliff, he sees Custer riding for Little Big Horn.
He offers himself as a scout.
At the battle, Jack is saved by Younger Bear (Carl Bellini), who owed him a life from childhood.
Before shooting could begin, producer Stuart Miller had to sign a treaty permitting the use of Custer's Last Stand battlefield in the movie.
Agreement had to be reached with the Northern Cheyenne to film scenes at Lame Deer, Montana, and with Scarvee and Stony Indians for the use of land in Calgary, as well as a contract drawn up for forty Crow Indians to appear in the film.
These agreements not only had the effect of gaining the Indians' approval of the film but also lent it a greater authenticity.
The days of using Jeff Chandler, Rock Hudson and Burt Lancaster supported by Debra Paget, J. Carrol Naish and Ricardo Montalban as Indians were virtually over.
To quote Kurt Vonnegut in Bluebeard : ‘In the movies back then, just about any big-nosed person whose ancestors came from the shores of the Mediterranean or the Near East, if he could act at little, could play a rampaging Sioux or whatever.
The audiences were more than satisfied.
‘Despite the use of assorted Caucasians as some Indians, two of the leading roles were played by Chief Dan George and Robert Little Star.
The movie was originally set to be produced on a budget of $5 million to be filmed at such diverse locations as California, Montana, Colorado, Nevada City and Calgary, Canada.
But a range of climatic difficulties from the blistering heat of Colorado to below-zero temperatures in Canada spectacularly doubled the picture's original budget.
Despite the problems with the elements, however, Penn's 114-person cast and crew brought the film in on schedule.
Because of the extensive location work, Dustin, who disliked being  away from his family for any length of time, insisted on Anne and Karina joining him at a house he had rented in Billings, Montana.
He needed their support after a hard day's work in often uncomfortable conditions.
Horse riding did not come easily to him, and he had to bathe in Epsom salts every night to soothe his acting legs and behind.
Dustin also found that firing a gun was not something he was adept at, and would often burn himself with the powder from the blank cartridge.
In addition, he insisted on doing the stunts that were in his power himself, like Lying face-down in freezing mud for a scene that would take almost two days to shoot.
But it was on his return to the West Coast that he was to suffer most discomfiture.
It was there that the scenes of Dustin as a centenarian were to be filmed.
Long gone were the days when an actor could, like Paul Muni, have his hair powdered and his face lined, and put on a wavering voice and a stoop to represent ageing.
Even as recently as Giant (1956), Rock Hudson, Elizabeth Taylor and James Dean undermined the later part of the movie by their inability to age convincingly.
When Dustin played old, as in Little Big Man and the later Death of a Salesman , he really played old, and aged everyone around him.
With the meticulousness with which he was to become associated on each project, Dustin decided that he had first to get the voice of the 121-year-old man right.
Some actors find the character initially in the posture, the clothes, or the make-up, but Dustin almost invariably works from the voice, perhaps because his own is rather nasal, flat and nondescript.
Like an ordinary face that one can build a character upon with multiple disguises, Peter Sellers's for example, Dustin draws on the blank score sheet of his voice.
He worked and worried about this long before he got to play the old man.
‘I first tried to get that kind of raspy voice that comes when the vocal cords have broken down.
A doctor friend of mine found this home on Welfare Island where I could just observe old people.
I found one guy and talked to him for a while on tape.
He wasn't right-just wasn't old enough — and I was very depressed afterward.
Then, another doctor told me there was a drug that dries out alcoholics and makes something very raspy happen to the voice.
But I chickened out.’
Then one day Dustin got laryngitis, and promptly put his crackling voice on tape.
It was exactly when he wanted.
Still, there was one small problem.
He could only really recapture the timbre if he had laryngitis when the time came for shooting.
In Montana, he visited a number of old age homes for someone to supply him with the right voice, but to no avail.
Eventually, when they  were in Canada, in the fifth month of the picture, Dustin got friendly with an Oriental man who claimed to be 104 years old.
Dustin spent hours watching and listening to the old man.
However, when the production shifted back to Los Angeles, the day before shooting started, he lost the kind of gravelly voice he had been working on.
‘I still didn't know what to do about the voice.
So in a panic I went into a room, closed the door, and started screaming until I got hoarse.
The next day my voice was okay again.
So I screamed while I got dressed, I screamed leaving the room.
In the car I rolled up the windows and screamed all the way to the Sawtelle Veteran's Hospital in Los Angeles where we were filming.
I screamed vowel sounds and different registers more delicate than the others that would get me hoarser.’
Actually, the voice was the least of his problems.
Dustin had to suffer under a fourteen-piece latex mask, which took five hours a day to apply under the hot, steaming make-up lamps.
(Far worse torture was to come in Tootsie .
Playing old was child's play compared with acting a woman.)
‘I defy anyone to put on that make-up and not feel old,’ Dustin explained.
‘I couldn't see too well with my contact lens cataracts, and the crew would walk me over to the wheelchair where they had to wheel me on to the sound stage.
Everybody was very gentle.
That really helped me believe my fantasy world.’
It was the process of his metamorphosis from a 33-year-old into a 121-year-old that got most of the film's pre-publicity.
Legendary make-up artist Dick Smith's creation ranks with some of the most celebrated elaborate make-up jobs in the past, such as Lon Chaney's thousand facial transformations, Boris Karloff's Frankenstein's monster, and Bette Davis as Queen Elizabeth I.
Little Big Man was released in 1970 and took a healthy $15 million at the box office.
The reviews were less perky.
Variety commented that, ‘Hoffman's prior films show up in marked contrast.
To be sure, the characterisations are low key, but in other pix they have manifested depth, plot propulsion and story meaning.
Little Big Man , in contrast, is rather like documenting the US space programme by following the janitor in the NASA HQ…
The show is advanced so sluggishly and episodically that, apart from first and last reels, there could be a mix-up in reels without much comment.’
As for the famous make-up, ‘It is a technical achievement but, for all anyone knows, it could have been Stacy Keach in such a rig.’
Vincent Canby in The New York Times felt that the film was often ‘not terribly funny, at just those moments when it tries the hardest, and it sometimes wears its social concerns so blatantly that they look like  warpaint’, but concluded that it ‘is an important movie by one of our most interesting directors’.
Of Dustin, he surprisingly found peculiar traces of both Ben Braddock and Ratso Rizzo in his Jack Crabb, but thought him ‘fine’.
John Simon found Dustin ‘always endearing with that sour-grapefruit face and voice of his, both of which, paradoxically, ooze the juice of human kindness’, while David Thomson thought that Dustin ‘was near his best, managing old age easily and riding the picaresque adventures of a put-upon outcast all the better because of his own denial of starriness.
Still, it was easier to accept Hoffman as Penn's spokesman than as someone actually living through the film.
His very intelligent scrutiny of a role can make him seem too detached, too much the performer of a plan.’
The one hundred and fifty minutes has its entertaining chunks but Little Big Man too self-consciously views the past from a modern standpoint (there is even a gay Red Indian and bluesy music), and the demystification of legends, such as Custer, is done in too simplistic a manner, a process Penn had begun in The Left-Handed Gun .
As Robin Wood has noted, ‘The presentation of the Cheyennes is confused and blurred by the divided impulse, the desire to recreate an ‘ideal’ alternative to the white world.’
Although his voice and the accent change slightly when he becomes the narrator, Dustin was brilliantly convincing as a very old man, as well as managing to look and behave like a very young man when necessary.
However, after many experiences and two marriages, the character still comes on like an idiot boy during the second meeting with Dunaway in a brothel, making Benjamin Braddock seem like Don Juan by contrast.
The tone of the picture is unsure, veering from broad comedy — Dustin as Bob Hope in Son of Paleface — and burlesque of the Blazing Saddles type to an attempt to make serious comments about Indian culture, and analogies between their treatment by the whites and the Vietnam War.
A sequence when Custer attacks an Indian village could not help but stir vivid memories of the My Lai massacre and the photos of Vietnamese on fire that were seen in all the newspapers and on television during that dark period in America's history.
At the time, student audiences were in no doubt as to the intentions of the scene, and would chant ‘My Lai!
My Lai!’ as well as cheering the death of Custer, whom they identified as Lieutenant Calley.
Little Big Man was certainly not the first Hollywood movie to attempt to redress the balance in favour of the Indians.
There had already been examples in the fifties, notably Delmer Daves's Broken Arrow , Robert Aldrich's Apache and Sam Fuller's Run of the Arrow , but it began a new trend in which the Western was appropriated by directors in order to express their liberal views.
Indians were seen as representing the Vietcong, nineteenth-century negro slaves spoke like members of the Black Power movement, and detailed blood-baths were presented as condemnations of violence.
The Western was moving out of its frame, until it disappeared altogether.
Despite the mixed response from critics, Dustin felt pride in his achievement and confidence in the film itself, so he expressed his anger when Little Big Man was not nominated for any Oscars.
‘Sure I would like to win an Academy Award,’ the twice-nominated actor told Daily Variety .
‘I realise that intellectually it doesn't really mean very much.
But it is a means to more power, which in turn enables you to be choosy about your scripts.
And it makes you more money — which you can put away toward the day when you won't be in such demand!’
In stark contrast with Dustin's ambition, this was the year that George C. Scott won and refused the Oscar for Patton .
‘Life isn't a race,’ he stated, ‘and because it is not a race I don't consider myself in competition with my fellow actors for awards or recognition.’
Ignored by the Academy,Little Big Man was acknowledged by The New York Critics and The National Society of Film Critics, who selected Chief Dan George as their Best Supporting Actor, and Harvard Lampoon presented the picture with their annual Twenty Cent Token ‘to that film which does the most fashionable injustice to a minority class’.
Although Dustin took no awards for the movie, he took away fond memories of the Indians.
‘To the Indians, death was a very simple thing, for life was just an appetiser.
The ideal way would be to call your own death, to fear it all through life, and then reach an age where fear disappears, when you could say, ‘I'm ready now.
I'm tired, I've had my life.’'
But just around the corner, Death was lying in wait for Dustin once again.
Bombs Away!
Film is a personal effort and if you fail, you should fail for the right reasons.
And the only way you're going to fail is if you get out on a limb.
AFTER THE FIVE months on gruelling location and the inconveniences of the long make-up sessions, Dustin took a rest with his family in New York.
In early 1970, he met the Italian director Franco Zeffirelli to talk about his playing Francis of Assisi in Brother Sun and Sister Moon .
He was almost on the point of signing before his better judgement saved him at the last moment from the emetic flower-child rompings of this 1972 Paramount flop.
A few weeks after his escape from a film disaster, Dustin came shatteringly close to a disaster of a more fatal kind.
On the morning of 5 March 1970, a white station wagon delivered some cartons to the elegant townhouse at 18 West 11th Street, next door to the Hoffmans.
The cartons contained dynamite, blasting caps, sections of metal pipe, and several cheap alarm clocks.
Gathered in the house were members of the Greenwich Village group of young Weathermen revolutionaries, including Diana Oughton, Kathy Boudin, Terry Robbins, Ted Gold and Cathy Wilkerson, the teenage daughter of the wealthy new owners of the house.
James P. Wilkerson, president of the Star Stations of Indiana Inc — a chain of five radio stations in the mid-West — had no idea of his daughter's political leanings, and was on vacation with his wife in the Caribbean.
With her family absent, a meeting was held in the basement to discuss the making of bombs.
A few days before, one of the male members of the group had bought two 50 lb boxes of dynamite from the New England Corporation of Keene, New Hampshire, for $50.
Dustin had been working at his antique desk all morning on contact sheets of his wedding pictures, taken almost a year before, trying to pick out the ones to develop.
Karina and Anne, now two months pregnant, had left for downtown New York.
It was Karina's birthday, and they had gone shopping for candles for her cake.
Dustin left to join them at 11.30.
About forty-five minutes later three huge explosions went off in the Wilkerson house, the force of which blew Dustin's $700 desk through a  hole in the wall.
He would certainly have been killed instantly had he still been at it.
When Dustin heard news of the ensuing blaze, he rushed back to the scene, and was able to push through the gaping crowds to pull three of his modern paintings and a Tiffany lampshade from the smoke-filled Federal-style building, before the police prevented him from re-entering the house.
Sadly, the rest of his collection of paintings and furniture had been badly charred or destroyed.
The basement of the house had sustained heavy damage and part of the ceiling on the top floor had collapsed.
All told, three people died and twenty-three were left homeless.
After he and Anne had gone to the Red Cross centre to help comfort some of his neighbours, he told a friend, ‘Thank God, I'm not poor!’
At first the explosions were thought to have been caused by a gas leak, but gradually the police were able to piece together evidence linking the disaster to the Weathermen, one of whom had attached a wire to the wrong terminal.
The fatalities were three of their number: Terry Robbins had been virtually obliterated in the blast, Diana Oughton was mangled almost beyond recognition and Ted Gold, on the first floor, was killed by falling beams.
Another three of them, never identified, escaped by crawling out of the back of the house.
Cathy Wilkerson and Kathy Boudin, the latter totally naked, stumbled into the street and were taken in by a neighbour who offered them a shower and clothing.
The two young women quickly washed and dressed before taking flight, not to surface again for over a decade.
(Boudin was finally arrested in October 1981 while fleeing an armed robbery.)
The Weathermen, about whom the underground filmmaker Emile De Antonio made a sympathetic documentary in 1977, took their title from the protest song by Bob Dylan: ‘You Don't Need A Weatherman To Know Which Way The Wind Blows.’
In June 1968, they produced a document that announced that young Americans must accept the need for ‘armed struggle’.
Their credo was: ‘Kill all the rich people.
Break up their cars and apartments.
Bring the revolution home, kill your parents, that's where it's really at.’
After fights with Mayor Daley's police on the streets of Chicago, they decided, at a ‘war council’ in Flint, Michigan, in December 1969, to go underground and become urban  guerrillas .
The Weather People, as they later called themselves because of the number of women in their ranks, were led by Bernardine Dohrn.
It was she who, commenting on the Sharon Tate murder in August 1969, said ‘Dig it, first they killed those pigs, then they ate dinner in the same room with them, then they even shoved a fork into a victim's stomach!
Wild!’
If the explosions had happened a few weeks later, the Hoffmans would have been living somewhere else.
They had decided to move to an apartment opposite Central Park because Karina had been molested in Washington Square Park.
Not very seriously — just a hand up her dress — but they felt they would prefer a better neighbourhood.
It would have been tragically ironic if one of the Weather People's victims had been the actor, however bourgeois in their minds, who had been associated with a certain rebellion against the exploitative capitalist system they wished to destroy.
Death had brushed Dustin's cheek twice, threatening to take him first by fire and secondly by a bomb.
Later, in the mid-70s, while on holiday in the Caribbean, he switched on a lamp that had frayed wiring and he received a terrific shock.
‘I got so angry.
I had a picture of myself standing barefoot in my swimming trunks, screaming and thrashing in a motel room, and I thought, ‘This isn't the way I'm supposed to go.’
' When the time comes, Dustin has expressed his desire to depart in the style of the actor David Burns, who suffered a fatal heart attack in the middle of a performance.
Because he was a comic actor, he got a laugh.
‘It was the perfect exit.
He died the death of an actor.’
His life spared once more, Dustin signed to star in Who Is Harry Kellerman and Why Is He Saying Those Terrible Things About Me?for Cinema Center Films.
The project attracted Dustin because he felt comfortable with the director Ulu Grosbard, his friend since 1962; it was to be filmed on his doorstep in New York, and the off-beat fantasy-comedy-drama which dealt with psychiatry, the price of fame, the fear of ageing and dying, and the need for love, struck a personal chord.
It also seemed terribly contemporary in a society where pop singers were becoming the spokespeople of the age.
The screenplay was written by Herb Gardner, a cartoonist who made his name with The Nebbishes and the 1962 hit Broadway play,A Thousand Clowns , filmed in 1965.
The latter told of a hack TV gag writer (Jason Robards Jr) trying to prevent his precocious twelve-year-old nephew from being taken away from him by a Child Welfare Officer (William Daniels).
It contained enough witty lines to keep the creeping whimsy, indicated in the title, at bay.
Who Is Harry Kellerman…?was only Grosbard's second film as director, although he had previously assisted Elia Kazan, Robert Wise, Robert Rossen and Sidney Lumet.
His debut had been The Subject Was Roses for MGM in 1968, the film of the Frank D. Gilroy play which, along with a plum Broadway role, was plucked away from Dustin by a pyrotechnical fondue pot.
The first shot in the movie is of Dustin writing a suicide note on the rooftop of the General Motors Building in New York.
‘There was a time when I planned to live for ever, but the time has come to change those plans.’
He finishes the note, sticks it on a pole and then jumps off the building, floating delightedly in slow motion behind the credits.
It is probably the best sequence in the film.
There was something suicidal about the whole pretentious enterprise, which Dustin should have been talked down from before he leaped.
Dustin, with an unbecoming Mexican bandit moustache and frizzy hair, mercifully covered by a cowboy hat for most of the time, is the vastly successful multi-millionaire Bob Dylan-type rock composer George Soloway (soul away, solo way), whose suicidal fall is broken on the couch of his psychiatrist Dr Moses (Jack Warden with a ginger beard and, naturally, a German accent).
The consoling shrink tells George that, ‘We must not rule out the possibility that you are a bird — a loony bird.
A crazy, nutty loony bird.’
What is George's problem?
His main one seems to echo another interrogatorily titled film,Will Success Spoil Rock Hunter?
Fame has made the former rebel into a smug, uncommitted and corrupt member of the musical establishment.
Apparently, someone called Harry Kellerman has been phoning people up about George, and giving him ‘the bad mouth all over town’.
Warden then starts miming to a Ray Charles number, ‘Don't tell me your troubles,’ in the manner of a Dennis Potter TV play.
It is unfortunate that Dustin did not similarly mime the songs he sings while strumming a guitar (an instrument he studied for the part), because his singing voice is strained and uncomfortably high.
By the end, we discover that of course he himself is Harry Kellerman, his alter ego and conscience.
Before the audience learns the truth, they are subjected to a depressingly muddled, self-conscious wallow on the theme of fame, time and death which, for some obscure reason, eventually ends with George and his psychiatrist skiing down a slope.
When Dr Moses appears in one of George's hallucinations as Santa Claus, he asks George what he wants for Christmas.
‘I'd like a new life and a day without fear,’ his patient replies.
Gardner's script contains other doubtful gems such as, ‘I keep thinking, how come I've got kids and I'm only eighteen years old.
Those kids are like clocks ticking away’, and ‘Time is not a thief, it's an embezzler.’
About midway through the film, a long sequence is given over to Barbara Harris, auditioning for a show by singing, intentionally weakly, ‘Painting The Clouds With Sunshine’.
‘I feel I've just auditioned for the part of a human being and I didn't get the job.’
Throughout her self-pitying  monologue (for which she received a Best Supporting Actress Oscar nomination), all Dustin has to do is stare at her while his moustache droops in sympathy.
The 33-year-old Dustin once again tries to run the age gamut, this time from 17 to 42 years old.
He just about gets away with it as a teenager in long shot and make-up, but mostly he is heard (putting on a ‘young’ voice) and not seen.
Firstly, Dustin is hidden under a folding bed which he is repairing in readiness for his first sexual experience, and then he is off-camera, talking to his parents, in the one comic-satiric scene that Woody Allen might not have disowned.
But this tone soon dissolves into a miasma of melancholy.
Neither Grosbard's direction nor Gardner's script is able to come into focus and, as a result, Dustin's character remains blurred.
Is he sympathetic, comic, grotesque, touching?
In the attempt to be all these things, he achieves none of them.
The crude satire seems to be directed at the fashionable protest singers of the time, who, while singing songs against the materialistic values of American society, are worried about the receipts from their concerts.
George Soloway has been so busy making money that he has been unable ‘to commit himself to another human being’.
Was it more than just an in-joke to make George's chauffeur go under the name of Chomsky?
(At the time, Noam Chomsky, the anti-Establishment linguistics professor, was a prominent critic of US intervention in Vietnam.
) Or did it reveal a conservative attitude at the heart of a movie that is dressed up in hippie garb?
Perhaps this contradiction contributed to its failure.
The producers, Grosbard and Herb Gardner, should have known that as a general rule films with long titles have short runs.
Previous verbosely titled flops had been Oh Dad, Poor Dad, Mamma's Hung You in the Closet and I'm Feelin' So Sad (which also had Barbara Harris in it) and Can  Heironymus  Merkin Ever Forget Mercy Humppe and Find True Happiness?
As far as audiences and critics were concerned, the answers to the two questions in Who Is Harry Kellerman and Why Is He Saying Those Terrible Things About Me?were ‘Frankly, I couldn't give a damn.’
The picture was thought by The New York Times to have ‘a flat, tinny sound’, apart from the several scenes shared by Hoffman and Harris that were ‘as touching as they were funny’.
Variety found that it ‘fails to engage any sympathy or interest: entire reels could be interchanged without it being evident’.
(The same critic said the same of Little Big Man .)
‘Hoffman's shy-guy ability to reach an audience is completely perverted; to say he is miscast is an understatement.’
On top of the unenthusiastic reviews for his last three movies, there appeared, at the same time, an article by Pauline Kael called ‘Notes on  New Actors, New Movies’ in The New Yorker , in which she wrote: ‘Dustin Hoffman has become such a culture hero that one hesitates to point out that he's more relaxed and likeable on TV talk shows than when he's acting.
In his screen roles, he hasn't yet found the gift of moving into a part and then just going with it.
I love to watch him, because he's intelligent and he has extraordinary drive and he takes us by surprise, but he isn't an intuitive actor, and we're aware of how cleverly he's playing the part.‘
In the meantime, Dustin was being honoured in other quarters.
He was selected as the winner of the annual William J. German Human Relations Award, sponsored by the American Jewish Committee's Motion Picture and Entertainment Division in November 1970.
Others who had received the award included Sidney Poitier, Stanley Kramer, Paul Newman and Joanne Woodward.
Over five hundred directors and producers gathered at a luncheon to pay tribute to him.
Gordon T. Stulberg, president of Cinema Center Films, in presenting the award cited his work to ‘further human understanding to achieve a better society through the political process’.
For John and Mary ?
Midnight Cowboy ?
Who Is Harry Kellerman…?
It turned out that the encomium had little to do with these epics, but for his generous economic support of the New York Psychoanalytic Institute, where he had once worked as a lowly attendant.
In the same year, Dustin was in London again as one of the guests at the Royal Command Performance of Love Story , where he was to be presented to the Queen Mother.
‘I could hear the assistant quickly telling her about the person she was being introduced to.
It was a lot of work for her.
I think I was at the end of the line.
So the first thing I said was, ‘You don't have to talk to me.
I know you're very tired.’
That was the first mistake.
She asked me what I was doing there.
Tony Curtis was standing next to me so I said I was there to try and collect money from Mr Curtis.
I said I'd been chasing him all over the world.
She was stunned.
I didn't get any laughs out of her.’
At that period, despite a postbag of film offers, Dustin tried to put his pregnant wife and his stepdaughter before everything else.
To prove this, he turned down the role of the American archaeologist in Ingmar Bergman's The Touch , because the shooting would coincide with the birth of his child.
How Dustin would have managed to submit himself to a real auteur like Bergman must remain a matter for conjecture.
He would have been the first non-Scandinavian to star in a Bergman film, an honour which went eventually to the more laid-back Elliott Gould.
He did, however, lend his now recognisable voice to an animated ABC feature called The Point , shown on 2 February 1971.
Based on a story by Harry Nilsson, it told of a father competing with a TV set for his son's attention.
Meanwhile, Dustin, who has said that he envies pregnant women, followed a natural childbirth course with Anne, doing all the exercises she did.
Dustin imagines himself angrily taking his case for male pregnancy to God, a bureaucrat behind a desk.
‘I don't understand.
Why don't I get to carry it?’
But God brushes him aside.
‘I don't want to talk about it.
I've spent a lot of time on this.’
On 15 October 1970, Dustin had a photographer stationed outside the delivery room of the hospital ready to film the first moments of his first child's life.
Anne, on cue, gave birth to her second child, Jennifer Celia (nicknamed Jenna), who weighed 8 lb 3 oz.
‘I was there for her birth and it was the most exciting thing I have ever experienced!’ exclaimed the father of the baby, and the owner of a home movie of strictly limited appeal.
‘Jesus, I Got ‘Em All!'
I'm not a violent person.
I don't shoot guns, don't fight, but I get excited by violence.
THE DAY AFTER Anne went into labour, Dustin signed to do Straw Dogs , due to start production in England on 3 February 1971.
The original title of the film was The Siege of Trencher's Farm , the name of the novel by Gordon M. Williams (a pseudonym for novelist J. Anderson Black), which was adapted by David Z. Goodman and the director Sam Peckinpah.
The plot tells of David Sumner, an introspective mathematician (changed from a professor of English in the book) who moves to a Cornish village with his sexy wife in order to escape violence in America.
She attracts the attentions of the local yobbos and he the suspicions of the villagers.
One day, while Sumner is out duck shooting, his wife's ex-lover bursts into the house and rapes her, followed by his friend.
After the simpleton Henry Niles (David Warner) strangles the teenage daughter (Chloe Franks) of Tom Hedden (Peter Vaughan) and is given refuge in David's house, Hedden, his sons, and Scutt, the local ratcatcher, try to break into the house and get Henry out.
This leads the non-violent professor to take up arms against the thugs to protect his home.
‘This is where I live.
This is me.
I will not allow violence against my house.’
After he has killed off the whole lot of them in various ways, he shouts in triumph, ‘Jesus, I got 'em all!’
In October 1970, screenwriter Goodman and Dustin started research on the character in New York by going to a couple of universities to observe the behaviour of certain professors, presumably threatening the eggheads with violence to see how they would react.
They then worked on the script together for a few months before joining Peckinpah in England, where he was busy with pre-production.
Although Goodman and Peckinpah are credited with the screenplay, all three of them hammered out a final script.
‘The basic characterisation of David Sumner represented an enormous amount of research and work on Dustin's part, and I think it showed on the screen,’ commented Goodman.
Dustin was fond of quoting Cicero's phrase, which his father kept pinned  on the wall beside his desk: ‘Wise men are instructed by reason, men of less understanding by experience, the most ignorant by necessity, and beasts by nature.’
The way Dustin envisaged his character in the scripting stage differed somewhat from what appeared (less subtly) on the screen.
‘I saw him as fleeing the violent campus situation in America for the peaceful English countryside on a conscious level, while on an unconscious level he would begin to set up the conflict in the small town he went to.
In other words, I saw the town as being completely different towards him at the outset of the film, and then in snide little ways he would turn them against him because he carried his violence with him.
That was the thing that I found exciting about the script.
The fact that Sam and I differed over this concept doesn't mean we didn't work well together.’
Another initial area of disagreement was over the casting of Susan George as his wife Amy.
‘Sam sent me screen tests of her and some other girls, and I went to London to meet her.
She seemed very nice and I thought she could act and we had a nice rapport, but I said to Sam, ‘I just feel she's the wrong type for a guy who's a teacher in college.
You're opening up a whole new can of beans as to why he married this young kind of Lolita-ish girl.
’ I could see a woman in her late twenties.
Also the whole rape thing.
I thought a woman who was a little older and starting to feel a little out of it in terms of being attractive — had the sensuality but was losing it — might be more ambivalent about being raped.
Sam said he agreed and that I shouldn't worry because he could get that out of her.
He even went so far as to say that he wouldn't do the picture without her.
He asked me, ‘Please go with my hunch.’
I said, ‘All right.’
I still think I was right.
Not that it didn't work the way we did it, but it worked in a different way.’
Lolita-ish the twenty-year-old Susan George wasn't!
She had been a former child actress, making her film debut at the age of four, and at twelve she appeared in the London production of The Sound of Music .
Her career in movies from the age of seventeen had not been particularly distinguished.
Among the other girls tested for the part of Amy were 23-year-old Judy Geeson, who had already played a number of cock-teasing roles, and Joie Gould, an English secretary who was Peckinpah's girlfriend at the time.
When Susan went for an interview for the role, she walked into Peckinpah's office, where Daniel Melnick, the producer, Dustin and Peckinpah were deep in conversation, ignoring her.
Suddenly she noticed that all three had their trousers around their ankles.
‘I backed towards the door.
I was in a terrible fluster.’
Then Peckinpah turned round and said, ‘Welcome, Amy,’ and the part was hers.
‘It was Dustin's sense of humour personified,’ Susan George says approvingly.
The rest of the cast, which included David Warner, Peter Vaughan and Colin Welland, were greeted more conventionally.
In January 1971, shooting began in what Patrick Agan, a previous biographer of Hoffman, called ‘a desolate corner of Britain', a risible if not insulting reference to the county of Cornwall.
The cast and crew were situated in the picturesque summer tourist trap of St Ives where they virtually took over the comfortable olde-worlde Tregenna Castle Hotel, while Peckinpah rented a small cottage for himself on the moor.
St Buryan, some twelve miles from St Ives, was selected as the town in the script.
The film people wanted to shoot in the local pub, but the landlord refused them permission, explaining that he did not want to inconvenience his regular customers, despite being offered a tidy sum as recompense.
As a result of the man's refreshing lack of avarice, a replica of the pub had to be built.
It was a raw, damp and cold Cornwall winter and, not long into the shooting, Peckinpah contracted ‘flu which developed into pneumonia.
He kept going on penicillin shots, but his condition continued to deteriorate.
Finally, clutching Joie Gould with one hand and a bottle of Scotch in the other, he was sent off by train to a London clinic.
Meanwhile the cast and crew occupied themselves as best they could.
Dustin, who had arrived with Anne, three-month-old Jennifer, and a nanny, played the piano or sang dirty songs to a guitar accompaniment in the hotel lounge in the evenings and, on one occasion, went into the kitchen to gather a few pots and pans to use as bongo drums in order to entertain his colleagues.
Dustin and Anne often had meals with Colin Welland and his wife, or sometimes with Susan George and her boyfriend, the young actor Simon MacCorkindale, whom she was soon to marry.
Otherwise Dustin was found swapping quotations with Irish actor T. P. McKenna in the bar or playing endless poker games.
He was quite content with the food as long as he could have a plentiful supply of fillet steaks and his daily dose of freshly squeezed orange juice.
One morning, Claude, the French maître d', ran out of oranges and had to top up Dustin's glass with some of the tinned variety.
Dustin took one sip and told Claude that he was the only man he knew who could get fresh oranges out of a can.
When Peckinpah left Cornwall, he seemed in such a bad way that the possibility of replacing him was discussed.
But the hardy director returned to the location four days later propped up by alcohol and Vitamin B12 shots.
Dustin and Peckinpah had a liking and respect for one another.
The Western character actor Strother Martin, a friend of the director's, visiting the location, gave an account of their working rapport.
‘There was this one  scene where Dustin first did it by coming on very strong as the scene opened and then gradually bringing things down until everything was just suggested by innuendo and gestures.
‘Beautiful.
Print it!’ says Sam.
‘Now let's do one the other way, Dustin.
Where you start down at the estbottom and build it right up to the goddamn, fuckin' sky!’
And Dustin says to Sam, ‘Which one did you like the best?’
And Sam says, ‘Well, in the first one I liked this moment, and in the second I liked this.’
And Dustin says: ‘Give me one more!
Give me one more!’
And he tries to catch what Sam likes in both takes.’
‘Dustin was so far ahead of me through the first half of the picture, it wasn't even funny,’ Peckinpah confessed.
‘Then somewhere about halfway, we were doing a scene, and after we had finished he turned to me and smiled and said, ‘Got me.’
That was it.
He realised I had finally caught him…
He forces you to work at controlling the character because he brings so much to the part.’
Dustin recalled that the director drove himself and his crew to the limits of endurance by keeping them up half the night, as he was never satisfied with the outcome of one take.
‘It was a tough experience,’ admits Dustin.
‘But I loved working with him.
He had the spontaneity of a child.
Suddenly he would come up with things that were very exciting.’
Several technical crew members were less enamoured by the director.
When they complained of the long hours, Peckinpah had them fired.
More friction was created when Susan George refused to play the rape scene all the way to the end.
After a number of rows, Peckinpah got a double to complete the scene.
Some of Peckinpah's behaviour arose from his view of himself as a victim of the movie industry, because as much violence had been done to Major Dundee (1965) and The Wild Bunch (1969) as to the characters in them.
For years he had continued a running battle with producers and film companies whom he saw as the bad guys.
The 44-year-old director was born and brought up on a ranch in California, before attending military school and a spell in the Marines.
His films reflect his background, a masculine world where one's manhood and independence can only survive through violence.
Hence the nostalgia for the ‘Old West’ where men were men and women were nowhere.
No matter how unpalatable one may find his vigilante philosophy-'We're violent by nature.
We're going to survive by being violent' — he expressed it with passionate intensity.
But away from the controlling mythology of the Western, his blood-dimmed vision lacked the same conviction.
Although Straw Dogs was his first non-Western, it had a plot that belonged in the Wild West rather than the West of England.
The comparatively gentle Dustin might not fully have realised the movie's meretricious implications.
‘The reason I agreed to do the film was because of the script and the potential that I thought was there.
What appealed to me was the notion, on paper at least, of dealing with a so-called pacifist who was unaware of his feelings and potential for violence inside himself that were the very same feelings he abhorred in society.
The best example of that type of person is the liberal who professes to be anti-war and anti-violence and then goes to the boxing matches or watches the football game and screams his head off.
He is totally unaware of that contradiction within himself.’
The first close-up in Straw Dogs is of Susan George's nipples, seen through a fetching sweater, which have the male townsfolk, young and old, leering.
They act as though no sexy young woman has ever trod those cobbled streets before, although the nubile daughter of the drunken town bully (Peter Vaughan) walks around in the mini-est of mini-skirts especially catching the eye of the long-haired village idiot (David Warner), who has already molested young girls.
Neither, it seems, has the population ever set eyes on an American.
When the mild-mannered and bespectacled Sumner, who has a nice line in polo-neck jumpers, enters the local pub, they look upon him with suspicion, just like a stranger entering a saloon bar in a Western.
He is also the only intellectual in a town full of morons, except for Major Scott (T. P. McKenna) and the well-meaning vicar (Colin Welland).
All the same, Dustin does some things that seem strange to the natives, like making the Woodstock peace sign to the yobbish workmen, who return it mockingly, and also by playing loud bagpipe music on the record-player when the vicar and his wife pay a call.
We find out little about his past or where and when he met his English wife.
There are only oblique references to the fact that he refused to ‘get involved’(in what? the peace or civil rights movement?) in the States.
(In this respect,Straw Dogs could almost have been called John and Mary in Cornwall .)
His young wife says, ‘You're here because there's no place else to hide.’
It seems as though he wouldn't hurt a fly, except there is an inkling that he could become nasty when he starts to throw fruit and vegetables at the cat, who is as suspicious of this ‘foreigner’ as the natives.
When the cat is found hanged in the closet (the first act of violence after nearly an hour's build-up), his wife reproaches him with being a coward because he will not confront the men she thinks have killed the animal.
There is also the suggestion that he doesn't satisfy her sexually.
The couple play chess in bed and then, as they begin to have sex, he stops to wind up the alarm clock.
He also ignores her during the day when he is busy with  his mathematics.
She gets bored, disturbs his concentration, and  surreptitiously changes a plus sign into a minus to upset his calculations.
(Despite the coming horrors, Dustin's most aghast look in the entire film comes when his wife sticks chewing gum on his blackboard.)
When Susan exposes her breasts to the already randy workmen by standing topless at an open window, the implication is clear that she is ‘asking’ for the eventual rape.
Dustin's transition after his wife's rape from passive to active, from Clark Kent to Superman, comes about too smoothly to be credible.
And he plays the menacing scenes that follow over-lightly, winking at his wife, giving his half smile and making quips.
A greater nervous intensity would have been more convincing than his almost icy calm as the brutes try to break into his home — something Al Pacino, Dustin's near double, might have achieved.
There is never a moment when Dustin gets as worried as Gary Cooper in High Noon , although, like Cooper, he has to cope singlehandedly with a number of killers, and is only saved at the final moment when his wife blasts the last opponent with a shotgun.
(Interestingly, Grace Kelly's character in High Noon was also called Amy.
) However, at the end of the Fred Zinnemann Western, there is calm content at good having defeated evil, no triumphant gloating of the ‘Jesus, I got 'em all!’ variety.
Using his logical mind, Dustin/Sumner takes them all on, getting rid of them in various ways — with a knife, burning oil, a gun and an animal trap.
Audiences cannot help but cheer him on.
At almost every showing there are cries of ‘Go get ‘em, Dustin!
Kill ‘em, Dustin!’
There is no doubt that Peckinpah makes us share the exhilaration of revenge.
The quiet American, as usual, comes out on top.
In theory, Dustin's man of reason forced into bloody revenge could be seen as a therapeutic investigation into the nature of violence, making audiences consider their own potential for brutality.
But Peckinpah is unable to create any objectivity towards the sadistic spectacle, in the manner of, say, Akira Kurosawa.
It is clear that the director relishes the cruel revenge meted out to the crudely characterised Cornish villagers even more than the turned bookworm does, thus inciting the audience to condone the sorry sight.
It may also have been reassuring to US audiences, while America was being condemned world-wide for its barbaric acts in Vietnam, to see that they did not have the monopoly on violence, which could even be found in an English village.
J. Anderson Black (alias Gordon M. Williams) was not amused by what had been done to his novel.
‘I will never again sell one of my books to an American,’ he said.
‘It was horrific to see what they have done to my work.
They've added a rape scene, an act of buggery, and lots of violence  that was not in the book.
A girl sitting next to me in the cinema vomited during one of the worst scenes and had to leave.’
Someone might have warned the poor girl that Peckinpah's movies do have that effect on some people.
In the 1987 Motion Picture Guide, the unnamed critic of the film goes into an absolute frenzy of hatred.
‘A disgusting tale…abysmal…this pus-oozing open sore of a film…
All of the actors, especially Hoffman, are nothing more than stooges to Peckinpah's notions of perversity, degradation, and dung heap characterisation…this putrid, wholly offensive and nauseating snotball of a film…two hours of a running sewer disgorging human waste…
’ And so on.
David Thomson, who found the film ‘gratuitous, misogynist, pretentious and repellent’, remarked about Hoffman that ‘his adoption of violence at the climax is the more troubling because Peckinpah never seems to have explained its need to the gentle and perplexed actor.
The gloating contrivance of Straw Dogs is accentuated by Hoffman's guardedness.
He fights back like someone under orders; he never concedes the thrill of revenge or the trembling orgasm of blood.
The one aspect of his character that works is the appeal of mathematics; but the actor's cerebral dimension never appeared to win Peckinpah over…
Hoffman is as unlikely a killer as he is husband to the very ripe Susan George.
The movie might have been truer to the actor if Hoffman had rejected retaliation and been left with physical ruin and intact theorems.’
Pauline Kael, who called it a ‘fascist classic’, thought that ‘Hoffman, notoriously a cerebral actor, projects thought before movement; he's already a cartoon of an intellectual.
’ According to John Simon, the casting of Hoffman ‘strikes me as ill-advised and damaging…
I do not see Hoffman's hesitancies of speech, his throatbound voice that has to struggle past a colony of frogs, his eyes that crouch nervously in their sockets, as a proof of consequential ratiocination going on inside his head.
I see it rather as an actor's bag of tricks, and not a very apposite one for the role.
Hoffman is a ‘character’ emanating a naive or crotchety puniness; in this part, however, a more neutral figure, scholarly and aloof but not infantile or even doltish in appearance, would have been vastly preferable.’
Robin Wood, however, defended the film, comparing it favourably with A Clockwork Orange ('the ugliest film I have ever seen') of the same year.
Wood claimed that ‘if one follows the film's narrative carefully, one finds that all the acts of violence perpetrated by the hero are logically motivated — he is forced into them step by step from the moment he determines to earn and preserve his self-respect.
Yet the effect of the violence is as much exhilarating as horrifying…if one's moral position is the tenable one that violence is intrinsically wrong and must at all costs be  held in check, then there is no doubt that Straw Dogs is an immoral film.
Peckinpah sees life as, inevitably, a bloody struggle for survival — not just physical survival, but the survival of one's manhood.
Peckinpah's films implicitly accept violence as a metaphysical fact, a condition of our existence.‘
Straw Dogs managed to attract enough blood seekers to put it into the black at the box-office, but this disturbing tale of rural atrocities can scarcely have done much for the Cornish tourist industry.
Hoffman — Italian Style
They told me I could do it in Italian.
But they lied to me and I had to do it in English.
AFTER THE MONTHS of location shooting in Cornwall, and the completion of the interiors of Straw Dogs at Twickenham Studios in London in March 1971, Dustin returned to his New York home, determined to spend as much time as possible with his family, only going down to his production office, SweetWall Productions, on West 56th Street, for a few hours a day.
But it was not long before he was off on location again, having accepted an offer from the Italian director Pietro Germi to star in a comedy entitled Till Divorce Do You Part .
‘I did not offer Dustin the role as insurance for American release,’ insisted Germi.
‘I thought he was perfect for the story and sent him a script with about as much hope as those who put messages in bottles and toss them in the ocean.’
After the cold of Cornwall, Dustin relished the thought of the warmth of Italy and the making of a genuine Italian film, unlike the bastardised Madigan's Millions .
With the admirable thoroughness with which he approaches each role, Dustin took a crash course in Italian.
Never having had much schooling outside acting, and without knowledge of a foreign language, he had to make a huge mental effort.
After some weeks, he had absorbed enough Italian to learn his lines in the lingo, and feel adept at ordering a meal at an Italian restaurant.
However, he was only called upon to reveal his prowess in the latter activity.
When he arrived in Italy with Anne and the children, Germi informed him that he was to play the role in English, to be dubbed later into Italian.
This was (and is) a common practice in Italy, where even Italian actors are dubbed, often by entirely different people, and Dustin was by no means the first English-speaking star to be given another voice.
(Luchino Visconti had already used Farley Granger, Burt Lancaster, Michael Craig and Dirk Bogarde.
Steve Cochran and Richard Harris had taken leads in Michelangelo Antonioni films, while Anthony Quinn, Richard Basehart, Broderick Crawford and Terence Stamp had been cast by Federico Fellini.)
But this was not the sort of thing Dustin was used to.
Besides, he always began creating a character from the  voice.
Yet he had clearly been naive to suppose that his American-accented Italian would be acceptable.
However, so keen was Germi to get Dustin that he had made him co-producer, and allowed him equal say as to how the role was to be played.
In fact, it was the sort of autonomy that Dustin had already won on his last two pictures, and would retain, much to many directors' displeasure, in most of his future ventures.
A further pandering to the star would seem to have come in the change of title to Alfredo Alfredo , repeating the name of Dustin's character, but in fact it was Germi who was not happy with the original title, which sounded as if the film were a sequel to his big international hit of 1961,Divorce Italian Style .
The four months of shooting began in October 1972, much of it in the Abruzzi, in the mountain town of Ascoli Piceno (well photographed by Carlo Rustichelli), with studio work at the De Paolis Studio in Rome.
Again, as in Straw Dogs , Dustin was the only American in the cast.
(He would later have the same experience in Agatha , and in The Merchant of Venice on the London stage.)
So Dustin found himself in the odd position of acting in English, while all around him the cast spoke Italian.
‘Germi knows exactly what he wants and cuts as he goes along.
He doesn't have to take as many shots and gives more time to each one he wants.
Everyone around him is like a member of the family.
He's worked with them for years.
I was the only newcomer to his unit and felt like a boarder in a rooming house until I settled in.’
More difficult than delivering his lines, however, was learning a multitude of meaningful Italian gestures.
But the gregarious and curious Dustin, after an initial awkwardness, forced himself to fit into the ambience.
If only for the veracity of the role, he mixed as much as possible with the cast and crew and with the local population.
He also learned a couple of Italian songs, which are sung in the film.
Germi had begun his career directing serious, realistic features on postwar Italy, but in the sixties he changed to broad, satirical sex comedies, the best and most popular being Divorce Italian Style , which received three Oscar nominations.
(It won Best Original Screenplay.)
Alfredo Alfredo was to be Germi's last completed film.
He died of hepatitis in 1974 aged 60.
Dustin played a timid bank clerk who dreams of being a ladies' man, although he does not seem to be short of girlfriends.
When he meets a voluptuous pharmacist (Stefania Sandrelli), he is astonished when she pursues him .
Marriage to her is a dream come true.
However, he soon discovers that she has a voracious sexual appetite, which he finds almost impossible to satisfy.
When she makes love she screams like a banshee, and things are inclined to get knocked over.
As no children seem to be on the  way, the doctor recommends that the couple make love from 10.30 to 11.30 in the morning and 2.30 to 5 in the afternoon, as well as in the evening, a situation that causes Alfredo to break out in a rash.
When his wife becomes pregnant, he is confined to a room in the cellar while her parents move in upstairs.
This gives him the chance to escape at night while The Count of Monte Cristo is on the radio.
On one of these escapades he meets and falls in love with a landscape architect (Carla Gravina), a far gentler woman.
When his vixen wife's pregnancy turns out to be a phantom one, and he has to return to her bed, he runs away from home, taking refuge in his girlfriend's apartment.
‘You have transformed a poor runaway slave into a man still capable of being happy.
’ He now finds he cannot get a divorce.
He is labelled a criminal because of his extra-marital affair, although the legal system sanctions his wife taking a lover.
But, with the help of the changing law, a divorce is eventually granted, which allows him to marry again.
At the wedding, he wishes his bride would say ‘no’, but he's trapped again.
The film ends with Dustin's fixed grin, while audiences are left with fixed frowns.
Dustin, with darkened eyebrows, oily black hair smoothed down on either side of a central parting, dark sunglasses and Italian gestures, wastes much of his talent in this frenzied, intermittently funny satire on Italian customs.
But it is difficult to imagine how Dustin could have felt any involvement in the picture.
Here, in a role that might have better suited Peter Sellers, or, more authentically, Alberto Sordi, he goes through a few variations on Ben Braddock and Jason Fister, the agent in his first Italian misadventure.
He is neither comic nor romantic enough for the role.
But it is difficult to blame him.
The film is like a light pizza piled with heavy dressing, and it sags under its burden.
Whereas the satiric intentions of Divorce Italian Style were pointed and comic,Alfredo Alfredo gets unduly preachy as Dustin and his mistress join the four-year fight to change the Italian law on divorce.
‘We want divorce and we want it now,’ they shout on a march.
However, because the absurd law, Germi's principal target, was changed at the time of the film's release, the message was rendered almost meaningless.
Variety thought that the ‘fact that so many of these gags depend on ill-concealed misogyny soon stifles the laughs that flowed more easily in a pre-women's liberation era.
Now, all the simplistic stereotyping of the femme characters is fairly distasteful…
Hoffman mugs satisfactorily in the leading role, but his voice has been dubbed by an Italian actor.
Since the choked delivery has become one of his trademarks, it's not a little disconcerting to hear a smooth vocal style accompanying his post- Graduate body movements.
With his own voice as back-up, the 36-year-old actor  might not seem quite so strained in still milking certain ‘boyish’ mannerisms.’
Nora Saye in The New York Times found him ‘Passive as a potato, timid as a fawn…
Despite his efforts to tear into his food with Latin gusto, or the slicked-down hair above the urban American face, he simply can't appear to be a native of a provincial Italian town.‘
Pauline Kael, on the other hand, thought that although ‘dubbing is an abomination’, the ‘stranger's voice does wonders for Hoffman — it brings him out.
In American movies, he's the perennial urban weakling-adolescent, doomed to swallow spit forever, but here, rid of the frightened, choked-up voice that constricts his characters, he gives a softer-edged, more relaxed performance.
Maybe the director, Pietro Germi, put him at his ease; Alfredo, Hoffman's bank clerk, is warm and friendly and likeable.
Hoffman's face has never been very expressive (sometimes his rabbit stare makes me think that the great Maureen Stapleton has spawned an emotionally retarded.son), but he has always been able to get our empathy.’
Disgusted by the reaction to his last few films, Dustin locked himself in his New York home and became a virtual recluse.
When scripts arrived he sent them back unread.
He seldom ventured out.
‘I'd always told myself that if I dried up creatively I'd walk away from acting.
So I thought I'd had it.
It wasn't easy, but it's better than burning yourself out making pictures you don't like for people you don't respect…
I've never turned down a film I've wanted to do because the money was too small.
If I believe in a film I'll do it.
On the other hand, of course I ask for as much as I can get.‘
Heat and Dustin
There are actors who like making movies, but I've never enjoyed it.
‘SO THE LUNATICS have taken charge of the asylum,’ remarked Richard A. Rowland, president of Metro Pictures, on hearing of the formation of the United Artists Corporation in 1919 by D. W. Griffith, Charles Chaplin, Mary Pickford and Douglas Fairbanks, the four biggest names in motion pictures at the time.
If so, it was inspired lunacy, for it led to the creation of such classics from the Big Four in UA's first decade as Griffith's Way Down East , Fairbanks's The Thief of Baghdad , Pickford's Little Lord Fauntleroy , and Chaplin's The Gold Rush .
UA was idealistically founded to act as a distribution agency to give independent producers freedom of expression away from the restraints of the major studios.
The films were not only to be self-produced and self-distributed, but self-financed as well.
Half a century later, in 1969, First Artists Productions, a new independent film company, was set up by Paul Newman, Sidney Poitier and Barbra Streisand, with a similar aim — a balance between mammon and idealism — to that which led to the formation of UA.
The idea of First Artists was to offer each star, tired of bureaucratic controls at other major studios, a rich financial package — including creative control.
The idea was that each film should have a $3 million budget limitation, be in colour and not exceed one hundred and forty minutes, have a rating of G, PG or R, and star or co-star the actor or actress involved.
It was just the sort of set-up that attracted Dustin, who had been itching to have more power over his films for some time.
So, on 12 September 1971, at National General Pictures' international conference for foreign film distributors in Hollywood, Dustin signed to become a partner, following Steve McQueen, who had joined the same year.
His contract contained a clause granting him creative control over the films and a final say on editing, and a salary of over $1 million per film and 50 per cent of each film's box-office revenue, a profit participation scale somewhat higher than the others'.
‘I always felt it was difficult for me to find films.
I'm not someone who's going to be the same person in every film.’
(Implying that Newman, McQueen, Poitier and Streisand might  be.)
‘One of the selling points when I joined was that I'd be privy to scripts that I was never exposed to because I never had an agent.’
As with the Fairbanks-Pickford-Chaplin-Griffith studio, the dream would turn sour, and the participants would all too soon realise they had mistaken Hollywood for Cloud-Cuckoo Land.
This rude awakening was, however, still a few years away at the time when Dustin joined.
Three of the principal shareholders were already producing films for release at the time of Dustin's signing, and unfortunately proving that artistic liberty was not synonymous with artistic quality.
Sidney Poitier directed and starred in the yukkie A Warm December ; Barbra Streisand played a rebellious housewife in Up The Sandbox , a garish comedy-drama; and Steve McQueen produced and starred in the brutish Sam Peckinpah heist movie The Getaway , which grossed more than $36 million worldwide despite mixed reviews.
Meanwhile, a screenplay was being concocted from Henri Charrière's 1969 semi-autobiographical bestseller Papillon .
Ex-convict Charrièere found himself a huge celebrity when the book sold a million copies in France, two-and-a-half million in America and ten million throughout the world.
The film was independently financed by French producer Robert Dorfmann, who had bought the rights to the novel.
When it came to casting, it was thought that Jean-Paul Belmondo would be the best choice to play the Charrière role, although his international renown was beginning to fade a little.
But in order for Dorfmann to get the money to produce it, an American superstar was needed.
It was Steve McQueen who was picked to play the French criminal determined to escape from Devil's Island where he has been sentenced to life imprisonment for the murder of a pimp, of which he claims he is innocent.
The title derives from the nickname of the hero, who has a large butterfly (Fr. papillon ) tattooed on his chest.
Franklin J. Schaffner was contracted to direct the $13 million movie.
The 53-year-old director was no tyro in turning millions of dollars into celluloid and possibly gold.
In the early part of his career he had made a number of smaller, better films such as The Stripper (1963) and The Best Man (1964), before embarking on bigger and more portentous projects such as The War Lord (1965) and The Planet of the Apes (1967), both with Charlton Heston baring his teeth and chest;Patton (1969), an ambiguous biopic about a modern war lord (for which he won Best Director Oscar); and Nicholas and Alexandra (1971), a tedious and simplistic Tsar-trek.
Over the two years of preparation for Papillon , the screenplay went through the hands of four writers.
The successful screenwriting team of Robert Benton and David Newman (Bonnie and Clyde, What's Up Doc?) did a treatment that was discarded by Schaffner.
He turned to William Goldman for help.
Goldman's prime input was his suggestion that the film should end with the first part of the book, before Papillon arrives in Venezuela and settles down.
Goldman worked on the script from October 1971 to April 1972, submitting three drafts, but all that remains of his contribution to the film is the last line, ‘Hey, you bastards.
I'm still here!’ spoken by McQueen when he finally escapes on a craft made of coconut shells — an attempt to round off the story as a paean of praise to survival.
Before leaving to begin The Great Waldo Pepper for George Roy Hill and Robert Redford, Goldman later recollected in his Adventures in the Screen Trade : ‘I was present at a meeting at which some guys said, ‘Dustin Hoffman is getting hot.
If we only had a part for Dustin Hoffman, that would be terrific.’
And we scoffed because there was no part.’
At the time, Dustin was looking for a role that attracted him.
He had recently shown interest when Paramount wanted him to play a homosexual murderer in a drama called The Witness , to be directed by Milos Forman.
But the project was scrapped at the last minute.
When he heard that a role in Papillon would be especially created for him, he was not only flattered but asked for (and got) a salary of $1.25 million.
(McQueen received $2 million.)
Steve McQueen and Dustin Hoffman were to be billed always on the same line.
‘Dustin was bought — not brought — into the film,’ said Schaffner.
Lorenzo Semple Jr came in to spend six weeks writing three quick drafts to create the character for Dustin — the wimpish, thickly bespectacled Louis Dega, ‘the best counterfeiter in France’, who did not exist in the Charrière book.
According to Schaffner, Dega was essential because the book contained no real human relationships.
When Semple departed, Dalton Trumbo came in to build up the Dega character in line with the buddy-buddy movie trend.
The filming began with only 57 pages of script and the rest of the story was simply blank.
Therefore Schaffner was forced to take the unusual step of shooting it mostly in sequence, getting on with what had already been written.
Trumbo continued writing on location in Spain and Jamaica.
(He is seen briefly, with his snowy moustache, at the beginning of the film, addressing the convicts in the role of the commandant.)
But when he suddenly took ill and returned to Hollywood to undergo surgery for lung cancer, his son Christopher helped polish up some of the last few scenes.
Dalton Trumbo, who was one of the Hollywood Ten, jailed and blacklisted in 1947, reappeared as a screenwriter in the sixties.
Papillon was his last film, and he died three years later in 1976, aged 70.
The production was plagued by money troubles from the start.
The  film subsisted on funds that Dorfmann would gather along the way by showing ten or fifteen minutes of cut film to prospective investors.
There was a period when only McQueen and Dustin were getting their per diem allowance, something they did not need as much as the rest of the cast and crew.
When McQueen discovered the situation, he refused to work until everyone was paid.
Not surprisingly, they were.
The first parts of the picture were shot in Spain before the company moved to Jamaica for most of the rest of the location work.
The filming in the tropics was ‘just nerve-racking’, prompting Dustin to say that ‘all pictures are hard work, although some actors have an easier time than others.
I've got a calendar from the day I start shooting, and I start crossing off the days the way I did at high school, waiting for summer vacation to begin.’
On screen, the locations certainly seem rough enough to give the impression that much of the filming must have been genuinely unpleasant, and the physical and emotional demands of the film, shot in high temperatures, led Dustin to lose twenty pounds by the time it was completed.
(He had in fact put on weight while resting after Alfredo Alfredo , and needed to lose it for the role anyway.
Ironically, it was a case of an out-of-work actor getting fat, then starting work and starving.)
McQueen was accompanied on location by Ali MacGraw, whom he had met on The Getaway , and whose presence he admitted saved him from going round the bend.
Both his and her children were there too.
It was in that tropical setting that Steve and Ali were married.
Accompanying Dustin on the trip were his wife and two daughters.
Anne is glimpsed briefly at the beginning of the film in the role of Dega's wife.
Wearing a chic black costume and white fur wrap, she is seen waving to him as he departs for the colony before walking away to a smart car beside which stands a chauffeur.
The relationship between the contrasting Hoffman and McQueen was an uncomfortable one.
Dustin had a certain envy of McQueen's looks, self-confidence, physical prowess and rebellious nature.
On the other hand, McQueen, seven years Dustin's senior, envied the other's reputation as a fine actor, something he had always wanted for himself.
Dustin privately entertained his friends with a wickedly accurate imitation of superstar McQueen attempting to upstage little Dustin.
‘Maybe what upset Dustin was that he knew that, although he was the better actor, Steve's performance in Papillon was superior,’ commented Norman Jewison, who had directed McQueen in The Cincinnati Kid and The Thomas Crown Affair , but who never worked with Dustin.
‘Like Bogart, Steve brought himself to each part he played and something of each of them rubbed off on his personality.
He was the quintessential film  star in that he never played anyone else.
A strong persona is the difference between a film star and a theatre star.
You'll see Dustin's acting, but you'll never see Steve's.’
Further differences between the stars were underlined by Schaffner.
‘I would always shoot on McQueen first to make him commit and then turn around and shoot on Hoffman.
It seemed to work better that way because, if I covered Hoffman first, Steve would become restless about what he was doing.
The quicker you got him comfortable, the better the scene would play.
Hoffman, on the other hand, is a totally electric performer.
He comes in with ninety-nine ideas of how to approach a scene.
And you're prepared to say, ‘Hey, look — here in my view is the approach.’
Usually, he'd say, ‘Okay, let's go right away.’'
Though McQueen collected cars and motorcycles while Dustin was interested in antiques and art, they respected each other 's acting abilities.
Actually, they came from similar traditions.
McQueen learnt his acting at New York's Neighborhood Playhouse, making his professional debut, somewhat surprisingly, at a Yiddish theatre on Second Avenue.
He also attended classes at the Actors Studio, before replacing Ben Gazzara in the leading role of the junkie in A Hatful of Rain on Broadway in 1956.
McQueen's most fruitful period in films had been in the sixties while Dustin was still unknown outside off-Broadway.
In the seventies, McQueen's appearances became more intermittent, and it was reported that he had turned increasingly temperamental, rejecting more scripts than he was prepared to accept.
But he still conveyed an easy-going personality and had a deceptively casual acting style that differed from Dustin's volatile nature and the nervous intensity he invested in each role.
Dustin as Louis Dega (pronounced, most of the time, as Lewis Dega), unshaven, thickly spectacled, in red striped pyjamas, with his head shaven on either side of his ears, spends most of the film with his mouth agape.
Limping behind McQueen, he has resurrected Ratso from Midnight Cowboy , and the performance also looks ahead to his mentally handicapped Rain Man character.
With his whining, nasal, urban voice, there are moments when he is the weedy boy at the summer camp or Woody Allen finding himself in the South American jungles in Bananas .
Dega is so myopic that he never takes his glasses off-there is a nice touch when Dustin holds his hand over his spectacles as he is showered down.
Nevertheless, he is not so short-sighted that he cannot catch a butterfly between his fingers.
Despite Dustin's worries over the script-'I learned not to try to build more of a character than the text can support' — his performance is one of threads and patches, full of actorish tics and attempts at pathos.
Next to Dustin's overacting, Steve McQueen's acting is almost naturalistic.
Although McQueen is too lightweight a performer for the part, he occasionally reaches moments of tragic agony.
One cannot help imagining, however, what Jean Gabin and Marcel Dalio would have made of the roles.
McQueen is happiest in the action sequences such as the exciting ‘Great Escape’ from the prison during a concert of French ballet music, and his subsequent flight through the jungle, surviving snakes, crocodiles, Indian blowpipes, and a leper colony until he gets himself to a nunnery and is betrayed by the Mother Superior.
Much of McQueen's acting was done for him by the make-up of Charles Schram, who effectively ages him over his years of solitary confinement.
(Yet despite leaving his cell quite old and grey after his first five-year stint there, he seems to shed almost ten years within weeks.)
The scenes in solitary are especially well depicted, as the prisoners react to a shrill whistle when it is feeding time, but Schaffner's tone, like McQueen's personality, lacks the austerity needed for such a subject.
Perhaps he should have watched Robert Bresson's A Man Escaped before embarking on the picture.
Although Papillon has rousing and touching moments, the whole enterprise meanders on too heavily for too long.
Unusually for a Hollywood film, the only glimmer of sex in the movie, until near the end — a hackneyed Polynesian idyllic interlude with a willing bare-breasted native girl — comes in a strangely Genetesque moment when a pretty young boy prisoner is fondled by the turnkey, who puts a rose in his mouth.
The only real kiss is the platonic one between Dustin and McQueen on the cliff top, before McQueen dives into the sea and escapes, swimming surprisingly powerfully for a man of his age and condition.
The movie opened on 19 December 1973 to less-than-glowing reviews, although it made over $22.5 million, becoming one of the year's top moneymakers.
(Alfredo Alfredo was also released nationwide on the same day, but the public obviously preferred Hoffman French Style to Hoffman Italian Style.)
In The New York Times , Vincent Canby thought McQueen was ‘as all-American as a Rover Boy’ and Hoffman was ‘not especially convincing’, but he enjoyed it as the sort of ‘escapist movie we used to go see on Saturday night without even bothering to read the marquee’.
Variety thought it ‘impact numbing and stunning’, and Hoffman did ‘an excellent job’.
Pauline Kael was less than flattering: ‘Why does he go through the picture with his mouth open, like some adenoidal chinless wonder?
Is he trying to be helpful by making himself different from McQueen?
(He really doesn't have to worry about that.)
This co-starring  arrangement between men needs the right chemistry, but McQueen doesn't supply for Hoffman what Voight did in Midnight Cowboy .
The reverse happens.
McQueen seems to inspire Hoffman to underplay, too.
When Papillon prepares for his final escape and Louis says he's not going, he sounds as if he had decided not to shave that day.’
Harvard Lampoon gave Dustin the Worst Supporting Actor award and the movie received the Please-Don't-Put-Us-Through-DeMille-Again award for the film which ‘best embodies the pretensions, extravagances, and blundering ineffectiveness of the Screen Spectacular’.
Anne's non-verbal bit-part as Mrs Dega was not even credited.
More importantly, she continued to struggle with the increasingly demanding role of Mrs Hoffman.