

Living Magically
The inner journey
You are a multidimensional personality and within you lies all the knowledge about yourself, your challenges and problems, that you will ever need to know.
(Seth)
When the gods created heaven and earth — according to an old Eastern story — they were left with just one problem: where to hide Truth.
They did not want it to be too obvious, since observing the search would provide them with great amusement.
One god suggested placing it at the top of the highest mountain; another on the farthest star.
A third god said it should be hidden in the deepest and darkest abyss; and another suggested the dark side of the moon.
Finally, the oldest and wisest god said, ‘No.
We will hide Truth inside the heart of each and every human being.
That way, they will search for it all over the universe before discovering it.’
Perhaps the greatest truth ever discovered is that we create our own reality.
It is a phrase which often brings a gentle shiver of recognition — as though it is a truth we had always known but had long forgotten; a truth concealed within our own hearts.
It is an idea whose time has come.
When I finally accepted that I create my own reality, I was excited but scared .
It felt like a huge responsibility.
There was no-one to blame any more.
It changed my  approach to global issues, to politics, to feminism, to psychology, to psychotherapy, to personal relationships — everything was turned upside down.
Every conversation, every event, took on fresh colour and significance.
I knew that I must live , must embody , this way-of-seeing — not merely hold it as an interesting idea.
I was living in two different realities.
I had to spend a lot of time alone, just thinking.
I felt scared that I would be seen as crazy — that I might even go crazy: that I would begin to see little green men, jump off a tower in the belief I could fly, or just sit in a corner humming ‘Om’.
Or perhaps I would simply be unable to communicate with people who saw the world in the ‘old’ way.
Then I reminded myself that I create my own reality!
I didn't need to go crazy.
I didn't have to block communication.
And when I came across people who told me I must be, at best, gullible to believe in metaphysics (and why didn't I rejoin their random, meaningless reality?), then I had invited them into my world.
They were expressing the part of me that saw metaphysics as some weird science-fiction fantasy!
And by mirroring my own hidden doubts and uncertainties, they would help me to clarify my ideas.
Gradually, I learnt to live more comfortably with a ‘foot in both worlds’, and to revel in my new way-of-being.
My personal and spiritual growth expanded into every area of my life, twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week, as I came to live more consciously in each and every moment — knowing that I had created that moment, and that it was an opportunity to grow.
And as I began to live metaphysically, rather than simply believing in it, my everyday life became more and more magical.
Big questions
life questions
have to be lived fully
with your whole life
Not just mentally
on the back of an envelope.
(Miller Mair)
At the entrance to the Mystery Temple at Delphi was the inscription: ‘Know thyself and thou shalt know the universe.’
Similarly, Tao Te Ching says ‘It is wisdom to know others; it is enlightenment to know one's self.’
Since ancient times, the wise ones have said that our greatest quest in life is self-knowledge.
Mystics have always known that we create our own reality.
Our everyday reality is a grand illusion, a dream metaphor, which we are creating.
By exploring and changing our inner world, we begin to transform our outer world.
And we do not need to undergo years of psychoanalysis, or visit a hypnotist, or meditate for twelve hours a day, in order to seek self-knowledge.
All of the beliefs and thoughts which create our reality are now accessible at a conscious level.
If we are willing to embark on an inner journey, we can discover all of the beliefs, expectations and hidden agendas through which we create our own lives, and begin to create the future of our Dreams.
We can also tap into inner wisdom and guidance, and discover our higher purpose.
We can learn how to maintain inner peace, joy and aliveness.
We can move beyond our five senses, learning to sense subtle energies, to work on the ‘inner planes’, to communicate telepathically, to heal with light and colour, to travel to higher realms, to contact our Higher Self and guides, and expand our awareness of unseen dimensions.
Just beyond our ‘common sense’ reality lies an unimaginable wealth of metaphysical (beyond-the-physical) realities.
As Seth reminds us, ‘Consciousness is far more mobile than you realize.’
Our normal reality is like each of us living in a tiny, windowless cell in a house that contains a hundred thousand rooms and covers a thousand acres of land.
(Michael J. Roads)
So — where do you begin?
If you accept metaphysics — whether very tentatively, or from a deep sense of inner  knowing — how can you use it to transform your everyday life?
How can you translate theory into practice, and learn how to ‘live magically’?
Part Two provides step-by-step guidance on how to apply metaphysics to your everyday life: how to process your beliefs and thoughts, how to use affirmations, how to programme your future, how to ‘listen to the whispers’ that can guide you, how to recognise your payoffs and hidden agendas, how to heal your inner child, how to handle your emotions, how to awaken to your higher purpose, and how to work with unseen friends.
The exercises involve exploring your thoughts, feelings, beliefs, desires, imagery and expanded states of awareness, looking at everyday events from a metaphysical perspective, and taking practical steps to change your life.
Although the exercises are ‘original’(unless otherwise stated), I take little credit for them.
Like most therapists, I have been inspired by countless different sources — from metaphysics to Buddhism, from object relations theory to Jung, from Gestalt therapy to psychosynthesis, from mysticism to shamanism.
Many of the exercises draw upon channelled tapes and metaphysical workshops; and several seemed to be ‘dictated’ to me from sources beyond my conscious mind (as were many other sections of the book).
QUALITY OF LIFE
Write down seven words which sum up honestly how your life feels at the moment , the qualities which your life expresses.
(It is important to write them down, rather than merely think about them.
The action of writing, or speaking, is a stimulus to change.)
Choose carefully, crossing out some words and adding others until your list truly reflects your current life.
For example:
Joyful, learning, laughing, understanding, dreaming, inspiring, releasing, deciding, changing, opening, loving, sensual, dramatic, scintillating, creative, expressive, exploring, learning, building, limiting, intense, comfortable, dull, stuck, dreary, routine, aimless, repetitive, chaotic, sad, lonely, resentful, anxious, guilt-ridden, cluttered, exhausting, hopeless, helpless, frustrating, rootless, disastrous, fearful, uneasy, drifting, argumentative, serious, ambitious, succeeding, opening, touching, listening, intimate, spiritual, peaceful, transforming, aware, stimulating, exciting, challenging, blossoming…
Looking at your list, decide whether your life is just as you want it to be.
You might want it to be different again in six months' time, or even next week — but do you love it as it is right now ?
Assuming there is room for improvement, that your life is not yet ‘heaven on earth’, make a second list of seven words in which you transform any words which feel negative, or mildly positive, into what you really want.
(The new list might include some of the original words.)
For example:
List 1
routine
lonely
limiting
rigid
serious
exploring
sad
List 2
spontaneous
intimate
expanding
flowing
light-hearted
exploring
joyful
Gaze at your second list, and repeat the words to yourself several times — out loud if possible.
Try to absorb the different ‘energies’ of that set of words.
How might your life be different if you expressed these seven qualities?
Many exercises in Part Two involve guided imagery, or visual meditation.
These are a powerful way of ‘talking’ with your subconscious, since it deals much more readily with symbols and images than with words, and does not distinguish between a ‘real’experience and one which is  vividly imagined.
Inner journeys also provide one way of accessing our higher consciousness, and our unseen friends.
Guided imagery is much more effective if you first enter a deeply relaxed state — an altered state of consciousness.
Simply sit in a chair, or lie down, and relax in whatever way you choose.
You might focus on each part of your body in turn, relaxing from your feet up to your head.
Or you might repeat the word ‘re-lax’ several times, then slowly count yourself down from 10 to 1.
Or concentrate on your breathing for a few minutes, just feeling your stomach rising and falling but without trying to control the breathing in any way.
Or imagine yourself in a peaceful place.
When you feel ready, start the visualisation, involving as many of your senses as you can.
At the end, you might slowly count yourself up from 1 to 5, suggesting to yourself that when you reach the number 5 you will be wide awake, feeling refreshed and at peace.
Some people ‘sense’ rather than visualise their meditations; others find that the images are faint and patchy.
Trust that whatever happens is right for you , rather than wanting the experience to conform to your expectations.
(The more you practise, the more ‘real’ the experiences tend to become, but they rarely seem as ‘real’as our waking life.)
Meditating regularly is probably the simplest way of expanding your consciousness, finding inner peace, and tuning into your higher guidance.
Meditation does not demand sitting cross-legged amidst candles and burning incense, muttering weird incantations.
Sitting in an ordinary chair, or lying down, is fine.
You might choose to repeat a chosen word or phrase, gently returning to it whenever your mind wanders; or concentrate on your breathing; or ‘watch’ your thoughts as they drift like clouds through your mind; or contemplate a theme; or embark on a visual-experiential journey to the inner realms.
Some prefer to meditate through movement, such as dance or T'ai Chi.
Many people enter a meditative state without even realising it — perhaps while listening to music, jogging, walking in nature, gardening or sitting quietly.
If you meditate for as little as 10–15 minutes each day, you will soon notice the difference it makes, and it will rapidly become a high priority in your life.
Meditating two or three times a day, for 10–30 minutes each time, is perhaps ideal — but it must be a pleasure, rather than a duty!
(If you find yourself meditating for hours every day, perhaps you should ask whether you are avoiding other aspects of your life.)
If you ever feel ‘spaced out’ or ‘floaty’after meditation, try stamping your feet on the ground, breathing out sharply three or four times, or doing anything physical; or close your eyes and picture roots emerging from the base of your spine, going deep into the earth.
Avoid driving (or using a sharp knife!) for a few minutes, until you feel grounded again.
It is invaluable to make notes on your inner journeys, since it is easy to forget insights and action plans unless you write them down.
Also, the process of writing often brings fresh insights to mind, and helps to ground them in your everyday life — as anyone who keeps a dream diary will know.
Keeping a journal of meditations, insights, dreams, thoughts, feelings and significant experiences can be a vital step in our personal growth.
There are as many ways to freedom as there are people, because each heart has its own journey, and each awareness has its own experience.
Each of you knows exactly where you are trying to go.
(Bartholomew)
INNER LANDSCAPE
Relax deeply, then imagine you are in a landscape or townscape of some kind.
Ask your subconscious to give you an image which reveals something about your view of the world.
It might be a familiar, foreign, historical or imaginary place.
Look around this place.
What do you see?
What do you hear?
Are you alone?
How do you feel in this place?
Ask your subconscious any questions which  occur to you, and let yourself hear, see or sense the answers.
When you are ready, gently come back to the room and write down what the exercise revealed about your way-of-seeing the world.
(When I practised this meditation, while writing this chapter, I was surprised to find myself in a small, dusty American town in the days of the Western.
It felt relaxed, comfortable, but very much a ‘man's world’.
People hung about talking and drinking.
From time to time, horses and riders would canter past.
Then I suddenly realised that it was a film set.
The bar-room whose porch I was leaning on, while gazing at the street, was surrounded by cameras, lighting and film crew.
I was one of the actresses.
And I had a vague sense that someone was making a film of us making the film!)
The meditations and exercises in Part Two are simply possibilities to explore, not straitjackets.
You don't need to follow the instructions rigidly.
Be playful.
Be inventive.
Allow yourself to be surprised.
If something unexpected happens during an inner journey — perhaps one of your guides will appear when you were expecting your inner child, or you find yourself in a cave rather than on a riverbank — go with your own experience.
Trust that your inner self knows where to take you.
Similarly, trust your inner wisdom in deciding which tasks to tackle, and when.
If you committed yourself to doing every exercise in Part Two in the order given, you would miss an opportunity to ‘listen to the whispers’ which guide you towards what you need, right now, as a unique individual.
As you read, some exercises might  inspire or excite you, while others leave you cold or unmoved.
Follow your own energy, and do whatever attracts you — bearing in mind that an exercise might be helpful next week, or in six months' time, rather than now.
Listen to your heart, follow your own path — and have fun!
THE BUTTERFLY
Relax deeply, then imagine yourself curled up inside a dark cocoon, which envelops you so closely that you can barely breathe.
How does it feel?
(Safe?
Constricting?
Suffocating?
Secure?
Lonely?
Dull?
Scary?)
When you feel a desire to break free, gently stretch out — feel the cocoon easily ripping open, letting in the sunlight.
You emerge as a beautiful butterfly, with wings ready to unfurl.
When you are ready, stretch your wings and fly into the forest.
Flutter here and there amongst the trees, sensing the life all around you — the plants, birds, animals and insects.
Feel yourself as a part of this living forest.
And now fly up above the forest, and take on a human form.
Look down on the trees, lakes and mountains far below as you soar through the air….
When you are ready, fly towards a mountain peak, and land.
Stand on top of this mountain, and shout out to the world below: ‘I commit myself to my own growth.’
‘I trust my inner wisdom and guidance.’
‘I am breaking free from the past.’
‘I am opening myself to new possibilities.’
(Or whatever feels appropriate and right for you.)
Then gently come back to the room.
Take one cosmic egg
Once you understand the symbolic nature of physical reality, then you will no longer feel entrapped by it.
You have formed the symbols and therefore you can change them.
(Seth)
Let's imagine two people, Joy and Gloom, who visit London one weekend.
The first visitor, Joy, experiences a wonderland of historical sites, museums, parks, theatres, shops and entertainment — a city full of friendly, smiling and colourful people.
Gloom, on the other hand, sees a noisy, grimy city with crowded underground stations, overpriced restaurants, jostling strangers and mournful faces.
They visited the same city, perhaps the same places, and spent the same amount of money — but Joy had a marvellous time, while Gloom was thoroughly miserable from start to finish.
Why?
The secret lies in their belief systems.
Joy holds the following beliefs: ‘Cities are exciting places to be.’
‘People are generally friendly and helpful.’
‘Life is to be enjoyed to the full.’
Gloom, in contrast, believes: ‘Cities are horrible places to be.’
‘People are usually unpleasant.’
‘Life is a burden — but we all have to struggle on.’
No wonder they experienced a different London.
While standing in the same street, joy would notice the creative window displays and smiling faces, hear the laughter and smell the roasting chestnuts on the street corner; while Gloom would see the  traffic, litter and inflated prices, hear the honking horns and smell the exhaust fumes.
They live in different worlds.
However, it isn't just that their perceptions and responses are affected by their beliefs.
Creating our own reality goes much deeper than that.
We create every experience we have.
We attract certain people and events because of our belief systems.
Joy would be drawn towards the shops and restaurants which had friendly, helpful staff — while Gloom would bump into those who were stern and morose.
Joy would happen across the unexpected delight of street theatre or a parade, while Gloom might attract muggers and crooked salespeople, or witness a street fight.
Both would return home believing they were right: London really is a wonderful/terrible place!
Our beliefs are not based upon our experiences, but vice versa.
Our experiences are created by our beliefs.
Beliefs, attitudes, thoughts, feelings, choices and decisions are the raw ingredients of the broth we call ‘life’.
Some ingredients result in a delicious, mouth-watering soup, while others will produce foul-smelling, unpalatable dishwater.
It's no good blaming the chef if our own broth tastes disgusting, or is simply bland and boring — because we not only chose the recipe, but stirred in each ingredient with our own hands!
DISCOVERING BELIEFS
The first step in learning how to live magically is examining our beliefs: the most crucial raw ingredients of our broth.
Beliefs are a form of self-hypnosis.
They are the guiding fictions which we repeat to ourselves so often, and with such conviction, that we forget that they are simply themes in a script we have written, and act as if they were true.
‘Life is full of suffering’, we might tell ourselves — and we see confirmation of our belief in every conversation with our problem-ridden friends, with every disaster-obsessed news report (which we compulsively listen to), and with every fresh trauma and misfortune that we attract into our own lives.
The task of the subconscious is to confirm that we are right.
It does not care whether we programme it to create laughter and joy, or misery and failure.
That is not its job.
It simply ensures that our beliefs and expectations are fulfilled, that they are consistent with what we experience, that the outer world mirrors our inner world.
If we have contradictory beliefs, it will reflect that in the reality it creates.
Cathy was a client in her early thirties, who was referred to me after her partner abruptly walked out on her.
It had happened three times before, with different men, and Cathy had reached the conclusion that she was somehow making it happen.
We began by exploring her beliefs about relationships with men, which came from two main sources.
First of all, like most of us, she held beliefs based upon her parents' marriage.
Cathy's mother had been a martyr to her gruff, domineering husband.
She devoted her whole life to keeping the house clean and cooking his meals, while he vetoed any possibility of her developing hobbies, interests or friends of her own.
She died of cancer at the age of 48, when her suppressed anger and resentment emerged as multiple tumours.
It was a grim, lifeless household, and Cathy had decided early on that, for women, marriage meant no freedom, no identity and no fun.
Moreover, men were selfish, cold-hearted and dull, and yet it seemed that, for some reason she couldn't quite fathom, a woman needed to have a man around.
Cathy's second source of beliefs about relationships was cultural: pop songs, magazines, TV and so on.
These added to her confusion.
On the one hand, the media screamed at her that romantic love was like an oasis in the desert; it would solve all her problems, and she would live happily ever after.
On the other hand, it warned her to watch out:love hurts .
The oasis is just a mirage.
It might be thrilling at first, but it will probably end in pain and tears.
Since our beliefs create our experiences, Cathy's love life faithfully reflected her mixed-up beliefs.
Men would be crazy about her at first, echoing her belief in the romantic ideal.
Then they would gradually turn into her father, becoming more and more selfish and domineering, confirming her beliefs about what men were ‘really’ like.
She, in turn, would become more and more pathetic and martyr-like, like her mother.
Finally, the man would do what she both wished and feared her father would do: he would walk out.
And she would be left with a bewildering mixture of emotions: shock, hurt, relief, resentment, confusion, anxiety, and a collapse of her fragile self-esteem.
As she gradually changed her beliefs, Cathy found that she was meeting different kinds of men.
In the past, she had only come across the ‘strong, silent men’ who fitted her old script.
But as she began to believe that men could be gentle, caring and sensitive, such men appeared as if by magic!
Her reality began to confirm her new beliefs.
We all have certain ‘core beliefs’ which sum up our views of reality.
We might believe that life is full of struggle and hardship, or that it is a delightful, challenging and exciting journey.
We might believe that other people are selfish, greedy and unpleasant, or that folk are generally kind and loving.
We might believe that people can never change, and there's no point in trying, or that life means forever growing and changing.
We might believe we are helpless in the arms of fate/God/luck, or that we have control of our own destiny.
Whether or not we are aware of it, we all have beliefs about the nature of life, people, relationships, health, work, money, success, pleasure, the world and ourselves — and these beliefs form the basis of the reality we create.
Whatever our beliefs, our subconscious mind will ensure that they are confirmed, over and over again, until we get the message: our beliefs create our experiences.
We all know intuitively that if someone firmly believes  they are inadequate and worthless, that the world is a rotten place and that life is full of suffering, then they will not have a joyous, exuberant and loving life.
It is so obvious that it sounds like ‘common sense’.
However, we make the mistake of assuming that beliefs follow experience — that we come to believe the world is a rotten place because we are treated badly.
The reality, according to the new spirituality, is that our beliefs about the world attract experiences which con firm those beliefs.
Like attracts like.
The more intense the belief, the more magnetically we attract the corresponding experiences.
(I do not pretend to understand precisely how this occurs, just as I do not ‘understand’ why an apple falls to the ground.
Scientists explain the descending apple by talking about ‘the law of gravity’.
I understand how beliefs create experiences in terms of‘the law of resonance’, or ‘law of manifestation’— that is , reality manifests according to our beliefs and expectations, since like attracts like.
Neither law actually explains anything; they simply describe what happens .)
Whatever you send out if what you draw back in.
Take responsibility for the thoughts and emotions you send out, for they go into the universe and create the events and circumstances that come back to you.
(Orin)
Graham, 28, was quiet, self-effacing and likeable — but his life was a disaster zone.
As soon as a new relationship or job came along, it began to grow sour.
Everything in his life seemed to go wrong.
Even his houseplants, he laughed, quickly withered and died!
When Graham was three years old, his father had deserted the family.
His mother, preoccupied with paying the bills, seemed to have little time and energy for her children — particularly Graham who, as the only boy, was a bitter reminder of her husband.
He recalled excitedly  bringing home a drawing from school, which a teacher had praised.
His mother glanced at it and grunted ‘Is that the best you can manage?’; he later found the picture in the bin.
He sobbed as he relived the painful memory.
Graham grew up believing ‘I'm worthless’, ‘I'm a failure’, ‘Men are selfish and wicked’, and ‘No-one will ever love me.’
As a result, despite his good looks and affable personality, women scarcely gave him a second glance.
His longest relationship had lasted three months, and he had few friends.
Men had beaten him up on several occasions, for no apparent reason.
At work, he had been used and abused repeatedly, each time becoming so anxiety-ridden and exhausted that he had handed in his notice.
His reality accurately reflected his belief system.
If we do indeed reap what we sow, then it seems sensible to take a careful look at our packet of seeds — particularly in those areas of our lives which go either particularly well or badly.
From the effortless, smooth-running parts of our lives — perhaps friendships, marriage or career — we can learn how to create success .
What kinds of beliefs and expectations underlie the successful parts of our lives?
From the difficult aspects — perhaps family relationships, money or health — we find out what needs to change.
Which beliefs are creating our problems in those areas?
These beliefs are not hidden and mysterious.
They are what we are telling ourselves every hour of the day, year in and year out.
We simply don't listen to ourselves!
By learning to listen, by switching our attention to our inner world, we take the first steps towards creating joy and success in our lives.
When Alison first walked into my office, she confessed with a weak smile, ‘Life seems to have it in for me!’
She had revealed a core belief before even sitting down!
She went on to catalogue a long history of disasters: from her mother dying when she was six years old, through to the latest traumas of seeing her cat killed by a car and being made redundant.
Her ex-husband used to beat her up and  she was the mother of a teenage child with a severe visual handicap.
I had to interrupt her flow of catastrophes to suggest that we try to understand what was going on beneath the surface.
Alison's parents met as teenagers, at a drunken party which resulted in her mother's pregnancy.
Due to family pressures her parents married, but they reminded Alison constantly that she was neither planned nor wanted.
She was a sickly child, frequently in and out of hospital.
After her mother died in a car crash she was sent to live with an aunt, who was barely more welcoming than her own parents had been.
She grew up believing that she had no right to be alive, let alone deserved any happiness.
If she had a brief glimpse of life's pleasures, then ‘bad luck’ would quickly follow.
Her core beliefs were ‘I have no right to be alive’ and, with somewhat convoluted logic, ‘I am being forced to stay alive as a punishment for being born.’
(She had attempted suicide twice.)
The recurrent thoughts which ran through Alison's mind, day after day, included ‘What's going to go wrong today?’,
‘I'm sure it will be Renata (her daughter) next’, ‘Why can't I get anything right?’ and ‘No-one wants anything to do with me — and I'm not surprised.’
She was so full of self-hatred that she made life into a torture chamber.
Her world repeatedly ‘proved’ to her that she was wicked and worthless, and was being punished.
Gradually, Alison came to question her core beliefs and realised that, in a moment, she could move from despair to inner peace by being loving and forgiving towards herself.
By catching herself saying ‘You stupid woman, can't you even pour a cup of tea without spilling it?’ and instead thinking, ‘OK, Alison, you seem a bit shaky today.
What's bothering you?’, she discovered she wasn't so bad after all.
She came to value what she had learnt from her difficult childhood, and to let go of the past.
As she learnt to be a friend to herself, she attracted close friends for the first time — and the disasters which had  become an accepted part of her life became more and more rare.
It is your belief system that runs every moment of your lives.
(Bartholomew)
PROCESSING BELIEFS
Make a list of your beliefs about some or all of the following:
myself, the world, life, work, relationships, love, sex, health, success, money, my career, my looks, parents, children, knowledge, responsibility, beliefs, the meaning of life, men, women, adulthood, religion, good and evil, reality, luck, change, death, pleasure, fun, limitations, creativity, my body, retirement, leisure.
Choose one of these topics, then scribble down everything that comes into your head about it.
(Don't just think about it.
With all or the exercises in this book, it's important to write down your ideas, or speak them into a tape recorder.
The action of writing or speaking somehow opens us to change.)
Don't censor certain thoughts —‘That's inconsistent’ or ‘I'm not sure that's relevant’, or ‘I don't want to believe that !’
Just brainstorm as many ideas as possible, including ideas which seem to you like obvious truths.
You might fill half a page or a dozen pages before you come to a standstill.
Note any feelings that come up as you write.
(‘Felt upset as I wrote this one down.’)
Then begin to sift through what you have written.
What are your central beliefs and attitudes about this topic?
Where have these beliefs come from?
What contradictions emerge from what you have written?
Do you hold other beliefs which might ‘explain' the contradictions?
(For example: ‘Everyone is creative’ and ‘I'm not creative, might be bridged by the belief that ‘I'm different from other people.’)
Make a summary list of your beliefs about this topic — including the contradictions.
Don't dismiss any of your beliefs by saying ‘everyone believes that’.
It is most unlikely that ‘everyone’ does — and in any case, if you believe it, then it is affecting your life, so you need to examine it.
We all surround ourselves with people who share our beliefs so that we feel comfortable, so it's often the ‘obvious truths’ which we most need to question.
How are your beliefs reflected in your life?
How might they affect you in future?
Would you like to change any of these beliefs?
Repeat the exercise with other topics.
(Note : You might wish to use scrap paper for this ‘processing’ exercise, so that you can later throw away or burn the negative thoughts and beliefs.)
Sally, like so many women, was full of negative beliefs about her body and food.
She constantly restrained her eating for fear of putting on weight.
She seriously believed that she could gain three pounds by eating a cream cake — and her body valiantly struggled to prove her right!
She looked on her body as an enemy, and groaned whenever she looked in a mirror.
At first, Sally was somewhat bewildered by my suggestion that her body was just trying to confirm her beliefs and that, if she honestly believed her body would maintain its weight, regardless of what she ate, then it would do so.
Gradually, however, as she took responsibility for other areas of her life, and began to feel empowered, she came to like and trust her body — and it responded.
Most of us are labouring under beliefs which limit our potential, or create personal trauma and suffering, or which deprive us of the magic and joy of being alive.
See whether you recognise yourself in any of the following limiting beliefs:
1.
Life is full of conflict and suffering.
2.
It's a struggle to survive.
3.
Happiness never lasts long.
4.
People are basically selfish and greedy.
5.
All men are….
6.
All women are….
7.
All children are….
8.
Women have it really tough.
9.
Men don't cry.
10.
We only grow through pain and suffering.
11.
I'm a hopeless failure.
12.
The world is heading for disaster.
13.
We live in a violent society.
14.
Love hurts.
15.
I'm a mess because of my childhood.
16.
People become frail and sick as they get older.
17.
There isn't enough to go round.
18.
No-one really loves/understands me.
19.
My health is never good.
20.
Schooldays are the best days of your life.
21.
Life is meaningless and futile.
22.
It's wrong to get angry.
23.
I've always been unlucky.
24.
Self-denial is good for you.
25.
Doctor knows best.
26.
I'm too old to change.
27.
I can't help how I feel.
28.
I have to justify my existence.
29.
The devil makes work for idle hands.
30.
It's dangerous to walk the streets at night.
31.
I can't help being….
32.
Life's miserable without a partner.
33.
I'm always short of money.
34.
Life is a rat race.
35.
I don't deserve to be happy.
36.
I never have enough time.
37.
If only my husband/wife/parents/children would let me….
38.
Everyone gets ill from time to time.
39.
You're over the hill once you're 20/30/40/50/60/70.
40.
If only….
You might wish to make a note of which limiting beliefs you identify with (and gradually add to your list as you process more of your own beliefs).
Then consider what effect such beliefs might have as powerful, creative forces in your life.
If someone holds the common belief that we only grow through pain and suffering, for example, then they are likely to create traumatic experiences at a fairly steady pace.
Someone crashes into their car; soon after that the house is burgled; then a neighbour dies; then they discover dry rot in the living room — and so it goes on.
They tell themselves they are just ‘unlucky’, without realising that they are the creative source of their bad luck.
Thoughts are energy.
Thoughts are magnets.
‘Scarcity belief’— also known as ‘poverty consciousness’— is another widespread belief system in our culture.
It involves beliefs such as‘There isn't enough to go round’, ‘I never have enough money’, ‘Money doesn't grow on trees’, ‘You have to work hard for what you want’, ‘If I have more, others have less’, ‘Better save for a rainy day’ and ‘It's immoral to be rich when so many people are starving and homeless.’
If any of these beliefs raise a martyr-like sigh, or an angry or self-righteous ‘But that's true !’ from you, then you're clinging to scarcity beliefs — and your life will reflect this.
You will either struggle over money, never feeling you have ‘enough’, or you will be wealthy but afraid of spending it.
For centuries, material  wealth and abundance has been seen as incompatible with spiritual growth.
As Bartholomew puts it ‘…your minds have programmed you against wealth and pleasure, against things that make your eyes sparkle and your feet dance.’
We have believed that God wishes us to struggle along, barely able to pay our way, and certainly doesn't want us to have any fun with our money!
Money is the root of all evil, dictates the puritanical thought of the Old Age.
The New Consciousness suggests otherwise.
It conjectures that God/dess, the Source, the Universe, the Force, the Light — or whatever term you  wish to use — just might prefer us to enjoy life to the full, to open ourselves to the joy and abundance of the universe; that All That Is is perhaps a loving force, and does not want us to endure sorrow, poverty and hardship.
Letting go of our poverty consciousness will be one of the many delights of the New Age, and a crucial aspect of our spiritual growth.
Instead of seeing money — or love, time, success or joy — as in short supply, we will come to see them as our natural birthright, letting them flow through our lives with great ease.
Until now, we have divided the world's abundance into ‘good’ and ‘bad’— it was OK to revel in the beauty of nature, but not to take pleasure in wealth.
We could either be good and poor, or bad and rich: that was the choice.
But as Lazaris reminds us, money (like nature) is just a set of vibrations, an illusion that we create — and we can have as much as we like of an illusion!
There is plenty to go round.
This doesn't mean seeing wealth as our main goal in life, or as a guarantee of security and happiness; nor does it mean being wasteful and extravagant.
It means learning how to create money easily and effortlessly, trusting that we will always have ‘enough’.
It also means enjoying it, using it, perhaps to create a pleasant environment in which to live, or to purchase experiences — whether travel, books, workshops, creative hobbies, social life, leisure or cultural pursuits — which will help us to grow.
If we hoard money, it  soon learns that it is not needed, and we no longer attract it.
We become a stagnant pond.
By learning to be ‘open channels’— spending money, giving it away, passing on old clothes, furniture and bric-a-brac we no longer use — we encourage more to flow into our lives.
As we learn to take it more lightly, seeing it as a mere illusion, money begins to flow through us like a 
He who binds to himself a joy
Does the winged life destroy;
But he who kisses the joy as it flies
Lives in eternity's sun rise.
(William Blake)
But what about all those poor, starving, homeless people?
Lazaris uses the following analogy: Imagine that you hear a little voice squeaking for help.
You move closer, and find that someone is at the bottom of a deep pit.
What do you do?
Jump in and keep them company?
Or do you use your strength, resources and imagination to throw them a rope, so that they can climb out of the pit?
Many, many people — in Western society as well as in other parts of the world — are living in poverty.
Unfortunately, limiting our own wealth does not help those people in the slightest.
It merely adds to the deprivation in the world.
But if we change our own scarcity belief, so that money flows more freely into our own lives, we have reduced — by one — the number of people in the world who struggle over money; and we might choose to use some of our wealth to help others — not out of guilt, but out of love.
Money always used to be a problem in my own life.
I managed to stay out of debt, but only by being careful.
For many years I huddled over a calor gas stove in the winter and ate beans on toast.
If someone bought me an expensive perfumed soap, I would save it — not believing I would ever have another — until I found it years later, grubby and odourless!
Even when I had money in the bank, I would buy cheap and cheerful clothes, books, food and other essentials — and save the rest for a rainy day which never came.
It was never ‘jam today’.
I never had a sense of abundance, of being able to splash out and enjoy myself.
When I processed my attitudes towards money, the reasons became quite obvious.
My beliefs about money were hopelessly muddled and contradictory.
On the one hand, I associated wealth with freedom, pleasure, joy, exuberance, travel and opportunities — and shortage of money with struggle, sacrifice, self-sabotage, fear, cold and hunger.
However, I also linked wealth with being selfish, greedy, materialistic, hard-hearted, snobbish, and dull — as well as with childhood images from the Bible about camels and the eye of a needle!
Poverty also brought up romantic visions of the struggling artist, fewer demands and expectations, and the kind of hard-headed practicality that was bred into me in the North of England.
(‘We'll manage somehow, so let's get on with it.’)
I also saw poor people as having more sense of community and warmth — as altogether nicer and more ideologically sound!
What's more, I had memories from many other lifetimes of taking vows of poverty.
No wonder I was struggling over money!
As I released my martyrhood and ambivalence over money, my old fears vanished into the air.
Although my income was unchanged, money ceased to be a problem, a worry, a source of guilt and anxiety, and became a reliable friend.
Despite minor lapses, I began to trust that whenever I wanted cash — whether to pay bills, attend workshops or take trips abroad — it would be available.
I came to see the world as an abundant and joyous place to be.
I no longer linked money with struggling, coveting, fearing and grasping; instead, words such as bubbling, enjoying, giving, welcoming and channelling came to mind.
My free associations about wealth changed dramatically: ‘Prosperity flows through my heart as a channel of pure light — the Light of the universe, which offers to me its vast abundance.
It is a key which opens doors to the wondrous possibilities in life.
It is a stepping stone in my spiritual growth.
Money is now coming into my life easily and joyously.
The more I have, the more I can enjoy and share.
I am opening myself as a channel to the Light.’
CRYSTAL CAVE
Picture yourself at the mouth of a cave.
The cave is almost transparent, as though made of ice.
It is a crystal cave.
Feel your feet on the ground — then walk into the cave.
It opens up into a fantastic cavern, which glistens and sparkles as though lit by an invisible Light.
You gaze at it, stunned by its wonder and beauty.
A tinkling music fills the cave, like wind-chimes.
You walk deeper and deeper into the crystal cave, hearing your footsteps echo in the hollow cavern.
Ahead, a brilliant white light is shining, at the opening to a passageway.
You walk towards it, and enter the passageway — and find yourself in another crystalline cavern, dazzling in its magnificence.
In the centre of the cavern is a small crystal column, on which a golden chalice stands.
The chalice glistens in the light.
This is the Chalice of Abundance, placed there by your Higher Self.
It is full to the brim of a wondrous liquid, which will bring abundance into your life.
As you hold the Chalice, become aware of any resistance you might have to drinking from it.
(What are your thoughts and feelings?
What are your fears?)
Then see your resistances become bubbles, which float away into the cavern, burst and are gone.
When you are ready, drink from the Chalice.
Drink and drink — for were you to drink a whole ocean, the Chalice would still be full to the brim.
If you have specific needs or desires, then throw a symbol into the chalice, and watch it multiply by the thousand, until it overflows the Chalice and floods out onto the floor of the cavern.
If you desire more love in your life, throw a tiny heart into the chalice — and see the chalice become filled with tiny hearts, which pour out over the crystal column.
(f you want more success at work, toss a star into the chalice, and it will brim with tiny stars.
If you want more money, toss in a gold coin, and you will quickly be ankle-deep in gold.
(Note any fears or uneasiness you might feel as the Chalice gives you what you desire.)
When you have finished, replace the Chalice — and thank your Higher Self for providing its abundance.
Know that you can return to the Chalice at any time.
Then gently come back to the room.
CHANGING BELIEFS
Let's suppose that, by now, you have become aware of one or more negative or limiting beliefs which you would like to change.
(If not, just listen to your stream of thoughts or conversation for half an hour.
Look out for any thoughts that involve ‘if only’, ‘should’, ‘ought to’, ‘can't’, ‘but’, ‘trying to’, ‘difficult’, ‘limitation’, blaming other people, feeling sorry for yourself, any fears or doubts, cynicism, guilt, judgements about yourself or others, feeling helpless, or beliefs in scarcity.)
Now — how do you go about changing these beliefs?
1.
Start by thinking about where a belief originally came from.
Your father?
Mother?
Schoolteachers?
Grandparents?
Friends?
Books you read?
TV programmes?
Your partner?
Perhaps you cannot even remember.
But the crucial step is to take responsibility for that belief.
Accept that no-one forced you to believe it.
You chose it.
Don't blame yourself for that choice; you had reasons for adopting it at the time.
Simply own it as yours.
2.
Now choose your new belief — based upon love, trust, abundance, and the belief that we create our own reality.
Here are a few examples:
Old
‘Life is full of suffering.’
‘I never have enough money.’
‘Happiness never lasts.’
‘I catch three colds every year.’
‘I'm a failure.’
‘If I have more, others have less.’
‘My childhood messed me up.’
‘I can't do it.’
New
‘Life is full of joy.’
‘I always have enough money.’
‘Happiness always lasts.’
‘I am always healthy.’
‘I'm a success.’
‘There's plenty to go round.’
‘I learnt so much from my childhood.’
‘I can do anything I want to do.’
The new belief should be entirely positive.
It's no good replacing the belief ‘I'm a failure’ with ‘I'm not a failure’.
If someone tells you not to think of a white bear, what happens?
Right.
It's like instructing a schoolchild not to giggle.
Similarly, your subconscious cannot try not to be a failure without first of all picturing failure.
So stick with success.
Create positive images.
3.
The next step is to work out why you are still holding on to your old belief.
(This is explored in more depth in ‘Cracks in the mirror’.)
You can simply ask yourself this question, sit quietly with pen and paper at hand, and expect the answers to come to you.
This simple method can work remarkably well.
Or, if you want to have more fun…
4.
Now, deal with your resistance.
Decide whether you will give up your old payoffs, such as blaming other people, feeling sorry for yourself, or asking for love by creating problems.
Are you willing to take responsibility for your life, to accept that we create our own reality?
Are you willing to be loving towards yourself and others, to seek love by being love, rather than waiting for others to love you first?
Are you willing to let go of the past and reach for the future?
Take time to think about it.
MEETING A BLOCKAGE
Relax deeply, then imagine yourself walking through a forest, feeling your feet on the ground, hearing the birds, smelling the flowers and trees.
Walk until you find a clearing and wait there, reminding yourself of your new belief.
Notice something coming out of the undergrowth towards you.
It might be a person, child, animal, bird, goblin, or some creature you have never seen before.
It has a scowl on its face.
You say ‘Hello’, and happily inform it of your new belief: ‘Life is full of joy.’
The person or creature — one of your sub-personalities — starts to argue with you, telling you all the reasons why you are wrong, and why you would do much better to believe that life is full of suffering!
(‘You'll only be disappointed.’
‘You'll be left all alone if you have no problems!’
‘You won't be able to feel sorry for yourself again.’
‘You won't be able to blame your mother any more.’
‘You'll be so boring if you're happy!’)
Each time it comes up with a reason, just smile and lovingly tell it that you now wish to give up your old payoffs, and believe that life is full of joy.
Hug the person or creature, give it your love, and walk on along the forest path.
Then gently come back to the room, and make notes on your resistance to change.
Don't punish yourself for your old beliefs, or you merely add paraffin to the fire.
People never change for the better by being hated, judged and condemned.
We change by being forgiven, loved and believed in.
Learn to love and forgive yourself.
5.
If you are ready and willing, change your old belief.
For just 5–10 minutes each day, repeat the new belief to yourself, over and over again.
Don't do it automatically, as though you were reciting a shopping list.
Instead focus on it, think about it, feel it, desire it.
Even better, write out your new belief, again and again, until it comes to feel a part of you — and note any thoughts or feelings which come up as you do so.
During the rest of the day, try to catch yourself if you have any thoughts or emotions based on your old belief, and remind yourself of your new belief.
Also, write your new belief on small cards, which you can place on mirrors, doors, dressing table, fridge, the dashboard of your car, in your diary and so on, as repeated reminders.
Or ask your inner wisdom for a symbol of this new belief, accept whatever image comes to mind, and draw this on the cards.
Positive thoughts and beliefs (or ‘affirmations’) and imagery can be used in every area of our lives.
Let's suppose you have an important letter to write — perhaps an application for a job.
You might find yourself procrastinating, because you see it as an enormous task which will take up all your time and energy for weeks !
Instead, try using affirmations and imagery.
Tell yourself ‘Writing this letter will be easy and fun’(not that it ‘won't be difficult’, or you still associate it with the word ‘difficult’).
Picture yourself posting the letter, and feeling that it was a simple matter after all!
It is amazing what a difference these simple techniques can make.
Yesterday, I had to change a headlamp bulb on my car.
I found myself mentally putting aside half the afternoon for the task as I struggled over the incomprehensible jargon in my handbook.
Then I caught myself, and saw it as an opportunity to have fun and learn something new.
I briefly imagined myself washing my hands after completing this simple task.
After this, the job itself took ten minutes!
We can use affirmations to bring a positive, joyful attitude to life in general— either using them as needed during the day, or putting aside a few minutes every day to affirm our beliefs.
At the moment, I start each day with this set of seven affirmations:
I open myself as a channel to the Light.
I trust in the power and magic of the universe.
I am attracting more and more love into my life.
I am attracting more and more joy into my life.
I am attracting more and more abundance into my life.
I am willing to let miracles happen.
I open myself as a channel to the Light.
The lessons of A Course In Miracles provide many wonderful affirmations such as—‘There is nothing to fear’, ‘I could see peace instead of this’, ‘All that I give is given to myself, ‘All things I think I see reflect ideas’, ‘Let me be still and listen to the truth’, ‘Light and joy and peace abide in me’, ‘Today I will judge nothing that occurs’, and ‘The past is over.
It can touch me not.’
Any phrase or sentence which makes you feel calm, loving, joyful and expansive is an affirmation.
Here are some more possibilities:
Whatever happens, I have created it — and I can handle it.
I have complete faith and trust in the universe.
I am letting go of the past, and reaching for the future.
I am capable of everything I dream of doing.
There is no limit to my potential.
The world is full of love, joy and abundance.
I lovingly create my own reality.
I release myself from pain and struggle.
I am becoming more and more of who I can be.
I love and accept myself just as I am.
I am listening to the whispers.
I am radiant with love and joy.
I am going with the flow.
Today will be full of exciting opportunities.
I accept the power of this present moment.
I release myself from my old patterns.
I have plenty of time.
I welcome and accept all my emotions.
I am loving, powerful and creative.
I am attracting more and more…into my life.
I am that I am.
Just one suggestion: be careful about the tenses you use.
If you use the future tense — telling your subconscious ‘I will soon be at peace with myself — it will just sit back and wait.
Tomorrow never comes!
On the other hand, if you only use the present tense —‘I am now bursting with health’, while you have raging ‘flu — your subconscious might believe this is your idea of good health, and do nothing!
Instead, try ‘I am more and more at peace with myself, or ‘I am healthy, and becoming more and more healthy’.
6.
Begin to act as if your new belief were true.
If you believe that life is full of joy, then you feel happy and excited when the post arrives or the phone rings, rather than feeling fearful or gloomy.
Imagine yourself in a beautiful garden, dancing across the lawns in sheer delight.
If you believe in abundance, then enjoy spending your money (even on paying bills!).
You could buy yourself a small luxury each week as a symbolic message to your subconscious, so that it begins to attract money into your life.
Begin to see yourself as someone with plenty of money to spare.
Vividly picture going on a wonderful shopping spree, buying everything you have ever dreamt of, with great joy and exuberance.
If you catch yourself worrying about money, then welcome the thought rather than fighting it, or getting angry with yourself.
The thought has come to the surface in order to be released.
So listen to it, send it your love — then use a positive affirmation.
When you change your old beliefs, you might find you have sudden impulses which are ‘out of character’.
Act on them!
These are leading you towards your new reality.
If you have an urge to go for a walk in the moonlight, do it!
If you think of phoning an old friend, do it!
If you want to buy a flamboyant pair of trousers, go ahead!
If you ignore these new impulses, your subconscious will assume you were not really serious about changing, and will carry on as before.
7.
Use your reality as feedback.
If you change your beliefs but your life stays the same and you feel the same, then you haven't really changed those beliefs, or perhaps more deeply rooted beliefs are blocking you.
The outer world faithfully reflects our inner world.
It is a feedback system which reliably informs us of our beliefs, attitudes, thoughts, feelings and expectations.
Sometimes changing beliefs will bring spectacular results within days: you feel radiant with health, your boss offers you a promotion, you meet a new friend, you win some money, you feel a sense of inner peace — or whatever your new beliefs would attract into your life.
Sometimes you have to be more patient and allow the universe to bring you joy and abundance in its own way, and in its own time.
But if you  honestly change your beliefs your reality will begin to con firm it.
You will feel different, even if your life is ‘objectively’ still the same.
If you find yourself thinking, ‘You can't change thoughts and beliefs just like that ’, then it might be wise to examine your attitudes and beliefs about change!
Old Age thinking — along with most forms of psychotherapy — suggests that change is inevitably slow and painful, or even impossible.
It views beliefs and attitudes as ten-ton blocks chained around our necks.
It condemns us as lifelong victims of patterns set up in childhood, the unwilling prey of our devilish subconscious, the helpless captives of our ‘character’ or genetic make-up.
Transformation can occur overnight — if we will allow it to be so.
Metaphysics invites us to revel in the never-ending process of personal growth, to delight in the ever-changing scenery of our lives, and to befriend rather than fear our subconscious mind.
Seth suggests that our beliefs are like children's playing blocks, which can be moved around with ease: ‘…all creativity and consciousness is born in the quality of play, as opposed to work.’
Personal growth is supposed to be fun!
Through the looking glass
Ever drifting down the stream —
Lingering in the golden gleam —
Life, what is it but a dream?
(Lewis Carroll)
Jonathan Livingston Seagull, in Richard Bach's inspiring novel, is no ordinary seagull.
Jonathan loves to fly.
While other seagulls fly in order to catch food, he has higher aspirations.
Despite the risks, Jonathan flies for the sheer joy of exploring his potential, of extending the boundaries of what it means to be a seagull.
Cast out by his flock, who fail to persuade him that life is merely a question of survival, Jonathan continues to pursue excellence in flight, and eventually discovers the unlimited potential of being.
As children, we learn that we shouldn't daydream.
We are told not to ‘waste time’ in our inner world when we should be paying attention to the Russian Revolution or the wildlife of Tasmania.
When parents or teachers mock our desire to become a deep-sea diver, an opera singer or a portrait artist, and encourage us to have more ‘sensible’ ambitions — perhaps to become a nurse, bank clerk or accountant — we obediently wrap up our fantasies with a label which reads ‘This is an impossible dream’, and so fail to take any steps to make those dreams come true.
It is the child who refuses to abandon Dreams — who  stubbornly persists in believing that he or she will explore the depths of the Amazon, or will become a film director — who becomes the adult who will achieve those ambitions.
Our daydreams help to build our future.
Nothing is realised unless it is first dreamt of, and believed in.
‘You get what you concentrate upon’ says Seth.
‘There is no other main rule.’
Every day, we can either be driven by the past — repeating our customary patterns and habits, believing in old limitations — or we can be propelled by our future, by our Dreams, by what we are becoming.
The carrot or the stick: which is it to be?
We can plod our weary way through the days, sticking to a monotonous job and loveless relationships, watching TV every evening, filling our days with meaningless trivia — leading lives of ‘quiet desperation’ in Thoreau's words.
Or we can decide that there must be more to being alive than this and, like Jonathan Livingston Seagull, become intrepid explorers of life's possibilities.
Relax — this doesn't mean we all have to make parachute jumps, battle with crocodiles or conquer the North face of the Eiger!
But it does mean clarifying what we truly want out of life — defining the Dreams which make us tingle with aliveness — and making those dreams come true.
Enthusiasm — which means ‘the God within’(en theos)— is the spark that lights the candle which illuminates our path.
The Old Age religions teach that we should not have desires, that we should simply accept whatever happens as God's will.
But this is just a way of avoiding responsibility for our lives.
If we create our own reality, we create our own future.
The future will not be as God/dess or fate decrees, but as we design it.
The only choice is whether we do it consciously or not.
We are not awarded extra Brownie points in heaven for living a life full of suffering, nor for one which is dull and dreary.
We simply live the life that we are choosing, day by day, to create.
I am responsible for what I see.
I choose the feelings I experience, and
I decide upon the goal I would achieve.
And everything that seems to happen to me
I ask for, and receive as I have asked.
(A Course In Miracles)
What you can do, or dream you can, begin it;
Boldness has genius, power, and magic in it.
(Goethe)
LIFE REVIEW
1)
Make a list of any activities which make you buzz with energy, which absorb you so much that time dissolves, or which give you a sense of inner peace and satisfaction.
What do you really enjoy?
What makes your heart glow and your spirit dance?
(A walk on the beach?
Gardening?
Reading a novel?
Writing poetry?
Listening to music?
Chatting with friends?
Sketching?
Jogging?
Making love?
Travelling abroad?
Charity work?
Playing with children?
Certain aspects of your job?
Which people make you feel good?)
Make sure the list is based upon how you feel now — not upon what you used to enjoy, or think you ‘should’ enjoy, or what other people like to do.
Next, make a second list of any activities (or people) which deaden and deplete you, which leave you feeling tired, bored or under stress.
Now assess how much of your life is devoted to each list.
Does this reflect how ‘alive’ or ‘dead’you feel?
How might you begin to change the balance so that you feel more and more energised?
2)
Review your life, and where it is going:—
What are your secret ambitions (large and small)?
What are your strengths, talents and abilities?
What does, or would, give your life meaning and purpose?
What personal qualities do you wish to develop
What is your ideal lifestyle?
What do you wish to experience in life?
What do you need — physically, emotionally, mentally and spiritually?
Is your work (whether paid or unpaid) just a way of paying the rent, or is it important to you as a person?
Are you learning and growing in your everyday life?
Is your life challenging enough?
Relaxing enough?
Loving enough?
If you knew you only had five years to live, what would you do?
Remind yourself that this is not a dress rehearsal for life.
This is it!
So it is worth regularly spending time on this exercise.
Be careful to distinguish what you want from what your family, friends or partner think you should want.
Bear in mind that we can keep changing our goals — but unless we have a destination in mind, we are unlikely to set off at all.
Our impulses, desires and Dreams are fingers pointing at the moon.
They reveal positive directions in which our lives might move, and move we always will, since being means becoming .
Change is the very process of life.
It is through change that we grow and discover ourselves, that we begin to actualise some of the myriad possibilities of our lives.
We can either freely choose to change, and enjoy the new challenges, or we can resist change until life forces us to grow, through unwelcome problems and traumas.
Growth through joy — or growth through suffering.
The choice is ours.
As Bartholomew puts it ‘The beauty and the power and the joy of life is not in what happens, it is in the motion, in the movement, in the constant changing of all that happens.
Joy is in the incredible dance of life!’
He begs us to learn to enjoy the changing scenery, rather than clinging to the landscape that feels safe and familiar.
We always know what the next step in our lives should be — which area of our lives needs to be resolved or changed — and we need to find the courage and self-love to start moving.
If ever we wake up in the morning and feel that this is just ‘another day to get through’, then our life is painfully stuck — and it is fear and limiting beliefs which are keeping us stuck.
Every day, we make countless decisions — decisions based upon either clinging to the past or reaching for the future.
At any time, we are either learning and developing or moving backwards.
It is not possible to simply stagnate for a while; and it is our choices and decisions which largely determine whether we are growing.
We can make fear choices, which lead us to cling to the past —‘I hate my job, but I won't find anything better, so I'd better stick to it’, ‘I always eat hamburger and chips on Thursdays’, ‘I'd like to know Chris better, but I'm sure s/he won't be interested in me’— or growth choices, in which we reach for the future —‘I hate my job, so I'll start applying for others, even though it feels scary’, ‘Maybe I'll try spaghetti bolognese tonight’, ‘What have I got to lose?
I'll give Chris a ring.’
Growth choices usually involve some element of risk — trying a new sport or hobby, changing your job, starting or ending a relationship, making new friends, going abroad, redecorating, moving house, joining a campaign group, being more open about your feelings, changing your routine or behaving in a way which is ‘out of character’.
Growth choices mean being flexible .
A freshly bought loaf, still warm from the oven, smells and tastes delicious — but we would not expect it to taste good a week later.
We throw out any stale crumbs for the birds, and yet we sometimes expect our lives to stay the same and always remain satisfying.
‘I was happy with life last year, and nothing has changed — so why do I feel unsettled?’
Because nothing has changed!
The loaf is stale.
It is time to buy a fresh loaf, or perhaps some rolls or croissants this time?
Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you; For every one that asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be opened.
(Matthew 7: 7–8.)
Let us suppose that you have at least a hazy image of your Dreams — your personal and global visions of how life might be.
Perhaps you want closer friends?
Or a more comfortable and spacious home?
Or a loving, intimate relationship?
Or to sort out your marital problems?
Or to be healthier?
Or to achieve a better balance between work, rest and play?
Or a more fulfilling career?
Or to develop your intuition?
Or work on your physical fitness?
Or abandon your poverty?
Or to travel more?
Or be more self-confident?
Or find a creative outlet?
Or set up a business?
Or spend more time alone?
Or perhaps you want to have more fun, and laugh more?
Or simply to be your own best friend?
At a global level, do you Dream of a more peaceful world?
Or an end to racial oppression?
Creative solutions to our ecological problems?
A world in which men and women have equal rights?
An end to child abuse and slave labour?
A world free from the threat of nuclear weapons?
What vision of the future most inspires you?
Whatever your Dreams, the steps towards achieving them are the same.
We can certainly take shortcuts if we wish, perhaps using creative visualisation on its own — and sometimes with spectacular success.
But here is a slow-but-sure formula for manifesting our Dreams.
It always works.
1.
Develop your Dreams.
Whatever you desire, the first step towards creating this new reality is to clarify what you want:
‘I want to find three new friends who share my interests.’
‘I want to learn to play a mandolin.,
‘I want to visit India and Thailand next year.’
‘I want to help in the peace movement.’
‘I want to live in a small village.,
‘I want to double my salary within two years.’
‘I want to build my own house.’
‘I want to express my anger more openly.’
‘I want to find a job that I really love.’
Write down all of your Dreams, including as much detail as possible.
2.
Why do you want it?
How will this particular goal help you to become more of who you are?
How will it change and expand your life?
Write down all your reasons for desiring it.
Might it have any hurtful or damaging effects?
Would it be a substitute for inner changes you need to make?
Being honest about our motivation is crucial since, at this stage, we might discover that it is not our own Dream at all, or that our motivation is somewhat dubious: ‘It will impress my friends’, ‘It will be one in the eye for my parents’, ‘It will ease my sense of guilt’, ‘It will make me feel more secure’, ‘It will give me power over other people’, ‘It will make me feel special’, ‘It's what my partner keeps suggesting I do’, ‘It's the opposite of what my partner suggests I do.’
(According to A Course In Miracles , ‘Any wish that stems from the ego is a wish for nothing, and to ask for it is not a request.’)
In that case, allow yourself to let go of that particular desire, and work towards another Dream.
Or you might realise that you want extra money, say, in order to have more free time, or so that you can help a charity, or so that you can travel abroad.
If so, programme for what you really want, it might arrive in an unexpected way.
3.
Where are you going now?
Which of your ‘probable futures’ are you creating at the moment?
What is likely to happen if you stay on your current path?
If you work as a sales assistant, but dream of owning your own business, what are you doing about it?
Are you saving up, reading about business management, surveying the market, giving yourself a deadline — or are you just wistfully dreaming over the cash register, with no intention of making your dream a reality?
If you fantasise about a warm, loving relationship, are you making an effort to meet new people, learning from past mistakes, and being a warm, loving person towards yourself and others — or sitting indoors waiting for Mr or Ms Right to knock on your door bearing a glass slipper?
Be honest with yourself.
Are you moving towards the future of your dreams?
Do you feel excited by the future that is unfolding before you?
Or are you marking time, hoping your fairy godmother will wave her magic wand?
We create our own reality.
We wave our own magic wands.
If you do not change direction, where is your life heading?
Towards being a prince(ss)?
Or a pumpkin?
4.
Examine your beliefs.
If we desire something which opposes a current belief, we set up an inner conflict — so look carefully at your beliefs in this area of your life.
Which beliefs or attitudes might block or limit this particular dream?
If you want to have more fun, for example, do you also believe that work justifies your existence, or that fun-loving people waste time, or that it's ‘better’ to be serious and heavy-hearted?
If you want good health, do you also believe that health is a matter of luck, or that you are a sickly person, or that the body is a machine?
If you want a nuclear-free world, do you believe that the world's political leaders are crazy warmongers, or that humanity is out to destroy itself, or that the world is a dangerous and evil place?
If so, you need to change those beliefs before moving on to the next step.
5.
Deal with your blockages.
Life is exactly as we have created it.
We are the artists, and if our life is a dark, jagged abstract when we prefer  Impressionist pastels which dance with light, we should ask ourselves why we painted it that way.
What did we hope to learn?
What do we gain from clinging to our rough abstract and refusing to start work on another canvas?
What is keeping us stuck?
Many of us are afraid of success.
Do you have secret fears about getting what you want?
Or unrealistic expectations about what success will bring?
(Do you fantasise that if you lost two stone, you would suddenly be happy, self-confident, popular and successful?
Or do you realise you would just be the same person, two stone lighter?)
What are the likely consequences of success?
What are your ‘payoffs’ for failing?
Write down ‘I really want…, but I'm afraid that if I get it…’
What dangers lurk in the shadows of your dream?
What might you have to give up?
Scribble down whatever comes into your mind.
Don't censor any thoughts — write down everything .
When you have finished, examine your fears.
When Susie first came to see me, she had had a string of unhappy love affairs.
Her life felt empty and meaningless and she was taking anti-depressants.
She was convinced that if only she could find ‘a knight in shining armour’, her life would be transformed.
However, when she wrote down ‘I'm afraid that if I find a man who loves me…, one evening, she was amazed to find words spilling out on to the paper.
She discovered that she was afraid of getting close, afraid of being betrayed, afraid of finding that a relationship did not solve all her problems, afraid of feeling trapped, afraid of ‘disappearing’ as a person, afraid of admitting that men were not all bad, afraid of losing her friends, afraid of having no more goals in life, afraid of giving up her unhappiness, afraid he might die, afraid of feeling dependent, afraid of sexual intimacy, afraid of letting go of the past, afraid that reality would not match up to the glorious fantasy….
Susie had not found a lasting relationship because (among other reasons) she  was too scared.
She was afraid of loving and being loved.
Many of us are afraid of failure too.
We only learn and grow by trying out new experiences, new ways of being, by reaching for the future — yet many of us are terrified of getting it wrong.
We would be amazed if a child decided that, since crawling was a perfectly good way of getting around, it wouldn't risk falling over by trying to walk.
After all, it would be crippling its potential.
Fortunately, young children are almost free from fear.
They pull themselves to their feet, stagger a step or two, tumble over and try again and again, until they can walk and run and skip and jump.
They do not see falling over as ‘failure’; it is simply part of the process of learning.
When it comes to riding a bike, a child doesn't say, ‘Well, I fell over a lot when I was learning to walk, so maybe I won't bother with a bike.’
They look into the future , not the past, and see themselves cycling.
As adults, however, many of us cripple ourselves with fears of making mistakes, of making a wrong decision, of failing, of feeling embarrassed, of repeating the past.
We might kid ourselves that life is perfectly OK as it is, so why risk trying something new?
(‘Why bother learning to drive?
I've managed so far.
I'd probably only fail the test anyway.’)
When someone points out that other people can do x, y and z, we reply ‘Yes, but they're different !’
We are butterflies thrashing about in our chrysalis, afraid to break free.
Angels fly because they take themselves lightly.
(Alan Watts)
Another possible stumbling block is self-image.
Some years ago, I helped a woman to stop smoking.
Lisa had been smoking for twenty years and felt unable to stop for more than a day.
In meditation, she met a cigarette in human form, to understand what functions smoking was serving for her.
The cigarette turned out to be a dirty, slovenly, foul-mouthed creature and Lisa realised that she was projecting her own nasty bits on to it.
(Other people project qualities they admire — such as ambition, sophistication or clarity of thought — onto their cigarettes.)
As she re-owned these characteristics in herself, she gave up smoking with ease.
However, three months later she relapsed.
The reason, we found, was that she had not changed her self-image.
Lisa still saw herself as a ‘smoker’ who was  struggling to give up, rather than as a ‘non-smoker’(who might occasionally have a cigarette).
She was blocked by her self-image.
Lazaris warns that reality always follows image.
Our self-image should be ever-changing, flexible, growing and expanding.
Unless our self-image stays ahead of the reality we create, reality will ‘snap back’ in order to be consistent.
If you create some spare cash but your self-image says that you are always short of money, there is a danger that you will create an unexpected and expensive event — a house repair, breakdown or bad debt — so that your self-image can be maintained.
Whenever our reality changes for the better, in a way which takes us by surprise, we should get to work on our self-image fast!
SELF-IMAGE
Pick an area of life in which you wish to move forward — perhaps health, work, relationships, money or spirituality — and scribble down whatever comes to mind about your self-image in that area (e.g. ‘Me and health’; ‘Me and work’).
When you have finished — it might take five minutes or five hours — look through your notes and pick out the central themes.
Is there a single word which sums it all up (e.g. loser, spoiler, thinker, cynic, martyr, goody-goody, complainer, doormat, groveller)?
What sort of reality would a person with this self-image create?
Now think about the reality that you want to create.
What sort of self-image would you need to create to  support this?
Scribble down everything that comes to mind.
Now pick on a word which describes your new self-image (e.g. winner, adventurer, sparkler, powerhouse, inventor, joybringer, enthusiast, philosopher).
How would this person think, feel and behave?
In meditation, picture yourself creating and handling situations which reflect your new self-image.
Begin to see yourself in this new way.
6.
Desire, imagine and expect.
Most of the time we create our own reality quite automatically.
We get what we expect from life, according to our desires, thoughts, beliefs, attitudes, choices and decisions.
However, the new metaphysics suggests we can interrupt this automatic process.
Instead of re-running programmes set up in childhood, we can create new programmes, so that we learn how to consciously programme our own lives.
(If the computer terminology makes you reel uncomfortable, remember that it is not suggested that we are computers.
We are the programmers .)
Seth suggests that ‘Mental images, accompanied by strong emotion, are blueprints…upon which a corresponding physical object, or condition or event, will in your terms appear.’
Other channelled sources — in common with the ancient magical traditions — confirm this theme again and again.
Everyone is a magician.
Whatever we imagine, expect and desire (or fear) will be ‘magically’ attracted into our lives.
This does work both ways.
The subconscious does not distinguish between desires and fears, between dreams and nightmares.
It simply works to fulfil our expectations.
I knew a woman who was terrified that her house would burn down.
It was the worst catastrophe she could imagine.
She dwelt on this potential disaster so often, and with such emotion, that eventually a freak electrical fault did cause a fire.
She then said she had somehow ‘known’ it would happen, that all her fears had been justified — instead of realising that her terror had pulled it into her life.
Her fears were the cause, not the effect.
People who are scared of getting cancer, or being involved in a car crash, or having a handicapped child, should be wary; their fears and imagining are a magnet for such an event.
They can become self-fulfilling prophecies.
As Lazaris says ‘…just put out a thought, a fear, a doubt, a concern, a hope, a wish, a joy — it matters not whether it's positive or negative in your reality — it will manifest.’
Every single thought manifests in some reality perhaps in our future, or past, or in a simultaneous lifetime, or in another dimension of reality; but it will manifest.
The more intense the emotion, the more vivid the imagination and the firmer the expectation, the more likely it is to happen now, in this reality, in this lifetime.
Creating our own reality, then, involves making positive use of our desire, imagination and expectancy.
With these three tools, we can carve and chisel the future of our dreams.
We can become conscious magicians.
Thoughts are things; imagination is experience.
Accept this and the gateway to other worlds will slowly swing wide for you and each day will bring forth new wonders, so that you become once more as a child, absorbed and enchanted by all there is of which to learn.
(Gildas)
Let's suppose you want to be offered a challenging new job.
In order to ‘programme’ this, start by choosing a scene which represents this ‘probable future’.
Imagine yourself in the new office, or at the successful interview, or signing the contract — and see every detail as clearly as possible.
Look around at the furniture, the colour of the walls, what you are wearing.
Use as many senses as  possible — sense your hands holding the letter, hear the clatter of the word processors, smell the coffee that is brewing….
If your Dream is to live in a country cottage, then picture the cottage as vividly as you can.
Perhaps imagine yourself in a cosy armchair, gazing into a log fire, stroking the cat on your lap and sipping a glass of dandelion wine.
Visualise the scene,feel yourself in the chair,sense the cat's soft fur,hear the hissing and crackling of the fire,smell the woodsmoke,taste the wine….
Try out various images until you find one that feels right.
Nothing comes into being without appearing, first of all, as an image in someone's conscious mind.
Now, for just a few minutes at a time, focus on this image — and stir in desire.
Feel your desire for this Dream intensely, in every atom of your body — stopping just short of desperation.
The more emotion you can muster, the more effective it will be.
Whenever you have a few moments, just ‘flash’ this image inside your head, feeling your desire.
Expect it to materialise.
know that your dream will come true.
Whatever we honestly desire, imagine and expect — so long as it does not conflict with our thoughts, beliefs and attitudes —will happen .
However, if you tell yourself ‘This is silly — it can't possibly work’, then naturally it won't work!
Reality conforms to our beliefs.
Many people begin with simple programmes, such as manifesting a parking space when they need it.
As you drive into town on a busy day, just remember the three key words — desire, imagination and expectancy.
Without taking your eyes off the road, ‘see’ a parking space just where you want it, and expect it to be there.
It will appear as if by magic!
Once you know that you can manifest a parking space whenever you need it, you will be open to making the ‘impossible’ happen.
As A Course In Miracles suggests, there is no order of difficulty in miracles; if you can programme a parking space, you can create whatever you Dream about.
There are countless different techniques for manifesting what we want, using the tools of desire, imagination and expectancy.
Here are three simple but powerful techniques which Lazaris suggests':
THE FUTURE LOOP
This involves three stages of visualisation.
Firstly, picture a scenario which depicts your goal or Dream, using as many senses as possible.
Secondly, pick out a memory from your past , perhaps from your childhood, which makes your Dream seem a logical progression from what has been.
(For example, if you dream of having a novel published, remember yourself scribbling away as an adolescent, or having a poem published in the school magazine, or simply reading novels.
If your Dream is to own your own business, then picture yourself playing with a toy sweetshop at the age of seven, or deciding not to be wage-slaves like your parents, or managing the household budget as an adult.)
Finally, picture yourself in the future beyond your Dream.
What will your future be like, say, six months or two years after you have achieved your goal?
How will your Dream change your life in the future?
Imagine it vividly.
STEP IN, STEP OUT TECHNIQUE
Picture the scene from outside your own body.
Then step into your body and look back at the scene.
Then step back out, then in — and so on until it feels complete.
Always end outside your body.
33 SECOND TECHNIQUE
Choose a simple image which represents your Dream.
Then visualise your Dream for exactly 33 seconds (for maximum effect) with all the joy, desire, bliss and thrill of  anticipation that you can conjure up.
Then let your mind go suddenly blank, or switch to another image.
(It is easiest to time this by tape recording a guided meditation which includes the 33 second technique.)
CONE OF POWER
(Lazaris describes a version of this technique, but it is also well-known within magical traditions.)
Relax deeply, then imagine you are in a grassy clearing in a forest.
See the tall trees, bracken and undergrowth which skirt the clearing.
Hear the birdsong, and the trees rustling in the soft breeze.
Reach down and touch the grass.
Use all your senses to make the scene come alive.
You are now joined by at least two helpers.
They might be sub-personalities, friends, family, guides, your Higher Self, or ‘selves’ you have been in other lifetimes.
Allow them to be whoever they are, trusting the first images that come to mind.
Discuss with your helpers what you wish to programme for, listening for any comments or suggestions.
Then join hands in a circle, feeling their hands in yours — and picture your Dream, in symbolic form, in the centre of your circle.
Surround the object with a small cone of light.
Now, along with your helpers, begin to raise that cone of light, little by little, by focusing upon it and feeling your desire.
Watch the cone of power slowly growing until it is as tall as you.
Allow the energy to build and build, pouring your intense desire and imagination into the cone, knowing that your helpers are focusing too.
The cone begins to vibrate more and more — then it explodes into thousands of fragments of light, which fall gently around you.
Celebrate your success, thank your helpers — and gently come back to the room.
7.
Begin to live your Dream.
Whatever you desire, start thinking and acting as though it were already true — in whatever small ways are possible.
If you want to make a trip to China then, even while it seems an impossible dream, start planning that trip.
Purchase a guidebook, and decide which areas to visit.
Estimate how much it will all cost.
Talk to people who have been to China, and make a note of their advice and recommendations.
Start buying one or two items for the trip.
See yourself as someone who will be going to China.
Don't view it as a game you are playing.
Believe totally that it will happen.
Do not even entertain the possibility that it will not.
Relax — and let it happen.
The right shot at the right moment does not come because you do not let go of yourself.
You do not wait for fulfilment, but brace yourself for failure.
(Zen In The Art Of Archery)
If you desire a loving, intimate relationship, ask yourself how you would think, feel and behave if you were in that relationship — and do it now .
Make yourself a candlelit dinner for one.
Go to the theatre alone.
Walk along the beach at sunset.
Buy yourself flowers.
Wear sensual clothes.
Be warm and loving towards other people.
Act as if it were already true.
If you want a new car, then cherish your beaten-up old Ford as if it were a gleaming red convertible.
Polish it with care, and gaze at it with pleasure.
When we act as if we already have certain qualities, experiences, relationships, opportunities or material possessions, we exert a powerful magnetic attraction for what we want to come into our lives.
The subconscious mind hates inconsistency, so if you begin to believe in abundance, and it sees you living in a tiny hovel with a leaking roof, it will start working overtime to correct the imbalance.
This doesn't mean becoming psychotic.
It  doesn't mean pretending you cannot see the peeling wallpaper and moth-eaten curtains, and going wild with a credit card.
It means firmly conveying the message that you no longer want to create this reality, that you now choose to attract abundance rather than poverty.
Know that you are already rich.
A friend of mine, who was unemployed and in debt at the time, decided that he wished to attend a certain workshop in Hawaii.
He used affirmations daily, and knew that he was going to be there.
Just three days before the workshop, he spoke to a virtual stranger about his firm intention to be in Hawaii in three days' time, saying he had no idea how it would be made possible.
The woman happened to be quite wealthy, cheerfully handed him a large cheque as a gift — and he flew to Hawaii.
Believing in your Dreams is a powerful magnetic force!
We create our own reality.
The world is just an illusion.
Anything is possible.
Miracles can and do happen, if we are willing to stop struggling and allow them into our lives.
Like the White Queen, we should perhaps make a habit of believing as many as six impossible things before breakfast!
Life is a gift, and it is yours to learn how to receive, not to earn.
(Lazaris)
FLOWING WITH YOUR DREAM
Imagine yourself sitting on a grassy riverbank.
Use all of your senses to make the scene come alive.
Then allow your goal or Dream to take on a symbolic form, and appear on the grass in front of you.
The country cottage might become a miniature replica of itself, or an ear of corn, or a vase which stood on the mantelpiece.
Your new job might be symbolised by a contract wrapped in a red  ribbon, or a tiny typewriter, or a bunch of office keys.
Look down at the grass, and simply accept whatever symbol appears.
Now pick up the symbol, and lovingly hold it against you — allowing it to dissolve into your heart.
Now walk towards the water's edge, and step into the river.
Feel the water on your legs as you wade deeper and deeper.
Then allow yourself to be carried gently downstream, going with the flow.
The river joins another river, then another, and the current becomes stronger and stronger, carrying you powerfully and joyfully towards your Dream.
Enjoy flowing with the river for as long as you wish — then gently come back to the room.
Programming always works.
Always.
As Lazaris puts it, we always get what we want — but not necessarily what we asked for.
So if you programme for something which fails to materialise, then you should not blame or punish yourself, or decide it was not meant to be.
You should simply sit down and work out why .
Perhaps your current self-image is at odds with your Dream?
Perhaps you have not processed all your negative thoughts and beliefs?
Perhaps you believe that programming doesn't work?
Or that you don't ‘deserve’ success, or should be happy with life as it is?
Maybe you need to try a different visual image, or another technique?
Perhaps you just have to be a little more patient?
Perhaps —just perhaps — your Higher Self knows that realising this Dream would not be in your best interests right now?
Or — as we shall see in the next chapter — perhaps you have payoffs and hidden agendas which are keeping you stuck?
Whatever the reasons, discovering why programming might have ‘failed’— as well as why it has succeeded — is all part of the learning process.
It is not success in itself that matters, so much as the process of/earning how to create success,learning how to manifest our personal and global visions — learning how to live in a looking-glass world.
Cracks in the mirror
This slowly drifting cloud is pitiful!
What dreamwalkers we all are!
Awakened, the one great truth!
Black rain on the temple roof.
(Dogen Zenji)
There is a story of a king who dwelt in the dark and musty cellars of his magnificent palace.
His servants and courtiers would bring him tales of the beautiful palace and grounds above, but he refused to listen to their mad ramblings.
He was not foolish enough to be taken in by such tales!
So, again and again, he declined even to take a look at what lay above the cellars and lived out his whole life in the semi-darkness.
Life, according to metaphysics, is exactly as we want it to be.
Our Higher Self is eager to give us a life full of love, joy, success and abundance; but it will not do so until we say ‘Yes’, and we keep turning our backs on it.
Day after day, we choose the dimly-lit cellars.
Why do we do this?
What sort of crazy person would choose to have a hard time?
Why do we cling to unhappiness and misfortune?
What is the poison ivy that so jealously guards our dark fortress?
We might kid ourselves that the world ‘out there’ creates our problems, but the truth is that the source of all our suffering is the Ego.
The Ego is the limited, separated, illusory self which cannot see beyond the end of its own  nose.
The Ego is our internal saboteur, our own worst enemy, which con fines us to the dark cellars of our mind.
It is the Ego which leads us to:
worry about trivialities
feel anxious and fearful
feel despairing, helpless and hopeless
feel resentful and guilty
want approval and admiration
take things personally
criticise and judge others
feel empty and dissatisfied
swing from one mood to another
feel hurried and ‘driven’
strive to be ‘perfect’
be concerned with outward appearances and worldly success
focus exclusively on goals and results
cling to the past
be afraid of change
worry about failure, humiliation and rejection
compete rather than cooperate
be manipulative
harm and abuse others
be rigid and inflexible
be unable to live in the present moment
become addicted to drugs or alcohol
desperately seek love and security
want to be ‘special’ to someone
feel that life is futile and meaningless
take ourselves very seriously
wait for the world ‘out there’ to be OK in order to feel OK
The glass in which the ego seeks to see its face is dark indeed.
(A Course In Miracles)
The Ego does have an essential function.
It is Ego that, like a moving camera, shows us what is happening in the world.
Without it, we would not have any conscious awareness.
While we have a physical body, we must have an Ego.
The problem is that it gets out of hand.
The Ego was designed as a mere postal service which delivers messages to our conscious mind.
Instead we allow it to open our letters, read them and tell us how to reply.
Not only that, but we let it choose which letters to show us!
Lazaris. compares the situation to a file clerk who is suddenly promoted to managing director, without having a clue of how the business operates.
In accord with the Peter Principle, we promote the Ego to its level of incompetence.
Our task is to understand our Ego, so that we can recognise its ranting and raving.
It is a slippery customer and will disguise itself in various ways; we must see through its masks, for beyond the Ego lies our true unlimited Self.
Here are five telltale signs that the Ego is in command:
1.
Feeling ‘better than’ or ‘less than’others.
The Ego loves making comparisons — and this can be useful.
After all, we are only able to see a chair, so that we can sit down, by comparing the look of the chair with the ‘look’ of the space around it.
(Or, in the dark, by comparing the feel of the chair with the ‘feel’ of air, or a nearby table.)
The Ego needs to make comparisons, to fulfil its duty as a messenger.
Problems arise when the Ego not only makes comparisons, but makes value judgements.
If someone believed that tables were better than chairs, we would think they were talking nonsense.
But if they tell us it is ‘better’ to be tall, or British, or artistic, or shop at Harrods, we just might take them seriously — yet such ideas are just as meaningless.
The Negative Ego is quite bemused by the concept of equality.
It simply cannot grasp that we are all  unique but equal.
It is the ultimate snob.
Everything has to be compared, and judged as either ‘better than’ or ‘worse than’the alternatives.
The Ego wants us to develop talents and acquire knowledge, not for the sheer joy and challenge of playing the clarinet, reading Proust or rewiring the house, but so that we will be flattered and admired.
The Ego wants a loving relationship with the sole aim of feeling ‘special’ to someone — not from a desire to be loving and to be truly intimate.
The Ego does charitable work in order to pat itself on the back, and feel self-righteous — not from a sense of love and concern.
The Ego cannot love; it is afraid of love.
It is selfish and arrogant.
It has delusions of grandeur.
Its driving force is to feel better than other people, to be separate from others, to feel ‘special’.
If you take up metaphysics, for example, Ego will delight in trying to convince you that this makes you ‘better than’ other people.
After all, this is the New Spirituality; all the others are behind the times!
With metaphysics, you can create miracles.
Wonderful, says Ego!
The Ego loves playing games — and spiritual games are as good as any other.
As long as it makes you ‘special’, Ego will go along with it (and will ignore the fact that specialness and spirituality are quite incompatible).
Ego relishes any notion that there is one ‘true’ religion, which you happen to belong to!
In reality, of course, nothing makes us better or worse than anyone else.
We are all unique.
We each have our own mixture of qualities, characteristics, abilities and shortcomings — and if we judge others, we are judging ourselves.
After all, the world is a mirror.
If we totally loved ourselves, we would not feel the need to judge others.
However, this doesn't mean we should pretend to love everyone and everything, handing out pink roses to passers-by in a sentimental haze.
Nor that we should not form opinions or make evaluations.
On the contrary, it's  part of our ever-changing uniqueness that we have our own opinions and beliefs, that we prefer certain sports, hobbies and interests, that we enjoy the company of some people and not others, that we like certain poets, novelists and playwrights and loathe others — and that is fine.
It is when we use our uniqueness to feel ‘better than’ that we separate ourselves from others and thereby create misery and suffering.
On the other hand, putting ourselves down — feeling ‘less than’— is just another way of expressing the Ego.
‘Oh, I'm just a miserable earthworm!
Don't bother with me!’
‘I'm so dull and boring.’
‘I'm utterly useless., ‘I'm just a nuisance.’
‘Why would anyone want to spend time with me?’
‘I'm just a neurotic mess.’
Seeing ourselves as less important than anyone else, or less worthy or deserving than others, is just another form of arrogance, disguised as humility or neurosis.
When we transcend the Ego, we know that we are all equal.
FEELING SPECIAL
1)
Make a list of what you secretly think makes you ‘better than’ other people, or ‘special’in any way.
For example: being intelligent, stupid, wealthy, poor, male, female, young, old, attractive, ugly, successful, happily married, single, tolerant, strong, athletic, sensitive, kind-hearted, loving, creative, talented, spiritual, insightful, well-educated, healthy, having a chronic illness, belonging to a certain race or religion, being left-wing or right-wing, being ecologically aware, being involved in personal growth, working for charity, belonging to a certain profession, having a traumatic childhood….
Be honest with yourself, and list all of your ‘better thans’ and ‘specialness’.
Now take a good look at these ‘better thans’, and see how ridiculous they are.
Think them through.
Remember that we create our own reality; we have each chosen to be  exactly as we are, and for good reasons.
(If you pride yourself on being intelligent, for example, bear in mind that someone else might have chosen to have a limited intellect in this life in order to learn from the experience, perhaps because they have over-valued intelligence in the past.)
Choose two or three ‘better thans’ which feel particularly powerful.
Are they maintained by anger from the past, which you hold on to?
How might you think or behave differently if you gave up these better thans?
Try out this new way of being, next time you catch yourself using a ‘better than’.
How does it feel?
2)
Repeat the above exercise with a list of what makes you ‘less than’ others.
What makes you a ‘miserable earthworm’ compared with other people?
Recognise that this is a form of self-importance — that everyone is perfect just as they are.
2.
Playing victim or martyr.
‘Victim’ and ‘martyr’are two of the most dangerous games that Ego can play.
Both are games which can destroy our lives, unless we simply refuse to play them any more.
Annie was a classic example of a victim.
She had been a battered baby, grew up in a succession of foster homes, and then married a man who regularly beat her up.
When she was heavily pregnant with their third child, her husband threw her against a chest of drawers, then kicked her, and she was taken to hospital with three broken ribs.
Amazingly, the baby survived.
A social worker was called in and, with a lot of support, Annie moved to a women's refuge and then to a small flat.
Within months, she was in severe financial difficulties, and had become involved with another man who, according to her friends, had a history of being violent.
‘I know I'm a fool,’ she said, ‘but I just can't seem to help myself!’
She knew she was messing up her life, and carried on regardless.
‘If only I'd had a stable childhood, maybe none of this would have happened….’
Meanwhile, countless helping professionals scurried around trying to help her, feeling more and more helpless themselves.
Like poor Annie, many people find that being in crisis is their only way of asking for love and concern.
They are afraid that if life went well, if they were able to cope, everyone would desert them.
If they weep and wail and gnash their teeth enough, their hope is that someone will rescue them, sort out all their problems,love them.
Of course, Annie did not want to be beaten up, but she didn't feel that she deserved any better, so she attracted violent men into her reality.
‘Victims’ are magnets for disaster.
‘Oh, I know I shouldn't feel sorry for myself, but it's all so awful !, is their constant refrain.
Victims create trauma after trauma, then sit back while others try to help — and fail.
They live in the past, believing that if only they had had loving parents, or if only little sister hadn't been born, or if only they hadn't married so-and-so, then everything would be fine.
They express their anger by destroying their own lives and thereby hurting others, while seeming to be wide-eyed and innocent.
The bad news is that everyone plays victim at times.
Whenever we blame luck, fate, circumstances, heredity, our childhood, society, the government, other people or God — for anything that happens in our lives — we are stuck in ‘victim mentality’, and so disempowering ourselves.
The payoffs for being a victim are simple: it allows us to avoid responsibility for our lives, to wallow in self-pity rather than taking care of ourselves, and to punish others.
This does not mean that victims are consciously playing this game, but rather that they have learnt to live this way, not realising there is any better alternative.
When we come across a victim then, we should never attempt to solve their problems for them, since this only reinforces the idea that they are helpless victims of circumstance, with no strengths and resources of their own; it disempowers them still further.
Nor should we  blame them for their predicament.
Instead we should provide them with the means of taking charge of their own lives; then — if and when they are ready — help them to understand their payoffs and hidden agendas, so that they can choose to stop playing this destructive game.
Martyrhood is rather more subtle and sophisticated — and therefore even more life-threatening, because it can go unrecognised.
Yet we all have a martyr within us.
Lazaris suggests' that if we ever experience any of the following, then that is our martyr, slinking out from its hideyhole:
1.
Feeling misunderstood.
2.
Feeling unappreciated.
3.
Feeling hopeless.
4.
Feeling burdened with unbelievable demands.
5.
Feeling saddled with insoluble problems.
6.
Feeling innocent of all responsibility.
7.
Feeling judged and treated wrongly.
‘But I really am unappreciated!’
Perhaps so, and you created that reality.
Why did you do that?
During the decade I worked in the National Health Service, I saw countless martyrs — and a good proportion of them were the staff.
Conversations in stall rooms frequently centred around the pressures of waiting lists, the burden of heavy caseloads, the ‘hopeless cases,, the lack of appreciation from management, the absence of support and the inevitability of working countless hours of unpaid overtime, at the expense of our personal lives.
‘Poor, wonderful us!’ was the unspoken consensus.
Staff meetings reverberated with heavy sighs (martyrs are very fond of sighing) and we were trying to help our clients sort out their lives!
Not surprisingly, we rarely identified our clients as being martyrs.
It would have been rather too close to home.
Martyrs seldom complain openly about their lot.
They usually deny feeling sorry for themselves —‘No, everything's fine!’— but they make it clear that life is tough for them.
They feel weighed down with responsibilities, but rarely accept any help.
(‘I'll just struggle along on my own.’)
They associate suffering with saintliness.
Whereas victims live in the past, martyrs live in the future: a golden age when their burdens will be lifted, their efforts will be recognised, and they will be fully vindicated.
But somehow that future never arrives.
While writing this book, I slipped back into my martyr for a couple of weeks.
I found myself working twelve to fourteen hours a day, barely coming up for air, and looking forward to finishing the book so that life could begin again — rather than enjoying the day-by-day process of writing, and living life to the full.
My external world began to reflect that all was not well.
My garden wall collapsed in a storm; a tyre was slashed on my car and I received several ‘wrong number’ phone calls.
I struggled for some time to understand the metaphors until an inner voice said to me during meditation: ‘You're in martyr over this book.’
Suddenly, it all made sense!
I looked at my beliefs and payoffs, reorganised my writing schedule, arranged several outings — and felt an enormous sense of relief.
Lazaris describes martyrhood as ‘silent and righteous anger that seeks silent and righteous revenge’.
Martyrs, he suggests, are out to punish.
They are convinced that they are the only ones who suffer, and refuse to see the impact they have on others.
Martyrs are never in the wrong.
They always justify and rationalise their own behaviour.
It is always other people who are at fault.
They simply feel misunderstood and unappreciated.
As parents, martyrs teach their children how to play the game.
(‘Look at all I've done for you, and this is how you behave!’
‘No, you go out and have fun with your father.
I'll just stay in and scrub the kitchen floor, wash your clothes and make your dinner.’)
Children of well-developed martyrs learn that it is wrong to enjoy life, wrong to fulfil your own needs, wrong to express anger directly and that ‘love’ means self-sacrifice.
Unless they see through the game, such children grow up to be victims and martyrs themselves.
Martyrs breed martyrs.
Jessica was the daughter of a martyr and had learnt the game well.
At the age of 17, she became pregnant to an older man who immediately deserted her.
She was rejected by her family and moved to another town, where she struggled to bring up her son alone and unsupported.
When her son was badly injured in a road accident, she nursed him to the point of exhaustion, refusing outside help, and comforted herself with the thought that if only her family knew what she was going through, they would rush to her rescue.
She became involved with a married man, who eventually ended the affair — but ten years later, Jessica was still convinced that, one day, he would realise that he loved her, arrive at her door with a ring and they would live happily ever after.
In fact, her wardrobe was stuffed with new clothes, shoes, perfume and cosmetics which she was ‘saving’ for this fantasised future.
In the meantime, she wore the same old rags week after week, lived in poverty and was ‘faithful’ to her ex-lover.
I had been seeing Jessica for twelve months before she admitted to herself that her lover would never come back.
she had ever wanted him to.
It took a great deal of courage — and self-love — to admit that all her suffering had been in vain.
Unfortunately, Christianity has been built upon a classic image of martyrhood: Christ on the cross.
Suffer — and get your reward in heaven!
Ego is the self-righteous martyr inside each of us.
It is the devil within; and if we recognise martyrhood in friends, relatives and colleagues, then we should remember: the world is our mirror!
MARTYRHOOD
1)
Consider the seven signs of martyrhood listed above, and remember when you have experienced those thoughts and feelings.
How did you behave in those situations?
Who were you angry with?
Who were you trying to punish?
(It might be someone who wasn't even there, such as a Parent inside your head.)
2)
Write down your payoffs for being a martyr.
Why do you play such a destructive game?
Do you enjoy feeling sorry for yourself?
Does it make you feel special, or ‘one-up’ on others?
Do you imagine you'll somehow be rewarded for being a martyr?
Is it your way of being ‘powerful’?
Is it your only way of expressing anger?
Who do you feel unable to forgive?
Do you believe that life is full of suffering?
Or that it is saintly to suffer?
Are you reluctant to accept help from others, because you hate feeling dependent or grateful?
Is it a way of avoiding responsibility for your life?
Do you cling to problems because you do not know what else to think about, and what else to discuss with friends?
(It is not enough to say that you learnt martyrhood from your parents.
You chose to play the same game.
Why?)
3)
Now write down the costs of being a martyr.
What is the price you pay?
How might life be different if you gave up playing this game?
How would you then feel about yourself?
Imagine yourself undergoing a sudden transformation, in which the martyr is forever banished from your life.
How does the ‘new you’ behave, think, feel, talk?
How does the change affect your personal relationships, work, finances, leisure and health?
4)
Finally, make the decision: are you prepared to give up your payoffs in favour of the benefits of losing your martyr?
If so, begin to be that new person from now on.
Whenever you can, catch yourself before you play martyr — and instead be loving, forgiving, honest, grateful, responsible, hopeful, courageous.
3.
Denying responsibility.
Ego is desperate to deny and avoid responsibility.
Whatever goes wrong in our lives, it will point the finger at others — our parents, our boss, our partner or ex-partner, our children, God, fate, the government….
It is always someone else's fault.
If someone is angry with you, Ego says they're bad-tempered and unreasonable.
If you fail to get a report in on time, Ego protests it was too tough a deadline.
If a worn tyre bursts, it's the manufacturer's fault.
The buck never stops with Ego!
The Ego is an expert at being defensive, at rationalising and justifying its own behaviour, at seeing itself as the hapless victim of a cruel, harsh world.
‘Poor me!’ is one of its stock phrases.
Ego takes great pleasure in wallowing in self-pity, and defending itself against all charges, whatever the cost to others.
It is dishonest and manipulative.
Blaming others or opting out of responsibility is a reliable sign that Ego is in control.
‘Look what they did to me!’
‘It isn't my problem.’
‘I was nowhere near it!’
‘I was just following orders.’
‘It's the government's fault.’
‘Nothing to do with me.’
‘Men/women are all the same!’
‘S/he made me do it!’
‘I can't do it because of him/her.’
‘This is all your fault.’
Or, in a more patronising manner, ‘Yes, I accept that you see it as my doing.’
(Or, even worse ‘Yes, I know I'm hurting you — but you're creating it!’)
Since we create our own reality, blaming others is nonsensical.
What's more, it disempowers us.
While we believe that a problem is all someone else's fault, we are powerless to resolve it, since we cannot change other people; we can only change ourselves.
Why give our power away to others?
The more responsibility we take for our lives, the more power we have to create life exactly as we want it to be.
Responsibility is not about duty or guilt.
It is response-ability : the ability to act.
The greatest freedom is to be responsible.
(Lazaris)
Taking responsibility does not mean blaming oneself.
‘Oh, stupid, terrible me!
I created having a car crash last week!’
This is just giving in to your Ego, which loves to play ‘Ain't I awful!’
If you have a car crash, then yes, you did create or allow it, but don't blame and harass yourself for that.
Accept it.
Try to understand why you might have chosen to do that.
Learn from it, and forgive yourself.
Don't pretend it was all the other driver's fault, even if they did crash into the back of you, or were driving recklessly.
From an insurance point of view, maybe they were ‘responsible’— and they must deal with that.
But once your anger has subsided, realise that you allowed the crash to happen.
You attracted it into your reality.
In a loving way, ask yourself why you did that?
What negative beliefs did it reinforce?
What are your payoffs?
There is no blame — just responsibility .
As we accept more responsibility, so we empower and enrich our lives.
TAKING RESPONSIBILITY
1)
Think about times when you have blamed others, or refused to take responsibility for your life.
Are there any areas of life in which you consistently deny responsibility?
Looking back, what might you have learnt if you had explored your own role in creating those situations?
Might other problems have been prevented?
2)
Consider the successes you have had in your life.
(All too often, we take responsibility for failure, but not for success.
‘Oh, I was just lucky.’)
What has worked out well for you?
What have you achieved?
Now look at how you created those successes.
What were your positive beliefs and attitudes?
Thinking back, did you use desire, imagination and expectancy?
How did you succeed?
What can you learn from those successes?
3)
Over the next few days, practise taking responsibility for everything that happens.
(Express your feelings at the time,then accept that you created that reality.)
How does it feel to be more responsible?
4.
Being busy-busy.
The Ego loves to clutter up our lives with meaningless tasks, clutter and trivia, so that we're ‘too busy’ to grow and change.
It convinces us that it is essential to read a daily newspaper, to watch TV, to mow the lawn, to iron the sheets, to read the junk mail, to darn our socks — just in case we decide to do something creative, challenging, productive, intimate or enjoyable instead.
The Ego is constantly chattering about its fears, worries and doubts, cluttering up our head with thoughts that go nowhere — just in case we decide to think for ourselves, to question, to explore new possibilities, to feel our suppressed emotions, to reach beyond our old ways of being, to develop a new vision.
Whenever you find yourself being busy-busy yet getting nowhere, you can be sure that your ‘clutterbug’ has taken control and that you are running away from change.
You don't take a monkey and make it into a mountain.
A monkey is a monkey and will move from tree to tree.
A mountain is a mountain and will maintain itself as mountain.
Your ego is the monkey, your Self is the mountain….
You can choose to use monkey mind or feel mountain.
(Bartholomew)
THE CLUTTERBUG
How does ‘the clutterbug’ express itself in your life?
What is the clutter and trivia which absorbs your precious time?
How could you simplify your life, to create time and space for what really matters to you?
What could you stop doing, or devote less time to, or ask someone else to do?
Imagine that you are expanding, and seeing your life from a higher perspective.
Where do you really wish to focus your time and energy?
Keep asking yourself throughout the day ‘Is this the best use of my time?’
5.
Flirting with disaster.
The Ego adores melodrama.
It enjoys nothing more than people's lives being destroyed — including our own.
Its greatest enemy is inner peace.
Whatever we most fear in life is exactly what our Ego would like to create for us.
It wants us to live out that gruesome fantasy, to find out whether we could handle it.
We fear that disaster because part of us is hell-bent on making it happen!
Lazaris suggests that whatever we most pride in ourselves gives a clue to our Ego's fantasies.
(Look back at your list of ‘better thans.’)
One of my ‘better thans’ is being very efficient and well-organised — my rising sign is Virgo — and I have been known to smile smugly when others display their lack of organisation, slowness or an inability to spell.
However, my corresponding Ego fantasy is of losing my wits to such an extent that I am unable to work; I am living in a filthy bedsit and the floor is strewn with pieces of paper that I am unable to make sense of, final demands which have not been paid, dirty clothes, plants which have fallen over, unwashed plates and mugs — and I am curled up in a foetal ball, wishing the world would go away!
(And my payoffs?
Self-pity, and an escape from responsibility.)
Have you ever secretly flirted with the idea that it might be rather glamorous or exciting to be widowed young, to go blind, to have cancer or AIDS, to go bankrupt, to be burgled, to be a social outcast, to go crazy, to become homeless, to be a drug addict, even to commit suicide…?
If so, beware!
You are being seduced by your Ego's love of melodrama and, since it can feel thrilling to dice with death, you might be tempted to walk rather too close to the edge of the cliff.
Jack came from a family which was riddled with alcohol abuse.
Both parents, his brother, and several other relatives drank very heavily, and an uncle had died from liver cirrhosis.
Jack had always been teetotal, since he was convinced that if he ever touched alcohol, he would  become dependent.
Yet one day, in his early forties, he purchased a large bottle of vodka — in order to prove, he lied to himself, that he was able to resist ‘the demon drink’.
He was teetering on the edge of the cliff.
FLIRTING WITH DISASTER
What are your Ego's most destructive fantasies?
Start from your list of ‘better thans’, and work out what the opposite extreme would look like.
Or think about any fantasy of disaster which has repeatedly flitted across your mind over the years.
Write it out in detail.
Visualise it.
Immerse yourself in it.
Feel the fear, as you realise that your Ego actually wants this to happen!
What would your ‘payoffs’ be if it came true?
(Don't worry that visualising the scene might make it materialise.
It is suffering such fears which make them more powerful.)
Now decide whether or not you want to move towards that ‘probable future’.
If not, then put a large red cross through the notes you have written.
Tear the paper into bits, and flush it down the toilet.
The Ego, then, has a whole array of negative beliefs, payoffs and hidden agenda which limit or even wreck our lives, and block our attempts to programme what we want.
It glorifies in struggle, self-pity, self-importance, self-righteousness, self-sacrifice, punishing others, avoiding and denying responsibility, dishonesty and manipulation.
It is afraid of intimacy, afraid of happiness, afraid of having to feel gratitude.
It fills our lives with trivia and clutter.
It makes us feel guilty, resentful and anxious, and encourages us to cling to the past.
Each of us has our own favourite payoffs, the golden oldies that we return to again and again such as‘When in doubt, just feel sorry for yourself.’
Which of the payoffs, games and hidden agendas above feel uncomfortably  familiar to you?
Which make you cringe slightly, or shift about in your seat?
Which make you think ‘No, that couldn't be me.
Could it…?’
If you are honest with yourself, you will know.
Who is the third who walks always beside you?
When I count, there are only you and I together
But when I look ahead up the white road
There is always another one walking beside you
Gliding wrapt in a brown mantle, hooded
I do not know whether a man or a woman
— But who is that on the other side of you?
(T. S. Eliot)
BEYOND EGO
Relax deeply, and imagine yourself walking through a beautiful forest.
Feel your feet on the ground.
See the sunlight dappling through the trees.
Hear the birdsong, and the crackle of twigs underfoot.
Touch a fallen trunk, or the ferns at your feet.
Smell the rich, damp forest air.
Follow the path as it winds its way through the forest.
Then something emerges from behind a tree ahead.
It is one of your payoffs or blockages.
(Perhaps self-pity, or specialness, or scarcity belief, or blame.)
See what form it takes — perhaps an animal, a mythical creature, a fictional character, a younger version of yourself, or someone you know.
Allow yourself to see it clearly.
The person or creature is blocking your path, so walk up and speak with it.
Assume that it has been trying to help you , in some misguided way.
Ask what it is trying to do for you, so that you can understand and forgive.
Assure it that you now have other ways of handling life, or new beliefs, that it can now help you in some other way.
Give it a new vision of your future, and ask it to join you.
Then allow yourself to merge with this aspect of yourself.
(Repeat as often as you wish, with other inner blockages.)
Then stride joyfully along the path, until you come across a waterfall in the depths of the forest.
Take off your clothes, and stand beneath the waterfall.
Allow it to wash away the last traces of your old payoff or negative belief.
Then gently come back to the room.
In case we become aware of its tricks, the Ego tries to throw us off the scent, by projecting aspects of itself onto the outside world.
As Lazaris humorously puts it, the Ego is not very smart, but it's smarter than we are!
While Ego is playing its ‘better than’ games, for example, we will see our own worst qualities outside ourselves, in other people.
When it chooses ‘less than’ games, we will project our good qualities on to others.
The world is a mirror.
If we look around at our friends, partner, family, colleagues and acquaintances, we see our own reflection.
‘Richard is so arrogant.’
‘Mary has her head in the clouds.’
‘John is very kind-hearted., ‘Julia thrives on having problems.’
‘Tony can only think about himself.’
All of these comments might be qualities which we refuse to see in ourselves, and could guide us along the path towards self-discovery.
‘But Richard really is arrogant!’
Well, yes, he might be.
But why do you choose to comment on it, even to yourself?
Why have you attracted him into your reality?
Whatever we most dislike or fear in others is sure to be an unacknowledged aspect of ourselves.
What we see others grappling with reflects our own struggle.
Of course, this doesn't mean that if a man exposes himself to you, you must be repressing that urge within yourself.
But it will reflect some aspect of you.
Perhaps your judgements and ‘better thans’ about people who do such things?
Or your negative beliefs about men?
Or maybe you have a desire to ‘expose’ yourself in some way — perhaps as an artist or politician — but are blocking yourself through fear of humiliation or rejection?
If the ‘mirror’ is not a  simple reflection, it will be a dream-like metaphor.
THE MIRROR
1)
Think about the comments you make about people you know — both people you particularly like, and those who cause you stress and heartache.
What qualities do you most like and dislike in other people?
If you are honest, can you see those qualities — good and bad — as aspects of yourself?
(If not, how might they be mirroring your beliefs?)
What do you see others struggling with?
2)
If you are having difficulties with someone, assume that the other person is an aspect of yourself which needs to be integrated, and try the Gestalt ‘empty chair’ technique.
Sit in a chair, and face another chair.
Imagine that the other person is sitting in the other chair — and start telling them why you find them so troublesome.
Then move to the other chair and answer back, as the other person.
Then back again, replying to him or her.
Back to the other chair, and so on— moving every time you pause for thought.
Continue until there has been some resolution of the inner conflict.
Jung termed these disowned aspects of ourselves ‘the Shadow’, and warned that they can become a destructive influence on our lives, unless we shine a light on them.
The Shadow is dark, brooding Heathcliff to Catherine.
It is the evil Mr Hyde to Dr Jekyll.
It can lead us to our own down fall.
As Jung pointed out, it is necessary for us to have a Shadow, since we cannot be everything that it would be possible for us to be.
We must choose which aspects of ourself to express to the world.
However, if we kid ourselves that we are all sweetness and light, then our angry and hateful Shadow will manifest itself elsewhere — in other people, in our view of the world, in our body, and in dreams (perhaps as a dark, shadowy figure, or a  thoroughly unpleasant character).
Our Shadow will repeatedly taunt us: ‘Look at me!
Here I am!’ and we can either pretend that it is ‘out there’, or we can take a serious look at ourselves.
At a social level, prisons are ghettos for one portion of our collective Shadow, as manifested in the world.
Criminals kindly act out the violent, greedy, selfish, destructive and immoral aspects of ourselves, so that we can pretend those nasty qualities are ‘out there’, and nothing to do with us.
It used to amaze me that we treat criminals in a way which is guaranteed to perpetuate their self-image as a ‘criminal’ and reinforce negative beliefs about self and society, and then seem surprised at the high rate of recidivism.
Yet there is an explanation for this madness.
We treat criminals in a disrespectful and often dehumanising way so that they will continue to express our Shadow.
To their credit, a few prisoners do manage to discover their loving, creative, expansive side — Jimmy Boyle being a celebrated example — but this does break the unspoken rule.
Criminals are not supposed to reveal that they are as human as the rest of us!
Likewise, most mental hospitals are carefully designed to drive people crazy, and reinforce pseudo-medical ‘labelling’, despite superficial appearances to the contrary.
Those who have been gallant enough to go ‘mad’ for the rest of us are supposed to stay mad, otherwise it threatens our belief that craziness is ‘out there’.
If we expose shadows to the light, they disappear as if by magic.
However, most of us are afraid, or merely ashamed of our Shadow side — so it remains in the dark, and as we shine the light more brightly on our conscious self, the shadows deepen.
This does not mean that we should act out the ‘dark’ side of our nature.
All we need do is experience and acknowledge our Shadow self, so that we no longer need to project it onto the outside world.
As long as we kid  ourselves that we could not even imagine wanting to murder someone, for example, those murderous impulses will be acted out by others, as a mirror of our Shadow.
It is not enough to say the words ‘I suppose I could murder someone’; we must own it within our hearts.
Only when we own our Shadow can we become whole.
(Those who disown their shadow often seem shallow or unreal.)
Talking of the Shadow is, of course, a convenient shorthand, since we have many Shadow selves — just as we have many Egos — and some of these selves carry our repressed positive qualities.
Exploring our Shadow does not only reveal the gremlins of our subconscious mind; it also uncovers some sparkling gems.
(I was delighted to meet two of my own positive Shadow selves in meditation — a friendly giant who represented my powerfulness, obscured by my gentle facade; and an el fin creature symbolising my magical self, which was still being suppressed by my ‘scientific’ beliefs.)
Since the Shadow is the complement of our conscious self, it is easy to guess what might lurk in the darkness.
Which aspects of yourself do you consciously acknowledge?
What are you shocked, frightened or disgusted by in others?
Which qualities do you most envy in others?
Which emotions do you rarely or never express?
What would your opposite, your mirror-image twin be like?
Therein lies your Shadow.
Uplift yourself from your lower self, even as an elephant draws himself up from a muddy swamp.
(The Dhammapada)
THE SHADOW
Picture yourself alone at night in a strange house.
Look around you, and see what you are wearing.
The wind howls outside, and beats against the window panes.
The room is dimly lit.
Suddenly you hear a rattling at the back door.
Someone is there!
Someone is trying to get in!
You feel afraid.
Now find yourself outside in the dark garden, concealed behind a tree.
Look at the back door.
Who is trying to get in?
(It might be a familiar figure, someone from past ages, an animal, or mythological character.
It might be anyone or anything.)
Remind yourself that this figure cannot hurt you, and approach.
When the figure turns, say ‘May peace be with you’, and request to hear who it is and why it is banging at your door.
Ask what qualities in you it represents.
When you have finished your conversation, thank it for its help, and see a shaft of light come out of the sky and illuminate this aspect of your Shadow.
The figure will then disappear.
Finally, move into the place it occupied, and try to breathe in and ‘own’ the qualities it represented — even though you might never choose to express them.
Then gently come back to the room.
(This exercise can be repeated several times to discover other Shadow selves.)
By now, your Negative Ego might be feeling a little nervous.
It might be attempting to bluff its way through this chapter.
‘Well, yes, I'll do these exercises when I have time, but right now I'm really rather busy.’
‘Programming sounds much more fun than all this Ego and Shadow stuff.’
‘I think I have good reason to feel sorry for myself!’
‘I have my Ego well under control.’
‘Oh, I know what's in my Shadow.
I wonder what the next chapter is about?’
Listen to yourself !
According to the ancient wisdom, spiritual growth involves transcending the limited and short-sighted Ego to make way for the Self.
Liberation does not mean slaying the dragon, but rising above it, growing beyond it, seeing through its tricks and laughing gently and lovingly when it snorts fire at us.
When we observe the Ego instead of hating and fighting it, we become free.
When we observe the Ego instead of taking it seriously, we find inner peace.
When we observe the Ego instead of identifying with it, we discover our Self.
You do not have to destroy every cloud to see the sky.
All you have to do is keep remembering you are the Sky.
(Bartholomew)
THE SKY
Imagine yourself in a lush, green landscape, with hills rising around you.
A stream flows nearby, bubbling and gurgling, and you sit beneath a large, shady tree.
Use all your senses to find yourself there.
Next, look up at the blue sky — and notice a small, dark cloud drifting past.
Now find yourself as that cloud, looking down on the landscape, seeing the stream and the large tree.
Notice a small, white, fluffy cloud not far away and become that cloud, gently moving across the sky.
Finally, become the sky.
Rise above the landscape, and experience yourself as the whole sky — with clouds drifting inconsequentially through your vastness.
Experience the limitlessness of being the sky….
Then gently come back to the room.
We cannot — and should not — destroy the Ego, but we can learn to recognise, accept and move beyond it.
Through knowing what happens if we empower Ego, and by understanding our payoffs, we can decide to change — to choose love rather than fear, joy rather than struggle, forgiveness rather than punishment, cooperation rather than competition, honesty rather than deception, responsibility rather than blame; and to do so every day of our lives.
Listening to the whispers
Lightning flashes,
Sparks shower,
In one blink of your eye
You have missed seeing.
(Mumon)
Let's suppose that your kitchen sink is blocked.
The mundane world view says this is just ‘one of those things’, that you have unwittingly allowed vegetable peelings or food scraps to bung it up — and so you probably did.
But what a barren, limited perspective!
A metaphysical world view suggests that almost any event can be a ‘whisper’, a message, a stimulus to growth, which you have created — if only you would listen to yourself.
We're so brainwashed into seeing the world as random and meaningless that we can ignore countless messages from our Higher Self every day.
We discover damp rising from the cellar, and dismiss it as ‘bad luck’.
Two light bulbs need replacing on the same day, and we say it's just a ‘coincidence’.
A flock of seabirds lands in our garden, a hundred miles from the coast, and we call it ‘curious’.
Yet all of these events are metaphors, helpful signposts upon our inner journey, if we will only learn to read them.
Nothing is random.
Nothing is meaningless.
If you had a dream about a blocked sink, perhaps you would take note of its intended message.
(That you are blocking up your emotions?
Or refusing to let go of  something you no longer need?)
But when it happens in our waking life, we tend to dismiss such incidents as meaningless.
Yet life is a dream-metaphor, which we create just as surely as we create our dreams — and our Higher Self will often communicate through ‘mundane’ everyday events.
If you ignore the ‘whisper’ of the blocked sink, you might switch on the radio a few days later, and immediately hear of a severe traffic jam in the Dartford Tunnel.
Another blockage.
It's the same message again!
But did you ‘hear’ it this time?
If these gentle whispers are not heard, your Higher Self might turn up the volume a little.
After all, it is yearning for you to grow.
Perhaps you will suffer from a bout of constipation.
Another blockage!
But you decide to take some laxatives, again seeing it as a ‘meaningless’ incident.
So your Higher Self lovingly sends you an emotional trauma, in the hope that this might release the blocked-up emotions.
Instead, you numb yourself with tranquillisers or alcohol, or bury yourself in work.
Eventually, if you continue to stubbornly ignore the message, the whispers might develop into a loud ‘shout’, such as bowel cancer: the same message again, several years on.
Let's take another example.
Suppose you discover that your car has been clamped.
The mundane world view would suggest that you've simply been foolish or unlucky, and that's all there is to it.
A metaphysical world view raises the question of why you attracted that event.
What were you trying to tell yourself?
In what way are you ‘immobilising’ yourself, preventing yourself from moving on or changing?
Perhaps you are blaming others for your stuckness, instead of taking responsibility for your own life?
If you ignore the ‘whisper’ of the wheel clamp, then you might choose to twist your ankle to give yourself the same message again.
(This isn't to say that twisting an ankle always means that you are immobilising yourself.
It might  carry a myriad of different messages.
Only you can know what your ‘whispers’ mean — by going within, and asking.)
Another example: imagine that you buy a bar of chocolate, and later discover that you were short-changed by five pounds.
Instead of allowing this to be a frustrating and pointless event, ask yourself why you created it.
What is the ‘whisper’ from your inner self?
Does it reflect your belief that you are hopelessly absent-minded?
Or that people are mostly crooks?
Is it a metaphor for throwing away your resources — your time, money, energy — or allowing others to take advantage of you?
Perhaps you felt guilty about ignoring a charity collection, and so decided to punish yourself?
Or perhaps it is an opportunity to be more philosophical, less clinging, over money?
Perhaps the bar of chocolate was significant?
Are you ‘short-changing yourself by eating junk food, when your inner guidance keeps whispering that you should eat a healthy diet?
Or is it an opportunity for you to be assertive — to go back to the shop, and request that they cash up and return your fiver?
Or perhaps several of these?
Which of these feels intuitively right?
Which possibility sends a tingle down your spine, or gives you that ‘Aha!’ sensation?
Which sounds painfully familiar?
Which makes you feel energised?
Every event is an opportunity to learn and grow — if only we can learn to listen to the whispers; and the more we listen, the more whispers we are sent.
When your Higher Self finds a way of speaking to you, it makes the most of it!
It's crucial to realise, to remember, to know, that this is not just an intriguing way of looking at our lives.
It's the way our system of physical reality works.
Life is not like a dream metaphor; it is a dream metaphor!
Everyday events constantly mirror our inner world, offer guidance, or provide opportunities to develop personal qualities, skills and talents.
Our everyday world is a truly magical oracle.
Not only are you
the shadow
that is dancing on the wall,
but you are the hand
that makes the shadow,
and you are the light.
(Emmanuel)
Of course, this doesn't mean that every cigarette butt on the street has a personal message just for you!
The Ego clutters up our reality with a great deal of unnecessary detail, in the hope that we'll miss the ‘whispers’— so we need to be discerning about what we pay attention to.
Since most people still live within a mundane world view, we also need to keep a foot in both worlds, to stay grounded in common-sense reality, to acknowledge that ‘This might sound crazy, but I think that blocked sink (or flock of seagulls, or broken light bulb) was a message to myself.’
Any strange or quirky event is sure to be a whisper.
Earlier this year, I set my cassette recorder to tape Bach's Magnificat in D from an original recording.
Then I sat down to meditate, with the sacred choral music playing softly in the background.
A few minutes later, I was disturbed by the sound of ‘boogie-woogie’ dance music — coming from my tape recorder!
On investigating, I found that the newly recorded cassette had inexplicably taped this lively, foot-tapping music, although the original tape was indeed Bach throughout.
I puzzled over this for a week or so, before a second whisper clarified the message.
I had recorded my favourite radio serial one evening, along with twenty minutes of a programme which happened to follow it.
I didn't bother to switch off the tape, and found myself listening to a religious programme, which suggested that suffering, guilt and penance is the path towards righteousness.
Just as I mentally registered this message, the tape suddenly began to play ‘boogie-woogie’ music again!
It was unmistakably the same music as before, though it was a brand new cassette.
Instantly, I got the crucial message.
Spirituality is not about suffering, martyrhood, duty, worship, obligation and self-denial.
It is about having fun, delighting in the wonder of life, tapping your feet to the music!
God/dess has no interest in our begging for forgiveness, bearing crosses and praying to be allowed into heaven, but is urging us to dance, to celebrate, to love — to create a heaven on earth , where it should have been all along.
The light that belongs to you is the light of joy.
(A Course In Miracles)
A few days after his mother died, a friend recalls that he gazed lovingly at a photograph of his mother, while pondering whether life continues after death.
The thought occurred to him, ‘Perhaps the end is just another beginning?’
Then he sat down to watch the video of a film recorded while he was away at the funeral.
The first few minutes of the film were somehow missing, but he watched it through to the end.
Then, to his astonishment, the video ran on to the beginning of the same film — which was, of course, quite ‘impossible’.
The ‘end’ is just another ‘beginning’!
He got the message.
‘Whispers’ frequently offer practical guidance in our career, relationships and other aspects of life.
A few months ago, I was invited to collaborate in a New Age book project, with several people I would have loved to work with.
On the way to our initial meeting I had to change trains, and soon found that I was travelling in the wrong direction.
As a result, I had to make an expensive taxi journey to arrive at the meeting on time.
Since this was an uncharacteristic error, I knew it was a whisper.
My Higher Self was warning me that this project, though attractive, would take me in the wrong direction, and would be a costly mistake.
With a lot of misgivings, I eventually withdrew — and within weeks, as new opportunities opened up, it was clear this had been the right decision for me.
On a more light-hearted note, a friend of mine had become sexually involved with a woman he met at a party, although he confided that he had niggling doubts about the relationship.
One evening, while they were dining out at a restaurant, he decided to buy some condoms from a machine.
He inserted a pound coin, pushed the button — and nothing emerged.
Mildly irritated, he returned to the dinner table.
Later that evening, they were in a pub and my friend placed a pound coin in another condom machine.
Nothing happened.
At this point, he remembers thinking: ‘Perhaps M. and I aren't supposed to be lovers?
Perhaps we should just be friends?’
Then he placed another pound in the machine, pushed the button, and out came — a penny.
The penny had indeed dropped!
He followed his inner guidance, and the pair have since become close friends.
A client who hated her job told me she had been considering other options for two years, without taking any positive action.
One day, she drove on to a roundabout, and could not figure out which exit to take.
She circled three times, then thought to herself, ‘Maybe I should just take any exit — at least I'll be heading somewhere.’
Yet still she circled the roundabout.
Suddenly, thump!
A car smashed into her rear end as she dithered over which direction to take.
It was a costly whisper, but she got the message.
Her Higher Self was literally giving her a ‘kick up the backside’, encouraging her to move in any direction, but to move !
‘Whispers’ can also point to aspects of our inner world which need attention.
Recently, while driving a friend home, I turned a corner to find the road ahead severely flooded.
Instead of taking a detour, I decided it would be fun to pass through the flood, and drove towards it.
Meanwhile, my friend was voicing fears and doubts: ‘There might be a great hole in the road!’
‘It could ruin your electrics!’
I ignored him and drove on, enjoying myself.
We passed through the flood safely, and later  discussed the incident as a metaphor.
Water is often a symbol of emotion (or the subconscious), and my desire to go through the flood symbolised my conscious willingness and desire to delve deep into my emotions.
Yet my friend was ‘mirroring’ another aspect of myself, a part of me which was fearful and hesitant, which would prefer to ‘detour’the emotional depths, a sub-personality which I needed to integrate and deal with.
(I, of course, was mirroring another aspect of him.)
The very existence of the flood — the fact that I had invited it into my awareness — showed that I had emotional ‘work’ to do.
Messages about emotional patterns are often expressed through the physical body.
The body perfectly mirrors the current state of our mind and emotions.
After all, we create our physical body, moment by moment!
Bodies are not real, not ‘solid stuff; they are a trick of the light, conjured up by our own consciousness.
If we accept the mundane world view — that disease has no inherent meaning or significance, that it is ‘caused’ by infections, viruses, heredity, biochemistry and the like, and can be ‘cured’by suppressing the symptoms with drugs or removing the offending part — then we are throwing away a priceless gift, covering our ears as our Higher Self tries to speak to us.
Any symptom or illness is intended to be a source of growth.
Every ache and pain, every common cold, every bout of indigestion, every headache, every broken bone has its emotional meaning, and has come to help us — if we will listen to its message.
According to metaphysics, even terminal diseases can potentially be cured, by tackling the emotional blocks, imbalances and negative beliefs which are creating that illness.
Suppressed anger and resentment, for example, might re-emerge as cancer or arthritis.
Suppressed love might be expressed as heart disease.
Suppressed tears might be symbolised by a ‘weeping’ skin problem, or chronic rhinitis.
Headaches usually represent an inner conflict.
Neck problems might raise the question of who (or what) is a ‘pain in the neck’ in your life.
If you suffer from constipation, perhaps you are clinging to the past?
If you have cystitis, perhaps you are ‘pissed off’ with someone?
If you are short-sighted, does this represent your reluctance to ‘look ahead’, to plan for the future?
If you have a sore throat, are you blocking communication?
Whatever the ‘whisper’ from your body, ask yourself what its message, its metaphor, might be.
What is the hidden emotion?
What are your negative beliefs?
What, if you are honest, are the ‘payoffs’ of having this symptom or disease?
Could you give up these advantages, or achieve them in more direct and positive ways?
How can you learn and grow from this illness?
Every event that you choose for your life, no matter how destructive, chaotic or miserable it may seem, has been allowed to manifest because your Wholeness has an innate knowledge of those things you need to get you to the place where you will choose to sink deeply within, into the stillness of who you are.
(Bartholomew)
LISTENING TO THE WHISPERS
1)
Think of a situation, event or physical symptom you have experienced in the past few days.
Write down this experience as if it were a dream .
Try to ignore the clutter and detail, and look for the central themes or metaphors.
Then ask yourself why you created this experience.
Was it a mirror of your inner world — your thoughts, beliefs, desires, emotions, fears, choices or expectations?
Was it guidance from your Higher Self?
Or was it an opportunity to develop certain qualities — such as unconditional love, forgiveness, inner peace, self-love, honesty, strength, courage, wisdom or creativity?
Or all of these?
2)
In the coming weeks and months, ask yourself as often as you can remember: ‘Why am I creating this?
Is it mirror, guidance or opportunity?’
The world is a dream metaphor.
We mistake it for reality because we are so involved, so lost in the illusion, so absorbed by the drama, that we forget we have chosen to be here, that we are willing participants in an elaborate stage production.
Since we create our own reality, then everything ‘out there’ is meaningful and significant.
Reality is simply a feedback mechanism which reveals our inner world.
As the Upanishads state: ‘What is within us is also without.
What is without us is also within.’
The outside world is not a fixed, solid reality, but a symbol, a means of communication, a map in our search for Oneness.
If we wish to know what we think of ourselves, we need only ask what we think of others.
Buddhism teaches us to love our enemies, since they help us to grow.
We have invited them into our lives as our teachers.
By recognising that whatever we dislike in others is a mirror, an aspect of ourselves which we have yet to love and accept, we gain self-knowledge and move towards self-love.
The more we love ourselves, the more we invite loving, caring, delightful people into our reality.
As A Course In Miracles puts it, ‘When you meet anyone, remember it is a holy encounter.
As you see him, you will see yourself…’
Global events, similarly, serve as mirrors of the inner world.
Every news report, every global problem which we invite into our awareness — from the AIDS crisis to homelessness — carries a message, and not only a message about shifts in world consciousness and the need for global healing, but a unique personal message.
Two people can hear the same news report, yet one ‘hears’ that the world is full of conflict and hatred, and another hears of the many global efforts towards love, peace and harmony.
For some, the collapse of the Berlin Wall was a fearful sign that we are ‘letting down our defences’; for others, it was a joyful, celebratory symbol of the healing of our divisions, the recovery of our lost wholeness.
If you choose to hear reports about terrorists and  football hooligans, what is the ‘whisper’ about you?
That you suppress your aggressive impulses?
That you like to imagine you are better than those you judge and condemn?
That you are afraid of yourself?
‘Yes, but that's just something that happened in the outside world.
It's nothing to do with me!’
But you chose to switch on the news that day, or to hear it from a friend; and you chose to have certain thoughts in response to that news.
Whatever we become aware of, we have attracted for a reason — because it can help us to learn and grow.
To change your world you must change your thoughts.
You must become consciously aware of what you tell yourself is true every moment of the day, for that is the reality that you project outward.
(Seth)
LOOKING GLASS WORLD
How do you see the world?
What kind of world do you think we live in?
Do you see a world full of greed, violence and hatred?
Or chaos and confusion?
Or a world full of love, hope and goodwill?
What do you see as the most serious problems that society, or the planet, is facing at present?
When you have written down your global impressions, explore how they might mirror the way you see yourself, and the challenges you are facing in your personal and spiritual growth.
How many of you have been hearing whispers in your mind that you have been ignoring?….
Intuition beckons you to the future with things you feel drawn to because you love them.
When you follow that voice, you will find doors opening everywhere.
(Orin)
Since we have a vast number of probable futures open to us, we need some form of inner guidance — otherwise we would be in a constant state of indecision.
This guidance often comes in the form of impulses to do this or that — to write to a friend, to read a certain book, to meditate, to go to a meeting, to buy some flowers, to sign up for an evening class.
These inner ‘whispers’ are always creative, since they come from our inner self which is encouraging us to develop our full potential, to expand our awareness, to live more magically.
Unfortunately, we are taught to mistrust our impulses.
Our culture persuades us to rely on intellect and logic when making decisions, rather than trusting intuitive hunches.
We are supposed to ‘think things through’ before acting, and to ‘control’ourselves rather than be impulsive.
But by viewing the subconscious as a wild animal which must be tamed, we cut off our most valuable source of personal wisdom.
As a result, impulses might be suppressed for so long that when they do eventually erupt, they can seem destructive.
Robert, aged 18, was referred to me because he had smashed several windows in a local church.
He had never been in trouble before and was frightened and bewildered at his own behaviour.
His parents, who were strictly religious and puritanical, saw any kind of pleasure as the road towards hellfire and damnation and forbade Robert from going to parties, wearing bright clothes, or drinking alcohol.
Although he loved his parents dearly, Robert had long felt the urge to argue with them, to disagree with their view of life, to fight against his own repression.
Instead, he meekly gave in to them and regularly attended church.
One night, in a state of despair, he drank several cans of lager with friends from college — and on the way home, expressed years of frustration against his parents' beliefs (as well as his deep need for their love) by throwing stones at the stained glass windows.
According to Seth, impulses which are repeatedly  denied will always re-emerge in one form or another.
Writer Jane Roberts, who channelled Seth, says that she tended to ignore any desires which might distract her from her creative work, so she used to suppress the impulse to take physical exercise.
As a result, she eventually developed an annoying arthritis-like condition.
By ignoring our impulses, we not only store up trouble for ourselves, but also relinquish our power, our ability to act.
‘When you are taught not to trust your impulses,’ says Seth, ‘you begin to lose your powers of decision, and to whatever extent involved in the circumstances, you begin to lose your sense of power because you are afraid to act.’
Trusting your impulses can bring many unexpected delights.
Shortly before moving to London, I spent a few days visiting ancient and mystical sites in Cornwall.
One evening, I sat on the rocks at Land's End, watching the sun set across the ocean, when I felt a sudden urge to find a standing stone circle which I'd read about that day.
I had only a vague idea where the circle was, but nevertheless set off towards it.
After driving several miles in the fading light, I spotted a signpost which marked a public footpath, and somehow ‘knew’ this was the right route.
The path led into a field, and I soon found myself walking more and more quickly, as though being urged to hurry by unseen forces.
There was no sign of a stone circle, and I began to wonder whether I was lost — and yet I was being ‘pulled’ so hard that I was forced to run.
I dipped down into a valley, crossed into another field — moving faster and faster — and then climbed up towards a thicket.
A dark path now beckoned me through the trees.
I slowed down to catch my breath, and stepped into the blackness.
Moments later, a light glowed ahead of me, and I emerged into a clearing.
The sight that greeted me was unforgettable.
I stood at the edge of a circle of standing stones, each eight to ten foot high, with a massive central stone which  leaned at a perilous angle.
The presence of the stones was quite tangible, quite awesome, and I somehow felt ‘they’ had given permission for me to be there.
Mist hovered in the circle, luminescent in the evening light.
Beyond the stones, in the West, the sunset was at its brilliant peak, streaking the sky with scarlet, pink, tangerine and purple.
The mist-covered landscape swept down towards the distant sea.
I he scene was so magical, so stunning, that it seemed surreal.
I wondered for a moment whether I was dreaming, and then silently gave thanks.
Two minutes later, the sunset had grown dull, the mist no longer glowed, and darkness was fast falling.
I understood why I had been urged to hurry.
GOING WITH THE FLOW
At least for the next few days, allow yourself to be more impulsive.
If you have a sudden urge to do something — as long as it cannot harm you or others — act on it!
Do it right now, even if it interrupts another activity.
Start listening to the subtle thoughts and feelings, the slight shifts in energy, which bubble up from your inner self.
Try to live in the moment, rather than planning your whole day ahead.
Follow where your energy leads you, in each and every situation.
Do something if and when it feels right.
Follow your sense of joy and enthusiasm.
When you are ‘going with the flow’, tasks become easy and effortless.
Trust that you have a deeper self which can handle your day better than ‘you’ can, and see what happens.
LISTENING TO NATURE
Next time you are alone with nature — perhaps in a wood, meadow, moorland, valley, clifftop or beach — allow your mind to become very still and silent.
Begin to feel the energies around you.
Become aware that you are not  alone.
Everything around you is conscious — the trees, the hills, the grass, the birds the sky — and all consciousness is interconnected.
Now focus your attention on whatever attracts you — perhaps a tree, mountain, flower, stream or rock.
Say hello, and ask it to send its energy towards you, to ‘speak’ to you.
Be patient, but expect to bear, feel or sense a response.
Sense your connectedness.
If you are musically inclined, you might hear sounds or tones.
If you are artistic, you might see patterns of light and colour.
If you are literary or verbal, you might it hear words.
Be open to whatever comes.
(This might sound bizarre, but it is a good way of learning to tune in to subtle energies which we normally ignore.)
MAKING DECISIONS
Caroline's problem was that she felt quite unable to make decisions.
She worked as a secretary, and loathed it — but she couldn't decide what she really wanted to do.
Her relationship with her boyfriend had lasted six years, but she was unsure whether to move in with him.
At the age of 30, she still looked and behaved like a teenager.
Then she began to have panic attacks.
She had ignored her ‘whispers’ for so long that her inner self was forced to send her urgent messages.
It was a desperate way of grabbing her attention.
In therapy, she realised that making almost any change was better than standing still.
We learn about ourselves by making mistakes, as well as through success; we learn nothing by staying in a rut.
She eventually decided to embark on a degree in business studies, and in the meantime, to move in with Jim ‘to see whether to make it permanent or split up’.
On making these decisions, her panic attacks stopped and were replaced by a mixture of emotions as she faced up to her fear of intimacy and commitment, and her excitement and uncertainty over  becoming a mature student.
She was reaching for her future.
If you dither over decision-making, over choosing which of your probable futures to reach for, or which step to take next in your personal growth, here are several ways of listening to your whispers:
Always start with at least three choices.
NLP (neuro-linguistic programming) suggests that if we give ourselves one option, we become a robot; with two choices, we have a dilemma; but with three or more options, we have a choice.
Whatever the situation, we always —always — have many different options, and sometimes we are stuck simply because we have not considered other alternatives.
So begin by dreaming up at least three possibilities.
Picture yourself having chosen each option in turn, and see whether it feels good, even if it feels scary.
(Remember that a growth choice always involves taking risks.)
Which choice would you be most proud of yourself for making?
Which choice would most help you to learn and grow?
Which choice(s) are based upon fear, or clinging to the familiar?
Which choice would make you feel more loving towards yourself, others and/or the planet?
Which choice(s) would make you feel smaller and more separate from others?
Which choice seems filled with light and joy?
Which choice increases your energy when you consider it?
If you wish to choose between two options, ‘hold’ one decision in your left hand, and one in your right, and close your eyes.
Tune into where your energy is shifting.
Which hand is feeling warm and tingly?
Which hand is feeling energised?
Which hand seems to hold your attention?
If you would like guidance, try an instant oracle such as tarot cards, I Ching, Angel Cards or PsyCards.
The  mundane world view suggests that the tossing of coins or yarrow stalks, or selection of cards from a pack, is random and meaningless — but metaphysics assures us that if we ask for guidance, we will receive it.
If you don't have an oracle, then simply open any book — a dictionary will do — and, with your eyes closed, point to a word or passage; then contemplate its possible meanings.
(Of course, it you are convinced that this is nonsense, the book might mirror that belief, and give you gobbledygook.
It is easy to prove ourselves right!
But if you honestly ask for guidance — and are not simply giving your power away, asking for a decision to be made for you — then the reply will invariably be wise and appropriate.)
Another approach is to use brainstorming.
If you need some creative inspiration — which direction to take in your career, which city to move to, how to tackle a relationship problem, where to go on holiday — then for a maximum of twenty minutes, scribble down every idea that comes into your head.
Do not censor any thoughts, however ridiculous they might sound.
Write down everything.
Then carefully go through your list, item by item, noting any idea which seems to leap off the page, makes you tingle or glow, or releases energy somewhere in your body.
Dreams, of course, are a rich source of inspiration and guidance, as well as excellent training in thinking in metaphor.
If you do not keep a dream diary, I strongly recommend that you give it a try.
After nearly twenty years of interpreting dreams, I am still amazed at their wisdom, beauty, humour and insight — and dreams have often guided my decision-making, by mirroring unexpressed emotions and thoughts.
When I was a postgraduate student, for example, I was about to embark on a research project on a topic I'd been involved in for many years.
One night, I dreamt that I was  about to dive from a springboard, but the ‘board’ was so ‘stiff’that I could not raise sufficient bounce to make my dive.
When I wrote down the dream, I realised that I was already ‘bored stiff with my proposed project, and should choose another topic.
My new project led me into unexplored realms of psychology which I might otherwise have ignored.
THROUGH THE GATES
(If you have to choose between two or three different options, this meditation is often helpful.)
Relax deeply, then imagine yourself walking along a country lane.
Use all your senses to make the scene come alive.
Feel yourself striding or dawdling along.
Visualise the fields and trees.
Hear the birdsong.
Smell the country air.
At the end of the lane, you come to three gates.
Each gate represents one of your choices.
(Decide before starting this visualisation which gate will correspond to which choice.
You might decide that the third gate will stand for an unknown option, which you have yet to consider.
If it is a simple Yes-No decision, then picture two gates.)
Look carefully at the first gate, then walk through it.
(Is the gate locked?
How easy is it to open?
Is it a shiny metallic gate, or a crumbling wooden one?)
What is the landscape beyond this gate?
Where does it lead to?
How does it feel to be here?
When you have taken a good look around, return to the lane, and choose another gate.
Repeat the same procedure with each gate in turn.
Then gently come back to the room.
(At one workshop, a man was trying to decide whether or not to change his career.
Gate A — which symbolised a new career — opened into a grassy field, and beyond it to a breathtaking cliff walk which stretched into the distance.
Gate B — pursuing his current job in computer sales — led on to a tarmac road, and then into a grey housing estate, ending in a cul-de-sac.
His choice could not have been more clear.)
Let me be still and listen to the truth.
(A Course In Miracles)
Our strongest drive is towards rediscovering our wholeness — and however much we try to ignore it, the impulse to grow will keep coming to the surface.
Perhaps you have always had a yearning to play the piano or flute, or run your own business, or work abroad, or build a boat, or write short stories, or run a marathon, or live in a country cottage?
Some of these desires might be adolescent flights of fancy, which you never honestly wanted to happen.
(The country cottage might be a romantic ideal but perhaps you prefer the comfort, convenience and hustle-bustle of city life?)
But other desires will be impulses which you should act upon — impulses which will help you to grow.
Intuitive flashes about which probable future to reach for often pop up from nowhere — perhaps as images, dreams, fantasies, feelings, thoughts, impulses or bodily sensations.
But whatever form intuition takes, it is completely reliable.
It is a form of knowing .
It is a message from our Higher Self.
If you do have an intuitive flash,act on it !
If you ignore the wisdom of your Higher Self, it might not bother to speak to you for a while.
Intuition will always guide you along your best path.
A time-honoured method for allowing intuition to blossom is to meditate regularly — whether this means taking an inner journey, dancing, walking in the woods or listening to music.
Intuitive flashes often appear during or shortly after meditation.
Through relaxing and stilling the mind, sinking beneath the constant chatter of the conscious self, we become more and more receptive to the whispers from our Higher Self.
Shortly after a private reading with ‘Bartholomew’ in Taos, New Mexico, I drove down to the nearby Rio Grande.
As I sat on the riverbank, in an expanded state of  consciousness after the session, I ‘knew’ beyond doubt that all wisdom and knowledge was available to me.
I simply had to ask.
I posed questions about my higher purpose, past lifetimes, karmic links with others, and probable futures — and answers came flooding into my mind.
An unusual bird flew past, so I asked what it was — and an inner voice told me.
Sadly, I quickly returned to ‘normal’ but the sense of having potential access to all knowledge has remained.
Whatever we wish to know — however trivial, however important —is available in an energy field that constantly surrounds us.
We only have to ask, trust, sink into our inner stillness — and listen to the whispers.
What is really real?
The fly that touches honey cannot use its wings; so the soul that clings to spiritual sweetness ruins its freedom and hinders contemplation.
(St. John of the Cross)
In her enchanting story of The Velveteen Rabbit , Margery Williams' tells of a cloth rabbit who longs to be more than just a toy.
Scorned by the more expensive and mechanical toys, the shy young rabbit feels very second-rate and insignificant.
However, he is told by the wise old Skin Horse that, while some toys are destined to remain toys forever, some playthings can be magically transformed — and become Real.
The secret ingredient is love.
When a child loves you for a long, long time, says the Skin Horse, then you gradually become Real.
And once you are Real, you will live forever….
If reality is an illusion that we create — no more ‘real’ than Middle Earth or Valhalla — then it raises an important question.
What is really Real?
As we probe deeper and deeper into the universe, what really exists?
The ultimate answer seems to be Love.
Love is everything that is really real.
Love is the Grand Unified Force; and, just as when we watch a good movie, we might become so emotionally involved that we forget it is ‘only a movie’, it is our feelings which make life appear to be so real.
Sadly, we are taught to look upon emotions as some  kind of social disease.
‘Nice’ people — saintly people — simply don't have them.
Oh, they might smile serenely, and perhaps express compassion, but they never get angry, or excited, or tearful, or passionate.
They are detached from anything as lowly and demeaning as human feelings.
Spiritual growth, apparently, means behaving like a robot!
The truth is that strong feelings are scary.
Emotions create too much of a mess in our neat, tidy, rational world — and so we learn to squash them.
We might sit on our anger, our sadness, our jealousy, our resentment, our fears, our hurt — even our love, joy and exuberance.
(When asked how we are feeling, how often do we shrug our shoulders and say ‘Well, OK, I suppose’?)
We have almost forgotten how to feel.
The problem is that suppressing emotions is not only unsaintly; it is downright dangerous.
‘Emotions,’ says Seth, ‘flow through you like storm clouds or blue skies, and you should be open to them and react to them.
You are not your emotions.
They flow through you.
You feel them.
And then they disappear.
When you attempt to hold them back, you build them up like mountains.’
And those mountains are volcanic.
They will eventually erupt.
Every time we laugh when we are hurt, or smile when we feel angry, it is like burying an unripe fruit inside us.
Instead of ripening into an edible delight, the emotion begins to rot and decay, and eventually its poison spreads throughout our body, often re-emerging as illness and disease.
What is more, emotions are a crucial aspect of how we create our reality.
Thoughts set up a resonance which attracts certain events, people and situations into our lives, while the strength of our emotions determines how rapidly we attract events.
Lazaris suggests that if we experience the full depth and intensity of our emotions — not just so-called ‘negative’ emotions such as anger, fear and hurt, but also ‘positive’emotions such as joy, love and enthusiasm — it creates a powerful force-field, which can attract miraculous success into our lives.
Emotions are not good or bad, positive or negative; they simply are .
They become destructive only if they are suppressed and denied.
It is not the emotion which is negative, but the fact that it has been squelched.
Stuffing down our emotions only makes them more powerful.
It is like taking out a mortgage: we have to repay the loan many times over.
Why bother, when we could so easily pay in cash?
As soon as we fully experience an emotion, it changes.
It leads us towards inner peace.
By accepting it, by wrapping it in a warm blanket of love, by flowing with it, we begin to release and transform it.
It is far more painful and exhausting to suppress our emotions than it is to experience them.
It is the struggle to suppress our pain which really hurts.
Nothing changes through being hated or denied.
Paradoxically, it is only when we accept ourselves as we are that we begin to change.
Emotions are part of our wholeness.
By welcoming each and every emotion — making no judgements about how we ‘should’ or ‘should not’feel — we allow ourselves to grow and change.
Go to the feelings, and in the acceptance of the feelings, the release begins….
The emotion comes and goes.
What you need is the willingness to sit with yourself and discover this.
(Bartholomew)
YOUR EMOTIONS
1)
Which feelings do you habitually suppress, or deny having at all?
Consider how you handle each of the following emotions.
Do you express them openly and honestly — at least to yourself?
Or stuff them down?
Or sit on them until you explode?
Or completely block them from awareness?
Do you handle these emotions better in some situations than in others?
Which feelings do you have most difficulty with?
Which feel most painful or  scary?
Which situations tend to arouse these emotions in you?
What are your beliefs about these emotions?
Anger
Love
Affection
Resentment
Jealousy
Passion
Lust
Envy
Sadness
Enthusiasm
Compassion
Grief
Irritation
Happiness
Hurt
Self-pity
Joy
Guilt
Disappointment
Shame
Embarrassment
Fear
2)
Where do your suppressed emotions go?
In what form do they re-emerge?
As physical symptoms?
Or feeling anxious or depressed?
Or do you project your emotions onto the outside world — seeing your fears, anger, sadness or envy in other people, or in the world at large?
How are your hidden emotions affecting your life?
What is the price you are paying?
ANGER
Anger can be a liberating form of self-assertion, and a powerful motivator for change, when expressed in a constructive and appropriate way.
However, it is an emotion that leads many of us to play games — either by denying we feel angry, or by squashing it in an effort to be seen as reasonable, easygoing and likeable, or from fear of being rejected.
Getting angry is often linked with being ‘bad-tempered’, ‘out of control’ or even aggressive.
But it only explodes into violence when it has been suppressed.
It is not anger that causes violence, but the attempt to block it!
Denied anger has to go somewhere; it cannot simply vanish into the air.
So it eventually re-emerges as violent aggression — or as physical disease, depression, ‘accidents’ or other traumas.
Unless we release our  emotions, they tend to create unpleasant realities.
Matthew grew up in a family atmosphere of sweetness and light.
His parents never exchanged a cross word.
If there was a difference of opinion, they would hurriedly remedy the situation by changing the subject.
Conflicts were never even acknowledged, let alone resolved.
Throughout his childhood, Matthew can recall feeling angry just once — when his father unwittingly trod on a model boat which Matthew had spent several weeks constructing.
Believing that he had no ‘right’ to be angry over this mishap, Matthew retreated to his bedroom, took out a penknife and cut a painful slit in his own hand.
Matthew married a woman who came from a highly volatile family.
He was fascinated — and frightened — by Marianne's ability to express her feelings so openly.
She, in turn, welcomed his calm quiet manner which seemed so restful after the hubbub of her childhood.
Within a few years, however, Marianne had grown weary of Matthew's only emotion being bland ‘OK-ness’ and had a brief but passionate affair.
When she admitted the affair to Matthew, hoping for a display of anger or jealousy, he meekly apologised for not being good enough for her and promised to try harder in future.
With that he left the room; end of conversation.
End of marriage.
Marianne, outraged by his response, promptly packed her bags and left — leaving Matthew bewildered and confused.
Two years later, Marianne remarried and Matthew plunged into depression.
In group therapy, I suggested that Matthew might re-play the final scene from his marriage,as if he were someone who expressed anger openly.
He chose to do this by re-writing the scene in the form of a script for a play.
In the first draft, however, the male character exploded with rage and hit Marianne across the face.
Although this showed that Matthew's anger was not far beneath the surface, it also revealed his belief that anger is dangerous, so I encouraged him to try again.
This time, the couple still shouted at each other, but  were open and honest about how they felt.
We enacted this scene, scripts in hand, during a therapy session — and for the first time, Matthew felt angry with Marianne.
As he released his anger, he felt his love for his ex-wife, and wept over their divorce.
Over the weeks, as Matthew experienced his tangle of emotions, his depression lifted.
Anger should be a constructive force based upon self-love and self-respect.
But while we suppress our anger, it will appear ‘out there’ in the world, in other people.
Like Matthew, we will keep creating realities which coax or provoke us into feeling anger — by being hurt, by suffering from injustice, by seeing a world full of hatred and cruelty.
The more we block anger, the more destructive it becomes in our reality.
Hang on a minute…
If we create our own reality, then how can we ever be justified in feeling angry?
Whatever happens, we created it.
Right, and after we have released our anger, the next step is to work out why we created that situation, and which beliefs and thoughts support our anger.
But we cannot skip to this stage until our anger has been expressed.
Feelings do not have to be ‘justified’; they do not have to be rational; they should never be judged as OK or not-OK, or covered up with positive thoughts and affirmations.
Feelings simply are , and they must be expressed and released in some appropriate way.
YOUR ANGER
Make a list of five incidents from your past which still make you angry.
Release the anger now — perhaps by writing down what happened, and how you felt.
Or by pummelling a pillow or cushion to express your rage.
(If you are not in touch with your anger, fake it!
Punch a pillow as if you were angry, until the feelings surface.)
Or  write a letter to the person concerned, being totally open and honest about your feelings — and then burn it.
(Resist the temptation to post it.
The problem is your anger, not what the other person did.)
Or, if anger is still spoiling your relationship with someone, then consider expressing your feelings directly to them, even if the incident occurred some years ago.
Also examine the beliefs which caused your anger in that situation.
Then think about why you suppress your anger.
What are your payoffs?
Does it make you feel ‘better than’?
Does it feed your martyr?
Do you believe that anger is destructive?
Do you tell yourself you have no right to feel angry?
Or live by the maxim ‘anything for the sake of peace’?
What are the costs of blocking your anger?
(Low self-esteem?
Physical symptoms?
Depression?
Shallow, unsatisfying relationships?
Inability to assert yourself?)
Finally, re-write each incident.
‘Rewind the film’, and visualise what you wish you had said and done in that situation.
Write yourself a new script in which you are open and honest about your anger.
Then look out for your next opportunity to express anger in a constructive way.
GRIEF
Grief is another emotion — or rather, set of emotions — which often creates problems.
Whenever we suffer a major loss in our lives — such as the death of a loved one, divorce, redundancy, miscarriage, children leaving home, or the end of a love affair — we need to go through a period of mourning.
Grieving might involve feeling sadness, yearning, fear, guilt, anger and even despair — and all too often, we try to suppress these emotions, because they are so intense and painful.
Many people believe that if they can just get through the days, time will heal the wounds.
Unfortunately, time alone does not heal.
It is expressing and releasing the emotions that heals.
Crying, sobbing  we suppress our grief, the longer it continues — and it will often re-emerge, years later, as depression or physical disease.
Even when we go through welcome transitions — such as getting married, moving house or having a baby — we need to mourn our former life.
Betty, aged 43, was severely depressed when I first met her.
She had been treated with drugs, which made her feel worse, and found it difficult to speak at all.
After an almost silent session, I felt unsure how to begin to help her; so I asked her if she could draw a picture of a tree.
Slowly, a drawing emerged of a yew tree, overlooking several gravestones.
A clue to her problem at last.
I asked Betty who lay in the graves.
‘Children’ she told me.
Gently, I said I wondered whether she had lost a child, whether that was why she was so unhappy.
After a long pause, she nodded and the story emerged of a stillbirth she had experienced in her early twenties.
Betty had never seen the baby, blamed herself for its death, and was still grieving.
Several weeks later, on the twenty-first anniversary of the baby's death, we held a tearful and moving ceremony with candles and poetry, in which Betty said goodbye to her baby and gave herself permission to get on with the rest of her life.
HURT
You add suffering to the world just as much when you take offence as when you give offence.
(Ken Keyes)
Creating our own reality is sometimes interpreted as meaning that we cannot hurt people unless they allow us to do so.
At one level, that is true.
But we do have impact on other people.
Metaphysics always gives us responsibility.
It never takes it away.
It never allows us to blame others, or avoid responsibility for our own actions.
If we hurt someone, we must take responsibility for it.
Lazaris suggests that hurting someone — consciously causing distress — is always manipulative; it is always dishonest.
We never hurt someone by being honest and genuine.
What is more, hurt is highly destructive.
It erodes love and trust; it rips our self-esteem, self-love, self-confidence and identity.
It is the only emotion that takes time to heal.
According to Lazaris, it is very dangerous to play games with hurt — hurting others, squashing our hurt, pretending to be hurt when we feel angry —‘more dangerous than you know’.'
Emily felt hurt and betrayed by a close friend who had borrowed a considerable sum of money towards down-payment on a house and then, when Emily eventually enquired about repayment, angrily claimed that she thought the money had been a gift.
Her ‘friend’ abruptly broke off all contact.
Although Emily knew that her friend had been manipulative, she wondered whether she herself had been selfish, and should have forgotten about the loan.
She struggled with her anger and guilt for nearly a year, and had gradually resolved these feelings.
But she was left with a deep sense of hurt over her friend's behaviour and had been unable to trust anyone since then.
One evening, Emily set aside some time when she could be alone.
She took the phone off the hook, and threw herself into her hurt.
She wept and sobbed.
She ‘spoke’ to her ex-friend.
She writhed about on the floor in agony.
She re-lived similar hurts from childhood.
Then, after half an hour, feeling exhausted but relieved, she stopped — and soaked in a perfumed bath with a magazine.
The next day, she realised that the memory had lost its sting at last.
Then she felt ready to look at why she had created that situation.
If someone hurts us, then we need to express and release our hurt, anger and sadness.
Then we should look at why we created that reality.
What were our negative beliefs?
What are our payoffs?
Why did we respond in the way that we did?
What are the thoughts and beliefs that support this emotion?
What can we learn from this experience?
We never get upset over what happens.
Never.
We get upset because of preconceived ideas as to what we think should happen, what we want to happen.
(Vernon Howard)
GUILT
Guilt is another painful and troublesome feeling.
Its original function, according to Seth, was to make us feel bad, by briefly separating us from our sense of love and connectedness, so that we would not repeat a harmful act.
It was not designed to punish us.
It was simply a preventive measure.
Unfortunately, the Ego has made a monopoly of guilt, seeing it as a splendid excuse for misery and martyrdom.
Nowadays, people do not just feel guilty over causing hurt .
We might indulge in ‘feeling guilty’ about having a lazy Sunday in bed, splashing out on new clothes, making love, eating a large slice of chocolate gateau with lashings of cream, and other completely harmless and enjoyable experiences!
The puritanical Ego believes we should always pay for having fun.
After all, life is supposed to be a struggle!
The Ego revels in guilt, since it is a way of clinging to the past, and hanging on to old payoffs.
‘I can't possibly allow myself to be happy now, because I had an affair/caused a car crash/stole some money/had sex with my brother or sister/ was cruel to my dog/betrayed my best friend — five, ten or twenty years ago.
So, in the meantime, I'll just see how dreadful a time I can have, so that everyone feels sorry for me and I can avoid taking responsibility for my life!’
(If this makes you squirm, or giggle nervously, you have just recognised yourself!)
A Course In Miracles repeatedly insists that there is no sin, only error.
We make mistakes through ignorance, fear, negative beliefs and misdirected love — not because we are evil or sinful.
Sin is an invention of the Ego, which  readily plays ‘less than’ games: ‘Horrible me!
Awful me!
What terrible things I have done!
What a miserable earthworm I am!’
Guilt is a sign of our refusal to love ourselves, a symbol of our desire to be separate from All That Is.
It blocks our personal and spiritual growth.
‘Guilt is more than merely not of God’ says A Course .
‘It is the symbol of attack on God.’
(‘Oh goody,’ says the Ego, ‘I can feel guilty about feeling guilty now!’)
It is not that you have to be ‘good’, just stop believing you are ‘bad’.
(Bartholomew)
It is the Ego that suggests that, because there are people starving in the world, we should feel guilty about having more than we need — as if our guilt will somehow fill those hungry mouths.
It is Ego which drives us to be dutiful and fulfil false obligations.
It is Ego that thinks we should constantly fret about our family and the future, in case God decides we are taking life for granted, and hurls down a bolt of lightning.
The Ego imagines that it is somehow being empathic to increase the suffering in the world by adding our own.
(‘Why should I be happy when others are miserable?’)
Most guilt can be understood as hidden resentment.
Guilt is not a true emotion; it is a cover-up for other feelings which we feel we shouldn't have.
Whenever we feel guilty, it is worth asking ourselves why we feel angry and resentful.
Our resentment does not need to be understandable or ‘rational’; it simply needs to be expressed and released.
Guilt can also be a form of self-punishment — anger turned against the self, in the absence of self-love and self-forgiveness.
All too often, it is also a form of manipulation — a way of hurting or punishing others, or persuading them to do what we want, in the absence of honesty and integrity.
Guilt does nothing but harm.
YOUR GUILT
If you suffer from guilt, write down what you feel guilty or ashamed about.
(If you are reluctant to commit yourself to paper, speak to yourself in a mirror.)
You do not need to confess to anyone else.
just be honest with yourself .
What are your shameful secrets?
What are the dastardly deeds, thoughts and fantasies which your Negative Ego pokes and taunts you with?
Now examine your list.
What is the hidden resentment that lies beneath your guilt?
Who are you angry with?
Who are you trying to manipulate?
Is your guilt based upon a belief that you should not have fun, or that your body is not your own, or that you are not allowed to feel angry, or assert your own needs?
If so, perhaps you should reassess those beliefs.
If your guilt is due to harming others — or harming yourself — then try to understand why you behaved as you did.
What were your negative beliefs, thoughts and fears?
Were you acting from your inner Child's desperate desire for love?
Or your inner Adolescent's need to be in control, or to be understood?
(See Into the Shadowlands .)
What are your Ego's payoffs for clinging to guilt?
Now — forgive yourself.
Don't let your Ego convince you that your mistakes are so ‘special’ that they are unforgivable.
(‘No-one bas done anything as awful as me!,
Who are you kidding?)
Understand, and forgive yourself.
Release yourself from the past.
FEAR
Fear
is only looking in the mirror
and making faces
at oneself.
(Emmanuel)
Reality is just a complex holographic illusion that we create.
There is nothing to fear.
Yet how many of us  are paralysed by our fears?
Fear of rejection.
Fear of humiliation.
Fear of failure.
Fear of success.
Fear of intimacy.
Fear of commitment.
Fear of caring.
Fear of being vulnerable.
Fear of getting hurt.
Fear of loving.
Fear of being loved.
Fear of being unloved.
Fear of loneliness.
Fear of loss.
Fear of making mistakes.
Fear of being found out.
Fear of thinking for ourselves.
Fear of change.
Fear of freedom.
Fear of responsibility.
Fear of the unknown.
Fear of cancer.
Fear of nuclear war.
Fear of financial problems.
Fear of violent crime.
Fear of our emotions.
Fear of fear itself.
According to Lazaris, fear is highly repetitive; our greatest fears now will probably be the same fears we had ten or twenty years ago, and even many lifetimes ago.
However, he suggests that fear does have a useful function.
Whereas love is the accelerator which gets us moving, fear is the brake which prevents us going in the wrong direction.
It can help us to steer a steady course through life.
But if we react too strongly to fear, the brake is applied so hard that we come to a standstill, and fail to grow — which means a wasted lifetime.
Perhaps the most basic human fear is that of loneliness or separation — a fear so great that many people will endure loveless and even abusive relationships, rather than face living alone.
Yet mystics have been saying for thousands of years that we are all aspects of a greater whole — that our separateness is an illusion, that we are ultimately One.
It is our illusion of separateness which lies at the root of our fears.
As it states in the Upanishads, ‘Wherever there is other, there is fear.’
If we realised that we are all One, and that the only true reality is Love, how could we ever be lonely or afraid?
The trick of overcoming fear is not to stop feeling frightened, but to act in spite of our fear — in the catchphrase of Susan Jeffers' self-help book, ‘Feel The Fear — And Do It Anyway!’
For example,everyone is scared of intimacy.
Some people allow this fear to block them from  forming close relationships of any kind; while others face the challenge of deep intimacy despite their fears.
Fear of death means that the most dangerous activity which many of us will contemplate is crossing the road; while others, no less afraid of death, will canoe down dangerous rapids, explore the wildest of jungles, or whizz around motorcycle tracks.
It is not fear that impedes us, but how we handle our fears.
(Personally, I find that labelling fear as ‘excitement’ enables me to tackle almost anything.)
Every day, we can make choices based upon our fears — or choices based upon our desire for growth.
If we do not face up to our fears, we might project them onto the outside world, perhaps in the form of violent crime, epidemics, disasters or a vengeful God, or (closer to home) in the form of a partner, family or friends who ‘block’ our growth, and thus protect us from facing our fears.
YOUR FEAR
1)
Check through the various fears listed above.
Which of these have blocked your growth?
Where have you allowed fear to reign?
How might life have been different if you hadn't been afraid?
Now look at which fears prevent you from doing what you want to do now.
Which fears stand in the way of your Dreams for the future?
Or block you from developing personal qualities, talents or skills?
Or prevent you from finding inner peace?
Which ‘fear choices’ do you need to replace with ‘growth choices’?
What are your payoffs for letting these fears overcome you?
Avoiding adult responsibility?
Avoiding the challenge of growth?
Feeling ‘better than’ or ‘less than’?
Blaming or manipulating others?
Rationalising and justifying your behaviour?
Feeling sorry for yourself?
What are the negative beliefs — about yourself, other people or the world — which underlie your fears?
2)
For each fear, visualise a worst-case scenario of ‘what might happen’— and how you would handle it .
(Our I  tendency is to suppress our worst fears, because we feel sure we would not even survive , let alone cope with the situation!)
Imagine feeling foolish, and a crowd of people laughing at you.
Imagine being told that you have cancer.
Imagine failing your examinations.
Or losing your temper at work.
Or being made bankrupt.
And watch yourself handling it, even learning from it.
Then tell your subconscious that you do not wish to create that negative reality.
Allow the traumatic scene to turn into a photograph, which you cut up with scissors and burn.
Finally, visualise the positive outcome that you desire: perhaps confirmation that you are 100 per cent fit, that you have passed your exams, or that your finances are secure.
OVERCOMING FEAR
Relax deeply, then imagine yourself on a mountain path.
Look around at the landscape.
Feel your feet on the ground.
Listen to the sounds.
Smell the air.
Walk along the path, as it winds its way up into the mountain.
Eventually, you turn a corner and notice a cave ahead of you.
As you approach the cave, you notice that someone is there.
It might be an old man, or an old woman.
Let it be whoever it is.
Greet the wise one, and talk to them of the fears that you wish to overcome.
You will be given one or more gifts — gifts which symbolise the personal qualities you need to develop in order to overcome your fears.
(Perhaps honesty, integrity, courage, trust, gratitude, humour, creativity, wisdom or love.)
Accept each gift, allowing yourself to see it, know what it symbolises, and understand its message.
If you are not sure, then ask.
Then thank the wise one, and say goodbye.
Now turn and retrace your steps down the mountain path, carrying your gifts.
Then gently come back to the room.
(Next time you face a situation in which fear blocks you, remind yourself of your gifts — and use them.)
Fear is the other side of love
Fear is the dread of love
Fear is the dread of losing
what we have and are
of letting go in order to
become what will be
We arc afraid of love
Love demands all we are
(Miller Mair)
LOVE
Many people believe that they would love themselves if only someone else would love them first !
But our relationships with other people — whether partner, friends, relatives or colleagues — can only mirror our relationship with ourselves.
The world is our mirror.
If we look at our relationships with others, we merely see a reflection of our love (or lack of love) for ourselves.
The Ego is afraid of love.
It only seeks relationships in order to be loved .
It gives in hope of receiving.
It yearns to feel ‘special’ to someone, to nourish its self-importance or relieve its sense of inferiority.
It does not want intimacy in order to love , in order to grow.
In fact, it does not desire intimacy at all.
It prefers the idea of ‘romance’, or searching for love.
For the Ego, it is highly dangerous to get too close to anyone.
Ego-based relationships, whether with friends or partners, tend to be characterised by a need for security or a search for self-esteem.
Some of the telltale signs might be:
idolising the other person
feeling desperate for love
a high degree of dependency
fear of being alone
seeking the other's approval
resenting the other person having their own friends 
feeling trapped
lack of emotional intimacy
lack of respect for each other concern with the social status of one's partner/friend
having affairs
feeling oppressed by the other
wanting to be ‘special’ to the other person
a sense of futility or disappointment
feeling anxious and insecure
jealousy and possessiveness
dishonesty and manipulation
worrying whether the relationship will last
not growing as separate individuals
expecting the other to be the solution to life's problems
a secure, stable but dull relationship
wanting a partner to be your ‘missing half
Deborah's parents had had a tumultuous relationship in which frequent violent arguments would be followed by tender love scenes.
She grew up associating ‘love’ with an emotional roller-coaster, and although she was looking for a long-term partner, Deborah quickly became bored and dissatisfied in a stable relationship.
She was hooked on ‘falling in love’, on the emotional highs and lows of fresh romance.
As soon as she felt secure in a relationship, she began to feel restless and uneasy.
Tom, likewise, was not searching for love.
His only desire was for security.
He was quite bemused by his wife's dissatisfaction with their empty, shallow and predictable relationship.
‘I work hard.
I give her all my money.
I would never be unfaithful,’ he shrugged.
‘What more does she want?’
For Tom, intimacy meant having sex twice a week.
Marriage was an excuse to stop growing.
Tom and Deborah were both allowing their Ego to control their relationships.
The Ego likes to be stroked.
It favours whatever is safe and familiar.
It feels most comfortable if the present merely repeats the past.
‘Better  the devil you know,’ says Ego.
If true love should knock on the door, Ego will coolly slip the bolt and pretend to be out.
If you really want a loving, supportive and intimate relationship, you will already have one.
After all, we create our own reality.
We always get what we want.
As soon as we are ready and willing, there it is!
It is only because of our fears and hidden agendas that we don't always get what we think we want.
Loving, intimate relationships do provide endless opportunities for growth.
Our loved ones will often be people we have known over many lifetimes, who have agreed to play a role which will help us to learn and grow — perhaps by recreating a childhood pattern, by rousing our hidden emotions, by challenging us to remain open, honest and loving, or by modelling qualities which we need to develop.
We choose the perfect partners for whatever we wish to learn.
Intimacy brings all of our unresolved conflicts, suppressed emotions and hidden agendas to the surface to be healed, and a partner provides an ideal mirror in which to gaze at parts of our own Shadow and rediscover our wholeness.
Sexuality, likewise, can be a wonderful vehicle for personal and spiritual growth.
For centuries, most religious traditions have debased sex — seeing it as dirty and sinful, or purely for procreation — and have advocated celibacy as a path towards God.
Yet when we truly ‘make love’— as opposed to merely having sex — our souls, our spiritual essences merge.
Making love is a metaphysical experience in which our Ego boundaries are lost, our fears of intimacy and vulnerability overcome.
When we make love, we briefly glimpse and touch our Oneness with another.
We learn not only to give and receive love, but to become Love.
Relationships (of any kind) which are based upon love, rather than upon the need for security or self-esteem, are marked by:
openness
honesty
vulnerability
responsiveness
trust
depth of sharing and intimacy
ability to resolve conflict
listening
caring
giving
mutual respect
shared values and attitudes
shared Dreams
commitment
having fun
forever learning about each other being embedded in a social network
encouraging each other to grow and change
unconditional love and acceptance
being two whole individuals
To whatever degree you have placed the responsibility for your feelings of love and wholeness on someone else, is the degree to which you are bound to disappointment.
(Bartholomew)
Love is the doorway to enlightenment
(Orin)
YOUR LOVE
1)
Think about the closest relationships in your life — past and present.
Are they based upon the need for security?
Or a search for approval and self-esteem?
Or genuine love and caring?
(Or a mixture of these?)
2)
Consider the characteristics of a loving relationship listed above.
How many of these are part of your closest relationship — whether with a partner, friend or relative?
What could you do to make this relationship more loving?
I 
3)
Look for opportunities to be more loving each day — not just with your loved ones, but in every moment of the day.
How can you be more loving towards yourself today?
How might you be more loving at work?
Or while shopping?
While doing household chores?
Or during leisure activities?
How much love can you pour into your life?
HEALING A RELATIONSHIP
If you have a problem with a friend, partner, child, colleague or neighbour, try meeting them on the inner planes before discussing the issue with them in person:
Relax deeply, then imagine you are on a grassy riverbank.
Use all your senses to find yourself there.
Now begin to breathe in white light (or whatever colour feels appropriate) until you are radiating light.
You are becoming your Higher Self.
You are now able to see the problem from a higher perspective, knowing that you have created it for a reason.
Now imagine the other person walking slowly towards you.
With each step, they are becoming more and more radiant with light.
You can now speak from your Higher Self to the other person's Higher Self.
Speak from your heart.
Speak from love.
Listen lovingly for their reply.
Understand the lesson in this for you, and heal the rift between you.
Then gently come back to the room.
(When you later discuss the problem face-to-face, you might be amazed at the telepathic impact of this meditation.)
RELEASING A RELATIONSHIP
1)
If you find yourself yearning for a relationship with someone where the feelings are not mutual, or the other person's love has died, ask yourself what aspect of you that person represents.
What qualities are you projecting on to them, which you need to reclaim as part of your wholeness?
Strength?
Talent?
Practicality?
Beauty?
Intelligence?
Intuition?
Emotionality?
Compassion?
Creativity? playfulness?
Spontaneity?
Humour?
What are your payoffs for clinging to this relationship?
Self-pity?
Martyrdom?
Avoidance of intimacy?
Clinging to the past?
Re-creating a painful relationship from your childhood, in hope of healing the wounds?
What do you need to learn from this situation, so that you can let go?
2)
Relax deeply, then imagine you are in a lush, green meadow.
Feel the warmth of the sun.
Hear the birdsong.
Touch the grass.
Smell the wild flowers.
Now ask to meet the part of you which refuses to let go of this relationship — and watch as this sub-personality approaches.
(It might be a child, or teenager, or of the opposite sex.
Let it be whoever it is.)
Find out why this part of you is clinging to this relationship.
What is it trying to do for you?
Now explain why it is necessary to let go, so that you can move on.
(If necessary, allow yourself to become this sub-personality, and experience the hurt, sadness, anger or other emotions he or she is holding.)
Then merge with that aspect of yourself.
When you are ready, the person you have been yearning for will enter the meadow, and approach you.
Explain that you are now ready to let go.
Give them a hug, and say ‘I love you enough to set you free.
I love myself enough to let go.’
See a cord joining you, from their solar plexus to yours — and cut the cord with a knife.
Then choose to walk away — and gently come back to the room.
Love is all that is really Real.
Love is the antidote to fear.
Love transforms every emotion.
Love is what we are, and what we are becoming — however hard we might resist it!
Whereas the Ego seeks to divide and separate, love seeks to unify and heal.
Love is the realisation of Oneness.
Or as Seth pithily puts it, ‘The whole is the sum of its hearts.’
Love might seem an airy-fairy, romantic, idealistic concept — all very well for weekends and holidays, but not  very relevant to our everyday, toast-and-marmalade, bills-and-office-lunch reality.
But love can become part of every moment of our lives.
Love is not just about intimate, sexual relationships, but about all of our relationships: our relationship with self, with friends, with family, with colleagues, with strangers, with animals, with nature, with possessions, with money, with our work, with our body, with ideas, with the planet, with our Dreams, with All That Is.
If we loved ourselves unconditionally, then we would create a totally loving and joyous reality — quite automatically.
Every fear, every limitation, every hurt, every trauma, every problem, every shadow that we see in the world ‘out there’ reflects our lack of self-love.
Whatever we crave from others — love, freedom, respect, pleasure, approval, appreciation — is what we need to give ourselves.
Until we love ourselves, we cannot love anyone else.
(We might ‘need’ someone, cling to them, romanticise them, pity them, idealise them — but we cannot love them unless we love ourselves.)
Metaphysical techniques are just interim measures while we are learning to love.
The power does not lie in the techniques, but in love.
At the first personal growth workshop I ever attended, I still recall an exercise in which we had to write down our faults and weaknesses, what we disliked about ourselves.
No problem!
The room immediately buzzed with activity as we all scribbled down voluminous notes.
Next, we were asked to list our strengths, what we really loved about ourselves.
A hush fell over the room.
Brows were furrowed and pencils licked, as people struggled over their empty sheet of paper.
Looking rather sheepish, we hesitantly listed one or two points, worrying that we might sound narcissistic or arrogant.
We are taught that we should not love ourselves — that self-love is conceited, vain or selfish — and obediently, we learn to dislike and criticise ourselves.
As Louise Hay points out, we do this all the time — and it gets us nowhere.
SELF-LOVE
1)
What makes you so unlovable?
What are the faults, characteristics, misdeeds and imperfections which you use as excuses for not loving yourself?
Make a list.
If a friend gave you this list of reasons why they could not love themselves, what would you say?
Now write down some affirmations, using your list of ‘faults’:
‘I love myself while being moody and bad-tempered.’
‘I love myself while being critical and judgemental.’
‘I love myself while being nervous and timid.’
‘I love myself while being lazy.’
(This does not mean that you must love being nervous or critical; just that you must love yourself — whatever your Ego is up to.)
2)
How would your life be different if you were your own best friend — if you loved yourself unconditionally?
In what ways would you change what you do, say, think, feel and believe?
Would you make different choices and decisions about how to organise your daily life?
Or have different Dreams for the future?
(Spend time over this exercise.
Don't pretend that you already love yourself totally.
If you did, you wouldn't be here!)
From now on— in whatever ways feel possible — begin to act ‘as if ’ you were your own best friend.
Self-love does not mean loving only your good points, or loving the person you are becoming, or believing you are perfect.
It simply means loving and accepting yourself unconditionally as you are .
Right now — including the fact that you are unable to love yourself!
Many of us secretly think we will love ourselves when we have resolved a certain problem, or when we are successful, or when we are less busy, or when we are older, or when we are in a loving relationship — but tomorrow never comes.
Loving ourselves has to come first.
‘But I don't deserve to be loved.’
We don't have to  deserve it — we just have to be willing to do it!
As we learn to love, everything else in life will naturally fall into place: relationships, work, money, health, success, joy.
‘But I don't deserve that either’ says Ego.
Just be willing!
If you stop trying to become whatever it is you are trying to become and instead have the feeling that you are what you are, and this is the moment — your struggle stops.
(Bartholomew)