

New MILLENNIUM summer holidays 1992 IN THE NEW EUROPE
Travel IN THE NEW EUROPE
Much has changed in Eastern Europe in recent times, and our perceptions of these countries and people there are slowly changing.
Nevertheless, prepare yourself for some surprises when you cross the borders.
We have wrongly formed a grim and forbidding picture in our minds but instead you will find beautiful scenery, historic cities and friendly and welcoming people.
The holiday resorts in our programme have a wide appeal.
In Poland, Zakopane, in the mountains, offers wonderful scenery and Gdynia on the Baltic Coast has all the attractions of the beach plus lovely countryside and interesting cities to visit.
In Czechoslovakia, we now have two resorts, we return to our popular holiday centre just outside the historic city of Brno and also to  Roznov near the Beskydy mountains.
In Hungary, Lake Balaton is larger than Lakes Geneva or Garda and is a well developed and long established holiday region.
New Millennium's unique programme of inexpensive, good value holidays to Eastern Europe is based entirely on travel by coach.
This is environmentally friendly, compared to plane or private car and is remarkably comfortable.
For the overnight journeys from the channel port, transcontinental type coaches, fitted with toilet, bar for soft drinks, tea or coffee, compressed air or air conditioning systems are used and most seats are reclining.
Please note that smoking is not permitted whilst on the coach (except by the drivers!).
Sometimes the final stage of the journey is made by local chartered coach which is not so well equipped, but we do make comfort stops for smokers and sometimes for meals, at the discretion of the crew, at all stages of the journey.
Passports and visas
All British Citizens need a normal valid passport (British Visitors Passport is not sufficient).
If visiting Czechoslovakia your passport must be valid for at least six months beyond the closing date of the holiday and if visiting Poland, nine months beyond the closing date of the holiday.
Holders of non-British passports and those issued outside the UK should check with their own embassy with regard to any special permits or visas required for all countries they will be visiting or passing through.
Visas are not required by British passport holders for Hungary or Czechoslovakia.
You will need a Polish visa which we will obtain for you.
The price, at the time of going to press, is £26.
Departures
Passengers assemble at Dover Eastern Docks Passenger Terminal for all destinations and cross to Ostend or Calais by ferry.
Timings are arranged to allow most people to reach the assembly point from home that day by car or public transport.
Most of our passengers travelling by car last summer used Relyon Car Parking services which offer reasonable prices (£3 per day in 1991), telephone number .
those who prefer to stay overnight in Dover before leaving and after their return, can reserve convenient bed and breakfast accommodation.
View  across Zakopane
Brno Lake, Czechoslovakia
Lake Balaton, Hungary
Poland
Gdynia on Poland's Baltic Coast
10 days
Gdynia is one of a number of beach resorts north of the city of Gdansk and is an area well established in Poland.
An attractive modern city, Gdynia offers much in the way of general amenities for the holidaymaker.
Shops abound (leather goods are excellent value), along with tennis courts, swimming pools, museums, many restaurants, bars, coffee bars and nightclubs.
The white sandy beach is typical of this area, with astonishingly pleasant scenery behind it and a warm and inviting summer climate.
Part of the so called‘Tri City’, the popular name for the complex of three main cities on Gdansk Bay, which also includes Gdansk and Sopot, Gdynia is an ideal base from which to explore this very attractive part of Poland.
Only an hour's drive from the beautiful Kashubian Lake district, rich in forests and rolling countryside.
One can visit the town of Kartuzy, the centre of Kashubian folklore, and the picturesque Wdydze Kiszewskie with its fascinating open air museum established at the beginning of the century.
There is beautiful scenery to be seen travelling to Malbork, a town on the eastern arm of the Vistula where there is a famous red brick Gothic castle, built in the 13th Century.
About 15 minutes drive away from Gdynia is the resort of Sopot, famous for its beautiful beach and for having the longest pier on the Baltic Coast as well as excellent shopping facilities.
Your stay in Gdynia would not be complete without a visit to the city of Gdansk (formerly Danzig), birthplace of the Solidarity movement.
The origins of Gdansk go back to the 10th Century and its historic centre has been preserved in its ancient style.
Optional visit to Berlin
On the way home from Gdynia, on selected dates, we will leave one day earlier and make an overnight stay near the German border so we can spend the day in Berlin — one of the most exciting cities in the world these days.
The following morning an optional sightseeing trip to take in some of the most famous places in the city.
The afternoon will be free in Berlin and departure will be in the evening for the night journey on the motorway to Ostend and the ferry back to Dover.
Our reservations staff will advise on when this option is available.
Accommodation
Rooms have again been reserved in the Hotel Antracyt plus some standard rooms (ie without private bathroom) in a nearby annexe.
Just 5/6 minutes from the wide sandy beach, the hotel offers a good standard of accommodation and amenities.
Most bedrooms in the main building have en suite bath or shower/wc and are comfortably furnished.
All our guests have breakfast and evening meal in the hotel dining room.
The Antracyt is a pleasant 15 minutes walk along a promenade from Gdynia, it has a coffee bar, disco, sun terrace, sauna and lift.
There are tennis courts and an open air swimming pool nearby.
Travel
Assembly in Dover is mid morning on Tuesday, followed by channel crossing to Ostend and then by comfortable coach via Germany to Poland arriving in Gdynia the following afternoon.
The homeward return time at Dover is in the afternoon on Thursdays.
HOLIDAY PRICES
The above prices include return travel from Dover and half board accommodation for 7 nights beginning with evening meal on day of arrival and ending with breakfast on day of departure from resort.
On departures where the final day is spend in Berlin, the price includes 6 nights half board in Gdynia and one night bed and breakfast en route on the homeward journey.
Supplements per person per week: Single room £20.
B/S/WC £25.
One extra week — basic room £100.
Typical Beach on Baltic Coast
Fountain in Spittelmarket Berlin
Typical Beach on Baltic Coast
Hotel Antracyt
Zakopane Southern Poland
Zakopane, Poland's leading mountain resort, is open throughout the year and offers lots of facilities for holidaymakers of all ages.
In spring, summer, autumn and winter, visitors to Zakopane find plenty to enjoy in this uniquely beautiful mountain region.
The town itself is very attractive with room for as many as thirty thousand visitors in the hotels and pensions on the tree lined avenues of its central district and in the simple picturesque traditional houses in the outlying and neighbouring areas such as the charming village of Koscielisko.
On the first day of the holiday we usually arrange a trip around all the districts of the town and outlying areas for New Millennium visitors to get their bearings and learn something about the life style of the locals.
The scenery all around is magnificent and the town itself with its traffic free high street now has lots of well established shops displaying their wares in the attractive style.
There are cafes, bars, discos and restaurants here too and pizza bars and hot sausage stands and lots of holidaymakers around enjoying themselves.
Life in this part of Poland is changing rapidly and now is the right time to see it and to meet the Polish people who live here or those on holiday from the cities.
The High Street is long and traffic free, many of the shops are in picturesque wooden buildings which line the street, making the whole scene really attractive.
There are visitors from other eastern European countries too.
Near the station of the cable railway which takes you up to Gabulowka for a lovely view across the town, there are Russians and other traders selling bric a brac in the open market.
There is much to see and enjoy in town but you could spend all your time walking through the Tatra National Park where there are hundreds of miles of paths and breathtaking views.
There are entrances to the National Park in Zakopane and Koscielisko where horse drawn carriages wait to carry visitors not wishing to walk along the parks beautiful valleys.
A cable car too takes you up over 6,000 ′ to near the mountain peaks.
There are indoor and outdoor public swimming pools and tennis courts in Zakopane and the area offers most of the amenities for an enjoyable holiday.
Excursions and evening entertainment
We will organise a whole variety of interesting sightseeing excursions during your holiday.
These will vary according to the weather and demand, but should include a visit to Wieliczka, famous for its salt miles which have been in existence since the 13th century.
A rafting trip down the Dunajec river.
A half day trip to Nowy Targ, famous for its huge outdoor market.
An evening of local music and dance.
The ill fated camp Auschwitz and, of course, a day trip to Krakow — former capital of Poland.
Accommodation
All of our Private Pensions and Private Houses are centrally situated in Zakopane.
These pleasing establishments offer comfortable accommodation with friendly service.
Half board is provided either in house or nearby.
Rooms are pleasantly furnished, with either en suite bath or shower and toilet, or with access to communal bathroom and toilet.
The Tatry is just a little further off the High Street, situated on a wooded hillside overlooking Zakopane.
It offers a good standard of accommodation, all rooms with en suite bath or shower/wc
Shopping, eating and drinking
This will present no difficulties during your holiday.
There are numerous good restaurants in Zakopane and similarly in the places where we travel for optional excursions.
There are also lots of places for quick hot snacks, hamburgers, sausages, chips, pizzas and so on.
The cost of eating and drinking is very low if you have western currency to exchange.
Very good value woollen garments, inlaid wooden souvenirs or leather goods may be bought at market stalls and some shops.
In previous years a number of our clients bought extra suitcases to carry their holiday purchases home!
Travel
Most departures are from Dover on Friday mornings by ferry to Calais.
The route is then via Belgium and Germany to arrive in Zakopane the following early afternoon.
This is followed by seven nights accommodation and arrival back in Dover is via Ostend on Sundays in the early evening.
Optional visit to Berlin
On selected dates we will leave Zakopane one day earlier.
We include a brief visit to Wroclaw (Breslau) for sightseeing and then on to the attractive town of Zielona Gora for an overnight stay.
The following day, we travel to Berlin.
There, we shall be making an optional sightseeing trip to take in some of the most famous places in the city.
Departure from Berlin will be late evening for the night journey on the motorway to Ostend and the ferry back to Dover.
Accommodation is on a bed and breakfast basis and is available at a £12 supplement on the following departure dates:
Two Centre Holidays
We are pleased to be able to add a further Two Centre holiday to our programme for Summer 1992.
This 17 day holiday combines a week in Poland with a week in Czechoslovakia.
Departures from the UK are early morning on Fridays.
Onward travel is via Belgium and Germany to arrive in Zakopane around lunch time the following day.
You spend the first week of your holiday here in Zakopane transferring on Saturday for your second week at Brno Lake Czechoslovakia.
The journey home commences on Saturday to arrive in Dover late on Sunday evening.
HOLIDAY PRICES
The above prices include return travel from Dover with 7 or 14 nights accommodation on a half board basis beginning with evening meal on day of arrival and ending with breakfast on day of departure.
Except where * indicates that overnight accommodation for two nights in Krakow is on a bed and breakfast basis.
On departures where the final day is in Berlin, the price includes 6 nights half board in Zakopane and one night bed and breakfast en route home.
Supplements per person per week: Single room £20 (Zakopane only).
B/S/WC £25.
One extra week — basic room £100.
Zakopane High Street.
View across Zakopane
Hungary
Alsopahok — Lake Balaton
Hungary is Austria's next door neighbour but almost unknown to the British holidaymaker.
It's a beautiful and interesting country, easy to reach and the weather is good.
Lake Balaton is western Europe's biggest lake and in this region the sun shines over 800 hours during June, July and August alone and on most days temperatures rise above 25 degrees.
It has many well developed facilities for holidaymakers with wonderful bathing and watersports, tremendous sightseeing and tasty food and drink at rock bottom prices.
An excellent choice for an interesting and enjoyable holiday.
Alsopahok is a charming village about a mile or so outside the spa town of Heviz and about 6 miles from the shore of Lake Balaton.
It is surrounded by beautiful gently rolling countryside, where the hillsides are often covered in vines and the valleys richly wooded.
It is a pleasant walk into the smaller town of Heviz which is famous in Hungary and much of Europe as a health Spa.
The town's main attraction is a thermal lake (one of the largest such lakes in the world) which as well as being therapeutic is delightful to swim in.
Heviz also has a permanent open market for inexpensive shopping.
The larger town of Keszthely, on Lake Balaton, is a short bus ride away from Heviz and easily reached.
As well as being a most beautiful country, with a very pleasant summer climate, Hungary is most interesting for its history and unique and engaging inhabitants.
Excursions
For clients staying in Alsopahok there will be much to see and do, new sights, sounds and tastes to enjoy.
Everyone will be free to enjoy themselves as they wish, but we shall be arranging a programme of optional sightseeing excursions and activities on a daily basis, which will ensure you miss nothing of the best the region has to offer.
These will include short local trips to Heviz, Keszthely and other points around the lake such as the Tihany Peninsula, enjoy a display of horsemanship, visit some of the wonderful vineyards of the region and, of course, a day trip to Budapest, Hungary's capital city about 100 miles away.
Accommodation
Our accommodation in Alsopahok is at the Hotel Pansio Heviz, which has proved to be extremely popular with New Millennium passengers over the years.
The Heviz has been run by Janos Toth and his family since it was opened in 1989.
There is accommodation for about seventy guests in the main building, with additional rooms of equally high standard in nearby houses.
Many rooms are twin bedded with private shower/wc and a good standard of service with half board is provided.
Drinks are served in the dining room or outside on the terrace, just the place to enjoy the superb local wines and other drinks at very reasonable prices.
There is a new tennis court and, new for 1992, an open air swimming pool and cellar bar.
There is a pleasant little cafe bar a hundred yards down the road and a disco a little further on and far enough away to avoid disturbing the neighbourhood.
The Pansio is itself a good social centre but there is further night life in Heviz and Keszthely.
Shopping eating and drinking
For years now people from neighbouring Austria, particularly from Graz and Vienna have been coming across the Hungarian border on shopping trips.
This is because eating out in Hungary is a real pleasure, with an excellent and internationally recognised cuisine and, for holders of western currency, it is all remarkably inexpensive, particularly in the country areas.
A really good meal for £4 with an accompanying glass of good wine costing about 30p is not uncommon.
Other drinks are similarly good value.
Hungarian shops are not bulging with consumer goods like TV's and so on, but there are excellent clothing and accessory shops with bargain prices.
Some goods are obtainable only at special shops where only western currency is accepted.
Here you can  buy at duty free prices all the usual items.
Eating out or shopping on holiday in Hungary is a real pleasure and it's nice to know that bringing home presents and souvenirs won't break the bank.
Travel
Departures to Hungary are every week throughout the summer from Dover on Sunday mornings.
Onward travel is via Belgium, Germany and Austria to arrive at Alsopahok mid afternoon the following day.
Arrival back at Dover is in the late afternoon on Tuesday.
Two Centre Holidays
A 17 day holiday combining the delights of two of the most interesting countries in Eastern Europe.
Departures from the UK are weekly, mid morning on Sundays from Dover.
Onward travel is via Belgium and Germany arriving Czechoslovakia round lunch time the following day.
You spend the first week of your holiday here, at Brno Lake and surrounding area, transferring to Hungary on Mondays for your second week at Alsopahok.
Your return journey follows the same route to arrive in Dover late afternoons on Tuesdays.
10 days to Hungary and Vienna
An interesting adaption of our 10 day holiday to Alsopahok in Hungary occurs when we make an overnight stay in the Vienna Woods area, thereby giving you plenty of time for sightseeing in Vienna itself.
Departures from the UK are on Sundays with the normal itinerary followed by six nights in Alsopahok and one night in the Vienna Woods area.
Accommodation for your last night is in standard rooms on a bed and breakfast basis and is available at a £12 supplement on the following departure dates:
Sailing on Lake Balaton.
Lovely countryside around Alsopahok.
Parliament Buildings Budapest
The warm lake at Heviz.
HOLIDAY PRICES
The above 10 day prices include return travel from Dover for 7 or 14 nights in standard rooms on a half board basis beginning with evening meal on day of arrival and ending with breakfast on day of departure.
Except where * indicates that overnight accommodation for 3 nights in Budapest is on a bed and breakfast basis.
Supplements per person per week: Single room £20 (Alsopahok only).
B/S/WC £25.
Czechoslovakia
Brno Dam Lake Area, Moravia, Southern Czechoslovakia
Czechoslovakia must count as one of the most beautiful countries in Europe.
Cut off for so long from most western visitors, the wonderful and varied scenery and marvellous historic cities will surely make this country one of the most popular tourist destinations of all.
On the northern frontier there are a series of mountain groups, culminating in the spectacular Tatras near the Polish border.
Our choice of holiday centre is the Brno Dam Lake area, in Moravia.
This is a province of lovely undulating countryside mostly thickly wooden, blending into hills and mountains.
This is an area of spectacular gorges and jagged cliffs, beautiful unspoilt villages, with historic castles and mediaeval houses.
The Brno Dam Lake area is a holiday and recreation centre just outside the city of Brno the capital of Moravia.
This is an area of low wooden hills and a large man made lake is the principal attraction.
Ten kilometres in length and about 25 kilometres on its shore line, the lake provides lots of recreational activities.
There are ferry boats plying between different points, several sandy beaches, lots of yachts and dinghies and windsurfing.
All this can be enjoyed in a warm and sunny climate.
The city centre of Brno is very attractive.
It's full of historic buildings, including a marvellous cathedral and appears not to have suffered damage during World War II so that there is much architectural variety from many eras including the nineteenth and early twentieth century too.
It all adds up to a pleasant ‘lived in’ atmosphere.
The main part of the city centre is a pedestrian zone but with a very efficient tram service to take you across the town.
There are mass of shops, restaurants, cafes and all the sophisticated amenities of a large city, including, concert hall, theatres of all sorts plus museums and so on.
One of the particular pleasures of visiting Brno is how welcome you are as a visitor from the west and how interested people often are to talk to you.
Excursions
During the summer season we will be organising a programme of varied optional day and half day excursions most weeks.
This includes sightseeing in Brno itself and subject to demand, full day trips to the capital cities of Prague, and Vienna.
In Prague we will start in Wenceslas Square, where the tender revolution developed.
We'll visit the Jewish quarter, count statues of Saints on the famous Charles Bridge and walk up to the Presidential Palace area, stopping to see the wax figurine of the infant Jesus and to rest in the lovely gardens.
Art, architecture and live sword fighting are all on display, as are the 6,333 diamonds in the ‘Sun of Prague’.
We will also be organising further shorter visits in the more immediate vicinity.
A trip to the beautiful Moravsky caves, taking in lunch at a hunting lodge (try  sampling the wild boar!) and a tour of the fairytale Pernstein Castle with its museum and gallery.
At Kunstat we visit a ceramics factory, where you can try your hand at the potter's wheel and buy some very reasonably priced pottery from their retail outlet.
For your evening entertainment, we intend to hold a ‘boat’ party with a trip round the lake, which will include drinks, live music and dancing plus a very enjoyable night of traditional folk music and dancing during a relaxing evening spent at a popular wine cellar (try the local vintage!).
Shopping eating and drinking
Best buys include Bohemian crystal, china, figurines, lace, embroidery, classical records, footwear, photographic accessories, salami, speciality vodkas and classical CDs.
The exchange rate is excellent and you'll find a pound goes three times as far as it does in Britain (a feast in a good restaurant can be less than £3).
For those who like to sample new and exciting drinks Czechoslovakia is an El Dorada.
Czech beers are rightly famous and excellent value.
Slovak ‘Borovicka’, a vodka made with berries from a mountain bush is not to be missed.
Accommodation
Hotel Jelenice
Situated on a hillside surrounded by woods, the Jelenice is close to the lake (about 5/6 minutes walk away) and was particularly well liked by our clients who stayed there last summer for its warm and friendly atmosphere created without doubt by a dedicated management and staff.
The hotel has accommodation for about 60 guests many in rooms with en suite bathroom.
Public rooms include a bar with lounge area and wine cellar.
Hotel Kozi Horka
The Kozi Horka is on the same side of the lake as the Jelenice once again situated on a hillside.
It's a smaller establishment with comfortable accommodation.
Standard rooms or rooms with private shower/wc are available.
Drinks are served in the dining room or  on the terrace which offers lovely views across the lake.
Hotel Santon
The hotel Santon looks out over the lake which is this area's main attraction.
It's of medium size with accommodation for just over 200 people.
Rooms are comfortable with en-suite bathroom and toilet.
The hotel has an attractive bar and large TV lounge, and indoor swimming pool and a clay tennis court.
There is very easy access to the centre of Brno, by tram (which is only a few minutes walk away).
Hotel Form
The Form has room for about 100 guests.
Many bedrooms have en suite shower or bath/wc or two rooms share a bathroom.
The Form has a bar, sauna and massage rooms, an outdoor swimming pool as well as clock golf and a tennis court.
In the grounds there is a well insulated building with a small disco bar.
Situated on the same side of the lake as the Santon, the hotel Form is in the countryside about one mile (15 minutes or so walk) from the lake.
There is a bus stop just outside the hotel and there is quite a frequent service into the centre of Brno.
Hotel Neptun
A complex of five buildings, where guests are accommodated in four two storey buildings, the fifth comprising reception, dining room, bar, a further restaurant and wine cellar and a  discotheque .
The Neptune is situated in the countryside about 6–7 minutes walk from the lake, near to the Hotel Form.
Travel
Departures from Dover are on Friday and Sunday mornings every week throughout the summer.
Onward travel is via Belgium and Germany to arrive at our centre around lunch time the following day.
Arrival back at Dover is late afternoon on Sundays and Tuesdays respectively.
View  across Brno
Hotel Neptun
Hotel Kozi Horka
Hotel Jelenice
Roznov, Moravia, Southern Czechoslovakia
Much of Czechoslovakia is mountainous and our holiday resort of Roznov is in the Radhost Highlands in the Moravian-Silesian Beskydy mountains.
Although not as high as the Alps, some of the peaks reach a most reasonable height of over 4,000′.
The area around Roznov is quite beautiful, offering plenty of walking in the valleys and hills.
Three fifths of the Beskydy range are covered by woods, inhabited by many wild animals, such as red deer and lynxes.
Bird species are numerous as are rare flowers which include wild orchids.
The whole area is sought out for its unique natural beauty and attractive recreational possibilities both in summer and winter seasons.
Roznov itself is  a good place to enjoy the Moravian scenery and countryside as well as being a good spot for excursions throughout the province.
It is a small town, with shops, some restaurants and pubs and its main tourist attraction is an open air folk museum.
This is in the form of a full size reproduction of a medieval village, placed in extensive parkland.
It too has an interesting hostelry, serving original Moravian dishes, as well as the excellent beer and wine for which the province is well famed in central Europe.
Accommodation
Situated on high ground on the edge of town, the Hotel Redast has rooms for about 500 guests.
It is clean and comfortable, with pleasant and friendly service.
Most rooms have en suite shower or bath/wc.
Its public rooms include dining room, coffee room, two lounges, a conference hall with cinema, night club, and indoor swimming pool, skittle alley, gym, sauna, solarium and massage room.
Outside, set in the beautiful surroundings of the forest park, is the hotel's sun terrace where snacks and drinks are served, a good size heated swimming pool, 2 tennis courts, a volleyball court and mini gold.
Excursions
There will be many varied excursions on offer during your stay in Roznov.
These will include a visit to the famous open air museum which documents traditional folk life in the Carpathian part of Moravia and  Silesia .
Visit the historical university town of Olomouc, seat of the Archbishop, with its 17th century university building, many fine churches, palaces and parks.
International flower shows are held in Olomouc during the summer which are always popular.
Take a trip to Karolinka which is well known in Czechoslovakia for its glass production and watch the glassware being made and maybe take the opportunity of buying some of its produce at very reasonable prices.
The scenic journey to Karolinka takes you through some beautiful mountainous countryside.
Brno is the third largest city in the country and is an ideal place to combine shopping and sightseeing.
Ostrava, only an hour away, will also provide ample opportunity for shopping.
There will be a chance to visit and automobile museum which belongs to the Tatra Autoworks in Koprivnice.
More locally, go by cable car to the top of Radhost, which is the highest mountain in the Beskydy Range.
Travel
Departures to Roznov are every week throughout the summer from Dover on Sunday mornings.
Onward travel is via Belgium and Germany to arrive in  Roznov the following afternoon.
Arrival back at Dover is in the late afternoon on Tuesdays.
Prague
There is so much to do and see in Prague — a city which is brought to life by street entertainers, festivals and exhibitions which add to the rich culture of its architectural, artistic and musical heritage.
From a historical point of view, the Czechoslovakian capital is one of Europe's more precious cities.
The earliest record of Prague is supposed to have been documented in the 9th century.
The first stone ridge was built over the Vltava in the 12th century.
The historic quarter of the city is full of grand buildings, undamaged during World War II, built in many different architectural styles.
The Town Hall Tower with its mechanical clock dating back to 1410, the old city's tower Bridge, the famous Charles Bridge adorned with its many statues of Saints and of course Wenceslas Square and the magnificent buildings facing it, are just a few of the many sights Prague has to offer.
There are really hundreds of churches, chapels and palaces to visit.
Even the smaller side streets shouldn't be missed, you'll find attractive houses in narrow alleyways, small gardens, pretty archways, fountains and quiet courtyards.
The shopping area in Prague although more modern, is still elegant and is the place to buy gifts and souvenirs at remarkable value.
For your evening entertainment you should try to take the opportunity to go to the theatre or enjoy a concert or maybe you would prefer to relax in one of the many wine cellars or bars.
Dining out is a real pleasure with a wide and tempting choice of menus and venues at a very affordable prices.
Two Centre Holidays
We are pleased to offer a Two Centre holiday incorporating 3 or 4 nights in Prague (depending on the date of departure) with the remainder of the holiday spent in Brno.
Both 10 days (7 nights) and 17 days (14 nights) are available.
Our reservations staff will advise which option is available.
Accommodation
The Hotel Barbara is conveniently situated in the suburbs of Prague, about 20 minutes by public transport from the centre.
It provides a pleasant standard of accommodation all rooms are with shared B/S/WC.
Travel
Departures are from Dover on Sunday mornings to arrive in Prague late morning the following day.
Arrival back at Dover is late afternoon on Tuesdays.
HOLIDAY PRICES
The above prices include return travel from Dover and accommodation for 7 or 14 nights in standard rooms on a half board basis beginning with evening meal on day of arrival and ending with breakfast on day of departure, except where * indicates bed and breakfast only in Prague.
Supplements per person per week: Sharing B/S/WC Hotel Form £12.
All hotels private B/S/WC £25.
Half board in Prague available on request.
Outdoor Swimming Pool, Tennis Court, Hotel Redast
Beautiful  Countryside Around Roznov
Hotel Redast
Folk Dancing
Barbara
Charles Bridge, Prague
Dear Holidaymaker,
The name, New Millennium, means the new period of a thousand years which will start in the year 2000–1 and it also suggests an era of peace and harmony.
It's for this latter meaning I chose it as the name of my new holiday company.
Throughout my many years in the travel industry, I have always believed tourism has an important part to play in the spreading of understanding between countries, as well as being a catalyst for economic development.
There is now a wonderful opportunity in Eastern Europe to demonstrate these positive benefits of tourism.
In 1991, I added Czechoslovakia to the programme and if you select a holiday there or a resort in Poland or Hungary, you will be delighted not only by the beautiful scenery but also by the welcome you will receive.
Another important aim I envisaged for New Millennium when it was incorporated in 1983 was the development of holiday ideas which would try to eliminate damage to the environment associated with mass tourism.
For this reason, our holiday prices are aimed to entice those who usually fly or use their own car to travel on superbly comfortable coaches as the means of reaching resorts and regions where tourism has not exceeded sustainable levels.
I hope you will find a holiday to interest you in this programme and will be able to travel with New Millennium in 1992.
Yours sincerely
New MILLENNIUM HOLIDAYS AND TRAVEL LTD
In 1989, 1990 and 1991 New Millennium holidays have attracted a lot of favourable comments in the news media of which the following are a few examples:
‘The travel bargain of the summer  must be New Millennium's 10 day holiday to Poland’.
THE INDEPENDENT 29 July 1989 
‘New Millennium Holidays, a small company in Solihull, offer a 10 day half board trip for as little as £129 in October.
This must rank as one of the holiday bargains of 1989.’
THE TIMES EDUCATIONAL SUPPLEMENT 29 September 1989 
‘An all time bargain holiday’.
BBC RADIO 4 HOLIDAY PROGRAMME ‘BREAKAWAY’ September 1990 
‘New Millennium's show stopping prices’.
INDEPENDENT ON SUNDAY 18 November 1990 
Below is a selection of excerpts from letters sent by holidaymakers who travelled with us during 1991:
‘My wife and I have recently returned from a ten day holiday in Gdynia, Poland.
We would like to say how pleasantly surprised we were with the countryside and the excellent excursions which were available, also the facilities, good accommodation and food provided by the Hotel Anthracyt’.
Mr. & Mrs. P. V. B. (Redditch, Worcs.)
‘Having been to Zakopane this year, I should like to voice my appreciation.
Your arrangements enabled us to have a holiday in a hitherto quite unknown area and one of great charm, and we look forward to travelling with you again.
It was the best holiday we had had for years’.
Ms. A. P. (Newcastle upon Tyne)
‘Just a little note to say thank you again for a lovely holiday, this time in Hungary, last year it was Poland, both very interesting and eye-opening holidays.
Next year I hope to make it to Czechoslovakia’.
Mrs M. C. (Whitstable, Kent)
‘We have just returned from Zakopane and we would like to express our delight in all aspects of the holiday.
The travel arrangements were efficient and comfortable; the Hotel Tatry was first rate and we had a room with matchless views.
We enjoyed the food and found the staff very pleasant and helpful’.
Mr. & Mrs. B. S. (Lincoln)
‘We must let you know how much we enjoyed our holiday in Zakopane.
The holiday is tremendous value for money and we feel New Millennium is doing a wonderful job in providing us with the opportunity to visit these Eastern European countries at such competitive prices.
Many thanks for an unforgettable experience’.
Mr. & Mrs. F. N. (Amberley, Glos.)
‘We have just experienced the most amazing value for money holiday available today.
Your 17 day holiday to Czechoslovakia and Hungary must surely be the travel bargain of the nineties’.
Mr. & Mrs. A. D. (Royston, Herts.)
‘My husband and I have recently returned from our holiday in Czechoslovakia and felt I must write to say how much we enjoyed it.
Our only complaint is that  it was all over too quickly and we look forward to another holiday with you in the future’.
Mrs. A. C. (Leek, Staffs.)
‘I am writing to thank you for a lovely holiday near Brno in Czechoslovakia at the Hotel Form.
It was so away from it all yet within easy reach of the city.
The package of trips was excellent value and every one was enjoyable’.
M., K. & S. P. (Folkestone, Kent)
‘I would like to tell you how much we enjoyed our holiday in Czechoslovakia.
It's the first time we have been on a coach holiday and we were a bit apprehensive.
We were impressed with the trip.
We made a lot of new friends and can't wait to go on one of your holidays again’.
Mr. & Mrs. D. P. (Littlehampton, West Sussex)
‘I have just returned from a holiday in Hungary with my six year old son and I feel I must write to thank you.
We both enjoyed ourselves so much.
The journey was an exciting prelude, the hospitality at our guest house was warm and sincere and Hungary is such a delightful country for the holidaymaker’.
Mr. I. S. (Oswestry, Shropshire)
‘We returned from our holiday in Hungary and I felt I must write to you.
It was the first time we'd ever done an overland journey.
We both thought the arrangements were excellent.
It was one of the best holidays we've ever had’.
Miss D. W. (Exeter, Devon)
‘The enclosed photo sums up the general verdict of our recent holiday to Zakopane.
Thank you once again for a wonderful holiday’.
Mrs. C. and friends (St. Albans, Herts.)
Clifford Hards Managing Director New Millennium Holidays and Travel Ltd