

Merchant bonkers!
You would not believe our 10,000 MANIACS Material World!
Onstage rampage!
KITCHENS, KINGMAKER, NICK CAVE and (yes!)
THE BIRTHDAY PARTY live Wreath all about it Pennants extra!
A history of FLAGS IN ROCK TRULY, MADLY, DIPPILY The Frank & Walters rule — bouquet MADNESS * ROLLERSKATE SKINNY * RADIOHEAD * MARK E SMITH Vs I LUDICROUS * INSPIRAL CARPETS * SMASHING PUMPKINS * DJAIMIN and, yee hah, COWBOY FILMS
NEWS
Moz Paris show — guaranteed!
MORRISSEY is to play a pre-Christmas gig in Paris and, in response to recent criticisms (not least in these pages), special schemes are being put in place to ensure fans are not again inconvenienced by a last-minute cancellation.
The gig will take place in the La Zenith Arena in the La Cigalle area of the French capital on December 22.
Tickets for the concert are available from European travel specialists Way Ahead, costing £109.50 (plus insurance) including luxury travel, ferry crossing and hotel accommodation in Paris.
But the big bonus for Morrissey fans disappointed by his no-shows at June's Glastonbury festival and the second day of the Madness/Finsbury Park weekend last month is that, on proof of purchase of tickets for either of the cancelled gigs, they can get a £20 discount per ticket for the French trip.
In the case of the Finsbury Park debâcle, the discount is bigger than the price of the Madstock ticket.
Way Ahead have also arranged a special insurance policy that ensures a refund of up to £50 if the concert is cancelled due to Morrissey becoming ill while the fans are in Paris.
Full details of this scheme will be given to fans when they book their places for the trip.
For further information, contact 
Stars threaten digital warfare
SIMPLY RED, GENESIS and DIRE STRAITS have joined forces to threaten a boycott of DCC, the new high quality cassette format recently launched by Phillips.
An argument has broken out over the royalty rate paid to artists for each copy of both DCC and another new format, MiniDisc.
Despite endorsing DCC on their world tour over the last year, Straits manager Ed Bicknell instructed record company Polygram to withdraw all Mark Knopfler's projected releases.
Artists and managers are also concerned that initial plans to price DCC in the same bracket as ordinary pre-recorded cassettes may be abandoned in favour of a cost comparative to the CD format.
However,U2 , who were also reportedly in favour of a boycott of DCC, have issued a statement supporting the introduction of the format.
U2 manager Paul McGuinness told NME : ‘We fully support the introduction of this ingenious new technology and wish to see U2 material on the new format as soon as possible.’
Meanwhile, the band have been courted by Democratic Presidential candidate BILL CLINTON on their current US arena tour.
Following Bono's unsuccessful attempts to speak to George Bush at the White House during the ‘Zoo TV’ tour, Clinton sent a letter to the band offering his services and later spoke to them on a live radio phone-in.
A spokesperson for U2 told NME : ‘The group were very surprised by Mr Clinton's knowledge of their early work.
His favourite LP is ‘The Joshua Tree’.
It's nice to know they have friends in such high places.’
‘Cop Killer’ furore rages on
US Police promise ‘living hell’ for Time-Warner — despite the track's withdrawal
ICE-T's ‘Cop Killer’ is still provoking deep-rooted and bitter resentment throughout America's police forces, some six weeks after the contentious track was withdrawn from the debut ‘Body Count’LP.
Executive-director of the National Association Of Chiefs Of Police, Gerald Arenberg, warned last week that cops ‘could create a living hell for Time-Warner’.
Meanwhile, police spokesmen are urging local government officials not to renew Time-Warner cable television franchises throughout the US.
Time-Warner is the second largest cable TV operator in the States, serving seven million viewers.
Arenberg, quoted in US trade magazine Variety , further claims that the US police are set to enforce the very letter of the law.
in a deliberate attempt to disrupt Time-Warner employees: ‘Just about every time one of Time-Warner's local cable trucks makes a call, it parks illegally.
We could write tickets for those violations.’
US law enforcement officers are also planning a renewed drive to encourage cable subscribers to drop HBO and Cinemax.
HBO plan to screen the rapper's new four-part talk show series,Ice-TV , in January next year.
Meanwhile, one UK promoter contacted NME last week, following the abrupt cancellation of Body Count's October tour.
A spokesperson for the controversial metal band last week declined to comment on reasons for the sudden  axing of the tour, fuelling speculation that objections had been made by worried promoters.
However, the promoter, who preferred to remain anonymous, issued a statement to NME claiming: ‘There is no objection raised by local promoters — far from it — promoters have been severely  f—ed around by an ‘artiste’ who has no consideration for his fans or the people who have put work into this tour.
‘Sources close to the ‘artiste’ suggest the decision to cancel the tour was not made for glamorous or news-worthy reasons, like police/local authority objections or fear on the streets of Britain…just that he can't be arsed.’
European promoters are currently considering suing Ice-T for non-fulfilment of contract.
THE BEATLES are  suing Sony over their release of an archive bootleg, ‘The Beatles Live At the Star Club — 1962’.
The recording was made in a Hamburg nightclub on a portable tape recorder by audience member Edward W Taylor.
Taylor, now a butcher in Liverpool, has admitted he never requested, or received permission to make the recording.
However, an American party acquired the tape in the late '70s and licensed it to Sony last summer.
Sony are allegedly not paying royalties to the Beatles, and refuse to withdraw the album.
Paul McCartney said, ‘Bootlegs are illegal and they cheat the public.’
McCartney and Harrison claim that the quality of the recording is so poor they cannot even decipher their own parts, and allege two tracks are not Beatles recordings.
JESUS JONES leader Mike Edwards is currently remixing new BON JOVI material in a North London studio.
The song, ‘Keep The Faith’, is the title track from Bon Jovi's forthcoming new LP, their first since the multi-platinum ‘New Jersey’ album in 1989.
US stadium rockers Bon Jovi, appear to be following U2's example, who employed dance remixers in an attempt at getting singles from ‘Achtung Baby’ accepted in clubs.
Insider sources claims that Mike Edwards' re-working of Bon Jovi's ‘Keep The Faith’‘sounds like EMF’.
HAPPY MONDAYS have added several dates to their forthcomimg UK tour.
The band play Sheffield City Hall .
Tickets go on sale this week, at venues and usual agents, priced £10.
NED'S ATOMIC DUSTBIN issue their second LP in late autumn,NME can exclusively reveal.
The new 13-track LP, titled ‘Are You Normal?’, was produced by Matt Wallace, who mixed Nirvana's seven million-selling ‘Nevermind’ LP.
The M Midlands-based five-piece issue a new single, ‘Not Sleeping Around’, in late September.
The album follows in late October, on the band's own Furtive label, through Sony.
As previously announced, the Neds play a batch of major UK dates in December.
REM's new album ‘Automatic For The People’, will not ‘divorce the band from their teenybopper fans’, as suggested in last week's news story.
Sources close to the Atlanta superstars have asked NME to reassure fans that the album will not be ‘mostly acoustic’ and that a forthcoming out-take album will include ‘Tighten Up’, a cover of the Archie Bell original and not Booker T & The MGs, as stated.
NME's Birthday Party to remember
THE BIRTHDAY PARTY, the highly influential Australian band of the late '70s/early '80s, reunited for the first time since they split in 1983 at an NME -sponsored gig last week.
There were ecstatic and emotional scenes at the first of NME 's ‘Viva Eight’ gigs in conjunction with the Spastics Society at London's Town & Country Club on Tuesday night, when headliner Nick Cave assembled the surviving members of his legendary former line-up for a short set that comprised the classics ‘Dead Joe’, ‘Wild World’and ‘Nick The Stripper’.
Towards the end of Cave's set with current band The Bad Seeds, guitarist Mick Harvey took over the drum stool as original Birthday Party guitarist Rowland S Howard took the stage — making this an effective reunion of the band's classic line-up, missing only the formidable presence of deceased bass player Tracey Pew (whose place was taken by Bad Seed Martyn Casey).
The shock reformation followed an earlier treat for the capacity crowd at the first of eight shows celebrating 40 years of NME and benefiting the Spastics Society, when a ‘rumpled’ Shane MacGowan joined Cave onstage for a duet on Louis Armstrong's ‘Wonderful World’.
Cave later remarked that he would like to see more Bad Seeds gigs take the form of guest slots and surprise additions.
See Lives page 45.
Birthday boys Rowland S Howard (left) and Nick Cave
Factory pub robbed
DRY bar in Manchester suffered another gangland attack last week.
Five raiders armed with sawn-off shotguns, rifles and machetes stole more than £10,000 from Dry, part of the Factory empire.
Clad in black ski-masks, the attackers stormed the Oldham Street bar just after closing time, and forced staff to lie face down on the floor.
Dry manager Leroy Richardson was frogmarched to a safe containing the weekend's takings.
Richardson was injured when one of the thugs slashed his ear with a machete, but returned to duty the following day when Dry re-opened.
Sinead has boy trouble
SINEAD O'CONNOR's record label Chrysalis has hit back at tabloid criticism of the sleeve of her current single ‘Success Has Made A Failure Of Our Home’.
Last week,Sun pop columnist Piers Morgan branded the cover image of murdered Guatemalan street child Carmona Lopez ‘the most tasteless record sleeve of the year’.
A spokesperson for Sinead told NME : ‘There is nothing remotely tasteless about the sleeve.
It shows a street child who was beaten by four Guatemalan police officers in 1990 and later died of his injuries.
It was given to us by Amnesty International and used with their full permission.
Piers Morgan seems to be very uncomfortable with the idea of a strong woman, especially one prepared to speak her mind.’
Morgan, however, stands by his article.
He told NME : ‘What article?
Oh that one.
OK, I suspect that Ms O'Connor's motive for using the photo might have something to do with the sales of her last two singles.
‘I think that pictures of this kind have no place on the sleeve of a pop record and I strongly question her commitment to Amnesty International.’
Meanwhile, Sinead's new album, ‘Am I Not Your Girl?’, produced by Sinead and Phil Ramone, is released next Monday .
A 40-minute TV special on the making of the album is broadcast by BBC2 on September 19 at 7.30pm.
Left: Sinead counts the cost of caring.
Above, the contentious image, Guatemalan murder victim Carmona Lopez.
This week's best 'Bye
THE SUNDAYS issue their first single on Parlophone in two weeks.
Co-produced by band members Harriet Wheeler and Dave Gavurin (pictured), ‘Goodbye’ is backed by another new track, ‘Noise’, and a version of The Rolling Stones' classic ‘Wild Horses’.
‘Goodbye’ will also feature on the band's second album, as yet untitled, expected to hit the shops at the end of October.
Their first LP, ‘Reading, Writing And Arithmetic’, sold over 500,000 copies following its release in January 1990.
A spokesperson for the band confirmed a national tour is currently being pieced together for late autumn.
New venue hassles for Brum
BIRMINGHAM'S ROLE as 1992 European City Of Music has come into question after the local council served an injunction on one of its own venues last week, preventing promoters from putting on live shows.
Following complaints from local residents, the Canon Hill Arts Centre has had the plug pulled on live entertainment, despite a £55,000 investment by the council's Recreation Department.
The venue was last used for gigs eight years ago, when such local luminaries as UB40 and Duran Duran appeared there.
The injunction is another blow to Birmingham's live music scene, following the recent closure of the city's main indie venue, The Barrel Organ.
The Arts Centre was planning to promote local-based talent and bridge the gap between pub gigs and the 3,000 capacity Hummingbird venue.
John Mostin, one of the venue's organisers, told NME : ‘Myself and several other people have put four months’ work into these gigs.
We went along with the council recommendations throughout.
‘We were using a 2,000 watt PA — barely big enough for a pub gig — and agreed to finish at 10pm.
It's £55,000 of poll tax payers’ money down the drain and, yet again, the bands and gig-goers have to suffer because of crazy council bureaucracy.
Birmingham is crying out for a venue for mid-size bands.’
A political storm has also been sparked by the closure, with the threat of legal action between the council's Recreation Department and Environmental Services.
The original writ was served on the day the venue was due to re-open, coupled with the threat of £20,000 fine if any gigs went ahead.
On a more positive note, THE TOWN & COUNTRY have announced the official opening of their latest club, situated in Leeds.
The £750,000 refurbishment of the former Colosseum building on Cookridge Street, is now complete, and the new 1,800-capacity venue opens in November.
T&C manager Ollie Smith told NME that the venue will stage film, comedy and club nights, as well as live music.
Therapy? grind on
THERAPY? follow their Reading Festival appearance with a 17-date tour of the UK, coinciding with the release of their third LP.
The Belfast-based hardcore trio play London Clapham Grand .
Meanwhile, the band's as-yet untitled Harvey Birrell-produced album, which follows their two indie chart toppers. 1991's ‘Baby Teeth’ and ‘Pleasure Death’last year, is due out on November 2.
As previously announced, new single ‘Teeth Grinder’, which serves as the first taster from the LP, is issued through A&M on October 19.
The track was inspired by a documentary about an American woman who has ground her teeth down to gum level.
Jackie Edwards: 1940–1992
JACKIE EDWARDS, reggae and ska singer and writer of a couple of '60s pop's most enduring classics, died in Jamaica on August 9.
Born in 1940, Wilfrid ‘Jackie’ Edwards first came to prominence as Jamaican R&B developed into ska at the start of the '60s.
Edwards, possessed of a strong if traditional balladeer's voice, wrote and performed for a variety of record labels, among them Studio One and Wirl.
It was as a partner to Millie Small, as Jackie & Millie along the lines of R&B stars Shirley & Lee, that his records first gained attention in the UK, released on the then-tiny Island label.
When Millie came to the UK in 1964 on the strength of her huge hit ‘My Boy Lollipop’, Edwards also arrived, and recorded under the tutelage of Chris Blackwell, Island's Jamaican-born boss.
Despite a couple of fine LPs, among them ‘The Most Of’, Edwards clicked more as a writer than a singer, and in 1966 he gave two songs to the Spencer Davis Group, ‘Keep On Running’ and ‘Somebody Help Me’, both of which hit Number One.
The late '60s saw little success, but Edwards never really sought stardom.
Always popular with older Jamaican audiences, from time to time he would perform on ‘revival nights’, still giving a stirring performance on classics like ‘Come Softly To Me’ and ‘Keep On Running’.
Eugenius gets the Urge
EUGENIUS have announced details of a 12-date September tour of the UK, including eight shows co-headlining with Urge Overkill.
The band, invited on to the main stage at Reading by Teenage Fanclub after their appearance in the club tent was cancelled due to inclement weather, play Newport TJ's , and appear as special guests of Pavement at London Astoria.
The band's debut LP, ‘Oomafama’, is out now on the Paperhouse label.
Eugenius, you!
Sampled Notes
THE THE have their first ever single ‘Cold Spell Ahead’ re-released by Some  Bizzare this week.
The single, which was originally issued in 1981 and deleted after a run of 2,000, served as a blueprint for the band's ‘Uncertain Smile’, recorded after they had signed to Epic.
‘Cold Spell Ahead’ is backed with original B-side ‘Hot Ice’and comes in seven inch, 12″ and picture disc formats.
THE BEAUTIFUL SOUTH issue a new single ‘36D’ through Go!
Discs on Monday.
The track, taken from the band's gold album ‘0898’, is backed with two new songs, ‘Throw His Song Away’ and ‘Trevor You're Bizarre’.
Heaton and co, who recently returned from a six week tour of America, are set to play three November dates at Birmingham NEC .
EMF issue a new single in advance of their second album.
Released through Parlophone this week, it's entitled ‘They're Here’ and comes backed with ‘Phantasmagoric’.
12″ versions include a Cenobite remix by Ralph Jezzard and Mosh mix by Joey Beltram, and the CD contains an extra track, EMF's cover version of Traffic's ‘Low Spark Of High Heeled Boys’.
The band accompany the September 28 release of their second LP ‘Stigma’ with their biggest UK tour to date, starting in Liverpool on September 25.
Support on the tour comes from My Life With The Thrill Kill Kult.
HOUSE OF PAIN issue their eagerly awaited ‘Jump Around’ single through Ruffness on September 28.
The Irish-American hip-hop outfit, currently riding high in the US charts, signed to XL Recordings' new Ruffness label last month.
The act, who have been playing dates in the US, including guest appearances on the Lollapalooza tour, plan to come to the UK to coincide with the single's release.
Their debut album ‘Fine Malt Lyrics’ is due out in November.
BABES IN TOYLAND (above), MEGA CITY FOUR, PAVEMENT and THE FALL are amongst the bands playing at an MTV 120 Minutes music festival in September.
The festival, organise din association with XFM radio and Riverman concerts, takes place at a series of London venues.
The festival kicks off with The Rockingbirds .
MOONSHAKE issue a new 45 to follow their acclaimed ‘Secondhand Clothes’, through Too Pure on September 14.
‘Beautiful Pigeon’ is backed with two exclusive new tracks, ‘Beeside’and ‘Home Survival Kit’, and serves as the first taster from their forthcoming ‘Eva Luna’LP due on October 24.
The band are planning an extensive UK tour with Jacob's Mouse in October.
 Meanwhile , both bands play at London Islington Powerhaus Smashed! on September 16.
CUD release a new single, ‘Once Again’, on A&M Records on September 28.
The track, a re-recorded version of a song from their recent ‘Asquarius’ album, comes backed with the band's version of ‘Day By Day’from the '70s musical Godspell .
CD and 12″ formats include additional acoustic versions of ‘Eau Water’ and ‘Soul Food’.
The band have added two extra dates to their forthcoming tour at Stirling University and York Hideway , and their Exeter University show has been switched from October 14 to 13.
The Family Cat are the support band for the tour, except on the opening Irish dates.
JAPAN are to be partially reunited when former members Mick Karn, Richard Barbieri and Steve Jansen form the rhythm section behind No-Man on their September dates.
No-Man, whose new single ‘Ocean Song’ is out now through One Little Indian, are currently collaborating with super-model Naomi Campbell on songs for her debut album.
ST ETIENNE issue a new single, ‘Avenue’, through Heavenly Records on September 28.
Initial copies of the track, featuring an eight-minute version, are followed a week later by a CD package of remixed from AR Kane and Gordon King from World Of Twist.
THE HOUSE OF LOVE have been forced to postpone their show at London's Albert Hall on September 24 due to forthcoming touring duties in Europe and America.
An alternative date has yet to be set, but it is understood that the band are expected to reschedule the show for the end of November, following the band's prestigious co-headline show with My Bloody Valentine at Tokyo's 14,000 capacity Budokan arena.
NME lensman Kevin Cummins is among the photographers featured in Down The Club, an exhibition of dance and nightclub culture taking place at Manchester Polytechnic's Institute For Popular Culture until September 23.
Incorporating club props, graphic designs and assorted audio visuals, the exhibition also includes the work of NME snapper Peter Walsh,.
10,000 MANIACS play a low-key live show later this month, the day after the release of their new LP ‘Our Time is Eden’.
Natalie Merchant and co appear at West London's Intimate Kensington Orange Club on September 29, showcasing their first new material since 1989's ‘Blind Man Zoo’ album.
As previously reported, the band's ‘These Are Days’ 45 is out now.
US NEWS
The GN'R/METALLICA tour resumed on August 25 in Phoenix, Arizona just over two weeks after Metallica singer/guitarist James Hetfield was seriously burned in an onstage accident.
Hetfield, whose injuries require frequent dressings and delicate handling, is unable to play guitar.
John Marshall of Metal church stands in temporarily.
DON WAS has composed and produced a rap song featuring excerpts from President Bush's political speeches.
‘Read My Lips’, released under the name of A Thousand Points Of Light, highlights Bush switching political positions and contradicting himself.
The song contains many of the President's most famous broken pledges, including ‘Read my lips — no new taxes.’
On MICK JAGGER's upcoming solo album, the Rolling Stone is backed by Los Angeles blues-rockers the Red Devils.
Jagger's record is produced by Rick Rubin, who did the honours on a Red Devils' live album, released on Rubin's own Def American label.
THE GRATEFUL DEAD have cancelled their autumn tour because Jerry Garcia has lung disease.
A Dead spokesman said, ‘30 years of smoking Camel Straights will leave their mark.’
U2's rehearsals for their US stadium tour drew thousands of fans to the parking lot of Hershey Stadium, Pennsylvania.
As a reward, the band played a charity concert with low-price ($15) tickets the night before they left town.
Meanwhile, U2 are featuring a Pres Bush video in their ‘Zoo TV’ concerts.
The band are using samples from a 1991 speech Bush made just before declaring war on Iraq, showing the President singing a version of Queen's ‘We Will Rock You’.
THE RONETTES' Ronnie Spector and Darlene Love of The Crystals have reunited 30 years after their appearance on Phil Spector's seminal album ‘A Christmas Gift For You’.
The two singers have contributed their first-ever duet to the Special Olympics' upcoming ‘Very Special Christmas II’ album.
In 1987, the first Special Olympics record featured Christmas songs recorded by the likes of Madonna and U2.
FAITH NO MORE, who upset animal rights organisations with their 1990 video for ‘Epic’, showing a goldfish out of water gasping for air, have found some unexpected supporters for their new one: People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals.
PETA's media manager, Steven Simmons, is delighted with the group's new video showing a rack of just-butchered meat.
‘We're always happy when people can see what goes on inside slaughterhouses,’ said Simmons.
‘It might convert them to vegetarianism.’
SINEAD O'CONNOR took time out during a recent two-week recording stint in New York to hang out and clean tables at Manhattan's Sine cafe.
BOB DYLAN is to be the subject of a major tribute concert on October 16, the 30th anniversary of the release of his debut album.
Presented by his record company, Columbia, an audience of 20,000 are expected to grace New York's Madison Square Garden for a live extravaganza featuring a host of stars to be named in the coming weeks.
The show will also be broadcast on pay-per-view TV worldwide.
FNM's Patton: butcher, by golly
RECORD NEWS
45s
BOY GEORGE: ‘The Crying Game’ Pet Shop Boys-produced cover version of the '60s pop classic for the title track of the forthcoming Neil Jordan movie — out now
BUTTERFLY CHILD: ‘Juice’ H. Ark!
Records scented dreampoppers make a guest appearance on the mail order catalogue — out now
DEPTH CHARGE: ‘Bounty Killers Part II — Lee Van The Man’ tribute to spaghetti western villain Lee Van Cleef from reggae, hip-hop and Chinese B-movie influenced Londoner — out now
EGGSTONE: ‘Eggstone At Point Loma’ debut four-track EP from Scandinavian rock-pop trio — out now
FANTASTIC PLANET: ‘Carry On Columbus’ Malcolm McLaren teams up with Lee Gorman for the theme to the forthcoming Carry On Columbus movie — out now
PETER GABRIEL: ‘Digging In The Dirt’ world music benefactor and Genesis escapee releases his first single in five years, produced by Daniel Lanois and taken from his forthcoming album ‘Us’
OMAR: ‘Music’ rising soulster lifts the title track from his forthcoming debut album — out now
THE ORCHIDS: ‘Thaumatology’ first new material of the year from the Glasgow-based popsters who recently issued their double compilation LP — out now
RUMBLEFISH: ‘Mexico’ Birmingham four-piece make their major label debut, backed with previous indie single ‘Sing Slim’— out now
SEVEN YEAR BITCH: ‘Sick ‘Em’ hard-hitting offering from all girl power crunch combo from Seattle — out next
SPECTRUM ZERO: ‘Free My Soul, Free My Mind’ Crawley six-piece issue their new EP in advance of Autumn live dates — out Monday
STEREO MCS: ‘Connected’ lauded British rap group lift the title track from their forthcoming album — out now
THAT UNCERTAIN FEELING: ‘On The Edge’ second single from the Stretford-based foursome following on from their ‘Sunriser’EP — out now
VEGAS: ‘Possessed’ joint venture from ex-Specials man Terry Hall and  Eurythmic Dave Stewart taken from the pair's forthcoming album — out now
WAS (NOT WAS): ‘Somewhere in America (There's A Street Named For My Dad)’ Detroit derived trickster funksters follow their ‘Shake Your Head’hit with a Harry Bowens-sung track packaged with live versions of ‘Where Did Your Heart Go’and ‘I Blew Up The United States’on the CD — out Monday
LPs
A CERTAIN RATIO: ‘Up In Downsville’ early Manc funksters follow up their ‘ACR-MCR’album with nine new tracks including recent single ‘Mellow’— out now
THE BALANESCU QUARTET: ‘Possessed’ bizarre homage to Kraftwerk from the exploratory string quartet covering classic Kraftwerk songs including ‘The Robots’and ‘Autobahn’plus their own compositions — out next week
BEL CANTO: ‘Shimmering Warm & Bright’ Norwegian blues merchants issue their third album of arctic passion and esoteric instrumentation — out now
BLUEBOY: ‘If Wishes Were Horses’ Reading six-piece issue their debut album in the wake of the recent ‘Popkiss’45 — out now
CHUBB ROCK: ‘I Gotta Get Mine, Yo’ 19 tracks of comic side-stories and emotional therapy from the New York rapper — out now
THE FRAMES: ‘Another Love Song’ debut album from the Dublin band fronted by Glen Hansard who starred in the Alan Parker movie The Commitments — out now
GERAINT JARMAN A'R CYNGANEDDWYR: ‘Rhiniog’ founding father of Welsh language music scene Geraint Jarman returns after an absence of five years — out now
INCOGNITO: ‘Jazz Funk’ reissued debut album from the British jazz groovers available after ten years' deletion — out now
ED KUEPPER: ‘Black Ticket Day’ Australian guitar celeb formerly in The Saints continues his solo work with poignantly slanted eight-track album
ROXETTE: ‘Tourism’ Swedish antiseptic pop duo issue double LP recorded in studios around the world, including 12 new tracks and live versions of past singles — out now
THE SEA URCHINS: ‘Stardust’ round-up of all the defunct Brum band's recordings from before and during their Sarah days — out now
SON OF NOISE: ‘The Mighty Son Of Noise’ South London hardcore rappers issue their debut LP — out now
TEN CITY: ‘No House Big Enough’ third album from the Chicago house trio who had late '80s hits with ‘That's The Way Love Is’and ‘Devotion’— out now
TLC: ‘Ooooooo…
On The TLC Tip’ skittish American funk girls issue their debut including Top 20 US hits ‘Ain't Too Proud To Beg’and ‘Baby Baby Baby’— out now
VARIOUS: ‘'60s Beat’ 40-track compilation featuring an array of hits from the fab decade including tracks from The Beatles, Herman's Hermits, Lovin' Spoonful, Amen Corner, The Troggs and Procul Harum — out now
Y CYRFF: ‘Mae Ddoe Yn Ddoe’ Welsh language guitar group who split up last year issue 22-track compilation spanning their eight-year career — out now
THE RAMONES: ‘Mondo Bizarro’ first LP of new material for three years sees the three chord wonders teaming up with old-time producer Ed Stasium; includes guest appearances from Living Colour's Vernon Reid, Psychedelic Furs' Joe McGinty and ex-Turtles vocalists Flo and Eddie — out Monday
TOUR NEWS
A HOUSE, whose ‘I Am The Greatest’ LP has just been reissued on EMI, precede the September release of a limited edition mail order single with dates at Liverpool Krazy House 
AFGHAN WHIGS, heavily favoured Sup Poppers whose cover of The Supremes' ‘My World Is Empty Without You’ is out now, appear at London Camden Underworld .
ALL ABOUT EVE, who release a new EP titled ‘Phased’ on September 25 — their first since signing to MCA — appear at Glasgow King Tut's Wah Wah Hut  Support on all dates is provided by Kinky Machine.
ANRHEFN, enduring Welsh punk trio, play a one-off benefit show for the Anti-Nazi League at Bolton McGee's on September 10, prior to a three-week European tour.
THE B-52'S, whose current ‘Tell It Like It Is’ 45 precedes the release of their Nile Rodgers-produced album ‘Good Stuff’, parade honorary member Julee Cruise at Manchester Apollo 
BARK PSYCHOSIS, bewitchingly avant-garde indie folk whose 23-minute ‘Scum’ single is released next Monday on the Third Stone label, play Chelmsford Y Club 
THE BEGGARS and ROBINSON present the new face of Mancunian guitar pop as part of the Tetley Bitter Guest List series of concerts at Manchester's P J Bell's on September 21.
BIRDLAND, fresh from recording a new EP under the helm of Verve/Scorpio Rising producer Barry Clempson, play London Gray's Inn Road Water Road Water Rats 
BLUEBOY and BRIGHTER take to the road for a series of Sarah Records extravaganzas at Nottingham Narrow Boat .
CHAPTER AND THE VERSE, who issue their second LP, ‘Renewed Testament’, at the end of September, play Brighton Zap Club .
CROSBY, STILLS AND NASH, legendary '60s folk-rockers, have added a few dates to follow up their sold-out Albert Hall show at Dublin's Point .
HOLY JOY continue to plug their acclaimed ‘Tracksuit Vendetta’ LP with a couple of London dates at Islington Powerhaus .
GRIMETIME, featuring various members of The Very Things, Laibach and Kill Ugly Pop, play London Camden Falcon .
I LUDICROUS, top football satirists and GEOGRAPHY OF LOVE, featuring numerous ex-Blue Aeroplanes, play London's West Kensington Orange Club on September 16.
JACOB'S HOUSE, who release their ‘Ton Up’ EP on the Wiiija label next Monday, play London Rough Trade Shop 
THE JAYHAWKS, Minneapolis' answer to The Black Crowes, plug their forthcoming Def American LP ‘Hollywood Town Hall’, with dates at London Harlesden Mean Fiddler and London Hammersmith Odeon supporting Dwight Yoakam.
NAKED TRUTH, fresh from their month-long residency at London's Brixton Old White Horse, play another series of dates at London's Tufnell Park Dome on 
RADICAL DANCE FACTION, DIE CHEERLEADER, SLUNK and AFTER FX play a benefit show for anti-fur campaigners Lynx at London's Tufnell Park Dome tonight.
RADIOHEAD, brooding Oxford-based band whose epic ‘Creep’ EP is released in the coming weeks, play Manchester University 
MR RAY'S WIG WORLD, currently winning admirers with their warped indie pop debut EP ‘Faster Kittykat Play Play’, precede their support slot on The Boo Radleys' November tour with dates at Chester Telfords 
NOEL REDDING, former bassist with the Jimi Hendrix Experience, and RANDY HANSEN play a series of Hendrix tribute concerts to commemorate the anniversary of his death at Glasgow King Tut's Wah Wah Hut 
GIL SCOTT-HERON, eminent jazz/soul figure, plays London's Camden Centre on October 29 and 30, supported by laconic Mancunian rap-fusion group Chapter And The Verse.
SKAW, issue ‘Sympathy Love’, their first single since signing to WEA next Monday, backed with a tour calling at Newport TJ's 
SPITFIRE, THE TELESCOPES and WINTERSET play London's Clapham Grand on September 25.
UGLY KID JOE,Wayne's World rock outfit, return to the UK to ‘kick some ass’ at Cambridge Corn Exchange 
WASP, Blackie Lawless' creaking rock monsters, play their first UK dates in three years at Wolverhampton Civic Hall  
ORBITAL: ‘Radiccio EP’ recent NME Single Of The Week featuring four tracks from the cerebral dance duo, ‘The Naked And The Dead’, ‘Halcyon’, ‘Sunday’and ‘The Naked And The Dub’— out now
MUDHONEY,(above) who release their major label debut album ‘Piece of Cake’ on Reprise in October, have announced details of their national autumn tour which visits Sheffield University 
ON ON ON
Here at On we're keeping trim with snip young gunslingers THE SCISSORMEN and say ‘break a leg’ to ROLLERSKATE SKINNY
THE FAMILY CAT
As doors slam close, other creak open.
Take North London, f'rinstance.
As the back door shuts on scene stalwarts Sun Carriage and Milk, it's now time for new faces, including THE SCISSORMEN, to input much-needed fresher perspectives and optimism.
They may play the same dives as those familiar Falconite grunge gluttons, but old lurch-riff formulas are being uprooted in a bid for a stronger individual identity.
Singer Chris is probably the first since Silverfish's Lesley from these parts to totally revel in being a pack leader.
New bassist Alex pumps out twisted urban blues-core and, along with manic driving sticksman Joe, adds extra colour to Scissormen style.
Then there's guitarist Adam, who may look like a squat punk bruiser with his daft haircut and tufty moustache, but is actually a guitar teacher and occasional dance track sessioneer.
The scuzz-noise melée lives on, but the setting's weirder than before.
‘Because I listen to a lot of jazz and classical music and the others listen to harder stuff, I find it a challenge to try and incorporate my influences into what we do,’ Adam enthuses, dropping in the expression ‘be-bop hardcore’to pinpoint his guitar quirks.
A demo of a forthcoming debut EP for Eve Records features pounding curio ‘The Real’, which recounts Adam's visit to a faith healer recommended by a friend.
‘I have been recovering from RSI (Repetitive Strain Injury ) since last October.
This guy I know really well suffered from it and went to see this faith healer and made a complete recovery.
He gave me her phone number so I went around, but didn't have the same experience.
‘The song is about the power of the mind, how you can take two people and do the same thing to both of them.
one is made better because of what's happening inside his mind, but it has the opposite effect on someone else.’
The Scissormen's finest moment so far is ‘Sever’, a love song positively stewing in its own blood and guts.
Its tearing rage tells of torment and the anguished devils that take up emotional residence in your heart after a fractured romance.
Chris has been there.
‘On the surface you're going, ‘oh well, it was really nice knowing you’, but actually inside you're going ‘UUURGH’’ he explains, philosophically.
‘You want to rip your heart out because it's broken.
Everybody tries to be as cool as possible but actually what you're feeling is something pretty bad.
It's just being completely, brutally honest about the nasty side of splitting up with someone.’
The Scissormen.
All cut up but raring to go.
VIVA SKATE
‘The main difference between here and America is size,’ announces ROLLERSKATE SKINNY's drummer-cum-guitarist beardie Jim, with masterful understatement.
‘America is so big that bands aren't surrounded by other bands trying to do the same thing.
They've got time and space to develop and be different.
Over here, everyone's too influenced by everyone else to do their own thing.’
Bingo!
Likewise, when the Pavements and Mercury Revs farted around in their peculiar padded cells, the thought of getting hip to sway the record buying masses was way down on a list of priorities filled with stuff like, uh, paying the rent and, dur, making music for the hell of it.
Bands like that are accidents waiting to happen in a world where 99 per cent of groups are casualties of their own blatant ambition.
Rollerskate Skinny have witnessed such lethargic genius ‘working’ at first hand by playing with Mercury Rev at The Grand in south London.
Luckily, they haven't recovered.
‘That was a brilliant night,’ gushes singer Ken, a man who holds his head onstage.
‘Mercury Rev smashed a piano, but it wasn't staged, it was completely natural.
Then they were giving out our flyers…‘
And the point of all this bountiful back-slapping?
Well, it's alarmingly early days, but Rollerskate Skinny have the potential and the passion to roll out the contrived barrel and give this side of the Atlantic the kind of kick up the arse it so desperately needs.
Their story begins in Dublin a couple of years ago, when Jim, Ken, guitarist Ger and bassist Steve stumbled around as Shake and got thoroughly nowhere.
‘I saw The Frank & Walters and Sultans of Ping FC play together at Dublin Baggot's Inn in front of 18 people,’ grumbles Ken.
‘Look what happened to those two when they came over here!’
Suffocated and uninspired by their hometown, Shake shook themselves up, hopped over to London, grabbed themselves a new moniker and, like, got their heads together in a chaotic kinda way.
Then things got weird.
None more so than on their debut single, ‘Novice’, wherein the crunching cruise that is ‘Cushy Daughter’ slam-dances its way into the spotlight.
A taut fusion of garrotted guitars, drum machine dynamics and half-hidden melodies, this is a spectacular, sensual starting point with slow bits and crazed barrages and everything else anyone could want from a slab of noise terrorism.
When asked about the lyrical content, Ken giggles bashfully and mutters strange things about tractors and farms.
When they played the song at London's Borderline recently, it stood out like a radioactive rabbit on a nudist beach, primarily because most of the remainder of the set collapsed like a drunk deck of cards.
‘Oh yeah, we got bored halfway through that one,’ beams Jim.
This is all about maverick tendencies making themselves heard, about imaginations running wild — if not downright livid.
Rollerskate Skinny claim they're not songwriters, they're ‘almost experimentalists’, and they have the good grace to piss themselves laughing.
Verily, these people are set upon pushing the noise boat out over the horizon until it arrives…somewhere.
Noise R Scuzz: The Scissormen cut a dash
Thin is in: Rollerskate Skinny (clockwise from top left)
THRILLS EDITED BY STUART MACONIE
LIFESTYLES OF THE RICH AND FAMOUS
UP AND down the country, in the backwaters of telephone directories and local papers and whatnot, to stars are leading secret lives which on the most eagle-eyed of NME readers can spot.
Thank you to Tony Hannant, Andrew Black and Simon Parrock for the following fascinating titbits.
From the records of the Crown Court, Bradford, comes news that Mr D BOWIE has finally been brought to book for his current misdemeanours.
From the yellow pages of the Preston Directory comes the shock revelation that NIRVANA are not only paying the price for their enthusiastic espousal of the rock lifestyle but even have their own nursing home!
And, most attractive of all, we see that Norfolk has gained a new and glittering addition to its night class line-up, with the news that NICK CAVE is to share his knowledge of advanced badminton with the good folk of East Anglia.
And I defy any of you to think of an amusing sign-off joke involving Nick Cave and badminton.
HOMES OF THE RICH & FAMOUS
THIS WEEK: WILSON PHILLIPS
WITH A musical pedigree like Wilson Phillips, it's no surprise that, more than any other group, except perhaps Cud, this all-girl-trio from California have defined pop music in the '90s.
And yet, though we are as familiar with them as we are with milk or Arsenal's new mural in front of the North Bank, no-one can ever remember their names!
I make an immediate faux pas when I enter their luxurious ‘triple bungalow’ in California and enquire as to the whereabouts of ‘the Fat One’!
She didn't seem to be around.
‘Oh, she's definitely a ‘round’ all right !,’says the Blonde One, joining in my good-natured sizeism.
‘Actually, we don't like to talk about her much,’ says the Other One, ‘because she's ‘biggish’, and it's difficult hiding her away in videos.’
Their beautiful home, hidden way up in the California hills, is divided into three parts, one for each member of the group.
There's also a spare room where the eccentric dad of the Fat One and the Other One, ex-Beach Boy Brian Wilson, stays when he comes to call.
Is it true that he'd forgotten that he was their father?
‘Yes, he did, actually,’ says the Other One.
‘He knew he had daughters somewhere, but he thought they were in L7 or The Nolan Sisters.’
After another half hour of lively sexist banter and innuendo, I am asked to leave and threatened with having dogs set upon me.
As I walk away from the house I meet Brian Wilson driving in.
He pretends not to know me, which isn't too surprising, as we've never met, but otherwise appears not too eccentric.
‘Saying hello to your daughters?!’
I enquire.
‘No,’ he replies, ‘I'm popping in on Wilson Phillips.’
‘BIG MOUTH’
‘We're a bunch of fat bastards now, we're inundated with things to eat.
It's always the same, as soon as you get success, people give you everything.
When you haven't got a bean, they won't give you anything.
The only  barbecue we ever had was when the house next door burnt down.’
‘Being a rock'n'roll star is like having a sex change.
People treat you like a girl, stare at you, follow you down the street, try to  f— you over.
I know what it feels like to be a babe.’
‘I get all this style thing from my dad.
He was a long distance lorry driver but he knew how to dress and taught me the golden rule ‘Don't mix your stripes’.’
Sartorial elegance the Charlie Watts way
‘We've got through all this by being ourselves — which is a bunch of lying, gibbering twats.
Know what I mean?’
‘I'm a bit of a passion killer.
I go in for really frumpy underwear.’
Hooky contemplates another burger
THRILLS BELIEVE IT OR NOT!
MARTI PELLOW of WET WET WET may have a world-famous grin — but, unbeknownst to his legions of fans, they are not his real teeth!
CARTER have not worn long trousers since March 1989.
Due to a translator's error, the new PAUL WELLER album is being advertised as ‘Usual Old Jazzy Bollocks’ in Japan.
GERRY RAFFERTY has threatened to kill anyone who buys Undercover's version of ‘Baker Street’.
PJ O'ROURKE is writing the lyrics for the new JULIAN COPE album.
NATALIE MERCHANT (10,000 MANIACS)
WHERE ARE YOU AND WHAT ARE THE VIBES LIKE?
Manhattan.
It's an extremely cool day for August, this apartment, and New York.
There is a medieval plain-chant echoing in the air shaft from an unknown stereo, providing a monastic vibe
WHAT WAS THE LAST THING YOU ATE?
My breakfast.
Cous-cous, dates rolled in coconut and half a cantaloupe that smelled a bit beyond its prime until I cut it open.
It was delicious
WHAT WAS THE LAST VIDEO YOU RENTED?
Time Of The Gypsies , a Yugoslavian film with incredible soundtrack
WHAT WAS THE LAST GOOD BOOK YOU READ?
FAVE POLITICAL FIGURE
Aung San Sun Kyi — Burmese democracy movement leader who was awarded the Nobel Prize while under house arrest
WHAT TV SHOWS DO YOU TRY NOT TO MISS?
I normally avoid television
WHAT WAS THE FIRST RECORD YOU EVER HEARD?
I have vivid memories of ‘Supercalifragelisticexpialidocious’, from the soundtrack of Mary Poppins 
WHAT SPORTS ARE YOU GOOD AT?
MOST EMBARRASSING RECORDS IN YOUR COLLECTION 
FAVE JOURNEYS 
FAVE BOARD GAMES
Maukala — a simple African stone game I've played since third grade
NAME THREE GREAT SONGWRITING PARTNERSHIPS 
WHICH PUBLIC FIGURES DO YOU MOST DESPISE?
Mass murderers in America who achieve overnight celebrity status due to the press and public's morbid fascination with their crimes
FAVE HISTORICAL CHARACTERS
Hildegard Von Bingen — 12th Century German  abbess , poet, healer, natural scientist, author, composer.
Mother Ann Lee — 18th Century English woman who founded the Utopian religious sect in the USA called The Shakers.
Victoria Woodhull Claffin — later 19th Century free-thinking radical feminist who was the first woman to run for the office of United States President over 30 years before women's suffrage.
Harriet Tubman — 19th Century African-American woman born into slavery who escaped to the Northern Free States and then helped establish The Underground Railroad, a network of abolitionists who aided slaves in escaping bondage.
Dorothea Lange — an American photographer of the Great Depression era whose portraits are among the most powerful I have ever seen.
Amelia Earhart — American heroic pioneer in aviation whose plane was lost as she attempted the circumnavigation of the earth.
WHAT ARE YOUR VIRTUES?
WHAT ARE YOUR VICES?
FAVE PUNK ROCK RECORDS 
FAVE TV SHOWS OF YESTERYEAR 
WORST LYRIC YOU'VE EVER HEARD
‘I'm still an embryo with a long, long way to grow until I make my brother understand…’— Helen Reddy's ‘I Am Woman’
WHO'S SEXY?
Carpenters and farmers
CAN YOU QUOTE A LINE OF POETRY?
WHAT WAS THE LAST GREAT RECORD YOU HEARD?
WHERE WOULD YOU LIKE TO RETIRE TO?
NAME A RECORD THAT CAN MAKE YOU CRY 
WHAT DOES ‘INDIE’ MEAN TO YOU?
Independent labels are usually refreshingly uncompromising, they fill a void in the corporate music scheme.
Because of their size and limited ownership they have a strongly defined character
WHO'S OVERRATED?
WHO'S UNDERRATED?
WHAT SCARES YOU?
Long tunnels, snakes, vicious dogs, ocean depths, ageing, failure, violent films, nuclear power, toxics, rape, the Universal Price Code, religious fanaticism and another four years of Republicanism and Bush.
WHAT BORES YOU?
Talking on the telephone
WHEN WERE YOU LAST DRUNK?
WHAT WAS THE LAST DREAM YOU CAN REMEMBER?
Two nights ago — a small girl approached me with a bottle of mercurochrome and, with a small brush, began to spread it over my lips.
The chapped skin began to burn.
I asked her to stop.
She painted layer upon layer, she drew laugh lines and reddened my cheeks.
After she had made me into a clown, she laughed in a very satisfied way.
She danced a tight circle around me.
I sat cross-legged, helpless and foolish.
THREE RECORDS GUARANTEED TO MAKE YOU DANCE 
WHAT CAN YOU COOK?
Vegetarian dishes in various ethnic cuisines — Mexican, Thai, Indian, Italian, Japanese, Middle Eastern, etc.…
FAVE FM ROCK BAND 
FAVE RADIO PROGRAMME 
FAVE STUDIO DEVICES
A grand piano
FAVE TAKEAWAYS
Cold noodles and sesame sauce
WORST JOB YOU EVER HAD
Easter break 1977.
For two weeks I tied grapes in a Concord vineyard for seven cents a vine.
The farm was beside Lake Eyrie and rain, along with bitter winds, would sweep over the vineyard.
I remember crying because my hands had gone numb from the damp cold.
FIVE GONAD IN FINLAND
Psychedelic geeks from Oldham in bollocks out shocker!
Can the INSPIRAL CARPETS, who tear round Finland comparing testicles, pondering piss-drinking and Japanese prostitutes, really be the same band who make such brooding, impassioned pop?
ROGER MORTON can't believe it, as he spends three days in the belly of the all-stupid, all-swearing beast.
Carpet buggers: DEREK RIDGERS
You have forgotten everything you know about the Inspiral Carpets.
You are suffering from total Inspiral memory loss.
Everything about ‘Cool As  F— ’ T-shirts, bowl-head haircuts, ‘Planecrash’EPs, cow obsessions and weirdo slideshows has been erased.
You've never heard a speed-thrash organ pop LP called ‘Life’, never experienced ‘The Beast Inside’ 's prog rock excesses and never drifted off to the gorgeous pop of ‘This Is How It Feels’.
Of Madchester, Mute, mooting audiences and gurning physiognomy you know nowt.
Temporarily an Inspiral virgin is what you are.
Then one day an album falls into your hands by the unheard-of Inspiral Carpets.
It's intriguingly titled ‘The Revenge Of The Goldfish’ and it blows your head off.
Twelve tracks of lashing, fiery, passionate pop, each of them a little nugget of punky guitaring, robust melody and shrouded, sensitive lyrics.
It has to be, you think, the product of a group of pained souls, shadowy wordsmiths burning with intensity, desperate to communicate their anger and their enthusiasm.
You blag a meeting with the band's lynchpin, organist Clint Boon.
In the hushed surroundings of a smart restaurant, Boon fiddles enigmatically with a fob watch on a neck chain.
The shirt's a bit bright, and he's not as young as you thought, but that's OK. hell, Nick Cave's no spring chicken.
Enigmatically, Boon sits in silence for a while.
Then he leans forward.
‘Alright,’ he posits. ‘'Ow much money would it take for you to drink a pint of somebody's piss?
No, go on, ‘ow much?
I reckon I'd do it for a thousand pounds.
It's alright, you're allowed to fridge it first.’
Aaaargh!
It's all coming back now.
The birds, the bollocks, the bodily functions — the whole wisecracking, can't be arsed, northern git trip has returned.
Brilliant pop shacked up with basic instincts.
Now you remember about the Inspirals.
‘This might make conservative, this,’ says Clint, thinking back to his recent viewing of Basic Instinct ,’but I think it's a bad day, me, when people like Michael Douglas are seen fookin' noshing on a woman's minge.
You know what I mean.
Innit though?
He's Kirk Douglas' son!
Y'know, fookin' Ben Hur he was in!
Makes you wonder what's going to happen in five years time.’
Richard Burton in anal sex scenes?
‘Yeah,’ says Tom Hingley.
‘With that little  f—er out of Home Alone .’
THE INSPIRAL Carpets spend the summer recording their third album and ‘doing’ the festival circuit.
They went to Belgium, Switzerland and Estonia, and now they are in Finland, playing a couple of low-key dates, doing an outdoor festival show and discussing Michael Douglas' scenes.
Finland is out there somewhere.
Out there, away from the Inspirals' tour bubble, is a land of a thousand lakes and a million fir trees, where the people drive with the headlights on in full daylight, past ‘Moose Crossing’ warning signs, to restaurants where you can tuck into sautéed reindeer.
Finland is orderly and bland, and the Finnish people are disorderly (when drunk) and blond.
But all of that stuff is out there .
When you're on the road with the Inspirals, you're in a little corner of the globe that is forever Oldham.
‘Look at the hair on this one,’ says Clint, inspecting the frizzy head of state on a Finnish note.
‘That's what you get for sticking your dick in a plug socket.’
The Inspirals have come a long way from 1989's full-tilt three-minute organ romp early days.
The last two singles, ‘Dragging Me Down’ and ‘Two Worlds Collide’, and new one ‘Generations’have pulled them back from the margins that the rambling excesses of ‘The Beast Inside’threatened to confine them to.
With the new LP containing a further clutch of eminently suitable, hard-hitting potential singles, they have undoubtedly developed into Respectable British Pop Songwriters.
In person, however, they have matured about as much as a sperm in a deep frozen sperm bank.
Craig is still Noddy, the hot-headed drummer, forever telling Clint he's talking ‘fookin' bollocks’, Martyn is still Bungle the bassist shuffling around with his hands in his pockets.
Graham the guitarist is still dry to the point of death, only showing signs of life when a football appears.
Singer tom is still all southern manners and embarrassment at the lads wanking around.
And Clint is still in permanent fifth gear, forever chasing the perfectly formed arse of a gross one-liner.
They cling to their gang-of-lads-from-Oldham identity like it's the last line of defence between them and the unthinkable horror of an interview with Melvyn Bragg.
Decked out in a specially selected volume ten fright shirt, Clint sits backstage at Helsinki's Tavastia club inspecting the cramped, graffiti-covered dressing room.
‘I bet Cannon & Ball don't have to put up with this.
They're big everywhere, them,’ he observes.
The Inspirals are not big in Finland yet, but they reckon it makes sense to play small shows in far-flung corners of the globe.
It's part of a policy of sowing the seeds of a ‘future audience’.
Remarkably, they turn what had looked like a dead duck of an evening — a half-full club of uninterested Finns busy soaking up the DJ's Toto records — into an event.
They play with a raw, unsmiling aggression that cuts through the crappy circumstances.
It's a fierce dash through a highlight-clogged set, peaking with their grunge-funk cover of ‘Tainted Love’ that has even the Toto fans pogoing.
Then they play the porno tapes over the PA.
‘Man, I've been longing for it…
Squelch squelch…
Christ you've got a tight  c- ’.
The extracts from a dirty movie fade away and the Inspirals clamber into their Scandia van, delighted with the comments of a Finnish woman journalist who had told them, ‘You make music that is going somewhere while at the same time standing still and one day it will end in a big BOOM!’
Meanwhile, I'm left pondering the age old Inspiral conundrum of farting jollity and dick fiddling on the one hand, and brooding, impassioned pop on the other.
HALF A million fir trees into the next day and the Inspirals tour party has motored cross country to Finland's Manchester, the medium-sized industrial town of Tampere.
By nightfall I have discovered that, before they thought of using money, the Finns used to use squirrels as currency, hence the splendid Finnish joke about trying to put a squirrel in a slot machine.
Clint has discovered the porn channel on the hotel TV ‘but they weren't really doing it 'cause her arse muscles weren't clenched.’
And we have had a sitdown Chinese meal where Craig has laid claim to having spent a night sleeping ‘on one of them tofu things’.
‘Erm, I think you mean a futon , Craig.’
A brief analysis of Primal Scream's pop career has also taken place, rounded off by a sure-footed declaration from Craig that ‘the only respect I have for Bobby Gillespie is that he's been closer to Kylie Minogue's fanny than I have.’
Even the Chinese waiters are impressed.
By day three of the Inspiral experience you're getting used to it.
Honestly.
The memories of yesterday's little discussion with Clint about Japanese prostitutes and not being able to get it up, and how the idea of being beaten by a fat old bint could be quite appealing ‘as long as there were no electrodes’— it's kind of the norm by now.
It's been a long day of trundling past an infinity of fir trees, and photographer Ridgers has hardly survived it.
Sitting in their Scandia van, scouting for photo locations (Forest?
Or forest?)
Ridgers witnessed The Inspirals' bizarre genital inspection routine, involving testicle size comparisons and close inspections of warts.
‘It's not normal ,’ was all he could say when they let him out.
The Inspirals, well away from Scrotal Sac-ville 
As we arrive in Joensu, site of the night's festival where the Inspirals are to join a bill featuring  The Cramps and Carter, Clint is up front in the tour van, tutoring their Finnish driver in Oldham vernacular.
‘My mate Noel in the back, he's a  c- , he is.
Do you understand  c- ?
OK, he's an arsehole.
Erm…
He's bad news .
Listen, I love him, but he's just not to be trusted.’
The redoubtable driver just keeps his eyes fixed on the road.
The final show in the Inspirals' foray into Finland takes place under clouded skies, on an enormo stage, in front of a field of fully of happily drunk hippy kids who, when they walk on stage, appear to be principally interested in fighting each other, or lying on their backs staring at the clouds.
Two songs in, however, with the Inspirals confidently soaring, the field Finns start to drift towards the stage.
One by one the first time fans gather in front of the crash barriers until there's a swaying mass of Finn youth vibing on the dark power of the Inspirals' pop.
It's another triumph against the odds, this time on a grand scale.
I wander backstage after the set and bump into Clint.
He is grinning madly, clearly moved by the occasion.
‘Did you see that girl in the audience?’ he says.
‘She was having a piss!
I could see everything from where I was.
I nearly had to stop playing, I got a hard-on!’
And with that he wanders off, to find somebody else to wind up.
WHAT DO you do with a pop group who spend the weeks writing songs with as much soul-searching gravitas as ‘Two Worlds Collide’, and the weekends getting their bollocks out?
Keep the records in a plain brown wrapper and wait for Inspiral puberty?
Or chortle and wait for the next T-shirt?
Do you think as a band you have a basic outlook that you all agree on?
Tom: ‘Oh yeah, otherwise we wouldn't still be here.’
What do you think of Ice-T's ‘Cop Killer’?
Clint: ‘I don't know, it depends on what the spirit of the song is.
If it's like promoting the idea of killing cops as being a good thing, if this band wanted to do a song like that I wouldn't want to be in the band.’
Craig: ‘The funny thing is we had a piss-take album title which was taking the piss out of that whole thing, which we all found was funny.
It was ‘Big Penis Dead Constable’.
Do you think David Mellor should have resigned over the sex scandal?
Clint: ‘No.
It's like should I resign for being involved in a sex scandal?
It's just a human thing, isn't it?
It's a very real part of humanity that blokes will go and  f— about with other women.’
Tom: ‘I mean, I doubt if anyone ever knew that bloke existed until the stories.’
Clint: ‘He's a bit of a goon, in't'e, but the bird looks alright.’
Now that two of you are married and a couple of you are starting families, does the band work as a lads' escape?
Clint: ‘It provides a lot of headaches, but it also provides the breath of fresh air we need.
Every time I come out with this lot it's like being back at school.
It's like throwing fookin' people's briefcases out of the fifth floor at school.
All the silly little tricks.’
So it's a split existence between the band and the DIY homelife?
Clint: ‘I think each existence rubs off on the other.
It's like you come out on the road and Craig sees me and Graham in the hotel room being very domestic, setting everything out nice, the ghetto blaster, and the hair dryer and the toiletries.
Then on the other hand you go home and do all your stupid humour on your wife and get fookin' hell kicked out of you.’
You told me that the porn tape you use is a hangover from the old Inspiral Carpets.
Clint: ‘No, it's not really a hangover, because we're still the same people we were, really.
It's just for the humour of it, I think.
I mean, none of us get a hard-on when it comes on.
It's just like it still surprises audiences.
You still get the girls red at the front.’
When you've been having a few beers, and clowning around having a bit of a larf, and then you go onstage and sing earnest, sensitive songs full of emotion and heartbreak and loneliness, do you ever feel like fakes?
Tom: ‘We don't really put on a big theatrical performance, so you don't look at it that way, you just try and sing it in tune.
I think we have always been aware of the contrast, though.
Like when we did ‘Sackville’ we used to have sex stuff over the end of it, so I think we've actually played on that.’
Clint: ‘It's probably one of the most sensitive songs about a prostitute that's ever been written, and then at the end you've got this tape going ‘Well ‘ow about a blow-job then?
Get your  f—ing cock out!’
You mentioned that the new album title ‘Revenge Of The Goldfish’ had to do with sympathy for the underdogs.
Clint: ‘It's just one of those things where the implications are good.
Y'know, we've been dead and buried as far as a lot of people are concerned, but this album will put us back up there.
When the Manchester thing was happening we did ‘The Beast Inside’ because we didn't want to be part of what was going on.
this time we were able to stand at a distance from it all and weigh it up and write better songs.
We was always on the edge anyway.
We was always from Oldham.’
You've said in the past that you thought the band stood or fell purely by your music, that your personalities had nothing to do with it.
Do you still believe that?
Clint: ‘Did I say that?
I don't know, but I think we were lucky.
I think there was a corner in the market that hadn't been filled and we were there to do it.
We were like, these geeks from Oldham who were doing psychedelic stuff.
I think we were lucky like that.
But those days of luck have passed.
We've transcended that.
It's not just part of a trend any more.
The music's very substantial now; and I think people recognise that.
The feedback we get is that we're the ones from Manchester that people look to for the music.
The Mondays is a party and the Roses is an enigma, and we're the musicians with the good melodies.’
So what would The Inspirals T-shirt slogan be to sum up the current attitude?
Clint: ‘Arsed’.
Which is an interpretation of a phrase which basically means ‘I'm not arsed’, but it's shortened to ‘arsed’.
Craig: ‘We're thinking of having these boxer shorts done with ‘E’ on one cheek and ‘D’on the other and a cow on the cod-piece.’
Clint: ‘They wouldn't get it, Noddy.
Nobody would get it.’
Craig: ‘Well, we thought no fooker'd get ‘Cool As  F— ’, and look what happened.’
Buy the record.
See the gig.
Throw the boxer shorts into the dirty laundry basket.
DO THE RIPE THING
Fêted Amer-indie faces SMASHING PUMPKINS eschew the indulgent side of the rock'n'roll lifestyle to engage in the healthy, non-macho pursuit of the Good Noise.
DELE FADELE meets our friends eclectic, and finds they aren't afraid to show their feminine side.
Smashing pic: DEREK RIDGERS
The most dangerous aspect of rock ‘n’ roll has always been to succumb to the mythical lifestyle that leads down the path of destruction.
History is littered with illustrious corpses of talented people cut down in their prime due to over-indulgence and a streak of self-destruction.
In almost every case, the concerned parties believed that, by living on the edge, they'd somehow gain insights denied normal, everyday people.
But what use are visions if you can't transcribe them so others can make some sense of them?
What use is canonisation — if you're lucky — after your death if you're not around to sense the effects of your work on the populace?
The reason for this seemingly moral rant is because, presently, some curators of modern rock think it's hip to scoff all the alcohol and drugs they can ingest and behave like beasts.
Some of them are American and a subset of them have this risible attitude that they can get away with just making loads of noise and, as long as the audience is in a similarly altered state of mind, no-one will be the wiser.
CHICAGO'S SMASHING Pumpkins hold no truck with antiquated r ‘n’ r myths.
Beyond the odd after-show beer, theirs is a devotion to the regime of immersing themselves in glorious music and trying to say something pertinent with it.
Although lumped in with the grunge movement and perceived in some quarters as worthy successors to Nirvana (as if the original has gone away), Billy Corgan (vocals/guitar), James Iha (guitar), D'Arcy (bass, and Jimmy (drums) are unique and accessible to anyone who's ever liked Led Zeppelin and Black Sabbath, hardcore and prog-rock, art and pop.
There's none of that overbearing macho posturing normally associated with loud noise and Billy C isn't afraid to show his more feminine side.
Listen to the powerful, sinewy, stop-start ‘Tristessa’ or the sledgehammer rattle of ‘I Am One’(both off the wild ‘Gish’LP) and you'll hear a group that loves to have melodies buzzing through a lattice framework of rhythm, a group with chemistry and a group with a sense of direction.
And don't forget ‘eclectic’.
Smashing Pumpkins have become one of the most fêted recent faces on the Amer-indie scene simply by doing what they want to do.
In their notoriously fashion-based hometown they've stuck out from the crowd by not following rules and soldering disparate musics together when everyone else was trying to fit into narrow categories.
Like-minded people have noticed this, with the results that they've always drawn diverse audiences.
Live, there's a mixture of experimentation and entertainment, but without them stripping themselves emotionally bare just for the sake of it — there's as much truth as there is artifice.
At this year's Reading Festival, Smashing Pumpkins came in slightly below par, perhaps due to the rigours of touring, but, a few nights before, in the more intimate setting of Newcastle's Riverside, they clean blew the roof off with an energetic gig that showed that some members had an appreciation of heavy metal but knew how to drag it breathing heavily into the '90s.
The scene was frantic: a sea of members but precious few stage-divers (these guys like to keep their distance), simply ridiculous volume levels that make sure you only concentrated on the music, lovely melodies, and people getting away from the pressures of daily life in a northern town.
Before this lively experience, I had a conversation with Billy that didn't proceed in the usual question-answer form of an interview.
If he's a prima donna or full of himself, then he hides it well.
This charming Mid-Westerner was serious when he needed to be and very humorous when he needed to be.
Because he's articulate he's often perceived as a serious intellectual who thinks out every step and nuance of Smashing Pumpkins, but he's actually quite aware of the stupidity of rock star posturing and this come out in self-deprecation.
Make no mistake, he's the group ringleader and possibly a control-freak, but he doesn't strike me as a dictatorial megalomaniac.
And while he was reared on metal and later discovered punk — but didn't necessarily subscribe to the attitudes for fear of losing individuality — he appreciates the blues.
In a steady drawl he corrects my misapprehension that his group attracts loads of metalheads amongst the other sub-cultures that clock to the gigs…
‘I think, just like any band right now that's alternative and heavy, we attract a somewhat open-minded crowd,’ he says, laughing, ‘I don't know if metalhead would be the word.
I would say that a band like Soundgarden probably attracts more of a metal crowd.
‘What I want our music to achieve for someone listening to it has become more ambiguous.
I want it to do something, I'm not necessarily sure what.
I think to have a specific goal in mind like ‘OK, I want this song to make someone feel sad’ is useless.
I think antagonising people is just as good as making people happy.’
Is making lots of noise an evil pursuit?
The PMRC, who're at the forefront of censoring music in America, certainly think so, in their usual over-reacting way.
Billy prefers to think of the music as representing the way he feels, the sound-picture corresponding with his inner self.
For me, it depends on what you're saying over the noise.
If, like Glen Danzig, you're calling for the death of religion, then you're evil and I want nothing to do with you.
If, however, like Bilinda from My Bloody Valentine you're singing tender entreaties to your partner or questioning the nature of love, then you're saying something universal and good.
There's good noise and bad noise.
Smashing Pumpkins make good noise, even if, as Billy says, he doesn't mind antagonising people live but would love to make pretty records: you know it's the punk in him speaking.
Billy Corgan is down with the current spate of female bands; he doesn't begrudge them success and thinks groups like Babes in Toyland deserve their kudos.
Closer to home, D'Arcy is an essential cog in the Pumpkins' wheel.
‘Playing with D'Arcy has been a real education because up until she joined the band I always thought about rock in male terms.
I thought about it as men playing music, I didn't think about it as women playing music, especially rock.
It wasn't like I was a big fan of The Runaways (laughs ), and I didn't like Black Flag either (more laughter ).
So, having D'Arcy in the band has been an education, not only from playing with someone who's obviously a girl, but seeing how people perceive that and seeing the kind of shit she takes because she's a girl.
You not only have to deal with people questioning her musical ability, but also just that constant male assault.
‘As a guy, girls do not come after you like a guy would come after a girl in a band.
It's ridiculous.
I dated Courtney Love for a while and that was another education on how people perceive.
And just to see the war on her, people constantly questioning her ability…‘
ONE THING Smashing Pumpkins have in common with shoe-gazers — they have their fingers in many pies — in the way the vocals aren't necessarily in-your-face.
Sure, they're more upfront, but it takes time to actually understand what's being said.
All you get are hints, little teases…
Billy: ‘For the first LP (Gish ), I was really trying to express more…like a feeling and not so much something specific.
On the LP we're writing right now, I'm definitely trying to express something more specific.
I feel I can encapsulate the feeling in the music and then say what I want to say in a direct manner.
I'm even thinking about printing the lyrics, which, a year ago, I wouldn't have considered.
As far as what comes into my head, I dunno, I write the worst dribbling shit you ever heard.
It's so hard to express how being jilted by a lover or something makes you feel without sounding…you write best when you have a certain objectivity…when your writing is both the passenger and the driver.’
Billy says the next Pumpkins LP might actually blow it for them in terms of commercial success — just when the going was getting really good.
He's determined to explore all the avenues open to him, including writing folky and pastoral stuff.
In other ways, he knows what's going down.
Even though he's been travelling around the world, he's kept up with what's going on back home.
And the picture he paints of Chicago is quite depressing, with tales of random murders and unsafe streets.
‘In Chicago, you drive around safe in the knowledge that when you travel home at night you're gonna get home.
And when you realise that there's only one cop for every hundred people…you realise that feeling you have of safety and society order is just a  f—ing whiff away from being gone.’
Billy Corgan thinks very deeply.
But when it comes to defending Smashing Pumpkins' tendency to write eight-minute epics he makes an r'n'r analogy: ‘You can either  f— for four minutes or sometimes you  f— for an hour.’
He's not above silliness.
Rock beasts?
Not us, say Smashing Pumpkins 
SINGLES
REVIEWED BY IAN McCANN
EMF: They're Here
The return of those irresponsible monsters who did all that mucking about with dead sheep, galleons and ice-cream vans.
And my, how they've changed.
They now sound like The KLF, but this is no ‘Unbelievable’.
Crunching riffs, frantic sneer, a sound so chewy that Rowntrees are currently sticking it under the microscope to see if it can be put into a crisp candy coat, and a bloody horrible noise it all is.
However, the ‘techno’ track, as we modern pop persons like to call it, ‘Phantasmogoric’, is much more like ‘Justified And Ancient’, so it all begins to make sense.
Dunno about the bleepy cover of the old Traffic song on the CD, ‘Low Spark of High Heeled Boys’, but Derry at least seems like his old fey self.
Try ‘Heaven Is In Your Mind’ next time lads.
10,000 MANIACS: These Are Days
Richey and his Maniacs are another band that have changed beyond belief.
In fact, Rich sounds remarkably like a woman in this one, and the band are like a piss-poor Jethro Tull with Marvin Gaye's drummer popping away in the background.
Twang, tinkle, tonk, and bloody sober boring sincerity.
Bring back ‘Motorscooter Handiness’ fast.
DEFINITION OF SOUND: What Are You Under
Answer: probably pressure to get a hit.
Not that these two, makers of last year's spunky, delirious, wankable ‘Love And Life’ album, are likely to get one, this being too bass-heavy and reggaeish for the world of Our Tune .
If the poppy ‘Moira Jane's Cafe’ and ‘Now Is Tomorrow’singles weren't enough to ‘big them up’, then why should this be any different?
A noisy, messy device.
FANTASTIC PLANET: Carry On Columbus
Techno of the most pathetic kind, with squealing,oh so excited vocals that will sound familiar to anyone who remembers Bow Wow Wow, not that it's Ms Louise Wynne, so far as I can gather.
Produced by one of those boring names that is usually the guarantee of at least a little hype, but who cares?
MICHAEL JACKSON: Jam
Here's a thing.
The credits on this one read ‘Music by…’ and list four people, and, separately, ‘Song and lyrics by Michael Jackson’.
This is how far we've strayed from the traditional concepts of pop.
The music is no longer anything to do with the song.
Funny, never would have guessed just by listening to it…
TASMIN ARCHER: Sleeping Satellite
Another personal singer/songwriter washing her mental dirty linen in public, but this time with a voice of pure thin ice and a faint air of jollification.
There's no hit here, but given the right bullshit production she could stick out the next ‘Damn I Wish Etc’.
Nice bloke's suit as well…
She resembles what a producer of The Bill would think a jazz singer would look like.
THE HIGH: Better Left Untold
The High's guitar sound is gradually thickening up from their mod-ish debut LP, and they're starting to sound like the Atom bloody Seed.
Slightly clumsy hard rock that may make it in America later.
Much much much later.
KITCHENS OF DISTINCTION: When In Heaven
A four-tracker, starting with the nervous, swirly title tune that drops from my mind instantly I've heard it.
Folk rock for folk that have forgotten the folk bit.
CATHERINE ZETA JONES: For All Time
All those wankers obsessed with the shape of Ms Zeta Jones' num-nums are looking at the wrong asset.
Someone at Columbia please send her nut-brown eyes round to me in a jar.
But you don't wanna know about that, do you?
You wanna know if she can sing (yes), and whether Jeff Wayne's ‘Spartacus’, from which this is drawn, is the truly superb musical experience that his adaptation of ‘War Of The Worlds’ was (probably).
And is it as poor as his theme for The Big Match ?
ITV's award-winning, Skyboshed soccer show?
Sure as hell is.
KILLA INSTINCT: Den Of Thieves/Ununited Kingdom
An intriguing throwback musically, flinging down fierce breakbeat rap of the kind Kold Sweat specialises in.
The chats sound untutored and Cockney, but there's depth here: ‘Ununited Kingdom’ puts down on to vinyl some of the chaos of London life, the violent, wasteful mess of street trouble — not that you can hear it too clearly.
Of course, ‘Ununited’ is grammatically incorrect, but they probably didn't want to dis the place.
What's here is anger and pain, and while this isn't easy to take, the hardcore is always a bitter pill.
OBLIGATORY SINGLE OF THE WEEK
SUEDE: Metal Mickey
Brett of the extra-long floppy limbs churns out a second easy classic.
What's the appeal?
It's not so much the sibilant, fey voice guaranteed to give sound engineers nightmares, or the churning guitars, or the stretched-on-a-rack arms, it's the choruses.
You feel like you've heard them a couple of hundred times when it's only been twice.
One day you'll reminisce about when you first saw them, and gloat over your worn-out copies of the Nude singles.
Or you could get a life instead.
Two more on the other side: the rambling ‘Where The Pigs Don't Fly’ and ‘He's Dead’, which is every bit as good as ‘Metal Mickey’, and as catchy.
This voice will gradually drive you mad.
Before it does, undress and caress yourself all over with it.
Fact: whenever the NME staff get all babyish and gooey over a band, I get suspicious because it happens every other week.
But even I like Suede.
Unstoppable, and so tailor-made for success it's like them lying there, legs akimbo, waiting for the major companies to come in and shag the ass off them.
Catch them before it happens.
Dandies on a beano: Suede take the ‘Mickey’— and McCann's fancy
THE WEDDING PRESENT: 9: Loveslave
The best one since ‘5’.
A dirge in which old Gedgey, the man who I, the great power-crazed bone-eating Svengali of indie-pop, reinvented, goes bloody man in the erm, bloody mad bits.
The cover version is grungy Bowie's ‘Chant Of The Ever Circling Skeletal Family’ and it sounds like The Fall.
And in the time it's taken you to read this, it's sold out.
THE FATIMA MANSIONS: Everything I Do (I Do It For You)
Reviewed last week as the flip to the Maniac Street Preachers' ‘Theme From MASH’, but here again so that I can say it's one of the best records I've heard all year.
Here I go: it's one of the best records I've heard all year.
Thank you.
THE PRODIGY: Fire
The Prodigy, or Prodge as his mates call him, discovers reggae and the Arthur Brown 1968 novelty hit of the same title.
The analogue armoury on here is fearsome, and doubtless his dad has got a huge record collection so he'll be churning them out for ages yet and we might as well get used to it.
And secretly, I think ‘Jericho’, the B-side is rather good.
THE SUGARCUBES: Vitamin
Six, or eight, Youth remixes of one track, depending on which format you buy.
Or don't buy.
Atmospheric stuff that gradually gets more atmospheric until on ‘Meditation Mix’ there's no music anymore, just atmosphere.
Einar goes ‘Whoooo’ a bit, the guitars saw away obligingly, but you're left asking why ?,what for ?, and I wonder if there's any juice left in the fridge?
There is, but there's not much juice left in ‘Vitamin’ by the time it reaches your ears.
FUZZWEED: Dream
Where guitar pop meets techno you'll find this hanging out trying to decide which direction to stumble.
The faintly stoned Indian vocal line doesn't help, and somehow this seems to me like a cross between ‘What Time Is Love’ and ‘Fools Gold’with the charm of neither and a lot of other unnecessary junk.
IC3: It Ain't That Yall
Sugarhill groove meets a jazz funk classic meets modern production values, with Duke, formerly MC Duke, chatting in fine form on top.
‘Poverty’ on the other side is equally alluring, although this will do zilch in the pop world.
File it alongside your old Tuff City imports where it belongs.
DEMON BOYZ: Junglist
I write this as the world's Number One fan of the Demon Boyz, a roughneck little Tottenham posse.
They've got a fine album and a string of great singles a long way behind them, but the Demonz have yet to have the mass market fawning at their feet, unless you count their brief appearance in the video for ‘The Bouncer’.
‘Junglist’ is lyrically typical: fast, furious, endless and uncompromising, and musically it's among the wildest ‘Jungle House’(to use the current revolting, faintly racist expression) tunes you'll hear.
This lot rarely put a foot wrong, and here, all feet are guaranteed right.
Fatter than a Weight-Watchers' enrolment evening.
STRONTIUM 50: Fighting For The Future
Five-track EP from unknown quantity, named after a radioactive isotope found in your dinner and extra-thick industrial milkshake thanks to the wonders of nuclear power, the government's equivalent of a big hard-on.
Track one is a growling, clapping disco song with a peace message, but far better to my ears are ‘Klangers’, a similar groove which sounds like it has in fact got The Klangers on it although it's probably just a synth, and ‘The Horns Of Jerricurl’(geddit?) which unfolds the depths of their groove and lays bare their sense of humour.
Given a few more quid to spend, this lot could beat almost anything on Talkin' Loud.
JOSEPH STEPPER: Wife
BUJU BANTON: Bogle
CUTTY RANKS: Who Say Me Done
GENERAL LEVY: Heat
And in case you're one of these pricks that think reggae pegged out with Marley, here's the modern breed.
All have been around awhile but you can still buy them, and they get the MC Cann seal of approval as seen on TV and the national press.
Joseph Stepper's ‘Wife’ is one of the maddest ragga records ever made, as raw as a dinner that's still walking around.
Buju Banton, one of the top ragga MCs of the age, turns his hand to the cheery if slight subject of the bogle, a dance that's bigger than Biggles in Jamaica.
Cutty Ranks' ‘Who Say Me Done’ is Cutty providing once and for all that he's not just a one-year wonder, with that perfect voice ruling a wild ragga tune laden with samples from a certain 1969 reggae classic.
It's been a reggae smash for weeks on end but no-one in the pop world has noticed yet.
I demand that this man gets a major deal now .
And the fantastic General Levy, another bod with STAR written all over him, just opens up and flows on ‘Heat’, a rap-styled tune far warmer than this summer has been.
Wake up to reggae.
Your mind will bogle like never before.
DEBBIE MALONE: Running From My Love
Put down your handbags and start dancing, because this one is pure class until the dubious vocals come in.
However, the hissing garage groove and the simple organ draw you in, and by then it's too late.
Almost midnight in fact.
Hold on, my watch has stopped.
It's gone midnight.
That's what you get for buying your jewellery from a bubble gum machine.
BOB MARLEY: Iron Lion Zion
A brief snifter from the forthcoming lovely luxury box set.
A pretty unfinished item too when they first dusted it from the vaults, I would imagine, judging by the amount of reconstruction that's evidently gone into it.
Assuming Bob had lived, and stayed with Island, doubtless he'd have worked with Courtney Pine's sax anyway.
Sounds like a guide vocal to me too, but with this voice it could be only a few words sung into a length of sewer pipe and it would still sound great.
Cleverly completed and a probable hit, still carrying all the broad-sweep magnitude of his vision.
No, I dunno what I'm on about either.
I like it.
It's top.
Will that do?
THE BARDOTS: Cruelty Blonde
Three tracks of the usual dreamy guitar pop from Norfolk's finest, with a lazy edge and maybe a couple of quid more spent on the studio than last time.
The vocals are starting to get a bit more character, developing that limp twang that seems to create a fuss at the moment.
Music for wasted afternoons that's nowhere near the bottom of the pile this week.
SKIVE OF THE WEEK
SANDALS: Nothing
London's beat underground drop a second mesmerising release.
A Disposable Heroes-type of item, but with a major increase in the vibe count and far less bile, this rounds on society and shrugs it to death.
It's as lazy as a cat in hot weather, with the lyric amounting to a mere two verses before the vocals just sit down to let the languid groove take over.
Protest music made by men with beards for people with fuzzy minds and books in the glove compartments of their Morris Travellers.
Sweet Scholl music: Sandals
Zion pop!
Bob's holiness!
vibes
SHERMAN AT THE CONTROLS
The tills are alive with the Sound Of Music as Switzerland's latest big cheeses DJAIMIN hit big.
Plus, what rings MARK from LFO's Bell, SHERMAN casts an ear over millions of records, and you can blag a very unhealthy video.
ZURICH 'N' FAMOUS
Every year the New York New Music Seminar seems to throw up one track which first flattens the delegates revelling at the local hot-spots, then sends the record companies into chequebook-brandishing overdrive.
Such is the launch-pad from which future club-crossover hits are jettisoned; last year's ‘Gypsy Woman’ behemoth is a good example.
This year it was ever-reliable Tony Humphries who shifted the club world on its axis and demolished the Sound Factory Bar by creating an hour-long mega-mix out of a tune he'd picked up the previous week during one of his periodical spinning visits to Switzerland.
Within days, the much-respected Strictly Rhythm label had steamed in and now DJAIMIN's ‘Give You’ is being unleashed in the UK by Cooltempo.
It's a veritable monster choon.
Four epic mixes running a total of 36 minutes, churning over a collision of US deep house and Euro-Italian styles.
Main success-implants seem to be the ‘Popcorn’ -ish synth-squiggle- and the four-and-a-half-minute intro on the ‘Dream Sequence Mix’; which sees featured singers Mike Anthony and Alessandra soaring against the elements and creating havoc when squirted over a rabid club.
Yes, the year's hottest dance track was created in Switzerland — land of alarm clocks, snow-capped peaks and junkies shooting up in public parks.
Sorry, that's scuzzy, hardcore-crazy Zurich, not the more garage-inclined Lausanne in the French-speaking section, where the country's top DJ, Dario Mancini — lives and records for the new Mania Records set-up.
A DJ for nine years since he was sixteen, Djaimin was born of an Italian father and English mum — but we still had to use Mike as an interpreter.
Mike reckons that this part of Switzerland, which has been frequented by most top DJs, is one of dance music's best-kept secrets.
Thousands turn up for parties every weekend and tune in to the national radio show he does with Djaimin.
Around two years ago Djaimin decided to follow the traditional DJ trail and embark on a recording career, starting with remixes.
‘The only problem was there was no product to remix!
There was nothing coming out of Switzerland which Djaimin could work on.
So he had to make his own product.’
When the original version of ‘Give You’ was recorded a year ago, the DJ borrowed Alessandra from a local band.
Singers are scarce, and when it came time to record more versions and do a spot of promotion she was unavailable.
Enter Mike, a Londoner who moved out to Lausanne six years ago (and may be remembered for his '83 cover version of Timmy Thomas's ‘Why Can't We Live Together’ as erm, Mike Anthony).
Djaimin had actually been advised to make his own music by Tony Humphries himself when the two DJs got matey on the American's Swiss spinning jaunts.
On his last visit Djaimin presented Humphries with the remixed ‘Give You’.
He proceeded to play it five times at the next night's party (‘We thought he was just being nice but he said it was great!’).
Then Humphries returned to New York and the rest is making our Swiss friends very happy.
‘The thing about the record is the influences of the music.
The bottom end is very New York/New Jersey and the top is very melodic, very European.
It's a hybrid.
A fusion of two styles.
You can play it anywhere in the world.’
And they are, they are.
Djaimin and Mike tour here this month and have already lined up the follow-up, ‘She's Ga Ga’, for Strictly Rhythm.
New kids on the choc: Djaimin
COMPETITION
ALRIGHT, CLEAR your heads, psychedelic visual binge coming up.
Fasten yourself to your armchair, because you ain't gonna believe this one.
Certain members of the Olympic Vibes team have been in serious disarray after one glimpse of this, and the guilty lightweights have been duly suspended from club duty.
So it's that Vibes question again.
Are you bloody hard enough or what?
Can you handle a 75-minute, mind-expanding barrage of animation, with state-of-the-art computer graphics and all manner of other psychedelic hogwash, set to a totally techno-ed up, in-the-mix soundtrack that comes fully digitalised so you can plug it through your stereo and stick your arms in the air to the glorious quality that rampages through your Amstrad Death Box?
Coming straight out of Studio K7 in Berlin, we've got TEN copies of ‘3 LUX—The Techno Video Mix’ to give away, featuring tracks from Format, Cosmic Baby, Exit 100, FUSE, Mixmaster Morris and tons, tons more.
You're not going to be able to pick this up very easily, so fingers on buzzers and no conferring.
Q: For which German label do EXIT 100 record for?
Answers to Sherman, Exempt From Classification 
TRANSFORMER 2 follow up their massive ‘Pacific Symphony Too’ club hit with ‘Fruit Of Love’, already creating a stir and set to step out of the clubs and branch off into higher regions.
The Transformers describe themselves as ‘Belgian masters of spiritual Techno’.
They continue with their distinctive style as ‘Fruit Of Love’ comes togged up with massive orchestral string chords and the luscious vocals of Turkish-born Asli Tanriverdi.
GROOVE CHECK
VIBES SINGLE OF THE WEEK
BASS CULTURE: Show Me
Christmas has come early for me with this one — another mysterious release that planted itself firmly on the Vibes desk.
What we have there is nothing strikingly original, just a fantastically good club record that enforces nothing more than that irresistible urge to jack your body.
The grooves are deep, penetrating rhythms.
Of the five mixes, three are nail-bitingly exciting, whilst the remaining two are absolute trouts.
The strong ‘New York Mix’, with its vocals that shimmer through in a Robert Owens-style haze, is a step up for dub house garage and is matched by a gently acidic, dubbier epic and a ‘Detroit Mix’ with an intro and a forest of familiar sounds from someone heavily influenced by the dextrous inventions of Derrick May.
This triple-edged razor is probably put together by a bunch of names that we're already familiar with and on a label strong enough to propel it into the club circus, but if it isn't it doesn't matter; there's a future here if this is a first attempt.
Serious club music.
MURK RECORDS EP: Feat Funky Green Dogs From Outer Space/Liberty City/Interceptor
Miami's new-born Murk label that has been causing something of a stir on these shores of late, enough at least for Network to wet their oars and row straight for a licensing deal that sees three of the label's best tracks to date brought together for a sampler EP.
Although not exactly comparable in sound, the superb ‘Reach For Me’ from the gloriously monikered Funky Green Dogs From Outer Space, is somewhat reminiscent of Sandee's 1988 club/dub monster ‘Notice Me’.
Deep House at its absolute best with itchy slices of funky, ‘Superbly’ -style guitar swishes and a desirable female cry vocalising insignificant yet enchanting phrases.
Flip over and you'll find equally impressive tunes from Liberty City and Interceptor patiently waiting to be tried and tested, both estimable club-friendly giants sleepwalking through Deep House style lobbies and thoroughly warranting as much attention as ‘Reach Me’.
And all this from the label that insists on bringing us KWS…
CHRIS CONNELLY: Come Down Here (Fini Tribe Mix)
Ex-Fini Triber, Ministry Man and Revolting Cock Chris Connelly team up with the Tribe once more in a long and slow shuffling expedition that's not necessarily a club-oriented track but is constructed from the fundamental elements of the club scene at least.
Connelly's haunting, purposeful vocals seep out of the cut at strange angles, spoken rather than sung, whilst the melody is bolstered by seductive female whispers that gently flit past, all knotted together over a boomy bass laden communication.
If you're snobbish about the vocals then you're probably the type of person that caused the instrument mix to appear on the B-side.
Take it up to plus eight , drop late and dig that slowness.
BIFF ‘M’ BANGUM BOYS: Bite The Bullet
‘Ghost Of The Workers’ is the stand-out tune on this otherwise rather ordinary venture into techno territory.
‘Ghosts’ at least demonstrates that the music doesn't have to have the speed of a cocaine-snorting cheetah to create the energy and is worth checking out for this alone.
Dark and relentless, feeding occasionally from a ‘303’ magic wand, it severs the veins of the other three tracks and stands powerfully over them, eerie and obsessively driving towards a finish line that seems will never appear.
11TH HOUR: The Awakening (The Leveller Mixes)
Hypnotic is the password that keys 11th Hour into an epic eight-minute atmospheric adventure, ushered on to the floor by tribal rhythms, annexed by haunting pianos and African paeans, all set on course to become another top bazooka with clubland.
CHESTNUT: Pot Of Gold
I've heard this in clubs of varying styles, such is its cross-over appeal.
Gallons of intoxicating percussion guided rhythms fuel ‘Pot Of Gold’ like a train rampaging along an empty track as it goes for an energetic jog in the shadows, pacing along a tireless circuit.
MIND CONTROL: Life Forever
Now for those of us that have been slightly biased by the dubiously titled ‘Warehouse Raves’ compilations that Rumour have been responsible for in the past, well we can not sit up and take note, because here comes their most exciting release for as long as I care to remember (sorry Rumour!).
‘Life Forever’ gives birth to one of the most gorgeous, melancholy intros you'll have heard for eons, before launching into a track that has the potential to take the pelican crossing between all manner of specialist clubs.
The breakfast used is not of the ruff-core variety, it's employed subtly throughout and will enliven your regular cuppa.
YENNEX: Biotic
A quite stunning piece of realist's techno composed by legendary (in some quarters) Detroiter Kenny Larkin and remixed by fellow townsman, the ever enigmatic Carl Craig, who once again employs his craft to outstanding effect.
‘Yennex’ is a mesmerising and twisting hypnotic chaser, full of electronic sidelines that lead more towards the armchair techno station.
And who's complaining?
CE CE ROGERS: All Join Hands
The other classic Ce Ce Rogers anthem lifted from the vaults and dusted down for rerelease.
There's nothing really to add to the words that have been previously written about Ce Ce Rogers' passionate songs and unfortunately there's no original mix, but David Morales has polished up this vocal yearner for today's club ambience and the Hacienda massive will lap it up.
When house is this pure, you can't tag it and you can't analyse it.
In the words of Tyree Cooper ‘House Music Is My Life’, there's no simpler explanation.
PURO SESSO: Bump 'N' Grind
Here comes that white label love/hate relationship again.
Can't tell you anything other except that if you're a Balearic Bogler you'll definitely have heard this out somewhere in the past three weeks.
It's the second mix on the B-side most spinners are plumping for, riding into tranceland on a deep repetitive bassline and helped along by fountains of floaty keyboards that wash you away into hypno-city.
Geddit?
PILLAR OF SALT: Shema
Well, the tide has turned and we're now viewing the fruits of the UK's most productive period for some time.
Again, ‘Shema’ won't cause any damn walls to burst, but it's perfectly representative of the kind of club rug that the UK is cutting for itself.
Long and floaty, with the bassline navigating, eastern vocals soothing and the early hours on the horizon.
And that's all you're expected to know.
It's excellent, it serves a purpose, but won't shed its shelflife skin that easily.
TONIGHT: Orson Karte
This previously hard-to-find Balearic tribal coaster has now been given the thumbs-up enough to get a bit of a push behind it courtesy of those spicy Power Promotions people, making sure that all the right channels are chosen (ie, those DJs), which is pretty much all you need, really.
The original mix is still the attention grabber, with its slightly (slightly!)
‘Rave Generator’ -ish shards weaving themselves into what is fast becoming the UK house sound.
Trancey and soothing, with some atmospheres concocted by more drifting strings and some ethnic vocal chants.
Once again it's just superb hearing it booming from those religious-like boxes that we all pray to at the weekends.
TERRACE: The Turning Point
And this week's Djax release…
Djax-Up are currently releasing records faster than most people can note and, with at least another seven in the pipeline over the next two months, they continue to stop anybody standing in their way.
‘The Turning Point’ is also one of the label's strongest releases for some time and it's the ever popular Terrace front of Stefan Robbers that once again leads Djax out into new regions.
‘In Search Of…
Myself’ trips off into an extended Twin Peaks -ish slither of pacifying, blissful techno-tasting house.
You'd never hear this in a club environment but who cares?
Got any spare  joss sticks ?
NUSH: Nush
Nush Nush sounds like something I mutter to the conductor of the night bus on a Sunday morning…but anyway…
Lent my original copy of this to some dodgy DJ, so I was dead pleased to get another copy with new sexy mixes.
‘Nush’ has now been firmly adjusted with the help of Leftfield and those top Zoomsters, Dave Wesson and Billy Nasty (Herbal Infusion, Acorn Arts, St Etienne mixes etc).
Leftfield go all New Yorky on us to demonstrate that there are more shades to their colour than first meets the eye, but really it's the pair of Zoom mixes that hold the trump cards.
BLUNT TRAX VOL 1: Head Space/Carried Away
Since this release the Toms have followed up with the equally impressive ‘Ruff Disco EP’ from Nature Boy and are now up to a healthy six releases.
Tomato deal in the riper side of UK House, of which the more familiar name of Pascal's Bongo Massive will be the stormtrooper with most, and this release is really worth it for the AA facet, where ‘Carried Away’ is a slow shuffling number that could equally serve as more of a chilled refreshment.
A simple, slow, bumping grind complemented by fine snippets of vocal, underpinned with soft strings that create a low-lit ambience as the rhythm rocks out with all the time in the world to spare.
‘Head Space’ is a rolling Brit house sort of, erm…thingy…oh  f— it, it's Balearic alright?
It's rocking, it's adventurous and it's got a wicked hookline that goes: ‘Break you down and get your head to the groove’, a perfect piece of advice.
And leave the skins on.
AQUA FORTIS: House Of Usher
Sappho are the providers of a darker side of UK techno, avoiding the plague of the breakbeats with much caution, choosing to take a more considered route to grab themselves a bit of attention.
This fourth release goes deeper into the core of haunting electronics, meditating on mysterious edges of sound.
‘Aqua Fortis’ intros with a gentle lapping of waves before thickening into a pulsing yet controlled hypno-technological dream and is supported by the scary ‘Asylum 3’, which involves a story about some magic toys and sets up the rest of the track for a chilling rollercoaster ride into a spooky world that you really don't want to enter.
Two mixes of ‘House Of Usher’ finish off the EP, and you're left fearful of turning out the lights at night.
Remember, don't mess with those spirits, kids.
NOTEBOOKS!
LOUT!
PLAGIARISTS!
Which scabrous, sarky interviewer could give Fall-derivatives, football-obsessive and all-around smart alecs I, LUDICROUS a good going-over as their ‘Idiots Savants’ LP sneaks out?
Naturally none other than MARK E SMITH, their crabby, caustic and, erm, slightly opinionated guru.
STEPHEN DALTON referees from the sidelines.
Eye ludicrous: KEVIN CUMMINS
Preposterous tales in the life of Mark E Smith, chapter 372.
Over copious beverages at a plush hotel in Notting Hill Gate, the stooping Lord of scabrous spleen-rock is speeding through scurrilous anecdotes about conspiracies within the monarchy, parties celebrating Freddie Mercury's demise, sociopathic ex-Fall associates and much more.
Quite extraordinary.
Smith could yak all day in this random mode, but to the task in hand: interviewing his most favoured fellow travellers and Fall acolytes — I, Ludicrous — for the NME .
That, at least, was the original plan.
On a lavishly embossed coffee table before us lies the justification for this grot-pop superpower summit.
The third I, Ludicrous album, ‘Idiots Savants’, brims with brilliantly bucolic observations about weather, football, macho cretins, daytime TV celebs, Carter USM and other festering symptoms of our national malaise.
Having built their cult reputation four years back on a rib-tickling broadside against bar-room self-aggrandisement called ‘Preposterous Tales In The Life Of Ken McKenzie’ and the hilariously deadpan ‘Three English Football Grounds’, this South London duo now augment their tinny beatbox-plus-guitar formula with throbbing keyboard moodscapes as in current single ‘We Stand Around’, the most unnerving paean to soccer obsessives ever recorded.
When I, Ludicrous — vocalist Will Hung (You're Killing us!— Save Our Sides Campaign) and musical brain John Proctor — shamble into our interview room, it immediately becomes five times more untidy.
Top geezers both.
Mark poses alongside them as a theatrically seedy rock-hack for the all-seeing lens of Kevin Cummins.
Having toured together before, both bands join forces again on September 15 for Not In The City at the Manchester Ritz, Smith's two-fingered salute to his hometown's official music seminar week.
So does Mark see any similarity between The Fall and these sarcastic southern pretenders?
Yes.
‘They pinch our tunes, but doesn't everybody?’
More importantly, both groups wittily peel back the scabs of modern pop until they form into mottled bruises.
Both pick the nose of rock credibility and flick rolled-up bogies at its established figureheads.
Both simultaneously revile and embody all that is crabbed and cankered about the shaggy fag end of English culture.
And both are ace.
So the Mark E Smith interview.
Masterclass splutters into grouchy go-mode, stumbling across several more shared concerns between I, Ludicrous and The Fall along the way…
1) NOTEBOOKS OUT, PLAGIARISTS
John: ‘When we started we just wrote Fall songs all the time.’
Mark: ‘Naah , you're underrating yourselves there, only ‘Three English Football Grounds’.
I thought, ‘This is really good, this tune’.
Then I thought, ‘Oh yeah, I  f—ing wrote it!’
JP: ‘Next time it's releases we'll give you a credit.’
MES: ‘Naah , you're alright.
It's an old Northern Soul tune anyway.’
JP: ‘We didn't nick the riff from ‘Elves’ because The Stooges had already done that.’
MES: ‘Ha ha ha ha!
Bastard !
Actually, Brix wrote that, she'd never even heard The Stooges.’
Will: ‘All this nonsense about us sounding like Half Man, Half Biscuit.
We'd never even heard anything by them when we started.
Carter are the latest thing people compare us to, every bloody review of them you read — two South Londoners with a drum machine singing about pubs and football, you think ‘Are they writing about us again?’’
MES: ‘They haven't done anything.
They haven't written an original word, or vowel , ha ha ha!
It's The Clash backwards.’
WH: ‘They really are appalling.
No, the boys done well really.
They've worked at it and we haven't, that's the difference.
It's a parallel universe.
We inhabit the universe where Carter made it and there's another one where we made it and they're getting pissed off about us.’
JP: ‘I wrote to them and said ‘I can't afford to buy your records, so will you take a couple of ours and swap?’
They did, so I'm sure they must be bloody good blokes.
I don't suppose they'd ever heard of us.
I mean, me and Will met in Carter Lane…’
The Ludicrous lads may lambast Carter for ‘boldly going where we've already been ’ on their new album, but another track, ‘Bloody Proud’, bristles with blatant Fall references, including a riff suspiciously akin to ‘Couldn't Get Ahead’.
MES: ‘Ahhh , now I understand, Steve.
Thought they were looking shifty.’
JP: ‘I knew I'd nicked it off somewhere, I just couldn't remember where.
I thought it was ‘Container Drivers’.
As long as The Fall keeping going we've got plenty of songs left, plenty of riffs.’
2) ADSPEAK BOLLOCKS
MES: ‘Your song ‘C2s In Vans’— what are C2?
Is that from the Civil Service?
WH: ‘Market research.
It's a socio-economic grouping, they're your skilled labourer.’
MES: ‘I'm a B summat.’
WH: ‘B is your professional classes, junior management.’
MES: ‘Oh, I'm definitely not a B then.
Although I am a professional.’
WH: ‘C1 is sort of someone who manages their own business, and D is an unskilled labourer.’
MES: ‘So what are beggars?
E?
Ha ha ha!’
WH: ‘It's all for advertising.
Lager companies aim their advertising at C2s.’
MES: ‘You can see it, thematic advertising.
They have a violent film then they have a violent advert.
These C2s are getting very clever, gradually taking over.
That's why I dress like a policeman, so they don't come up to you.
It's getting like that in Manchester — I was brought up not to stare but they stare at you, these workmen.
I've just had me house decorated and I'm seriously thinking of becoming a serial killer of bleeding workmen, I think they're a bleeding disgrace.
Yelling at women all the time, that's encouraged by adverts.’
3) CRAP BRITISH TV
WH: ‘We've got a new song called ‘Hats Off To Eldorado ’ which has references to Woody Allen in it.
If you know the plot of Eldorado , they've got this 17-year-old girl married to this 50-year-old bloke…‘
MES: ‘There's a lot of middle-aged blokes around with nowt else to do, have you noticed?
They've retired early, they're all around 50 and they hang around in leather jackets.
I'm one of them.
Eldorado , that's what it's all about, they're aiming towards that type.
The B minus, ha ha!’
JP: ‘The thing is, everybody goes to Spain.’
MES: ‘Who?
Nobody I know.
Who wants to go there?
It's bloody living death, living boredom.
Eldorado just reflects BBC producers, their lives, and adverts reflect what all advertising agents do.
They're just advertising their own lifestyle.
Eldorado just reflects the people who make the programmes, that's what I hate about it.
It's not about real people, whereas Coronation Street is.’
JP: ‘I never heard the word ‘mithering’ before except in one of your songs.
Then I heard it in Coronation Street …‘
MES: ‘And now your life is enriched .
It's a bit corny, but they've got the language down pat.
You hear a slang word in a pub or shop in Manchester, you'll hear it in Coronation Street three weeks later.
They're really on the ball, quite frightening sometimes.
In EastEnders they're still saying ‘Oh, here's that nice Jamaican bloke…here's the yobbo with the short hair’…’
WH: ‘Our track ‘Eastenders’ is not about the TV show, it's about…
C3s!
All that crap about family.
Have you noticed, whenever an Eastender talks about his mum, his lip starts quivering.
I'm a bit worried about that song, if Chas ‘n’ Dave get to hear it they might declare a fatwah .’
JP: ‘Our songs are just the conversations you have in pubs, put to music.
All these bands who sing about women — that's just not true to life, is it?’
MES: ‘So you're not going out with anybody at the moment?’
JP: ‘No.’
MES: ‘Oh.
Sorry.
Ha ha ha ha!’
4) FOOTBALL SONGS
WH: ‘It's a subject which should be covered.’
MES: ‘Getting a bit hip now, though.
When ‘Kicker Conspiracy’ came out in 1983 no bugger wanted to know about soccer songs.
You did it a long time before anybody else.
‘We Stand Around’ is good.
WH: ‘We took some of the more menacing lines out.
It's about the menace you feel when you go to a football match.’
MES: ‘I think it's quite sympathetic, compared to the glorification by people who know nowt about soccer.
Better than ‘The National Front Disco’ or whatever by Morrissey — he's obviously never even seen a soccer ball in his life.
I get people who I worked with ten years ago in the record business saying ‘Been down to see City lately?’— but ten years ago if you'd have said to them ‘How did City get on?’ they would have said ‘I don't go to soccer, I'm into meditation’.
Now they go ‘I went to see City, or United — on an E!’
WH: ‘We're thinking of challenging Carter to a game, actually.’
5) FAN WORSHIP (OR NOT)
MES: ‘Ha ha ha ha!
I walk around the street like this (spreads arms into Messianic pose ) with ‘I'M FROM THE FALL’ on me forehead, but they ignore me.
Naaah, it's for the best…d'you wanna talk to these two?
I'll nip out, I'm going to get big-headed.
I'll see you in the pub over the road — first one you come to.’
With this, Smith abandons his nascent journalistic career and scuttles from the room, clothing a sack of fag packs and scrappy scrawl notes.
I, Ludicrous shrug knowingly and settle for being Britain's second-best band.
Preposterous, but true.
Smith become a sycophantic journo.
Sort of Clash of the titans!
MES and I, Ludicrous caught relaxing in sober, sophisticated interview mode
BANNERAMA
NME'S GUIDE TO FLAGS IN ROCK
Star and stripes.
Sonic Youth's Kim Gordon wrapped in the very flag thereafter incinerated by the band for NME's American Independence Day cover shot.
Detroit's MC5 got a lot of mileage out of‘inverting’ the American flag.
The self-styled ‘White Panthers’ patented the ‘being wrapped inside the stars 'n' stripes for, hey, ironic effect’later borrowed by, erm, Fabulous.
True story.
In 1965, THE WHO were due to play in Dublin.
The horrified band received an anonymous warning from a paramilitary group saying that, if they wore their famous Union Jack (ie, symbol of British oppression) jackets, they would be shot on stage.
The Who accordingly took the Dublin stage in specially made green, white and gold tricolour gear.
Another true story.
In 1992, MORRISSEY played in Finsbury Park.
During the second number, he draped himself in the Union Jack, presumably in an attempt to endear himself to the bulldog breed.
They, in turn, threw rocks and coins at him.
For emotional resonance, flags are about as potent as a quadrilateral of cloth can be.
Rock — whose currency has always been controversy and youthful rebellion — and bands have continually dallied with the flag for political, ironic and purely aesthetic reasons.
Flagwavers, flag-wearers and flag-burners — from JIMI HENDRIX and THE NICE, through THE DOORS and THE WHO, to SONIC YOUTH and THE MANICS, they've all run it up the flagpole to see who salutes.
Or chucks cartons of orange juice.
NME , standard-bearer of triv and truth, unfurls its own definitive pictorial guide to those who have flown the flag, trooped the colour and singed the stars'n'stripes.
Waving, we're waving…
Sly And The Family Stone's 1972 classic ‘There's A Riot Going On’ took the ‘Old Glory’irony to its furthest extreme.
Their album, an endless assault on the drugs, thugs and mugs American Way came without any mention of the band's name or that of the album, just the stars'n'stripes.
Recent reissues have compromised this stance with the appropriate info.
Neil Young's ‘Hawks And Doves’ album was as quirky as much of his mid-'80s stuff, and quite what the message of the sleeve — with hugely magnified star on the cover and equally immense stripes on the reverse — was meant to convey has never been satisfactorily explained.
A couple of years later, he took the conceit one step further and actually called an album ‘American Stars'n'Bars’.
2 Live Crew's take on Bruce Springsteen's ‘Born In The USA’ is an obvious one, reflecting the flipside of The Bossman's now legendary downhome blue collar patriotism.
Funkadelic were always flag mad.
Early stage shows saw them recreating the famous Iwo Jima flag-erecting ceremony, while the cover of their great ‘One Nation Under A Groove’ album took the American flag to new psychedelic heights, the red, white and blue coloured in all manner of drug-crazed hues.
A liver version of their personalised pennant is pictured above.
NME flies the flag!
In other words, another shameless (but timely) plug for ‘that’ Spastics Society album.
More subversion of apple pie Americanism in The Manics' ‘Theme From M.A.S.H.’
(out this week!)
The Wedding Present played similar games for their ‘Kennedy’ single.
For legendary country star Johnny Cash, America's history has always been a rich source of material — and dressing up!
On the cover of his ‘Gunfighter Ballads’ album, he donned cowboy gear; for his ‘Bitter Tears (Songs Of The American Indian)’LP he got feathers in his hair; and for ‘America’, he whipped out the flag.
Cultish American guitarist Eugene Chadbourne (ex of Shockabilly, the mid-'80s band who were too fierce to be Hüsker Dü) used the sleeve of his ‘Country Protest’ solo album to make this very subtle political point.
The cistern of his lav is adorned with the hammer and sickle while the stars and stripes is also strategically placed.
Above: Not everyone's ashamed to be Australian!
Inset: Gobaith mawry y ganrif, Mike Peters, yn orfoleddus wrth iddo edrych ymlaen at ei wers gwymrage nesaf.
What a beauteous thing is this cover of Bob Marley And The Wailers' militant ‘Survival’, which contained all the flags of the independent black African nations.
Educational note for the new, easy-to-pass-Tory-GCSE's: All these flags contain one or more of the following colours: green, red, black and yellow — green for the land, black for the people, yellow for the sun and red for the people's blood.
Flags R Us!
Good to see The Clash covering all bases here in 1979 with Joe Ely at Monterey's Tribal Stomp fest.
Ever the rather jaundiced, eccentric Brit, Ian Dury (right) made his own rather tawdry statement with this extraordinary dental motif.
As far as teeth flags go, though, it was up there with the best of ‘em.
Rather spurious ‘rockabilly rebels’ Matchbox used the American Confederate flag as generic overlay-stroke-emblem during their somewhat brief halcyon days.
They are pictured above with Albert Lee.
It is worth noting that Bob Dylan's '66 tour featured a huge American flag as backdrop — at that stage the biggest ever produced.
The Who are the original flag-wearers, as the Mods adopted both Britain's flag and the RAF's roundel as their own pop art icons.
By the end of their career, however, the old behemoths had either a) realised the inherent contradictions contained in the old cloth or b) run out of ideas for their record sleeves.
‘…
The British are a-comin'!!!’
Top Texas exiles The Rolling Stones parked up their private jet for a hands across the water-style ambassadorial piss-stop at Davy Crockett's old gaff The Alamo on their '75 US tour.
Jerry Hall, apparently, was not at home.
‘Look at the Irish flag,’ said Bono at a mid-'80s concert.
‘You see green, you see white, and you see gold…all I see is red!’
For bands further away from the reality of Ireland's endless agony — like top new paddy rappers House Of Pain from New York — the flag, however, presents no such problems.
In 1979, notorious French Situationist and shagger Serge Gainsbourg outraged conservative France, as was his wont, with his, ahem, reggae version of the National Anthem (‘La Marseillaise’).
Delighted with the reaction (ie, death threats from paratroopers based in Strasbourg), he took to cavorting naked in le tricolore.
As the Maastricht treaty gets ready to be flushed down the toilet, bands have already jumped the gun and gone Euro bonkers, the 12-starred flag having appeared on sleeves by The Divine Comedy, Simply Red, The Manics (who, natch, couldn't resist giving it a spot of slash ‘n’ burn!) and, most notably, Carter.
Their ‘1992’ chart topper was adorned with the required pennant, for some sixth form reason, there was an extra star.
Making, hey, 13.
Spookee…
JOHN WAYNE'S WORLD
If Kevin Costner's Dances With Wolves made the Western commercial again, then CLINT EASTWOOD's Unforgiven has made it credible.
It caps Eastwood's own career as the metaphysical presence in Hollywood's most all embracing genre — and gives KIM NEWMAN an excuse to re-spool a whole wagon-train load of Oater classics
WHEN, AT the climax of Unforgiven , Clint Eastwood walks into the darkened bar-room to face up to Sheriff Gene Hackman and the posse who have killed his only friend, Eastwood the star and Eastwood the director are playing a deliberate game of evocation.
They're yoking in not only Eastwood's entire career from the days of Rawhide and the Man With No Name to the present, but also the entire, rich panorama of the Western, the genre that, more than any other, represents the American cinema…and, by extension, America itself.
From The Great Train Robbery (1903) onwards, the Western has been informed by a species of bitter nostalgia, looking back to the wild days of the West and questioning the value of the civilisation won by all that exciting gunplay.
The national guilt over the destruction of native American culture is merely a part of the regret at the heart of the genre.
In Unforgiven — a brilliant but never-clarified title — Bill Munny, Eastwood's screen character, is quizzed about the times when he was the most feared gun in the West, irresistibly evoking memories of the Man With No Name's six-shooter holocausts in Sergio Leone's Dollars trilogy (A Fistful Of Dollars ,For A Few Dollars More and The Good, The Bad And The Ugly ) and the mellower but still genocidal guerilla of The Outlaw Josey Wales .
He claims to have been drunk throughout most of his killing days: every line on Eastwood's face and his stiff-in-the-saddle old man's posture conveys how much each of Munny's killings have chipped away at his heart and mind, leaving him the reformed shell we first see covered in pig-shit.
The finale of Unforgiven is as much a tragedy for the survivors as for those who bite the dust.
For a genre which, by definition, dwells on the glories of the past, the Western is remarkably short on tales of the opening-up of the wilderness, the heroic 19th Century myth of the virgin land somehow always being obliterated by a sense — no matter when a given film is actually set — that the wild times are over.
For every bright-eyed wagon train or trail blazing adventure, there are a dozen Westerns dealing with lawmen or outlaws who have outlived their times and now find themselves constrained by the pettiness of a civilisation which is rarely grateful for the way they have cleared the ground for its progress.
John Wayne may be fresh-faced as the Ringo Kid in Stagecoach (1939) but, a scant decade later, he was prematurely playing old men in She Wore A Yellow Ribbon (1948), much more convincingly that he would 20 years later on as a real old man in the indulgent True Grit (1967).
The bulk of Wayne's greatest films, from The Searchers (1953) through The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance (1963) to The Shootist (1975), cast him as the Ringo Kid grown old and useless, vanishing at the fade-out into desert obscurity, drunken oblivion or cancerous death.
The cinematic trail to Unforgiven is long and winding, and the expression that crops up most often in describing the movies that constitute it is ‘elegiac’.
It draws strength from the ghost riders that trot alongside Bill Munny, evoking spectres by Eastwood's dedication of the film to Sergio and Don and by his use of stalwart players.
Richard Harris and Gene Hackman have been in Westerns before but never one as good as this (indeed, Harris' character's inflation of his own pompous myth relates to the sham of his A Man Called Horse ), which is a key to their characterisations and the way they are constantly stacked up against Eastwood.
Here are merely 20 of the trail-markers:
THE LAST OUTLAW
EVEN IN infancy, the Western was convinced the great days were over.
One of the first efforts of director John Ford, who would chronicle the closing of the frontier for the rest of his life, this stars Harry Carey as an old-time badman released after a 20-year stretch into a bewildering world of Model T Fords and short skirts.
Carey would play the role again in a 1936 remake, and the same plot would serve for James Stewart in Dynamite Man From Glory Jail and William Farnsworth in The Grey Fox .
DODGE CITY
THE NEAREST thing to a primal myth in the Western, this colourful, rip-roaring, action-packed Errol Flynn vehicle is based on the story of Wyatt Earp.
Flynn and his pals clean up Dodge only to feel suffocated by a town so decent it ain't fit for a man to live in and head off in a joke finish for the still-wild Virginia City, which Flynn cleaned up in an unconnected follow-up.
Directed by Michael Curtiz, who stages the best-ever bar-room brawl in the movies as a fist-fight explodes through the wall of the saloon and into the meeting of the Pure Prairie League next door.
Various people have claimed to have had the idea for the scene in Curtiz' Casablanca where the patriots drown a German song with ‘La Marseillaise’, but here, four years earlier, good-guy ex-rebels drown out ‘The Union Forever’ with ‘Dixie’in exactly the same way.
MY DARLING CLEMENTINE
A MORE considered, romantic and melancholy version of the above, with Henry Fonda's Wyatt Earp cleaning up the nightmarish town of Tombstone, making the community safe for the church-going, square-dancing just plain folks who have been hiding in the shadows while the Clanton gang runs riot.
However, for all the splendours of the Monument Valley scenery and Fonda's tight-lipped moral integrity, there is a downside to his crusade, which is only won at the cost of the lives of two of his brothers and involves the death of Doc Holliday (Victor Mature), a noble outlaw who gets washed away by bullets and consumption along with the bad elements.
Like Flynn before him, Fonda cannot stay in the town he has tamed and rides out at the fade-out into the desert.
HIGH NOON
IF DODGE City and Tombstone had to wait for movie star-type heroes to save them from the outlaws who were over-running the communities, would they stand by the lawmen if it looked like the bad guys weren't going to stay beat?
This digs deeper than Dodge City and Clementine , showing gutless townsfolk deserting a pained Gary Cooper in his literal hour of direst need, causing him to toss his sheriff's star into the dust at the end.
SHANE
A RE-THINKING of High Noon , awarding more points to the practical men who have finally to take a stand, as represented by farmer Van Heflin, who just wants to get his crops in, with the figure of the hero reincarnated as Alan Ladd in fringed buckskins.
Ladd's Shane, like villain Jack Palance, seems to have ridden out of a simpler, morally clear-cut Western, and is bewildered by this now-complex and difficult situation.
In the end, Shane has to ride out again, despite the cries of the boy who prefers him to his father, not qualified to live in the community because of his purity and violence.
THE SEARCHERS
THE GREATEST walking-off-into-the-desert-at-the-end-movie, with John Wayne as the obsessive out to rescue abducted white girl Natalie Wood from the Apaches.
Aside from addressing the genre's habitual racism by showing an Indian fighter who kills red men because of his own savagery and self-hatred, this is one of cinema's great stories of incomplete redemption and shows Wayne eaten up inside by emotional turmoil, in his best-ever role.
RIO BRAVO
RELAXING AFTER The Searchers but still masterly, this is Howard Hawks' critique of High Noon , arguing a true professional like Wayne wouldn't waste his time begging amateurs for help and would only go up against superior odds if he thought he could cheat his way to victory.
Full of Hawksian romance (Angie Dickinson) and comedy (Walter Brennan), plus songs from fresh-faced Ricky Nelson and dried-out drunk Dean Martin, this is a rare, convincing celebration of the positive values of the Western.
Riding off into the sunset: Eastwood and Morgan Freeman in Unforgiven
Alan ‘Shrimp’ Ladd shoots up in Shane
John Wayne somehow survived being christened Marion to become the living embodiment of How The West Was Won
The oldest (gun) slingers in town: Henry Fonda in My Darling Clementine and Gary Cooper in High Noon
Artful Dodger Errol Flynn (right)
RIDE THE HIGH COUNTRY
SAM PECKINPAH, after John Ford the great poet of the end of the trail, began his career with this hymn to passing times, also known aptly as Guns In The Afternoon .
Randolph Scott and Joel McCrea, second-string cowboy heroes, cap long careers by playing elderly fast guns hired to escort a gold shipment.
McCrea sums up the Western code by his declaration that all his wants is to ‘enter my house justified’ while Scott is more easy-going and hence survives to mourn his partner in a world where a Westerner is more likely to be an unshaven brute played by Warren Oates than a white-hatted, true-hearted paladin.
THE MAN WHO SHOT LIBERTY VALANCE
as if explaining away the downright lies and beautiful evasions of his Westerns, this is the one (echoing Fort Apache , 1948) that concludes with the idea that if the legend is better than the truth then you should ‘print the legend’.
It is also a clear-sighted revision of Clementine , with a sharp politician (James Stewart) poaching John Wayne's credit for ridding the territory of sub-human outlaw Lee Marvin and riding on to success in the 20th Century while Wayne dies broke and drunk.
THE GOOD, THE BAD AND THE UGLY
STRANGELY, THE climax of the Dollars trilogy is a prequel to the others, set during the Civil War and showing how Clint Eastwood's Man With No Name gradually picks up the props — the poncho, the sheepskin jacket, the cigar — that mark his identity in the other films.
Eastwood's ice-eyed killer with a moral streak (he never guns down anyone who doesn't deserve it) is also confronted here with the horrors of a war that makes his own death-strewn path seem comfortable.
Finally, he rides out of the graveyard into the future.
Sergio Leone is the first of Unforgiven 's dedicatees.
BUTCH CASSIDY AND THE SUNDANCE KID
THE CUDDLIEST end-of-the-trail movie, enormously successful because of its canny miscasting.
Paul Newman and Robert Redford might now be right for the roles of a pair of outlaws on their last legs who flee to Bolivia to find that civilisation and its increased firepower are after them there as well, but in 1968 they were more an emblem of defiant youth and, rather than be riddled with bullets, they go out with a freeze-to-sepia and some plunky Burt Bacharach music.
THE WILD BUNCH
MORE HONEST than the above but just as romantic, albeit after Hemingway rather than Erich Segal, this finds Peckinpah surveying the carnage of the Mexican Revolution and has his heroes — William Holden, Ernest Borgnine, Warren Oates, Ben Johnson — go out in an authentic apotheosis, a slow-motion orgy of mass-destruction even more trippily appealing than the wryness of Butch and Sundance.
The first hint, via the Gatling gun mounted on a Ford, that the 20th Century will prove even more horrifyingly capable of atrocities than the Wild Bunch's heydays in the 1890s.
ONCE UPON A TIME IN THE WEST
WITH CHARLES Bronson stepping into the No Name role as the vengeance-seeking Harmonica and Henry Fonda, trashing his Wyatt Earp image as the dead-faced killer, this is Leone's final Western statement.
It gets political in its indictment of the corrupt railroad — it ‘leaves two shiny, slimy tracks like a snail’— that is the representation of a rapaciously capitalist civilisation, and dares to traduce Fonda, Monument Valley and sundry rather icons of the Ford universe.
EASY RIDER
‘THIS USED to be a hell of a country,’ muses drop-out Jack Nicholson, ‘what the hell happened to it?’
With bikes replacing horses and asphalt instead of a trail, this is a key rereading of the essence of the Western, with a younger Fonda (Peter) and frequent hired gun Dennis Hopper (Gunfight At The OK Corral ,From Hell To Texas ) as modern-day outlaws (significantly named Wyatt and Billy).
Travelling the trail, as in numberless journey Westerns from Stagecoach to Red River , is still the game, but there's nowhere to go now except to a pointless death.
COOGAN'S BLUFF
EASTWOOD'S FIRST American movie finds him as a modern-day Deputy who travels from Arizona to New York and finds his values challenged by a community represented by social workers, hippies and ulcer-ridden cops.
A better film than Midnight Cowboy , which similarly pits a Westerner against the Big Apple, this was the first of Eastwood's films with Don Siegel, the second of Unforgiven 's dedicatees, and is a transitional film between Eastwood's cowboy roles and his later cop pictures, which reached an early climax with Siegel's Dirty Harry .
HIGH PLAINS DRIFTER
A SUPERNATURALLY-flavoured Western and Eastwood's second film as a director.
The star reincarnates his No Name as an avenging ghost in a High Noon -style rotten community, forcing them to paint their town red before he stands up to the killers who are about to ride through and finally saving the place only by burning it down (a process the US army tried in Vietnam).
In Pale Rider , Eastwood returns from the dead again as an angel, and this time re-runs the plot of Shane , showing more affection for the community and for the values of the Western hero.
PAT GARRETT AND BILLY THE KID
PECKINPAH'S LAST masterpiece, with James Coburn gloomily remembering, as he is shot to death, how he betrayed his values by tracking down free spirit Kris Kristofferson.
Sequences of familiar violence are interspersed with achingly beautiful, melancholy moments, and Peckinpah marshalls a posse of bit part stalwarts (Slim Pickens, Jack Elam, Richard Jaeckel, Harry Dean Stanton, Katy Jurady, Chill Will, Elisha Cook, Matt Clark, R G Armstrong) and pays tribute to their contributions to literally hundreds of Westerns as he leaves them dead in the dust to the accompaniment of a Bob Dylan score.
THE OUTLAW JOSEY WALES
THE MID-POINT between No Name and Unforgiven finds Eastwood as a Confederate raider redeemed after the war as he is assimilated into a rag-tag community of rejects and losers, slowly losing his appetite for violence and vengeance.
At the end, Josey settles down with Eastwood's then-girlfriend Sondra Locke, whose public split with him is reflected in Unforgiven by the death of Bill Munny's wife, the influence who led him away from violence.
HEAVEN'S GATE
AN ATTEMPT to inflate the historical nugget of Shane into one vast indictment of America, this symptomatic disaster also served to gun down the Western for ten years.
DANCES WITH WOLVES
A RARE movie — the mainly horrible How The West Was Won is another — that tries to include the whole arc of the West in its plot, expending its first hours on the virgin land as Kevin Costner communes with nature and Indians, but the finale has to admit the good days are gone, as demonstrated by the coming of the brutish cavalry intent on making the Sioux the first victims of the expansionist whites.
Although only incidentally Western, this cleared the way for Unforgiven by finally rendering the genre commercial again.
James Coburn (right) forgets his Colt Peacemaker in Pat Garrett And Billy The Kid
Cuddly kids Newman and Redford run out of steam in Butch and Sundance
Clint as The Outlaw Josey Wales…and as the Man With No Name in A Fistful of Dollars
Even the cavalry couldn't save mega-flop Heaven's Gate
Terpsichorean animal-lover Kevin Costner
The Old West revisited on a Harley — Peter Fonda in Easy Rider
FILM
BOB ROBERTS
BOB ROBERTS (Robbins) is a right-wing folk singer (key albums: ‘The Times They Are A'Changin' Back’, ‘Bob On Bob’) on the way to the Senate; Brickley Paiste (Vidal) is there already, and needs shifting; English documentarist Terry Manchester (Brian Murray) has his cameras running.
Tim Robbins' writing-directing debut is amazingly ambitious.
It starts off as a satire of Pennebaker's Dylan doc Don't Look Back and — cut to the pace of Roberts' twangy crap folk songs — also attacks Saturday Night Live , rock ‘n’ roll, right-wingers, and stupid people.
Bob Roberts himself is a monster never quite accessible to the cameras or us, vilifiable only by off-the-cuff remarks (‘Don't take crack, kids…it's a ghetto drug’), and opposed only by Bugs Raplin (Esposito), a wired outsider-hack linking him to every scandal of the '80s in a string of fact-filled rants.
It's these lectures which finally unbalance Bob Roberts , which shifts from crisp satire to stodgy tract under the sheer density of Robbins’ disgust with US politics, losing along the way the warped rock ‘n’roll and documentary trappings which give bite to the first film intelligent enough to see assassination as a career move for the victim.
Bob Roberts is also the first UK film in years to ‘fail’ for being stuffed with too many ideas, marking Robbins as a fresh and major talent.
Vote Tim!
HOUSESITTER
WHAT IS it about Frank Oz that leads him constantly to make so-so films with fabulous trailers?
After scoring an early off-beat artistic hit with The Little Shop Of Horrors , the man who was once muppet-creator Jim Henson's closest ally has blossomed into the master of mediocrity.
Here, the middle-ground once again reigns supreme, despite the promise of a gorgeous tag-line (‘She turned his house into a home — hers’) and a heaven sent situation set-up.
Jilted-architect Newton Davies (Martin) blubs to a down-and-out waitress Gwen (Hawn) that his loved one wouldn't marry him, despite the fact that he built a beautiful house for her.
Said waitress promptly decamps to the vacant love nest where she swiftly sets up home, insisting to the locals that she is Newton's new spouse.
Lip-curling japes ensure as Newt firs tries to evict the compulsively fanciful Gwen, then agrees to go along with her charade, just to make his intended fiancée jealous.
Hilarity is clearly on the menu.
So why doesn't it work?
Like the equally unfulfilled promise of Oz's earlier effort Dirty Rotten Scoundrels ,Housesitter lurches clumsily from one comic set-piece to another without ever gaining any form of narrative momentum.
Each zany episode is hermetically sealed, like an extract from one of the late-night TV revues on which both Martin and Hawn have cut their teeth.
As a result, you keep wishing they'd wind up this particular gag and move  on to the next item, a frustration which makes the film seem drawn out and sluggish.
On the plus side, Goldie Hawn gets to do what she's best at (namely, being ditzy and hyperactive) whilst Martin's trademark hang-dog mooch is perfectly suited to Davies' ridiculous predicament.
As for Oz, perhaps he should go back to doing the voice for Fozzy Bear.
CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS: THE DISCOVERY
TOM SELLECK as the King of Spain!
Rachel Ward as his missus!
Marlon Brando as Marlon Brando!
Crap editing!
Crap acting!
Crap script!
But there's always a silver lining.
In some alternate, barely credible dimension, this almost inexplicable first shot in the Great Columbus Wars (Gerard Depardieu and Jim Dale still to come) must have seemed a really good idea.
Instead it's a confused product of jobbing hacks and sad people out of their depth — none more so than George ‘Columbus’ Corraface, a handsome trier reminiscent of those blokes that used to be out-acted by skeletons in Sinbad films.
He's supported by dozens of nondescript Brits hired,a la Alien , to give theatrical class (posh accents) to a script too dire to be spoken in public, with stand-out work in interpreting it anyway by Rachel Ward's pouting Queen and Marlon's mumblingly camp Torquemada — wasted when they're left at Court while Columbus and co cast off for ‘America’.
Amazingly, the film takes on instant depth the minute it touches ‘American’ soil, suggesting something very like moral ambiguity as Columbus suddenly turns into the hard-arsed imperialist we now fondly imagine him to be.
There is genuine drama and intelligence here, but the film can't take the strain.
It ends with CC the culture-worker standing ‘heroically’ on a mountain top.
How?
Why?
Best not to ask.
IMMACULATE CONCEPTION
BARREN BUT desperate for a child, US Senator's daughter Leo persuades her stiff-upper-lip Brit husband Wilby to soak up some fertility vibes at a Karachi shrine for three days.
Far from guarding mystical secrete, however, the transvestite eunuchs running this shrine employ rather more basic method of impregnating their female guests — a sinister twist whose destructive effects only surface after the baby's birth.
Setting his drama in 1988, writer-director Dehlavi makes this human tragedy the epicentre of a nation torn asunder by religious and political pressures.
General Zia's assassination and the Satanic Verses controversy feed into a spiral of deceit, adultery, murder and blackmail, all comically underpinned by a lurid extract from Pakistan's version of The Godfather .
Subtly satirical of western gullibility towards ancient rituals and superstitions, this is several cuts above standard culture-clash fare.
But Dehlavi takes his time getting up steam, leaving a good 20 minutes of surplus slack in these two hours.
Although finely acted throughout, any sympathy for Wilby's self-pitying pomposity or Leo's wrong-headed flakiness becomes increasingly difficult.
This is doubtless deliberate, as their selfishness inevitably culminates in a brutal flourish of imperialist rank-pulling and blatant injustice.
A surprisingly hard-hitting and sporadically fascinating modern fairy tale, but the Pakistani Godfather looks much more fun.
Tim Robbins plays his Subterranean Homesick dues in Bob Roberts
Embraceable two: Martin and Hawn lock tonsils in Housesitter
REELING AROUND
WALKEN: ‘the King and I’…
SPIKE LEE cuts class…
ICE-T takes on Wogan…
Max Schreck in Batman Returns , CHRISTOPHER WALKEN is writing two screenplays.
One is on American cultural icon and top undead/passed on/not very well rocker ELVIS PRESLEY.
According to Walken's script, Elv is 57 years old, looks completely different, is a health nut who eats fish all the time, and is getting ready to come back.
Asked why the interest in Elvis, Walken said that a girl he had a crush on in school used to carry round a picture of her boyfriend, and this was used as an excuse for why Walken couldn't take her to his high school prom.
He got hold of the picture, found it was just Elvis snipped from a magazine, confronted the girl, and she conceded, accompanying him to the dance: ‘I guess I've had a connection with him ever since,’ he says.
Let's hope he never had a connection with the other American icon — or I dong — he's writing about: JOHN HOLMES.
Holmes was the number one American porn star throughout the '70s, although his attempts to break into mainstream Hollywood failed dismally.
His story is certainly fascinating enough to make a biopic: as if being a porn star isn't dodgy enough, he was later a cocaine addict and was involved in a bizarre murder/robbery towards the end of his life.
He died two years ago from — you guessed it — AIDS.
Walken has not yet, however, said whether he'll be playing Holmes himself.
Perhaps ROB LOWE would be a better bet.
Among the visitors to the Republic Convention, ARNOLD  SCHWARZENEGGER , CHUCK NORRIS and BRUCE WILLIS.
Hardly a glittering array of stars, they're backing more losers than SLY STALLONE…
Single White Female star JENNIFER JASON LEIGH once dated ERIC STOLTZ, the current boyfriend of BRIDGIT FONDA, who is Ms Leigh's room-mate in SWF .
Asked whether his made things a little awkward between the actresses, Leigh was dismissive: ‘It didn't affect us at all.
It was something in the past.
I'd like to spend my life staying off the ‘who  f—ed who’ map but you just can't control everything.’
Maybe a few Hollywood producers should take that idea to heart.
SPIKE LEE is once again in hot water, once again at a time when he's got a movie to promote.
The bespectacled motormouth gets a cover splash on the New York Post for urging black kids to skip school the day his Malcolm X biopic opens, claiming that ‘the teachers can't hold it against them if they write a report on what they see.’
NY's black mayor, DAVID DINKINS, says ‘Go to see the movie after school or after work — like I will.’
Presumably he means after work.
The Reverend AL SHARPTON, who is in the movie, says: ‘Even though it'll be my premiere as an actor, I wouldn't advise boycotting school.
Instead I'd challenge schools to bring kids to the movie.’
Joining ARSENIO HALL, DAVID LETTERMAN and bloody CLIVE ANDERSON in the talk show business — ICE-T!
Ice will use clips from '70s blaxploitation movies to set up talking points for his guests.
The series was scheduled before the current ‘Cop Killer’ controversy, and once again Warners are using their considerable muscle to promote their man: HBO is owned by Time-Warner.
AL PACINO is currently shooting Scented Woman , in which he plays a blind army veteran, Frank Slade, who goes to New York with the reluctant teenage boy assigned to care for him.
Perhaps the Frank Slade role is a sign that Pacino is looking for something to stretch him, because he's also about to embark on another slightly unusual project.
A couple of years ago he made Local Stigmatic , a version of a 1956 Heathcote Williams play that has had no official theatre release.
Local Stigmatic is about two Cockney thugs who beat up an actor in the pub because ‘fame is the first disgrace because God knows who you are.’
And you thought that Cockney thugs just beat people up for their Rolexes.
Norris: the poor man's Schwarzenegger goes to the rich man's convention
VIDEO
ROBERT JOHNSON: The Search For Robert Johnson
LEGENDARY BLUESMAN Robert Johnson has gone missing.
He was last seen floating into a radiation bar in a bid to drink the crew of the USS Enterprise under the table but hasn't been seen since.
Star Trek IV ,The Search For Robert Johnson is the story of how Kirk, Sulu, Page and Plant tried to find him.
They go to England, where Eric Claptout, the legendary thief of the blue dilithium crystals, says that Johnson was a top geezer.
They meet the Keef Of Richards, a creature so alien that he looks like a superannuate chimp on heroin, who agrees!
Johnson was a top geezer.
Over at Galaxy Crossroads 5, they see the place where Johnson paused to have an Embassy Mild and a can of Fosters, and bumped into an old nutter who thought he was the devil.
Incredibly, Johnson turns up working as a janitor dusting his broom in Ilford, Essex.
He has lived in this pleasant suburb 45 years, entirely unaware that Kirk, Keef, Claptout and all of Led Zeppelin had been looking for him to apologise for stealing his songs and to pay him much-needed royalties.
Unfortunately, it is decided not to reveal the fact that Johnson is not dead in this video, as this would affect sales of the ten-album box set of his old songs, so Richards thumps him with a Gibson L5 and Johnson finally dies, leaving behind one last blues classic: ‘Devil Dog On My Trail’.
MIDNIGHT OIL: Black Fella White Fella
IN WHICH Peter Garrett steers his intrepid gang into the wilds of Oz to play Aboriginal settlements a trip already documented in the revealing if slightly bitchy Strict Rules book.
In the latter we learnt about gammy gear, in-fights, unprofessional ‘promoters’ and an obscure though mystical ceremony between band and tribal chiefs up in the hillside.
This film documentary has a little of that flavour, but chooses to showcase the songs and monumental sights instead — rolling rock video as opposed to a study of the rich culture clash that later flourished in the fine ‘Diesel And Dust’ LP.
Garrett and songwriter Rob Hirst both acquit themselves verbally and we see the horrid side of the Aboriginal lot, but the ultimate drift is that important chances have been missed here.
VARIOUS: Red Hot And Dance
DECEMBER 1, 1991 was World AIDS Day, in case you've forgotten.
On that day, various poptastic things happened all over the world, all to convince you that AIDS is a terrible thing, that safe sex doesn't mean no sex and that we must all love one another and usher in a new era of positivity etc etc.
Red Hot And Dance is a quasi-record of that day: an uneasy cocktail of blipvert public information and fairly lifeless live shots of acts who could loosely be classified ‘dance’.
Whereas ‘Red Hot And Blue’ had a hefty thematic strain, ie Cole Porter songs revisited, nothing really holds this together except a certain sagging trendiness.
There are only so many people you can watch jumping up and down, and only so many slogans you can be bombarded with before the brain goes into defensive shutdown.
By the end of this, the slogan could have read ‘Take Smack.
AIDS does not exist’ and I wouldn't have noticed.
Of course, AIDS is a terrible scourge on society, but the way to cure it is massive financial input into research and better sex education in schools.
It isn't going to be defeated by watching C&C Music Factory or Sabrina Johnston or marky Mark going through the same tired MTV moves.
Of all musics, ‘dance’ is the one that most preaches unthinking hedonism.
Watching it extricate itself is rather weird.
EMF's James and Derry dodge the blipverts in Red Hot And Dance
SOUND AND VISION
WEDNESDAY SEPTEMBER 9
Heavy metal cretins, evil aliens, pan-global pop celebs and long-lost spaceships drifting forever in the airless void of deep space — yep, those ELDORADO plotlines are finally picking up.
No, not really, it's just another vintage STAR TREK followed by a further dollop of WAYNE'S WORLD.
New Age rapper de Basehead starts a session on MARK GOODIER, more scary McCarthy-era revelations in THE UN-AMERICANS, deadpan Brummie mirthmaker Frank Skinner hosts new comedy PACKING THEM IN and John Lennon enjoys the loads-of-geeks-crapping-away treatment in the increasingly shoddy MOJO WORKING.
BBC 2, Wednesday: that Robert Johnson review (above) is illogical, Captain
THURSDAY 10
Open Channel D for the Man From Uncle pilot film TO TRAP A SPY, sympathise with Ribsgy's lodger-stroke-offspring problems in another ancient RISING DAMP, don your spangly cod-piece when Erasure go IN CONCERT or boggle your eyes at the whizzy visuals of schlockfest movie FX — MURDER BY ILLUSION.
FRIDAY 11
Anything can happen in the next half hour — specifically, fabbo '60s puppet drama STINGRAY is happening, followed by more MAN FROM UNCLE stuff.
Joe Brown and The Beatles are some of the repeated SOUNDS OF THE SIXTIES before Herbie Hancock chills out with his jazzer mates on BIRD LAND.
Julian Clary finds a flatmate in a new sitcom TERRY AND JULIAN, poker-faced chortle-merchant PAUL MERTON returns and Steve Martin gives legions of brainless admen ideas above their station with his classic nostalgia comedy DEAD MEAN DON'T WEAR PLAID.
Meanwhile, emperor JOHN PEEL's lucky guests are Drunk Tank and Th' Faith Healers.
SATURDAY 12
LOOK OUT IT'S ALIVE is a history of radio-recorded band sessions hosted by John Walters.
Trash sci-fi alert, Skipper!
Kirk finds God in the slightly rubbish STAR TREK V: THE FINAL FRONTIER and Jane Fonda gets her kit off for the evil Duran Duran in groovy pop-art romp BARBARELLA.
Disposable Heroes of Hiphoprisy tell it like it is to ANDY KERSHAW before Kitchens of Distinction and Babes In Toyland join JOHN PEEL.
SUNDAY 13
Something of a drought today, in pop-yoof-electronic-media terms.
You could check out theme park documentary EQUINOX or the tribute to recently-deceased avant-garde composer John Cage on OMNIBUS.
Better still, do your homework.
MONDAY 14
It's hip.
It's happening.
It's Manchester's In The Citymusic festival and MARK GOODIER will be there alongside motormouth Mane Tony Wilson,NME 's own Steve Lamacq, indie spunkers 3½ Minutes and the astounding Ozzie Tentacles.
Then watch a big truck trying to squash a hapless motorist in Steven Spielberg's best ever movie, DUEL.
TUESDAY 15
More In the City vibes when Fret Blanket, Back To The Planet and The Frank & Walters share a joke and a singalong with MARK GOODIER.
Wolfie tries kidnapping MPs for another creaky CITIZEN SMITH and a visionary Spanish architect is celebrated in GAUDI.
Then Mike Leigh's best ever movie LIFE IS SWEET jostles for your attention with stylish but empty thriller POINT BLANK.
Go for the Mike Leigh — you'll love it.
INGENUE KIDS ON THE BLOCK
From Cork they came, with their cider-fuelled spiky pop instincts and charmingly naive enthusiasm, to fulfil their ‘fierce dream’ in rock'n'roll UK — now, here are THE FRANK & WALTERS, family goatherds climbing every mountain in Sound of Musicland and staring in awe at the view with SIMON ‘Von Trapp’WILLIAMS.
Tyrol corporation: AL BARRETT
The hills are alive with the sound of…
The Frank & Walters!
Mountains shimmer in the distance.
Cowbells clang across the endless green fields.
The camera rolls, the DAT machine grooves, and over the grassy knoll, the beanpole figure of singer Paul Linehan appears, grinning and spinning his way into the video vaults.
This is no run-of-the-hill outcrop, either.
This, we have been assured, is the very hillock that Julie Andrews pirouetted across in The Sound Of Music .
Quite how the camera crew knows this is beyond me — the land's stature is hardly advertised by a Von Trapp statuette.
The Frank & Walters look dubious about the crew's certainty.
Then again, it's difficult to look anything but in a pair of lederhosen.
This is the land where dreams come true if you really, honestly want them to.
The Franks have been up mountains and down valleys, floated around idyllic lakes and cruised through the staggeringly beautiful (see The Prisoner -meets-Brothers Grimm) town of Salzburg, they've even mimed in a restaurant hall which provides the definitive ‘Sound Of Music Dinner Show’, during which tourists can dine on ‘cream-coloured ponies’.
All of this, natch, is for the purpose of creating a three-minute visual epic for the panoramic pop blast that is ‘This Is Not A Song’, main track on the craftily-titled newie that is ‘EP4’.
Only one person seems less than satisfied with the band's efforts, that's the cameraman, who's of the earnest opinion that ‘This Is Not A Song’ is ‘a heap of shit’.
As he's had to endure several million playbacks of that very single over the course of the weekend, one can only say, ‘poor bastard’.
Still, always look on the bright side.
You want maddeningly picturesque countryside dwellings?
You want blazing sunshine and God-sized cathedrals?
You want a cultural paradise where the only Mozzer who counts is Mozart?
For 48 hours, the Franks have got it.
A fairytale environment for a fairytale career…
ONCE UPON a time, somewhere in Ireland, two brothers and a like-minded friend decided to form a band.
Fuelled by a heady cocktail of cider, Beatles records, cider, local heroes like, erm, bus drivers and a bit more cider, the trio tripped over a delirious blueprint for success.
Before you could say ‘blimey, look at that stagecoach turning into a pumpkin’, Setanta Records had booked The Frank & Walters into Wimbledon YMCA and Camden Underworld, where a support slot in front of a dozen punters showcased their spiky pop instincts and a subtly hysterical enthusiasm for life.
The end?
Hardly.
After the sober belches of the shoe-gazing clique (itself a knee-jerk reaction to the brash swagger of baggydom), The Franks came across like circus clowns pissing around in a casualty department, all charmingly naive, astoundingly cheerful and dafter than a boardroom of brushes.
That they managed to translate that attitude on to sparkling vinyl (in the form of ‘Michael’, ‘Walter's Trip’, ‘Fashion Crisis Hits New York’et al ) was worthy enough.
That they remain so wonderingly wide-eyed in a business sold on cynicism is nothing less than miraculous.
Yup, four EPs on, embraced by the Flop 40 and zapped halfway across Europe, The Frank & Walters still have the amazed outlook of three squirrels in a Planters peanuts factory.
Sitting in the foyer of their Salzburg hotel — between ‘shoots’, obviously — Paul, guitarist brother Niall and drumming hair bear Ashley Keating are gulping down mineral water, babbling on about the ‘fierce’ sights of Austria and generally behaving like men who are having a blinking good time, thank record companies very much.
There's just one snag: Paul wanted to make the video in a cafe in Peckham.
‘I thought that Austria was too much of a hifalutin idea,’ grumbles the bowl-headed frontman in an Irish accent that could shag a shamrock.
‘It wouldn't suit the song if we end up with a video like Simple Minds or Big Country.
The cafe idea was more down-to-earth, which is what the song's all about — it's supposed to be against arrogance and affluence and snobbery.’
Oh well, never mind.
‘The way I see this song is like, I'm an alien on this planet…’ he continues, worryingly.
‘No, seriously!
I'm all alone, 'cos I think everyone's alone, like, 'cos they're themselves and they're different from everyone else.
‘So I just see myself passing through and meeting all these people along the way, like, and I have a good time.
The song is a tribute to people, how I'm grateful to them all and I love them and I love everyone.
I don't like everyone, but I do love them, although some days that gets altered 'cos you meet some wankers.’
That's a relief — you were beginning to sound like a Jehovah's Witness.
‘But the day I wrote this song I honestly believed that I did love everyone!’ insists Paul, chirpily.
‘I just woke up one morning and I felt glad to be alive, and glad that I wasn't on this earth on my own, that there were other people to share it with me and help me get through my life.’
Predictably, ‘This Is Not A Song’ is not that simple: for every slice of strings added by producer Edwyn Collins, there's a line like ‘This is not a song about animals’.
For every emotive vocal outburst from the strained tonsils of Paul, there's a feeling that reality is fast vanishing around the corner of The Franks' collective mind.
Not least when the thin one says that this is an ‘anti-politics’ tune: ‘Songs are too romantic to give across a political view, like.
Politics scar the song, I think.’
But haven't there been some great political records?
‘Oh, there have been some great political records , but I don't think songs are the medium for getting such views across.’
‘The problem is if there were a few kids out there who believed everything that Paul says and we did a really heavy religious or political song and some kid was influenced by it…it would be dangerous,’ argues Ashley.
‘Bands bigger than us have got a responsibility — they can't be messing with the kids!
Like, we know people in Cork who are still influenced by Sid Vicious — they were good in school and they had brains and all that, but now…‘
‘We know people who were influenced by Ian Curtis,’ says Paul, with an all-encompassing shake of his head.
‘And people who had nervous breakdowns about Robert Smith!’ shouts Niall.
‘They enacted his lifestyle, hiding away on their own and having breakdowns over it just because they couldn't relate to people!’
Ashley, meanwhile, shatters any possible pretensions towards cool by claiming that Simon & Garfunkel, The Beatles and Prefab Sprout's ‘Steve McQueen’ is the kind of music that uplifts him.
‘Yeah!’ yelps Paul, furiously.
‘Songs should move your heart, but politics are in your mind, not your heart.
Music is more romantic than that.’
‘It's like watching these American presidential campaigns,’ frowns Niall.
‘They have all this music in the background and people like Bush giving all these fierce power speeches.
They con people with their music by getting across a romantic side of themselves when really there's none there.
It's all about money and egos.’
IT'S AT times like this when one begins to wonder about The Franks & Walters.
During a previous cross-town cab-journey, the band quizzed the driver about his car's air conditioning — an absolute necessity in this blistering heat.
After the cabbie had explained the concept behind a warm engine and cold air, Ashley gave the matter some thought and then gave a triumphant shout: ‘So it's like a fridge then, right?’
Right!
Like, are they more sussed than the rest of us?
Have they mastered a second sight which differs from their brethren in the sense that they can appreciate things no-one else can? or are they, in fact, totally bloody bonkers?
The Franks take a bow in Salzburg, where the only Mozzer who counts is Mozart
The Franks & Walters, the men who love everyone (l to r): Niall, Paul and Ashley say it with flowers
Sometimes they talk sense.
At others they don't make any at all.
It's certainly a cheery coincidence that, while the Franks fritter away several chunks of their Go!
Discs advance on alarming quantities of Austrian ice cream, back home Madness are dusting away the cobwebs in Finsbury Park.
As ‘This Is Not A Song’— a smart, sophisticated musical step forward — proves, the Franks are developing a similarly direct pop panache, an across-the-bored appeal that could stretch from vegetarians to octogenarians, from grebos to grandmothers.
They may not have mastered the  Mad ones' darkly comical undercurrent, but the Franks' cheery exterior needn't preclude them from participating in some sussed ponderings.
They're also wise enough not to play any gigs with fellow countrymen Sultans Of Ping FC, for fear of encouraging a ‘kooky Cork scene’.
Which doesn't mean that I can bloody well fathom them out.
You have a go.
‘We were very lucky when we first came over,’ acknowledges Niall with a hearty slug of purified H 2 O. ‘We didn't know what was going on in London, we were just here at the right time to entertain everyone.
People come up to us and say, ‘You're a joke band,’ and we are to an extent, but ultimately the joke's on you.
If you listen back to the music, that's always been serious and not wacky or whatever.
I suppose we're nutters in our own way.’
‘When we go in to write songs it's not fun,’ protests Paul, who promptly giggles hysterically as if to suggest that, actually, songwriting is about as much fun you can possibly have with your clothes on.
‘But live it has to be a joke,’ says Ashley.
‘When we're writing or recording it's always serious, and then if you went on the road for two months and you were serious you'd spend your whole life being serious!
It'd be too much!
So when we tour we go crazy!’
‘We had no money last summer, but then we signed to Go!
Discs in November and got some money, so we started celebrating,’ chortles Niall.
‘Unfortunately, the celebrations never stopped…they went on until Christmas!
We had to sort ourselves out 'cos all the gigs we've done when we're completely pissed have been diabolical, like.
We can't take our drink — we can't just sip at it, we have to get blotto.
We had to stop drinking or we'd have got nothing done this year, like!’
‘It was difficult 'cos we'd walk into our dressing room and there would be 30 cans waiting for us every single night,’ confesses Ashley.
‘I think it would be physically impossible to drink all that every night on a tour.
Like, I did it for three nights and I was wrecked!’
It's not only the alcohol that's suffered from self-enforced cutbacks: the Franks (ironically enough) used to be a Martini band — any gig, any town, any night, they'd pack their guitars and socks and head  off into the Tranzophobic sunset, until exhaustion fully reared its head and the heart decided that home was definitely the place to be.
‘We got to the stage where we thought that there was nothing else in life,’ shudders Paul.
‘There was no soccer, no ski-ing…it was just gigs.’
‘And it was a brilliant world to be in, like!’ gasps Niall.
‘When you're on the road you don't have to think about anything.
There's always people there to tell you when to soundcheck, when to eat…there's no pressure at all.’
True!
When a taxi-driver took the band to the wrong side of town earlier in the day, the Franks simply sat on a nearby wall, chilled out and waited for ‘someone else’ to panic and discover their whereabouts.
Video shoot or no video shoot.
‘We're just pawns in the whole game,’ leers Niall.
‘It's like being on school trips when someone's in charge and the challenge is to dodge them,’ guffaws Paul.
‘That's our chance to get up to tomfoolery!’
PAUL LINEHAM has a story about being at home in Cork at Christmas and having to keep the band's first two EPs by the side of his bed, so scared was he that the previous three months had been nothing more than a ‘fierce dream’.
The records were unassailable proof to him that the Franks had really landed in the mainland.
This is the key to the trio: there's disbelief at their achievements, awe at their ever-new surroundings and experiences.
And there's insecurity as well: Ashley may go moshing down the front at Gallon Drunk gigs, but when he came face-to-face with James Johnson recently, the drummer was ‘too scared’ to talk to him.
The Franks were also worried about how ‘tough’ Carter appeared — before they toured with the duo they expected Jim Bob and Fruitbat to beat them up.
To get to the point, Frank & Walters are not Guns N' Roses.
‘It's a funny old game, the rock ‘n’ roll business,’muses Paul.
‘The idea of someone performing a song and being made out to be a god or whatever…it's very strange.
That's why we have so much fun!
When I go up onstage I think, ‘What the hell am I doing here?’
Hahaha!!
This rock thing baffles me, especially when people reach up and try to touch your hand.
It's like, we're only messing like, don't you understand?’
‘When we did a signing session at the Rough Trade shop, we thought it was the biggest ball hop ever!’ cackles Niall.
‘People were waiting for us to sign things and it was like, you're taking the piss out of us, aren't you?’
‘I still sneak into record shops to see if there's a Frank & Walters section,’ confesses a disbelieving Ashley.
‘It's probably healthy to have the outlook that we have, though.
It keeps us sane!’
Hmmmmmmm…
‘I think it's really sad if you actually believe you're a star,’ gurgles Paul.
‘You'd be living in a fantasy world!
You'd go mad!’
‘Like, if this all fell through we could go and work for Niall's old man tomorrow,’ shrugs Ashley.
‘But if it all went wrong for Michael Jackson, what's he do?’
BEING IN a pop band isn't all work, work, work y'know.
Oh, sorry — it is.
If you disagree, try arguing with Paul after his 37th run-through of ‘This is not a song about old James Dean’ while standing by a three million foot drop off a mountain top.
Try telling that to Niall — a practised afternoon riser back home — at breakfast after he's been assaulted by crack-of-dawn alarm calls.
Try explaining it to Ashley as he sits in the back of the minibus watching the streets of Salzburg slip by for the last time as — filming finished — we begin the journey back home.
Picture his bleary expression, his fuzzy eyes, his baffled demeanour.
It is now half past six in the morning.
‘I have never,ever experienced anything like this,’ he groans miserably.
‘Hey!’ he blurts, ‘Look at that building!
Did you know that's one of seven brothels in the town?’
You learn something new every day.
Franks for the music.
Paul on that actual Julie Andrews hills-are-alive hill
It's hard to be taken seriously in lederhosen…
Rock ‘n’ Tyrol heroes: The Franks push the boat out
THESE ARE A FEW OF MY FAVOURITE THINGS
THE STRANGE AND MYSTIFYING FRANK & WALTERS ALPHABET
A
AMPS: Very useful when you want to play gigs.
ANTI-NORAS: As in scuba divers.
ARCHIE KETTLE: Ageing East End villain with very good memory, who loves scenery.
Still looking for his Woodbines even though he gave up smoking in 1956.
AVALANCHE: Something Roxy Music have no song about.
B
BEN JOHNSON: Gave up poetry to run and take drugs.
BODICE: Name given to spare ribs when they were really spare and much cheaper.
BUSHING: A tradition that goes back generations.
Somebody purchases alcohol from an off-licence and proceeds to drink it in the open air, usually in a secluded place called a ‘bushing spot’.
BUTTER: Soft and round.
C
CATSY POONEY: Dooney's brother.
CONCUBINE: Something or other.
D
DANCE:…in the old-fashioned way.
Made famous by Pope Dan (…ce) in the old-fashioned way.
DE VALERA: A man who used to be President Of Ireland before he turned into Jimmy Stewart.
DOONEY POONEY: Catsy's brother.
DRUMS: The things Ashley hits when he's upset.
E
EINTRACHT BRAUNSCHWEIG: Crack Second Division German team who are sponsored by Frank & Walter.
ENNASCARTHY: A place where ageing Frank & Walters go to retire.
F
FENDER DONCASTER: Guitar used by the late great Bobby Clapton, the unsung hero of arm wrestling and inventor of the pogo stick.
FOREIGNER: Anyone who doesn't come from Ireland, the UK or Australia.
Should never be allowed near a recording studio, not even to make the tea.
FRANK: A common first name for people.
FRANKMOBILE: A certain tour van that gave us so much pleasure and pain during the first six months of this year.
Could always be relied upon to break down on the most dangerous stretch of the motorway.
Very good at overheating.
Knows the way to every venue in the UK. £600 ono.
FRONT GATE: They got the hall and the bridge, but they're not getting the front gate.
G
G: When you need something to rhyme with Sandra Dee.
GARDEN, BACK: The thing that you give all your wet washing to and never get back.
GOOSEY GOOSEY GANDER: How does your garden grow?
GUTTERSNIPE: A sniper who hangs off your gutter pipes for 12 hours a day pretending to be Peter Sellers.
H
HAVE A BARNEY: Favourite expression of George Bush and also the name of the only greyhound to win both the Irish Derby and a clock radio.
HELP ME: As in ‘Help me upstairs’ or ‘Help me!’
HOO HAH BOYS: A strange tribe of people from the south of Ireland who have no interest in the concept of life as we know it but instead tend to live out their winters bushing it (See: BUSHING) behind the Carlini factory and spend their summers drinking their way across Europe.
I
I: As in ‘I, I, Captain’ or ‘Where is your left I gone?’
IKE: Name given to General Eisenhower, husband of Tina Turner, the famous black female singer who was also a pigeon fancier at weekends.
INJECTION: As in ‘fuel injection engine’.
J
JACINTA: Our planet where we come from.
JENESIS: The world's favourite band.
We don't care if they can't dance, we still love them and they're bald.
THE JIVE: Name given to the mating habits of the family butcher at the ice rink.
K
KAJAGOOGOO: Our one and only true influence: Viva Limah!
KOOL: Cool spelt wrongly.
L
LANGER: The most widely used word in the world, describes lovely people.
LANGER DAN: According to ancient Cork mythology, the first human being to sing the seventh verse of ‘Danny Boy’ after drinking 16 pints of cider while being chased upstairs by his sweeping brush-working wife.
LAPSY PAVA: Person who lives just outside Munich who breeds ferrets.
M
MORGAN FAIRCHILD: Ex-star of Flamingo Road whose latest role sees her guesting alongside the Franks in their latest video.
N
NOOBLE HOOBLE or NOBBER: Rude words when you're in space and no one can hear you scream them.
Other than that, they mean  f— all.
O
OPEN AIR BEEF BURGER STALL: Because Andrew Collins said so.
OTTER: Furry mammal with teeth and a certain penchant for Hamlet cigars.
P
PONCE: The bit that goes at the end of ‘Res’ to make up the word ‘Response’.
POL POT: Kitchen utensil for boiling Pots in.
Q
QUACK: Why drug pushers with lisps are always mistaken for ducks.
BASS: Because B has already been used and Paul plays it too.
R
RACHMANINOV: Composed music, hence the saying, ‘How much is that doggy in the window, the one with the waggly tail’.
RASA: Drink eaten by a rare Talahari tribe that no one has ever seen or found any evidence to prove that they exist.
ROLLERCOASTER: Not gigs — funfair!
S
SACCHARINE: Sugar substitute.
S is also for SUGAR, saccharine substitute.
S is also for SUBSTITUTE, which sugar and saccharine are of each other.
SANDWICHES: Nice tomato and hydro flavour inside.
STEERINA: A car you used to make when you were a young fella out of old prams and burnt out helicopters.
T
TANGO IN PARIS, LAST: As in ‘Oh look, a tango in Paris!’ or ‘I'd like to drink a tin of Tango in Paris.’
U
UMBILICAL: Chord, which is used in all the best songs.
UNDER THE BRIDGE: Cork slang used to describe anything that is beneath a bridge.
V
VIOLENCE: Also, sex, death and gory things.
W
WIBBLY WOBBLY WONDERER: Paul's favourite ice cream.
X
X-RAY: A picture of your bones you get when you go to the hospital.
XEROX: Shakespeare's silent character, hence the continuing confusion over ‘Something is rotten Xerox in the state of Denmark’, ‘Neither a borrower nor a lender be for loan Xerox oft loses both itself and Xerox friend’ and the most famous ‘You are disgusting, in fact you are rank, Xerox.’
Y
HUGO SANCHEZ: Famous footballer who was sometime considered to be the black Pete.
YUMMY: Rashers are yummy.
Z
ZIMMERMAN: The real name of Bruce Springsteen's cat's wife's sister's goldfish's Uncle Tom's hoover's spring's Anthony Quinn.
ZORRO: The most influential swordsman in modern day Atlantis, the cheque's in the post.
An amp: to be turned up
Bush: worth two birds
Kajagoogoo: Frank inspiration, particularly Limah!(centre, harlequin-trousered)
Crack German soccer squad sponsored by our two friends…
The Walter gate conspiracy: the dirty laundry's in the back garden.
Great value beefburgers — courtesy Andrew Collins
Ike (left) who won the Battle Of The Bulge, as did his famous wife Tina
LONG PLAY
EDITED BY STUART BAILIE
VARIOUS
The Immediate Anthology
THE MOST interesting thing about the way the Immediate label was run was the fact that, as this set proves, it really didn't have much more of an idea what was hot and what was not than the majors it was supposed to supplant.
Founded in 1965 by Andrew Loog Oldham, the Stones' manager, and Tony Calder, the business brain to Oldham's hype, the pioneering indie label lasted six years and released a huge amount of material.
Too much dependant on first the Stones and, later, The Small Faces, for material, much of the stuff on ‘The Immediate Anthology’ is bizarre, over-produced and under-thought-out.
Hence we have perfect pop from PP Arnold and The Small Faces alongside junk from Twice As Much, Jimmy Tarbuck and, erm, The Marquis Of Kensington, who was in fact The Kinks' manager.
However, all these years later, it doesn't much matter that much of Immediate's product was dross.
This triple set holds enough gems to keep you interested, the history is fascinating and even the disasters, which must have seemed ridiculous even then, have a certain kitsch value.
The Small Faces could only really produce themselves, a fact made clear by Billy Nicholls' dire ‘Would You Believe’, and PP Arnold's ‘If You Think You're Groovy’, a great song ruined by cack-handed production.
On the plus side there's Rod Stewart before he became a joke, The Nice inventing prog rock, Fleetwood Mac singing ‘Someone's Gonna Get Their Head Kicked in Tonight’(who said the '60s was all peace and love?) and Murray Head's lovely ‘She Was Perfection’, as well as the obvious Faces, Amen Corner, Humble Pie and McCoys classics.
If some of it's crap, that's how it was.
An anthology should have an honest attitude and offer a bit of everything.
This does.
here's '60s London pop, warts ‘n’ all.
THE STRANGLERS
Stranglers In The Night
NOW WITHOUT Hugh Cornwell, the withered-looking Stranglers are not the successful eccentrics they once were, having traded in commercial respectability for the kind of cultish irrelevance pioneered by the likes of Gary Numan.
Consequently, it's unlikely that anyone who isn't in their fan club is at all fussed about what this record sounds like.
I'll be brief.
‘Stranglers In The Night’(arf arf) is an inoffensive collection of songs that tries to capture the charms of the old Stranglers and fails miserably.
There are stabs at the mysterious menace of ‘Skin Deep’, the trashy pop wonder exemplified by tunes such as‘Nice In Nice’ and the arty decadence of ‘Golden Brown’— and they all sound like little more than well-executed pub rock.
Things are hardly helped by new singer Paul Roberts, who delivers almost every track in overblown, melodramatic tones that are downright hilarious.
The Stranglers started going downhill when they took to releasing piss-poor cover versions as singles.
This album, surprisingly enough, is as terrible as its title.
THE GOLDEN PALOMINOS
A History: Vol 1 (1982–1985)
A History: Vol 2 (1986–1989)
MATERIAL
One Down
Memory Serves
VARIOUS
Hard Cell
CELLULOID RECORDS was one of those insanely annoying New York labels where everyone seemed to be making records based on weird theories and somehow all the records were great.
It also managed to take the Famous People Playing On Our Record concept to new and unlikely levels.
The Golden Palominos were drummer Anton Fier's rockesque project.
The first half of ‘A History: Vol 1’ catches them in their annoying squally phase with vocal coaching by Peter Blegvad.
RUN AWAY! is one's first reaction, but this stuff grows on you, especially as the rest of the music here is from ‘Vision Of Excess’, the Palominos' amazing rewriting of the Led Zeppelin story.
The likes of John Lydon, Michael Stipe and even Richard Thompson lend their memorable voices to huge mad riffbastards of songs, all tied up with Fier's Bonham-type drums.
‘Vol 2’ is more eclectic.
The half that's from ‘Blast Of Silence’ is basically warped country rock, featuring Syd Straw, T-Bone Burnett and early REM producer Don Dixon.
It's charming and runs neatly into the songs from ‘A Dead Horse’, which broaden the brief into richer territory.
A song called ‘Shattered Image’ accidentally invents Lush.
Palomino bassman Bill Laswell also found time to run Material, themselves no strangers to ridiculous name-dropping.
Their debut album — apart from containing the remarkable ‘Bustin' Out’, sung by Labelle's Nona Hendryx — also features Chic's Nile Rodgers and Tony Thompson and the first recorded appearance of Whitney Houston.
‘One Down’ treads the fine line between spooky moderne dance and proper fund, much as the young Was (Not Was) used to.
‘Memory Serves’ from 1982 is a different kettle of tosh altogether, being largely fiddling instrumentals, spiky chicken pop and a really dated cover of ‘For A Few Dollar More’with scratching on it.
Finally, for the idle, the ‘Hard Cell’ compilation offers Lydon and Bambaataa's excellent apocalypse rap ‘World Destruction’(recorded as Timezone), some of the Stipe tracks from ‘Visions Of Excess’and some OK dance/oddity stuff from Material and a droll bloke called Lightnin' Rod.
A lazy compilation, in keeping with Demon's sleevenotes: you'd be better off buying the Palominos' ‘Vol 1’ and tracking down the Timezone single.
TORCHED BY YOUR PRESENCE, DEAR
SINEAD O'CONNOR
Am I Not Your Girl?
‘Look at the one wearing the collar, then or now, there's only ever been one liar, and it's the Holy Roman Empire.’
‘Speech’
ONLY SINEAD O'Connor could put together a seemingly uncontroversial, fun thing like a collection of cover versions of old standards and torch songs and put a speech at the end of it that questions the very foundations and ethics of the Catholic Church.
Only Sinead O'Connor would have the courage, the reckless spirit, to take on songs made famous by the greatest singers — Ella Fitzgerald, Billie Holiday, Peggy Lee — to sing them live in front of a 47-piece orchestra, then take on organised religion and blame it for child abuse, and damn the consequences.
She has no fear of appearing foolish — none whatsoever.
Love her, hate her, you can't be lukewarm about Sinead.
She is either Joan of Arc or the She-Devil.
Whatever your opinion, the incontrovertible fact is that Sinead O'Connor is a woman of great passion and conviction, an absolute believer that truth will triumph over lies, right over wrong, love over hate.
Mistakes — she's made a few, but growing up in public was never easy.
So she's a Number One hit tear-in-her-eye wonder, eh?
Well, how come she's still impossible to ignore?
‘Am I Not Your Girl?’ is Sinead's third album, and even though not one single song is written by her, it is every bit as confessional, as painfully honest, as her first two —that's why you must sit up and take notice.
‘These are the songs I grew up listening to,’ she says, ‘they are the songs that made me want to be a singer.’
But you sense that's only half of it, that there's some form of exorcism going on here, some sort of expulsion of childhood ghosts.
She has often darkly alluded to some form of abuse in her own formative years, and there's a strong sense that she's singing these songs to someone in particular.
They are comfortably familiar tunes, but she interprets them in an intensely personal way.
Sinead is no Liza or Barbra, but she sure knows how to pin the pain on the door.
We had a glimpse of that with ‘Nothing Compares 2 U’(she cried, we cried too…) and she doesn't staunch the flow (‘Can you really say you're not in pain, like me?’—‘Speech’’) Don't be fooled by the slight swagger of ‘Why Don't You Do Right?’, the fragile, breathy innocence of her ‘Bewitched, Bothered And Bewildered’, we're just warming up to those where's-my-baby-blues of ‘Black Coffee’.
Then comes ‘Success Has Made A Failure Of Our Home’ and knocks you over; she wrenches it from the grasp of Loretta Lynn and Tammy Wynette and makes it absolutely her own, Phil Ramone's arrangement swelling dramatically to Sinead's own end-piece, and with the last emphatic plea of ‘Am I not your girl?’both you and she fall down, emotionally exhausted.
And then she nearly tops it reclaiming Lloyd-Webber's ‘Don't Cry For Me Argentina’(the song she used to sing in talent contests in Ireland to please the old ladies) from the showbiz scrapheap — softly, gently, poignantly.
And it could so easily have been a suicidal career move.
Perhaps there is a hidden agenda here — a desire for mainstream success in America, a need to introduce old songs to a new audience, a bid for Radio 2 playlisting — but I doubt it.
You quickly get past the point of worrying that there are no guitars here, Phil Ramone and the orchestra do a superb job of keeping the arrangements crisp and fresh, and the strings never overwhelm the singer, even when she is at her most whispering, as in the Marilyn vehicle ‘I Want To Be Loved By You’ and amidst the tragic melancholy of ‘Gloomy Sunday’.
How many of these songs could she have been singing to her daddy?
Certainly ‘Scarlet Ribbons’ was one he used to sing to her; here Sinead tremulously gives it an elegiac quality with tin whistle and uileann pipes and painful memories nearly overwhelm her halfway through.
Mourning over, the package is rounded off by a stunning double flourish; a cod-Broadway instrumental reprise on ‘Argentina’, followed by that speech in full, and it's the most serene, quietly-spoken rant you'll ever hear.
Quite extraordinary.
But Sinead is an extraordinary woman.
She will be pilloried for making this record, she will be told it is an ill-advised change of musical direction, foolish to do yet more cover versions when she has not established herself as a songwriter, madness to be so outspoken, dubbed Mrs Bonkers of Ireland — by people she cared little about.
‘I'm not a liar and I'm not full of hatred, but I hate lies and so the liars hate me,’ she says in her speech.
Sinead has really pulled it off in a big, bold way here; her honesty and emotional intensity permeate every bar, every nuance of every lyric.
Against the odds, she succeeds in making an intimate personal statement out of tunes that are almost public property.
She could sing ‘Chirpy Chirpy Cheep Cheep’ and make it hurt .
Sack Kylie — she is but a cipher, a simpering, unthreatening man-pleaser.
Sinead has never used coy sexuality to sell herself — maybe that's why the boys and the blusterers feel so uncomfortable with her and her volatile emotions.
In ten years' time, when Sinead has made her mistakes, sung out all her emotional baggage, then she will start to do the real work with her extraordinary power.
Then she will have a global stage.
For now, enjoy a life-affirming interpretation of great songs, and be enriched by one woman's passion and the courage of her conviction.
Immediate Svengali Andrew Loog Oldham with two sleeve-design awards presented to him by the NME in 1969
BILLY MACKENZIE
Outernational
THE WORST thing about Billy Mackenzie is other people's expectations of him.
There's still some who want the shrieking, whirling dervish of the old Associates days and refuse to give him any credit for growing up and wanting to just get on with it.
‘Outernational’ is significant in being the first purely solo Mackenzie work.
He's dropped the long-redundant Associates moniker and is standing alone, on his own merits.
Gone, maybe, are the famed histrionics but in their place is an assuredness which hints at a new maturity.
The voice is better than ever; tamer yet still capable of extreme passion.
One minute soothing and seductive, the next, heart on fire.
He's never been afraid to show his vulnerability and songs like ‘In Windows All’, a great, sweeping ballad, make a positive virtue of it.
There may not be obvious hits — and his two stabs at the dance floor, ‘Groovature’ and ‘Feels Like The Richter Groove’may be a little too self-conscious — but the subtlety and power of the first single ‘Baby’and its follow-up ‘Colours Will Come’are in turns enchanting and evocative.
Producers Boris (Yello) Blank, Thomas Fehlmann and Moritz Von Oswald have brought out the best in him.
The cover of Stevie Wonder's neglected classic ‘Pastime Paradise’ and the best John Barry/James Bond-theme-that-never-was, ‘Sacrifice And Be Sacrificed’are undoubted highlights.
Blank et al have pulled together all those niggling influences which previously were like a series of half-formed sentences and have made something coherent and splendid out of them.
Where before he went off at obtuse tangents, now he takes the songs where he wants them to go rather than let them control him.
The old detractors may remain unconvinced, but taking ‘Outernational’ on its own merits — and leaving the past where it's best left — this has to be the culmination of what Mackenzie has been striving for through those half-pitched albums of the late '80s.
MIKE OLDFIELD
Tubular Bells II
BRIAN ENO
Nerve Net
TWENTY YEARS ago Oldfield's epic original ‘Tubular Bells’ was a teenage obsession of mine, a soundtrack to my fevered adolescent imagination, its sweeping vistas providing a place of escape.
And young Michael himself, with his serene Jesus-esque looks, was the hippy pin-up par excellence.
I played his record to death.
Then I grew up.
‘TB’ was organic, low-fi, low-budget and defined the then fledgling Virgin record label.
This sequel has the benefit of 20 years of studio technology, the might of Warner Bros, and behind the scenes, the unholy alliance of producer Trevor Horn and record company bigwig Rob Dickins.
Apart from that, nothing much has changed.
Echoes of those early themes and motifs weave in and out of‘II’ like friendly ghosts, Oldfield again favouring mantra-like repetition, layer upon layer of instrumentation, building to crescendo and giving way to acoustic guitar in a grand reprise of the original.
It goes into the red on the epic-o-meter, and is technically as ambitious as the original, but it's all too easy now and times aren't as innocent; the spirit of '72 is missing.
This may have something to do with the fact that ‘Tubular Bells’ was a labour of love, and ‘II’is a determined effort to reclaim past glories and make a wad.
Hey — the guy wasn't a breadhead back then, right?
My enduring affection for ye olde original triumphs over this calculated spectacular.
Oldfield was never conferred with boffin status, unlike his contemporary, Mr Ambient himself, Brian Eno.
After 20 years, Mike's going backwards but Bri continues to forge into the future, dragging the brat Rock Music behind him.
‘Nerve Net’, however, is not the cure-all for Orb fans; no soothing meditative moods here.
This is Eno on the jagged tip, stabbing bits of broken glass into funk, jazz, electro, world and otherworld, to produce a sonic mutation clearly ahead of its time.
Guest musicians with fantastic pedigrees (Roberts Fripp and Quine, Benmont Tench, Ian Dench (!),
John Paul Jones) play even more fantastically monikered instruments (‘pintrumpet guitar’, ‘kuti-bass’) while BE tinkers on his tube organs and valve synths in a tonally-challenging 63 minutes of pop weirdery.
Tight, metallic-funky backbeats provide solid grounding for swooping  other-worldly guitar and sinister soundings synths (‘Fractal Zoom’), bonkers screech-guitar effects give a post-holocaust mambo feel to world music (‘Wire Shock’), '50s cocktail jazz gets an outer space-meets- Twin Peaks overhaul (‘Pierre in Mist’, ‘Juju Space Jazz’) and we get a welcome return to the weird pop vibe of ‘Before And After Science’ in the space nonsense of ‘The Roil, The Choke’and ‘Ali Click’.
He takes you round the block and back, does Eno, with few comforting reference points, although I sense echoes of early YMO and Yello lurking behind closed doors.
Otherwise, he's out there on his own, and I mean,out there , in another squelchy world.
ALPHABET SWEEEEET!
MOOSE
XYZ
YOU SHOULDA killed them last year, right?
Tough Shit,mate .
Since you refused to understand their brittle moods, onstage detachment and offstage mateyness, how the hell will you cope with Moose making a record as rich, adventurous and undeniably majestic as this?
Face facts, you were wrong.
‘XYZ’ is the perfect kiss-off to everyone who raved against Moose in 1991 with such blinkered zeal, to all the people who sneered at shoe-gazing — a ‘scene’defined, uniquely, by those who hated all of the bands they ill-informedly lumped together — for being one-dimensional and destined for a quick death.
Reference points?
You can forget those laughable, knee-jerk comparisons to My Bloody Valentine, for starters.
‘XYZ’ is rooted much further back down the racks of dog-eared discs in the second-hand shops where Moose once worked, back to C&W, maverick balladeers and songwriters like Jim Webb, Lee Hazelwood, Gram Parsons and Fred Neil (whose ‘Everybody's Talkin'’gets charmingly worked over here) rather than soundscapers.
For anyone who could be bothered to look and listen, Moose's potential for pulling off something as weirdly, almost classically beautiful as this has always been there.
Early interviews saw Russell ranting lovingly about Tim Buckley, third single ‘This River Never Will Run Dry’ dabbled alluringly with woozy C&W miserabilism and — heaviest hint of all — a five-minute break for retuning at their last London headlining gig back in January was accompanied by ‘Wichita Lineman’drifting through the PA and a slide of Glen Campbell projected on to the stage.
What's been missing up until now, though, has been the right producer — early REM cohort Mitch Easter's enlisted here — the cash to afford a string section for those weeping, sweeping passages and, crucially, confidence on the part of Moose themselves.
There's a definite swagger to many of the songs here, as Russell emerges out of the mix far less reticently on the likes of the jaunty single, ‘Little Bird’, and ‘Soon Is Never Soon Enough’, a belted-out duet with Delores O'Riordan (on day release from The Cranberries) driven recklessly along by some well haywire slide guitar from Easter.
It gets weirder — and even better.
‘The Whistling Song’ matches abrasive riffs with strolling nonchalance and — oh yes — undignified, shit-eatingly stupid and great whistling.
‘Polly’ and ‘XYZ’gorgeously relocate the textured yearning of Moose's first two EPs (‘Jack’and ‘Cool Breeze’) into an orchestral context, all windswept elegance and love-sick musing.
And ‘I'll See You In My Dreams’ is a lush, fleet-footed waltz that spins winningly away from every narrow-minded expectation of what indie-aspirants should sound like in this year of grunge, glam and glassy reveries.
And you'll have to admit that's a brilliant thing.
At a time when the easy option for a band like Moose would be to step up the distortion, rip off a few riffs and steam into the easy-money heaven where rock pigs run wild, they've flipped away on a heady, affecting tangent that's been traced in the last five or ten years by The Weather Prophets and Lloyd Cole, but rarely in that time with such grace and preconception-shattering nerve.
The band you thought had no personality and were locked into a strait-jacketed genre have just made an album packed with more character and  idiosyncrasies than practically any other released in 1992.
Eat humble pie and get used to it mate .
TUMBLEWEED
Theatre Of Gnomes
THE PSYCHEDELIC graphics adorning the sleeve provide a good clue as to the contents: five songs that attempt to combine the grunged-out, Sub Pop-esque approach common to bands on Australia's Waterfront label with a distinctly druggy ambience.
The fusion leads to tiresome twaddle like ‘Shakedown’ and ‘Holy Moses’, whose brain-crushing riffing and aimless guitar solos are strongly redolent of Black Sabbath.
Fortunately, Tumbleweed are redeemed by the remaining songs: ‘Carousel’ which all but abandons their rockist bluster in favour of a gentler, almost poppy sound; ‘Stoned’, a brilliantly dumb dope-tribute, and ‘ Millenium ’, which is a little too heavy on masturbatory muso-isms, but manages to retain enough hyperactive charm to make it a success.
Had they been born 15 years earlier, Tumbleweed would probably wear loon pants and big belts and be called something like Satan's Spaceship.
Thankfully, this lot's obvious love of latter-day long-hairs like Mudhoney and Monster Magnet and their ear for a tune make the best bits of ‘Theatres Of Gnomes’ sound almost wonderful.
UGLY KID JOE
America's Least Wanted
UGLY KID Joe are crap.
Utter crap.
Californian white dopes on metal, they're gum-chewin', butt-kickin' nasty little toe-rags with french fries for dicks and spongiform-infected burger beef for brains.
In theory.
In practice, there's no doubt that they know what they're doing.
An instant hit last year with a mini-LP and the single ‘Everything About You’, they're probably the best straight rock band in America.
Everything about them is traditional: bluesy licks, Whitfield Crane's sneering vocals, lyrics about being the devil, a bum, or a mixed-up kid.
Yet somehow, this lot get it right most of the time.
The songs are mostly short and flash.
They're never over-produced and as their name and LP title makes clear, they're not afraid to laugh at themselves.
Who else would call their tour the ‘Zitpoppin', butt pickin' bogger-flinging across America tour '91 –'92; nging’?
While they're suitably snotty, they don't hunt in packs — we're not talking Axi Rose's scapegoats here.
Ugly Kid Joe are likeable, fun assholes.
They're aware that you wouldn't want a bunch of dickheads like them moving in next door, as ‘Neighbor’ makes clear.
They love to doss about, as ‘Busy Bee’, which in another era might have been a Lovin' Spoonful song, explains.
They even take a pop at Donald Trump on ‘Panhandlin' Prince’, although doubtless they'll change sides when the money starts to roll in.
There's nothing new about UKJ.
Their punkish stance is probably a put-on: doubtless their dads are commodities brokers.
But most rock is false in one way or another: you have to accept that some bands fake it better than others, and Ugly Kid Joe fake it like champions.
Wacko Macko's backo!
Moose and Russell's majestic adventure…
SHORT CIRCUIT
Various dance bollocks tested by IAN McCANN in the Ilford area…
DIGITAL ORGASM: Come Dancin'
GEDDIT?
‘COME Dancin'’ Top joke from a ‘band’called Digital Orgasm, eh?
Designed to explode from rave speakers at highly-paid PAs, full of hooks and analogue noise.
Marginally more credible than the same label's Oceanic, they're still hugely annoying on the appalling ‘Startouchers’.
Does this shrill din really emanate from the top Praga Khan and Jade 4U?
Yep, and it's only saved by ‘Moog Eruption’, a whirring epic named after one of those daft '70s synthesiser LPs that nobody bought.
Excuse me a sex, I've just got to grab a tissue, I seem to have been ‘dancin’sic too hard.
49ERS: Playing With My Heart
THE 49ERS are that irritating factory-recorded Italian mob who hit big two years ago, most notably with ‘Touch Me’.
However, lately 49ers have improved considerably, largely due to the punchy vocal presence of Anne-Marie Smith, a black English girl with more balls than FIFA.
This means that tunes like ‘Got To Be Free’ and ‘The Message’are amongst the best Italian House tracks I've heard.
It also means that the irritability level is as small as a speedfreak's willy and therefore ‘Playing With My Heart’ isn't exactly hit city.
Tough life, huh?
FRANKIE PAUL: FP The Greatest
THIS REGGAE LP has a huge handicap in that the sleeve is not horrible.
On the plus side, however, blind singer Frankie Paul can usually be relied upon to turn out a stinging record, and this crisply-mixed, soulful mélange of ragga, lovers and soul soon hits your aural G-spot.
Includes the superior ‘Me And You’, the hard-rocking ‘FP The Greatest’, plus the slightly aged reggae chart smashes ‘Little Walter’ and ‘A No Nutten’, which still sound great.
The probably crazy Frankie introduces himself several times during the LP in a mad US radio DJ voice, and if that isn't novelty enough to make this worthy buying, then ignore it and just marvel at that great voice.
THE IKETTES: Fine Fine Fine
TWO DOZEN '60s soul and R&B songs from Ike & Tina Turner's backing singers.
Includes the classic mod ‘floater’‘I'm So Thankful’, a record so cool that it makes Inspector Morse look like The Bill .
Otherwise, it rounds up the usual suspects: The Jaynettes ‘Sally Go Round The Roses’, various dance songs and an impersonation of The Newbeats' ‘Bread And Butter’ in ‘Peaches ‘N’Cream’.
Hardly thrilling, but 27 times funkier than the crap their former manageress does today.
EVELYN ‘CHAMPAGNE’ KING: The Essential Works Of
DANCE MUSIC from a marginally less cynical and altogether simpler era.
Evelyn King was 15 and singing while hard at work sweeping a Philadelphia studio when she was heard by producer T-Life.
He put her behind the mic and the first hit was ‘Shame’, an unstoppable, enormous disco and pop hit in 1977.
It's here, along with‘Love Come Down’, her biggest UK success, ‘Back To Love’ and 14 more.
What you don't get is her recent excellent EMI stuff with Ten City, nor ‘I Don't Know If It's Right’, another early record that is surely an ‘essential work’.
A pleasant, if hardly thrilling listen.
VARIOUS COMPUTERS ON DRUGS: Danger Zone Volume 1
SAFETY ZONE, more like, and I don't mean ‘safe’ as the raggas once used it.
Various ‘exclusive’ remixes of Altern-8, Digital Boy and a variety of Italians including Anticapella, Antico and DJ Professor and Art Of Noise (a Prodigy mix of ‘Instruments Of Darkness’0 etc.
It's hard to see what the aim is.
KWS' ‘Please Don't Go’ indicates a commercial bent, but much of this stuff doesn't aspire to chart status.
Yet again, if slightly more hardcore fans haven't already got ‘Injected With A Poison’(mix credited to Digital Orgasm, daft since they made the record in the first place) or Sonz Of A Loop Da Loop Era, then they must have been in a coma for months.
Which is possible, and probably preferable.
VARIOUS COMPUTERS: Reactivate Five
A BIG bonus for not using the letter E in a huge typeface on the sleeve despite three opportunities to do so.
‘Pure Trance And Techno’ is the catch-line here and for once it's roughly right.
Includes the decidedly strange ‘Urban Bells’ from Passion Flower (no, I dunno who it is either) and Westbam's ‘Mr Peanut’, a chirpy, bizarre record from the originator of German techno, guaranteed to send your brain running for the exit.
VARIOUS COMPUTERS ON DRUGS: Trance Dance
HOW CAN you tell the life-span of a dance compilation is limited?
An advert for a Bank Holiday rave on the sleeve is a clue.
Here are hits from Future Sound Of London, Alison Limerick, The Shamen, Snap, plus Humanoid's (ie Future Sound Of London's Brian Dougan's)‘Stakker Humanoid’, probably the first UK techno hit.
How some of this stuff qualifies as ‘trance’ is unfathomable, but a bigger question begs an answer.
Why was ‘Rhythm Is A Dancer’ Number One?
My arse makes more exciting noises than that.
VARIOUS COMPUTERS ON DRUGS: Warehouse Raves 7
PROBABLY THE best of the regular compilation series, ‘Warehouse Raves 7’ is up to the usual standard.
Two hot records from the obscure but heavily collected Hooj Choons label from Felix and Hyper Go-Go, plus The Ragga Twins’ fine ‘Shine Eye’, Peter Bouncer's ‘So Here I Come’, plus Finitribe, Phuture Assassins etc.
VARIOUS ROUGHNECKS ON THE RUN: The Gangster
THE STANDARD reggae format: one tough rhythm — particularly so in this case — and a variety of stars laid end-to-end over the top.
A Studio One drum lick introduces this, but that's the only old-fashioned thing about it.
Includes ‘Borderline’ from Poison Chang, a gun song in which other DJs are the target; Sugar Black's ‘Lift Up Yourself’, a roots tune with a similar feel to Dennis Brown's classic ‘Westbound Train’, and Red Rose's scorching title tune.
Rougher than Desperate Dan's chin.
VARIOUS GROOVERS ON GROLSCH: Mo' Jazz
IF DISCO was the techno of the '70s, then jazz-funk was the decade's chill out.
This compilation, mostly recorded recently, despite an inevitably dated feel, holds all the usual advantages and disadvantages of the genre: a mild manner, a certain tricksiness, a breezy cool, a little too chilled.
Includes The Brand New Heavies (inevitably), Snowboy (ditto), New Jersey Kings, and various other parties.
Certainly a relief after a hundred techno tracks: this stuff is as good as anything.
VARIOUS PENSIONERS ON ZIMMER FRAMES: For Dancers Forever
TWENTY-FIVE Northern Soul dance numbers cut a lifetime ago, largely lifted from the ‘For Dancers Only’ and ‘For Dancers Also’albums and as essential for the '60s soul fan today as it ever was.
Try Mary Love's delicious ‘You Turned My Bitter Into Sweet’, Lowell Fulsom's ridiculous ‘My Aching Back’(poor Lowell is as good a lover as any younger man, he moans in pain) and the Brilliant Corners' ‘Three Lonely Guys’, a record that owes a fiver to Sam Cooke's ‘Another Saturday Night’.
Doubtless antique to today's 140 BPM dancers.
VARIOUS SMOOTHIES ON MARTINI: Classic Mellow 2
A HALFWAY-decent compilation of '70s and '80s soggy soul.
On the plus side, The Dramatics' ‘Whatcha See Is Whatcha Get’, The Mary Jane Girls' ‘All Night Long’ and former Temptation Dennis Edwards being all masterful on ‘Don't Look Any Further’.
On the minus side, everything else; particularly Ray Parker Jr's dire ‘I Don't Think That Man Should Sleep Alone’.
All donations to the ‘Send Ray Parker Jr a teddy bear’ appeal gratefully received.
Frankie Paul enjoys hitting your aural G-spot
The ubiquitous inevitable and tricksy Brand New Heavies
ELECTRONICALLY TESTED
The NME team's pick of the month's best LPs
THROWING MUSES
Red Heaven
LIBERATED FROM the constraints of a trad group therapy session, Kristen Hersh sounds at once happy with her lot and tremendously fired up.
This is Throwing Muses' no fannying-about ROCK album, the band hunched like gargoyles over their instruments, knocking 50 varieties of shit out of them.
VARIOUS
Dub House Disco — This Is What Guerilla Is About
GUERILLA ARE to dance music what Creation are to Brit indie guitar pop.
React To Rhythm, Superreal, and Spooky are all a sophisticated hybrid of US and European influences, shot through with a dub sensibility and turned into a driving, expanded hypnodance sound.
JULIANA HATFIELD
Hey Babe
BLAKE BABIES singer Juliana has released a record that's spacier than her band efforts, but has the same breezy, poignant quality.
As well as the tender melodies, you get snatches of biting lyrics that build an aura of strength about her personality.
If she'd been on 4AD, she'd be given the same amount of attention as the Muses, Pixies or Breeders.
BABES IN TOYLAND
Fontanelle
BASICALLY, THESE are the blues after they got molested, divested and all but drowned in the swamps; to this end the Babes are the inheritors of The Birthday Party's unholy rule book.
But ‘Fontanelle’ is not a grimness trip, where faces are rubbed with slurry until they cough in submission.
They make hate sound like fun!
SUGAR
Copper Blue
THIS IS Mould, for the first time since his epic ‘Workbook’ album, recapturing the sense of the definitive: the last word in love songs and the full stop after heartbreak.
The days of the Hüskers are gone.
All that needs saying is that Mould is back with a razor sharp cleaver, a new band, a re-tuned view of the uneven-ness of life.
BLADE
Survival Of The Hardest Workin'
BLADE IS a sussed DIY street rapper who tells it like it is, never dreaming of softening the edges to the social and economic fractures that are his life.
This mini-album, a work-in-progress affair, shows that only Black Radical Mk II comes to mind as a UK rapper that's as articulate with his rage.
PAUL WELLER
Paul Weller
THIS IS the best thing he's done since he binned the golf shoes and invented frothy coffee.
Most things are played with conviction and have neat tunes, and if nothing here changes your life, it's a decent record for a bastard hot sticky day.
Bring on the Pimm's because Paul Weller is back.
Nearly.
POP WILL EAT ITSELF
The Looks Or The Lifestyle
THEIR TITLES are still mad and they're still nastier than anyone really needs to be.
This is a huge disaster zone, a nightmare of monstrous proportions.
Nose-thumbing and impolite, chaotic and renegade to the last, it explains exactly why the Poppies aren't as big as Nirvana.
 It's a shame they're not.
EPMD
Business Never Personal
LISTENING TO this record is like hearing a whole ordinary album on the stereo of a passing BMW.
The music is untouchable, managing to retain clarity in an oppressively dense mix — the sleevenotes call it ‘hardcore P-funk from the basement type shit’.
It's like a nightmarish Prince B-side played at 33 with fluff on the needle.
TOM WAITS
Bone Machine
HE'S DOING a few things differently this time; he says the album was recorded in a shed and he's used waste metal for percussion, but elsewhere he's shuffled further down memory lane.
The lyrical beauty of the ballads recall the piano bar raconteur of ‘Foreign Affair’, even if the recurring theme appears to be death.
WRITE SAID FRED
EDITED BY THE INFO-MOUS FRED DELLAR
GRETTON'S CATALOGUE!
Could you supply A CERTAIN RATIO's plans for the near future?
North of the border we've heard nothing since ‘27 Forever’ last Christmas, though I believe a limited edition 12″ was released in March.
Please enlighten me as to the whereabouts of THE OTHER TWO album, which was supposed to emerge earlier this year.
Also, will Stephen and Gillian be joining Bernard and Peter for a New Order single soon?
Forward Rob Gretton, supremo of Rob's Records (ACR's current label) and manager of New Order.
‘ACR will have a new album, ‘Up In Downsville’, out through Rob's Records in October.
This will be preceded by a single, ‘Mellow’, remixed by M People.
As for Steve and Gillian, their album will also be coming out, on Factory, during October, the first single being ‘Moving On’.
Currently Steve and Gillian are working with New Order, who are recording an album.
It's hoped that the album will be completed by the end of this month and will be out early next year.’
Gretton launched Rob's Records in late 1990 via ‘Security’, a single by Beat Club remixed by Bernard Sumner.
Since then there have been various releases from Beat Club, ACR, Sub Sub and The Flamingoes, both The Beat Club and Sub Sub fashioning soon-to-be-released albums.
As for ACR, a full discography will be appearing on this page in the next couple of weeks.
WHERE'S DES RES?
Whatever happened to THE RESIDENTS' American Composers Series?
They originally said they'd be covering the works of 20 composers over the period 1984–2000 but, so far, I only know of the LPs ‘George And James’(Gershwin and Brown) and ‘Stars And Hank Forever’(Sousa and Hank Williams).
In recent years the band seem to have diverted themselves on to projects like ‘God In Three Persons’ and ‘The King And Eye’.
So has the series been abandoned?
I'm really surprised that you expect something logical from an outfit that released their second album well in the wake of their third.
But as there's a whole discourse on the subject in the September 4 edition of Goldmine , I suppose that interest thrives regarding the sons of the mysterious N Senada.
Apart from the ‘George And James’ and ‘Stars And Hank Forever’album,Goldmine claims that the project got no further than the ‘It's A Man's Man's Man's World’video and 45, adding: ‘It's not quite clear whether or not The Residents ever got to work on Volume Three — which would have featured the compositions of Bob Dylan and Sun Ra — but leftovers from the earlier volumes occasionally crop up as rare treats, such as‘I'm So Lonesome I Could Cry’on the ‘Potatoes’folk song composition.’
For further enlightenment, contact EWEWEB (Enigmatic Willie's Enlightenment Webb Of Eyeball Buddies) and enclose a International Reply Coupon.
CALE, CALE ROCK ‘N’ ROLL!
J CALE's laconic blend of rock, Country and blues has been influencing the way other axemen think for years.
For reference, check out Mark Knopfler or Clapton, whose staple repertoire has included Cale's ‘After Midnight’ and ‘Cocaine’.
Now signed to Silvertone, Cale's about to release his tenth album, craftily titles ‘No 10’.
Previous albums have included  the first eight now on Mercury, the final couple on Silvertone.
You'd like to possess all ten albums on CD wouldn't you?
And YOU CAN!
Just jot down Cale's home base on a postcard.
Is it (A) Tulsa, Oklahoma,(B) Nashville, Tennessee, or (C) Austin, Texas?
Forward the answer to CALE'S NO 10  And even if your card is not the first hauled from the bag, you might still prove a winner, because NME has 20 COPIES of a special promo three-track CD, ‘Lonesome Town’ /‘Low Rider’/‘Passion’, to hand over to runners-up.
So get sending those cards now.
The closing date for the competition is September 24.
'BOOT BEAUTS
Following on from reader S Brady's letter concerning unreleased early tracks from U2, I have some added information on the subject.
About 1986, I purchased two seven-inch bootleg EPs from an Edinburgh record fair.
Titled ‘U2 — The Unforgettable Demos’, Volume One is on blue vinyl and contains ‘Into The Light’, ‘Another Time Another Place’, ‘The Dream Is Over’ and ‘Shadows And Tall Trees’, while Volume Two is on orange vinyl and features ‘Out Of The Living World’, ‘A Day Without Me’, ‘Silent Planet’and ‘Dream Vision’.
These demos were released in 1985, just after the release of ‘The Unforgettable Fire’, but were recorded either in 1978 or 1979, presumably at the sessions Barry Devlin produced at Dublin's Windmill Lane Studios or those produced by Chas de Whalley.
Incidentally, the track listing is somewhat  inaccurate , for ‘Into The Light’ is probably ‘Alone In The Night’; ‘Out Of The Living World’is definitely ‘The Fool’and ‘Silent Planet’is ‘Judith’, while ‘Dream Vision’is actually ‘Street Missions’, the first song that Bono ever wrote.
I'd be pleased if you could print my full name and address so that S Brady (or anyone else) could confirm or extend my info on this subject.
I'll pass on this one and leave interested parties to contact John Watson, though I guess it's worth adding that NME's ‘Dancing Master’ cassette is now a collector's item mainly because it contains a live U2 cut, ‘An Cut Dubh’, recorded in March, 1981 and unavailable on an authorised recording.
Noodle noodle noodle…
JJ Cale with the prototype Knopfler headband
DISCOGRAPHY
MADNESS
‘With all this Madness hype in the air, is there any chance of a completely Nutty discography?’ requested reader Simon Kelso, of Guildford, Surrey.
Which is why we're meeting here at this very spot.
No need to go on about the band in this preamble.
Better that it's used to revamp the old chestnut about ‘how many electricians does it take to change a lightbulb?’ in the form of ‘how many reissues does it take to relaunch a band's career?’
Take, for instance, the case of Labi Siffre's ‘It Must Be Love’, a UK Top Five single for Madness in 1981.
Re-released by Old Gold in 1988, the record sold well but was only aimed at a collectors and oldie jukebox market.
A new breakthrough should have been made in mid-1989, when the track was used as a theme to the Jeff Goldblum/Rowan Atkinson movie The Tall Guy , in which Suggs made an appearance.
Virgin duly made the appropriate rerelease but nothing happened.
So there was a further delay in operations until February this year, when the single made yet another appearance and ultimately made a reacquaintance with the UK Top Ten, sparking off talks of that Madness reunion.
So what made the difference?
I dunno.
But it does seem that if you keep re-delivering the right kind of goods, there'll come a time when the customers start queuing all over again.
Encouraging news for those who re-run and re-package at frequent intervals.
Mad not sad: here are the young men
NME GIG GUIDE
Britain's best and biggest gig list, compiled by FIONA FOUGAR.
Send your dates to NME Gig Guide 
To ensure publication your dates should reach us at least 14 DAYS before our cover date.
Please send a telephone number for all venues with your listings.
THROWING MUSES, whose warmly-received new 4AD LP ‘Red Heaven’ shot to the top of the indie charts, forge ahead with their British tour this week.
Now slimmed to the three-piece line-up of Kristen Hersh, David Narcize and Bernard Georges, they play London's Town & Country Club .
Support on all this week's dates comes from Pond, with Unrest joining the bill for the London show.
SMASHING PUMPKINS celebrate the release of their new single, ‘I Am The One’, through Hut Records with a string of British shows this week.
The Chicago quartet follow their Reading Festival appearance with dates at Manchester .
Support on all dates comes from LA's Medicine.
LIVE
Edited by Simon Williams
NICK CAVE
MOOSE
THE VEGAS tat, the bandanas, the ‘maturity’ of much of the audience, all this tells you that this is not your standard T-shirt rock gig.
This is the first of NME 's eight-night stint at the Town & Country Club in conjunction with the Spastics Society and there's a palpable sense of occasion, fuelled by rumours that Old Nick has something up his frilly sleeve.
But first, Moose.
Bad associations cling unfairly to this troupe.
Fake indie label, one-syllable name, unfortunate ‘shoe-gazing’ connotations.
But Moose are weathering the cold winds of Indifference well, chiefly by releasing their best single yet (‘Little Bird’) and a debut album full of interesting moments.
They begin with a lukewarm rendition of their second single ‘Suzanne’ and exude a self-conscious hesitancy, although I'm told they're a roaring juggernaut of assurance compared to their earlier live self.
But Moose have got steadily better as they've gone along and arrived at a winsome pop style not a million miles from Lloyd Cole.
All the new stuff is pretty cool, even if there is the odd bit of useless indie thrash.
‘Everybody's Talkin'’ is a brave stab at an Olympian song.
The guitar player's cardigan costs £39.99 from Next.
When Nick and the Bad Seeds take the stage though, the cosiness of most indie pop is shown up for what it is in the harsh light of some feral and shadowy music.
I've never subscribed to the deification of Nick cave and still don't subscribe to the theory that says ‘difficult’ or ‘dark’music is somehow better than squeaky-clean pop, but ‘The Mercy Seat’and ‘The Good Son’automatically establish a tone of commanding bleakness, Cave scuttling the stage like a wretch possessed and the band striking bunslinger poses.
Perched on a stool, he intones a seriously grave ‘Christian The Astonishing’ whilst Blixa Bargeld leads the morbid singalong of ‘The Weeping Song’.
Having never given a tinker's cuss about The Pogues, I don't share in the general mayhem that greets Shane MacGowan's stumble-on for a mumble through a sickly ‘Wonderful World’.
After this freak show, we are led inexorably to what everyone has waited for; the re-assemblage of The Birthday Party for a mini-greatest hits package of ‘Dead Joe’, ‘Wild World’, and ‘Nick The Stripper’.
If this music was used on Tibetan detainees, Amnesty would rightly ban it, but I can see, if not enjoy, its twitching, cataleptic power.
Cave returns to demonic crooner mode for ‘The Ship Song’ and a withering ‘Tupelo’.
Not being an obsessive gives me the benefit of clear sight.
And I can tell you that there is something in Cave's music, something black and unnameable, that's becoming an increasingly rare commodity in modern rock.
I wouldn't want to hear it every night, but tonight it took the breath away with its doomed glamour.
A good night for the low-life.
It's our party and he'll cry if he wants to!
Old Nick gives it hell at Viva Eight
Nick and Shane: was it something they eight?
KINGMAKER
GALLON DRUNK
THERE IS a notice hung at the side of the stage which reads: ‘You are in an area where the sound level may exceed 95dba.
Earplugs are available from the bar on request.’
For a band like Gallon Drunk, earplugs should be standard issue.
Gallon Drunk are an aural offence.
They are also the greasy old retro pimps it's OK to like, a bunch of seedy would-be Lynch subjects who happen to be one of the most important groups in Britain today.
No other contemporary band is this fiercely unique or devilishly immediate.
No other band can take an already macabre melody, violate it beyond humanity and then somehow spit out a bona fide song which such contemptuous animosity.
Tonight is the hate explosion of '92: with this London four-piece, anger exists on a fairly primal level.
James Johnston's hellish screams, torrid streams of abuse and vehement playing sever all traces of decency, and unless you're familiar with obscure (and now practically obsolete) bands like Silver Apples, you're able to experience a whole new and distinctive way to appreciate the feral and  f—ed -up.
The NME Viva Eight concerts are co-sponsored by Brylcreem.
Just thought I'd mention it.
Kingmaker's anger is more erudite.
Poker-faced, wired, clenched-fist and serious.
They question everything, accept nothing, and won't be satisfied until they've burnt the entire house down.
They also make more noise than two iron foundries having a fight.
What a shame then that, post haircut, Loz now looks like Clive Dunn playing Grandad.
He actually resembles the working class hero he's always  striven to be, the ‘Armchair Anarchist’ with a bottle of light ale in one hand and an incendiary device in the other.
Bassist Myles has also had a word with Viva Eight's co-sponsors, all slicked back and ready to storm the school hall.
Although the venue is not as packed as the previous night's (happy) Birthday Party bash, those who have ventured out tonight are a partisan faction in regulation red ‘Eat Yourself Whole’ shirts.
In the broad scheme of things, Kingmaker are as important as Suede.
OK, so they've had more than one single out, buy anyone who's ready to dismiss them as past-it stroppy brats is wrong — they're in tune with reality and still nowhere near their peak.
For all of Suede's delicate nuances, both bands basically play guitar-based rock and are hell-bent on injecting danger and provocation into the charts.
On a stage draped in regal red velvet and gold  tassels , Kingmaker deliver the old faithfuls whilst mixing in new material from their forthcoming album.
And, against all odds (nerves, power failures, nothing to promote, TV camera pressure, awful posters), they pull it off tremendously.
Songs like ‘High As A Kite’, ‘Drop The Bomb’ and ‘Highway's Gate’scrape the sky and then bring it crashing down to earth.
When Loz finds the solutions to the problems that clearly weigh heavy on his shoulders — and a new hairdresser — the Kingmaker campaign could wind up at Wembley.
Viva hate!
Ale and Hearty: Kingmaker's Loz models the ‘Armchair Anarchist’ look
SCREAMING TREES
THOSE OF the opinion that rock ‘n’ roll is a soft option are advised to cast a cynical glance at the Screaming Trees.
Singer Mark Lanegan and bass chap Van Conner are both suffering foot injuries and consequently hobble on to the narrow confines of the Powerhaus stage.
These recently acquired spoils of war, added to the Trees' well-documented generosity of girth and a general world-weariness alarming for men only in their mid-20s, lend the impression that a lifetime's shift down that proverbial coal mine would be a less gruelling occupation.
Until, that is, the Screaming Trees play.
Suddenly, the circumstantial shackles are banished and this hirsute foursome wings scarcely precedented amounts of beauty and pathos from their thunderous psycho-grunge blueprint.
It's all down to the Trees' happy marriage of some notable individual virtuosity to a clear shared vision of where his multi-layered trip is headed.
Drummer Barrett Martin lays down a dauntingly hard-but-fair rhythm manifesto, while Gary Lee Conner is the band's only obvious showman, a tangle of sweat, hair and punkoid Townshend windmill routines who, even when horizontal, somehow managed to keep his act on the rails for such intricate anthemic lullabies as ‘Bed Of Roses’ or ‘Shadows’, the opening nugget from the new ST album.
That most of these songs seem designed to soothe a troubled soul is down to Lanegan's croon, a remarkable vocal instrument that posits Leonard Cohen as stadium rock god.
As a physical presence, Lanegan is oddly compelling for a man who clings solemnly to the mic stand throughout, breaking off only occasionally to reach for a glass or perform his quaint little bop routine at the outset of ‘Nearly Lost You’, another gast-flabbering newie.
It might be crass to describe Screaming Trees as The Cult Without The Stupid Bits, but they do have a rare knack of crafting glorious, quite literally classic heavy rock without resorting to the pompous clichés.
This partly explains why they've been struggling on for around six years now, but is no excuse in the current climate for them not gaining some long overdue recognition.
Hey — go down to the woods today and you're sure of a fairly stupendous surprise.
AUTOBAHN STORMERS!
KITCHENS OF DISTINCTION
KITCHENS SINGER Patrick Fitzgerald has a way with egotistical comments: ‘Our tour manager's fallen right down-to-earth,’ he beams at one point during tonight's proceedings.
‘He's worked with The Smiths, The Sundays and the Valentines — now look at him!’
The Death Of Cool?
Let's bloody hope so.
This is part of a whistle-stop ‘tour’ of Europe, encompassing a grand total of three dates — all separated by several light years of van travel.
The jaunt from last night's Brussels show has taken a nifty eight hours, guitarist Julian Swales is grumbling about his stubble, and Patrick is off and running again, revealing what bargains a young man can get for ten deutschmarks in a darkened back room in Hamburg's reeperbahn.
Yeah, this is a family paper, but…
Anyone got any spare German currency I could borrow?
The good news is that, aside from being squashed into a tour van, the Kitchens Of Distinction are back on top form again after the various disasters surrounding their last UK tour.
Plagues by troubles with management, record companies and poor audience turn-outs — not to mention the agony of seeing their ‘Breathing Fear’ 45 being weighted out of the Top 75 by Gallup — band talk during the summer revolved around emigrating to the States and leaving ‘them’all behind.
Ironically enough, the main reason for the collective's buoyant humour (they're all Harry Enfield jokes and Kenneth Williams double entendres ) is a forthcoming trip across the Atlantic for a five week make-or-break binge, headlining a package bill with — get this, Pop Kids — Bleach and Kingmaker!
See, in America they're being touted as (cough, splutter)‘The New Smiths’, which presumably has nothing to do with The New Seekers and a lot to do with, ‘Hey, these guys are  grreaat  !’
And, as Hamburg so feverishly proves, they are.
History is somehow proving that Kitchens Of Distinction are a valid fusion of the (early) '80s and '90s, where spiky, overcoated rock meets effects-stunned pop and gets on, miserably.
In a joyous way, naturally.
The fundamental difference between themselves and their supposed shoe-gazy contemporaries is that the Kitchens don't hide behind a wall of noise: they cherish it, ride it, f—k it up.
The louder Julian's guitar gets, the more violent Patrick's vocals become.
Anger is an energy, and Kitchens Of Distinction are buzzing with outrage and tragedy and all those emotions that floppy indie sorts would faint in front of it trapped in a lift with them.
So the K-Mart chain in the UK has banned a book on AIDS because it's ‘obscene’.
So ‘Hammer’, a tempestuous saga of death by lustful adventure should be picked up by a Channel 4 researcher and used on an equally graphic AIDS documentary.
Sounds trite, right?
Well, pardon me for belching, but what we're talking about here is a virtually unparalleled (in this musical medium, at least) honesty and open-ness that so far has hampered the Kitchens' career like a rucksack full of rocks.
The fact that the lyrical desperation is aligned to some seethingly classic melodies is both here and there.
Look at the way old favourite ‘Four Men’ has been rebuilt and reinvented: if it sounded bold in '89 it sounds positively bionic now.
Similarly, ‘Railwayed’ and ‘Drive That Fast’incorporate these great bits of acceleration, where Patrick starts bouncing up and down and it sounds as though all of Julian's dozen effects pedals are going ‘WOOOSH!’at the same time.
The newer material, such as‘When In Heaven’ and ‘Mad As Snow’, weaves subtler spells, diving into deeper pools of pain, but it's no less ravaged or vivacious.
Come the end, the trio are hunched over their instruments, thrashing out ‘Mainly Mornings’ and ‘Hammer’like men who are having a lot of bloody good fun, actually, and even a BO beast in a ZZ Top crew T-shirt is forced to shift his Neanderthal parameters into the 20th Century for a few minutes.
Some achievement.
Beauty is in the eye of the beholder, in which case Kitchens Of Distinction are using it as a sharp stick.
‘The Death Of Cool’?
No, just the rebirth of brilliance.
The Death Of Cool…let's leave it at that
Kitchen sync: Justin flaunts his grate technique
SISTER SOULJAH
DEMOCRAT CANDIDATE Bill Clinton wants to be President of the world's only superpower — a nation capable of swatting any other off the globe at the push of a button.
And Sister Souljah has got him worried.
Sister Souljah is a black political activist turned rapper.
She has one rap —‘Killing Me Softly, Deadly Code of Silence’— which starts ‘George Bush is a terrorist’, and Bill Clinton apparently thinks she's one of the major problems facing the USA today.
Can you imagine John Major taking time out to attack Carter?
The backdrop is the controversial ‘SS’ logo painted over a prison wall on which 500 years are marked off.
A drummer in an ‘I LOVE BEING BLACK’ T-shirt beats out a rhythm, another reads a poem.
The beat drops and Sister Souljah marches on, up and down the stage, jabbing at the audience with her finger.
Her voice is double tracked and powerful, her presence utterly commanding.
This gig is part of an ‘edutainment’ organised to ‘uncelebrate’Christopher Columbus and his 1492 ‘discovery’of a continent where 100 million people already lived.
The audience is small, a few hundreds, of whom maybe a third are white.
Sister Souljah hasn't come for them.
‘Are there any AFRICANS in the house?
Somebody told me that in England there isn't any racism.
That black people in England are as free as free can be.
So I went out to get some fish and chips and they called me NIGGGGGAH!’
Raps like ‘African Scaredy Katz In A One Exit Maze’ and ‘Nigga's Gotta’are aimed solely at a black audience.
But Sister Souljah obviously strikes a chord in Liverpool, a city which contains both the oldest black community in Britain and some of the worst racism.
Not everybody here tonight is totally gung-ho.
Sister Souljah expresses opinions that jar.
She talks at great length before the title track of her album, ‘360 Degrees Of Power’ about how African men shouldn't go with ‘the other woman’, meaning white women.
A multi-racial couple in the crowd look distinctly uneasy.
Does she know exactly how many ‘mixed’ marriages there are in a city like Liverpool?
And are you surprised that a society which discriminates so much on the basis of race produces radicals like Sister Souljah, who sees race as the bottom line and ‘weasel’ whites as the problem?
That if you play the game of divide and rule long enough then you end up with Sister Souljah?
She could be described as prejudiced but she can no more be called a racist than a rape victim who hates men can be called sexist.
She's not the problem, Bill Clinton, you and George Bush are the problem.
Sister Souljah is a powerful and dynamic performer, easily the best live rap act since The Boo Yah Tribe.
Strong, dedicated, skilful, passionate, intelligent and as angry as hell.
You're going to hear a lot more about her — and you may not like a lot of what you hear.
ROLLERSKATE SKINNY
ROLLERSKATE SKINNY sound like hyperactive urchins who've had one bottle of Strongbow too many and been let loose in the local guitar shop.
The four fresh-faced Dubliners scream and screech their way through a sprawling four-song set, suggesting a messy amalgam of My Bloody Valentine (guitarist Jim, it turns out, is Kevin Shield's younger brother) and Sonic Youth.
Backed by the incessant thud of a drum machine, it's only these electric rhythms that prevent them from tumbling into disorder.
The aura of chaos is furthered by the band's weird demeanour: each member seems to be shuffling to a different beat, while scruffy frontman Ken staggers around the stage, tugging at his hair and letting rip with bloodcurdling screams whenever the fancy takes him.
All of which is crucial to Rollerskate Skinny's strange appeal.
Their feedback-drenched fog makes it almost impossible to discern anything resembling a tune, and each song coasts along for upwards of five minutes — but it's precisely their avoidance of career-minded polish that makes them so invigorating.
Tonight's highlights, ‘Cushy Daughter’ and ‘Complacency’, may be short on hooklines, melodies and technical competence, but they're the kind of frenetic noise-outs whose energy is utterly infectious.
Given time, Rollerskate Skinny may well mature into the kind of discipline outfit who could give the American noise set a run for its money.
For now, their impudent, untutored music stands as a shining example of talent as yet untainted by the demands of The Man.
In short, they're the sort of people who'd make Dire Straits fans, buyers of ‘Spirit Of Ecstasy’ compilations and Q journalists turn white.
If you've got any sense, you'll love them.
SCRASH FACTORY CIRCUS
FACTORY CIRCUS look like the result of a particularly sadistic fashion designer's bad acid trip.
Colour clashes which would make Timmy Mallet vomit on sight are the order of the night, and the music is an equally mixed bag, although it is peppered with enough goodies to eat between meals without ruining your appetite.
At their best they combine funky chugs of hyperactive bass with agonised guitar and belt-across-the-chops vocals which verge on the schizophrenic.
When this is augmented by oddly tangential keyboard sounds it's an enjoyable little maelstrom to be caught up in.
Their combination of styles can lead to blandness occasionally, but when the Circus throw caution to the wind they can be both powerful and inventive.
The same applies to Scrash, although they're about as glamorous as a donkey on Skegness beach and marginally less attractive.
However, wild horses couldn't drag them away from the task in hand tonight, namely lowering the floor six feet with every beat.
They go about this by jumping up and down a lot and cranking the drum machine up to unfeasible volumes.
Perhaps unsurprisingly, considering the patronage they have enjoyed from Clint & Co, they're dead ringers for the Poppies.
To be fair, though, there's just as much of mad Al Jourgenson's influence in their sample-laden industrial ear-bashers, coming with a good 50 per cent more hate than your regulation grebo fare.
Scrash specialise in grating guitars to set your teeth on edge and thundering, bass-heavy rhythm to send your bowels through your trousers.
But that doesn't deprive them of their fair share of malignant little blisters full of pop to inflict on their potential audience, who may soon be buying their T-shirts and phlegm samples by the lorry load.
HENRY ROLLINS
WORD IS out that Henry Rollins is more than just an ugly face.
The ex-lead singer of Black Flag has established for himself a reputation as punk rock's answer to Peter Ustinov.
Look at the faces of this young crowd who sit entranced at Henry's wit and wisdom.
Is he in danger of becoming the hardcore guru?
Imagine discovering him sat cross-legged and naked atop a mountain of skulls.
‘Master, we have found you, please sign this Black Flag album.’
‘GET THE  F— OFF MY MOUNTAIN!’
There is a buzz about Rollins right now, since he has achieved amongst grungers the kind of semi-legendary status that his self-proclaimed nemesis, M-M-M-orrissey, enjoys amongst clinically depressed onanists, cat-rapers and young Conservatives.
Henry takes the stage in a  f—ed -up black T-shirt tucked into  f—ed -up shorts atop hideous Essex Man/Cliff-from- Cheers white socks and rolls straight into a monologue about posing for a high fashion magazine dressed like a regurgitated dog's brunch.
Somehow this leads into nearly meeting Morrissey backstage, taunting Nazi skinheads in Florida, discussing racism with Dion and his mother's new-found blissed-out approach to life:
Mom: ‘How are you, Henry?’
Henry: ‘I WANNA KILL THE WHOLE WORLD!’
Mom: ‘Oh look everybody, Henry's doing an anger thing!’
He's slick.
His timing and his mimicry are superb.
He has the audience hooting with laughter and then within seconds, shocked into silence.
Where Rollins is taking his spoken word performances is anybody's guess.
At the moment he's just short of achieving the rigid intensity of Eric Bogosian at his best.
To finish, Henry takes the crowd gently through the day when he and his best friend, Joe Cole, were stopped in the street by kids with guns.
Henry lives to tell the story.
His friend doesn't.
Henry then talks about ‘the truth’ and the Californian Lifestyle Philosophy Bullshit Detectors — the noise NYUP!
NYUP!
NYUP! goes off in a couple of hundred limey brains — and are ignored.
Because it is patently obvious that Rollins is not bullshitting or manipulating.
He is being honest and honesty is such a rare quality in a performer that the audience are stunned.
Rapturous applause.
Bang.
Henry's out of here.
DF 118
FRESH FROM the wreckage of semi-legendary crusties Radical Dance Faction, DF 118 peddle a similar line in guitar-laced dub.
To their credit, they've all but ditched RDF's cringeworthy word polemics, giving a greater role to singer Linda Goodman and infusing almost all their songs with a wealth of nightmarish samples.
The resulting mixture of haunting female vocals and high-tech clatter is surprisingly intoxicating, and the brew is strengthened by DF 118's penchant for metallic slabs of guitar that turn tunes like ‘Blasphemy’ and ‘Kinky Sex’(!) into wonderfully menacing beasts.
Each of the six songs aired tonight moves through repetitive, bass-heavy passages, seductive segments in which Linda steers the band into more melodic territory and shocking moments when power chords suddenly cut through the mesmeric grooves and things take on an atmosphere of nervy unpredictability.
Every offering seems to contain at least four separate songs — so there's rarely any danger of things descending into the kind of tedium often purveyed by dreadlocked squat-dwellers.
True, DF 118's predilection for improvisation results in one yawn-inducing instrumental howler entitled ‘Preacher Dub’(foolishly placed at the start of the set), and they're daft enough to return to clichéd ranting on '60 Seconds’; but by the time proceedings close with ‘Chainsaw’, they're looking like people who could take on more established named and win hands down.
Hard-faced, eclectic and distinctly dance-friendly, DF 118 are Pop Will Eat Itself on bad drugs, Big Audio Dynamite with a ring of low-rent authenticity and much more besides.
Sounds good, doesn't it?
LUNG
NATIVE NEW Zealanders and erstwhile Peel favourites, Lung are a frustratingly nondescript experience in a live setting.
I dare say their dabblings in a wide pool of indie noise styles would gel more effectively on record, but tonight it's just directionless and dull.
I suspect the singer is angry about something — maybe he's warning the kids of impending war and pestilence — but the lyrics are indecipherable and the mood is never really constant so the anger rarely comes across.
You half expect their quiet moments to be a mere ‘quiet before the storm’ intro to some Metallica prog-thrash epic about hellspawn putrefaction, but then they meander into Sonic Youth discordant territory, then suddenly it's walls of sonic bliss, then it's off into a sample-aided, arse-quaking, ‘Die asshole  muthaf—er ’industrial rant, then some tedious feedback wanking then…erm, that's it.
Hey, thanks for trying, but maybe I'll just go back to bed with my cocoa and my Simply Red CD, if you don't mind awfully.
Lung are never short of ideas, but their appeal is seriously limited because they give us a small taste of everything on their creative menu but seldom enough of one thing to really satisfy.
I'm sure there's artistic merit in plentiful supply here, but would a little entertainment be too much to ask?
MAGNA-FICENT!
MAGNAPOP
RADIOHEAD
STRANGE ONE, this.
A brace of bands — one from each side of the Atlantic — who perhaps aren't as ‘credible’ or (shucks)‘cool’as certain fringe-flicking contemporaries, striving to clamber up pop's league table.
Yeah, in soccer terms this is like Norwich City versus QPR.
And look where they are.
Out of all the dark horses currently flogging themselves around the circuit, Oxford's Radiohead are more shadowy than most.
A fraught fivesome with ants in their pants and, presumably, cockroaches in their coat pockets, they're all about threats and menace and a three-guitar assault which owes rather a lot to tykes like the Pixies but has absolutely no intention of paying the buggers back.
They've also got a song called ‘Creep’(the next single, natch), which has a habit of making innocent bystanders go, ‘Jeez, what the  f— is THAT?’
It's lovely in a thoroughly vile way, full of self-contempt, swearing (remember, these people are on EMI) and marvellously evil clanging bits from guitarist Johnny Greenwood.
Surround those splendid three minutes with plenty of screaming, attitude with a capital ‘TUDE’ and a song called ‘Anyone Can Play Guitar’and it's apparent that Radiohead are at least halfway towards realising some worryingly aggressive ambitions.
A cathartic education, anyone?
If Radiohead's singular problem lies in the sheer obviousness of their line of attack, Magnapop confuse by being so blatantly obvious in a bloody weird way.
Look at singer Linda Hopper, quite literally hopping on the spot and grinning like a hyena in an amyl nitrate factory.
Then listen to the guitar of Ruth Morris, bellowing over in the corner like a love-lorn brontosaurus.
Then think…say what??
It's like Belinda Carlisle fronting Mudhoney, or Clare Grogan grooving with Therapy?, or Gary Lineker leading out a Japanese league team.
Oh, sorry — that last one was too ridiculous.
The point is that tonight — Magnapop's UK debut — is peppered with punky teenage licks and festering grungy rumbles, yet just as one expects lyrics concerning death, drinking and corporate rock shagging, Linda hops, hiccups and beams, ‘Won't you let me walk you home from school? /Can I meet you at the pool?’
So she's more to do with bobbysox blues than sex'n'drugs'n'booze, but there's no hiding from the fact that Magnapop as a whole are capable of creating some genuinely horrible noises.
The vibrant meets the violent and dozens grin at a joke they're not quite sure they understand.
Hope springs eternal.
Pirates of the airwaves: Radiohead kick your granny's tranny in
At the Hopper…looks more like a Go Go
EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES
WHAT'S IN A NAME?
On stand duty at a recent careers convention, my distant thoughts were interrupted by approach of a young bloke enquiring as to where he could find PCL.
After somewhat flippantly suggesting that he head a couple of hundred miles south to the banks of the River Thames, I pointed him in the direction of a purple clad stand just two along from our own.
There in gold lettering on the regal back-drop were the words ‘The University of Westminster’.
Yes it's true, the Polytechnic of Central London has completely changed identity.
And very impressive it looks and sounds too.
So what is going on in the world of higher education today?
How can a perfectly well established institution change its name overnight and why should it?
The answer is that the new identities are just one of a number of changes taking place in higher education.
Changes which, whilst they may be confusing to those of you seeking a place at university, poly or college, also offer advantages for all.
All over the country, polytechnics and colleges have been applying to the Privy Council for approval of their new titles.
So Liverpool Poly is now Liverpool John Moores University, the Dorset Institute of Higher Education in sunny Poole is known as the University of Bournemouth, and the Thames Polytechnic has gone decidedly up-market by becoming the University of Greenwich.
These name changes result from reforms being put into place by the Government to broaden access to higher education and to remove the barriers that have traditionally existed between the ‘academic’ and ‘vocational’higher educational routes.
A key factor in this process is the elimination of the artificial distinction or ‘binary line’ between universities on  the one hand and polytechnics and colleges on the other.
The binary line originated with the creation of the polytechnics which were established primarily to provide vocationally oriented studies in higher education equal in status to that accorded academic studies.
Now, the new framework being put into place has allowed the title of ‘university’ to be extended to any polytechnic which wishes to use it.
In the meantime, major institutions were also granted the power to award their own degrees.
In the past, only the universities had this power, leaving polytechnics and colleges to award their degrees via the almost defunct Council for National Academic Awards (CNAA).
The route that we at Buckinghamshire College have chosen to take though, is to become an accredited college of Brunel University.
This means that we can still operate as an independent entity with our own, in some cases, unique courses and programmes, but we have the backing of a highly reputable university.
All students who graduate from the Buckinghamshire College from 1993 onwards will receive Brunel University degrees — nobody can deny that this  isn't going to look good on the CV!
So, in summary, a university is still a university, a poly can now call itself a university and award its own degrees, and colleges of higher education may, in some instances, stay as colleges, but issue university degrees.
What this illustrates is that you can't take an institution at face value any more and certainly shouldn't select or dismiss an institution on your (or your  parents' ) first impression.
In spite of this potential confusion, the changes that the Government is introducing are a positive step forward in broadening access to higher education.
This doesn't mean that any Tom, Dick or Sheila can get a degree — far from it — stringent measures are being taken to ensure quality control.
However, young people and adults who have the necessary intellectual competence, motivation and maturity to benefit from higher education (even if they don't have three top grade ‘A’ Levels to prove it) are being allowed to do so.
You can't say fairer than that!
The fact of the matter is that we, as a country, desperately need to catch up with our counterparts in Europe, in the USA and in Japan, when it comes to the level of qualification held by the workforce.
The signs are that this is starting to happen.
In 1979, only one young person in eight went on to higher education.
Today, it is one in five.
By the year 2000, the Government wants to see one in three school leavers entering a university or college.
They want to encourage latecomers to consider the possibilities of higher education too.
It's not unusual nowadays to see ex-bricklayers returning to college after 10 years hard labour to study for computing degrees or for ex-secretaries to take a completely different direction and to join a furniture restoration course.
With the breakdown of the artificial barrier which has for too long divided an academic education from vocational one, there are opportunities for all — provided you're intelligent enough to sort out the colleges from the universities from the polytechnics that is.
CHARTS
Repel!
Repel!
It's Monster Magnet
The Bells, The Bells!:
Oldfield's back!
For he's a jolly good Weller
Duh!
Brian Wilson tries to remember when it was ‘Nice’
Behind you!
The God-like genius of Anita Harris
Blam!
Richard Roundtree cocks up as Shaft
FRED FACT
STEPIN FETCHIT has a lot to answer for.
To the movie-goers of the late '20s and '30s, the gangly, open-mouthed black, whose every second line appeared to be ‘Yes, Massa’, epitomised his race.
Hollywood black males were perceived as an amiable lot, eye-rolling, singin'n'jiving, ever ready to provide a shoeshine, while bandanas were obligatory for the female of the species — and if they spoke in a tiny, cutesy voice like Butterfly McQueen, then so much the better.
With the coming of '60s black power, Tinseltown revised its attitude.
Suddenly, black movies became Malcolm X-rated and Richard Roundtree appeared, not as some hat-tipping descendant of Uncle Remus, but as Shaft, a dark avenger, unstoppable, sex-sharp, streetwise and as cool as a Harlem icebox in December.
He also came kitted out with his very own soundtrack theme, a funk-filled affair crafted by Isaac Hayes, that made everyone aware of his presence.
This combination of fights, action and music proved equally unstoppable (and profitable) right through the '70s, Roundtree slugging his way through a TV series and a couple of further movies, stopping, at one point, to gain the vocal assistance of The Four Tops as he blasted a gang of unfortunate slave traders.
This combination of cert hit movie and attached hit record proved too much for Hollywood to ignore.
Before long every ghetto became a set and every soundstage a jukebox.
If Roundtree shared annihilation activities with Hayes, then Ron ‘Superfly’ O'Neal made mayhem in the company of Curtis Mayfield, Robert ‘Trouble Man’Hooks achieved mass wipeout to the sound of Marvin Gaye, and Max ‘The Mack’Julien attempted all the right sexual and violent moves to the accompaniment of a score by Motown's Willie Hutch.
Not that it was all down to rippling black biceps.
Someone, somewhere, figured out that a shapely, karate-dispensing ebony superwoman wouldn't be at all a bad idea.
And so Tamara Dobson became Cleopatra Jones, CIA narco queen supreme, as Millie Jackson and Joe Simon warbled soulfully amid punch-ups, and Pam Grier went into the castration industry as Foxy Brown, with Willie Hutch again offering street-sound support.
Riffs equated with biffs right down the line.
And the line included such blood-bathed flicks as Tough Guys ,Slaughter's Big Pay-Off ,Across 110th Street ,Sheba Baby and Cool Breeze , the latter boasting ‘music of every kind, from rock to soul to blues, gospel and even a bit of the ‘William Tell Overture’ performed by Solomon Burke and eight of his children.
Frequently, the soundtrack was of higher quality than both plot and script — as Ice-T observed when piecing together ‘Pimps, Players And Private Eyes’, a currently in-demand import compilation that features ten of the most potent soundtrack cuts  from blaxploitation's golden age, thus fulfilling a life-long ambition.
But Jorge Hinojosa, the rapper's manager, revealed that there was just one disappointing aspect of the whole deal.
It wasn't that Ice-T never got to meet the highly desirable Coffy, whose destruction of dope dealers took place to the accompaniment of a Roy Ayers score, but rather that he and Hinojosa failed to obtain the rights to a James Brown track from the movie Black Caesar .
Wimps.
If Shaft had wanted the cut, he'd have damn well gone in and blasted ‘til someone handed it over to him.
ANGST
EDITED BY STEVEN WELLS
EVEN MORE MOZ…
ICE-T NOT EVERYONE'S HERO…
SWELLS TO JOIN TODAY?
WHY MORRISSEY SHOULD SPEAK UP NOW !
I am Asian and a big Smiths fan (from the days of '82).
I am writing to thank you for the Morrissey article.
My family and I have been subjected to unprovoked stone-throwing and spitting by gangs of youths who I presume are from right wing groups.
The music of The Smiths was a way of life for me and still is.
I never wanted to hear of Morrissey as a racist.
I agree with you on his ambiguity and the danger of flirting with such issues — you're not telling him what to write but, being an idol to many fans, he has to have sense of responsibility.
His change in direction is giving me sleepless nights.
I'm afraid my Morrissey albums will remain on the shelf.
OK, maybe I shouldn't let politics influence music, but that's how I feel now.
In fact I can't put down on paper exactly how I feel.
I watch over my shoulder just walking to the local shops.
I agree: Morrissey, stop this shit now!
Name and address withheld by request
I am, now, resigned to the fact that Morrissey, who I once loved and idolised, is a racist.
All I can do now is praise the NME for finally showing him to be the xenophobic shit that he really is.
And by the way, Steven, I did not find your views about Pakistanis very humorous.
But that might have something to do with the fact that I, myself, am Pakistani.
The reasons Morrissey got booed off the stage at the Madness gig is because the Nazis that were allowed in don't like anything remotely to do with diversity in music or anything else.
Morrissey is a product of the political climate he finds himself in, a period of the reformist Left moving to the right and the Right getting righter (ie, bigger liars and thieves).
He has to compose around something, so his isolating (once strident) individualism sets him up for a Bowiesque plummet into British nationalism and a flirtation with racism with overtures to the Nazis.
Well, Morrissey luv, the Nazis don't want you — Saturday confirmed that.
But if you bothered to ask, anyone in the Anti-Nazi League could have told you so before you got that 50p stuck in your face.
We know what happened to Judas and his pieces of silver, so don't turn traitor on your anti-racist fans 'cos then we wouldn't be able to wear our Morrissey Fans Against The Nazis badges with pride (Gay, straight or otherwise).
Up yours Suggs, why don't you condemn the attackers instead of the victim when you refer to Morrissey pulling out of the gig?
Or is it OK by you to be a Nazi and a Madness fan?
PS: F— you!
All Nazi filth out there.
MOZ MUSH MISH-MASH
As fans we would plead with Morrissey to set the record straight.
Is he racist or not?
Either way, an explanation is due.
We find racism and violence unacceptable, and we thought Moz did too…
Flirting with racism is sick, no matter who does it…
Re Mathew Evans.
Do you seriously BELIEVE in Morrissey?
Are you really oblivious to the fact that he is one of the most overrated twats of this century?…
I think you're all reading too much into the Morrissey thing as to why he wrapped himself in the Union Jack, I think he was probably just cold…
Ever heard of irony?…
Stop giving the  c- free publicity…
This is serious and healthy journalism…
As for‘flirting with skinhead imagery’, ask Swells.
He doesn't flirt with it, he takes it home and gives it a good  f—ing .
He's obviously a raging Nazi!
SOME BALANCED CRITICISM
Re Mathew Evans' nauseating letter regarding Morrissey's Finsbury Park cop-out.
His letter was probably the saddest, most pathetic six paragraphs it has ever been my misfortune to read.
‘I had waited 385 days to see him, the one I love’; ‘I love Morrissey’; ‘How could anyone be as wonderful as he is?’
Has this guy no self-respect?
He tells us how he cried and cried when he found out the Almighty Mozzer had slung his hook and  f—ed off home for a veggieburger.
What a soppy little prick.
For  f—'s sake, Morrissey is nothing more than an enormously overrated writer of terminally dull pop songs and now for some obscure reason is regarded as the new rock messiah by every spotty, snot-nosed sixth former in Britain, as well as most of the English music press who should know better.
‘I assume a lot of people will laugh at Morrissey for this…
’ Too  f—ing right they will, Mathew, my old son.
But not half as many as will laugh at you for writing such a  loathsome , snivelling letter to the NME .
You didn't even have the sense to use a false name.
TWAT!
You'll be known ever more as ‘that girly little tit who wrote the crybaby letter’.
Steven Patrick Morrissey…you tricked me.
And I thought you were a dead smart poet — once.
Certainly not a dumb patriot.
We agree on the ‘Americanisation of England’(I prefer to call it Britain) but for strictly opposite reasons.
We call it ‘cultural imperialism’ when a powerful nation imposes its views/culture/political opinions etc on a weaker nation.
Why do you think all the ex-colonies of Britain play cricket?
Apart from McDonald's, other Americanisations imported from Uncle Sam include rock ‘n’ roll, rockabilly and that 1950s Elvis quiff.
Bit like the crap you're trading on now.
Rock ‘n’ roll, by the way is Black American music…
I really do hope you're not a racist.
And what's this about ‘English language hopelessly mucked about’?
Everyone has added to/amended the English language whether it be invaders (Romans, Saxons, Normans, Americans etc) or invaded.
Did you know ‘pyjamas’ was an Indian word?
Thought as much.
This doesn't qualify you as a racist — just a bit slow.
But the skinhead shit you're flirting with is really worrying me.
I want to hear what you've got to say now 'cos at the moment it's hard enough listening to your gems to even contemplate buying what's spouting out of your Arsenal.
Show me a patriot and I'll show you an idiot.
To all the idiots who wrote almost identical letters claiming that the mere adoption of the Union flag doesn't make Morrissey a racist — of course it doesn't, nobody ever said it did.
Nor does using a skinhead backdrop — not all skins are Nazis.
But a man who makes his living playing black music suddenly sporting the flag waved on every Nazi march AND toying with skin imagery (and like or not, lads, the crop and boots HAVE been adopted by Nazis in the USA and Europe) AND writing ambiguous lyrics about an issue which brooks no ambiguity AND making idiotic remarks about blacks and black music in interviews AND hankering (in a curiously middle aged manner à la Gary Numan) after a nice, homogenous ‘England’ that never actually existed AND refusing to defend or explain himself — ALL that means, at the very least, that he's got a case to answer, surely?
You have a TV?
Haven't you seen what's happening in Germany and the rest of Europe?
Do you know about the increase of racist attacks and murders in Britain?
Don't you think that maybe it was just a teeny-weeny bit curious or stupid or disgusting that Morrissey should choose to wrap himself in the flag?
I've taken the piss out of Morrissey in the past.
Unlike most NME'ers, I'm no fan.
But his has gone well beyond mere critical posturing.
There are racist vermin out there who have always taken whatever comfort they can from any public figure that refused to come off the fence.
Come on, Morrissey!
Stop hiding behind your apologists.
Being enigmatic or ‘mysterious’ at this point in the debate is ridiculous.
Read the letters above from two of your Asian fans.
How do they make you feel?
Do you care how THEY feel?
Does the pink triangle mean anything to you?
You owe it to them and all decent people to put the record straight and slap the Nazis back into the gutter.
This isn't about some petty artistic vendetta.
It's about you failing to answer genuine questions raised by your art and, thus, surely, failing as an artist.
And to all of you who've written moaning about storms in a teacup, claiming that the mouthings of a mere pop star can have no impact on the real world, may I direct your attention to the letter below.
It's but one of several the NME has received from Nazi filth rushing to defend Morrissey and claim him as their own.
No, you don't want friends like these, Steven.
SO DO SOMETHING ABOUT IT.
I don't give a shit what you think about the NME, it's what you think about the BNP that matters.
These pages are yours, stop being a dickhead and use them — SW
Re The Morrissey debate.
What the NME fails to realise time and time again is that we whiteys have minds and therefore opinions and views of our own.
Do you truly believe that this country has really benefited from the importation of blacks, Asians etc?
Do you think for one minute that I want to live next door to a stinking curry eater or a mugging, drug-dealing, sweaty black rasta?
Of course not, you mugs.
When we really get something from the ‘street’ you can't stand it, can you?
I remember the Happy Mondays interview.
You poor sad middle-class college boy wankers.
Get a proper job, fatties.
Bring back Sounds .
Unreadable Chimpanzee Scrawl
Typing and correcting your misspelt, illiterate, moronic letter, Chimp, nearly made me sick.
As a ‘whitey’ who never went to college, here are some of my opinions.
You are so stupid that you are a fan of black music and yet hold racist views.
You are so incredibly screwed up and lonely that you feel the need to scapegoat and stereotype your neighbours.
You are so ignorant that you really believe you represent the ‘street’.
Of course Britain has benefited from black and Asian (and Greek and Italian and Arab and Jewish and Irish and…) immigration.
Who built the house you live in?
Who's your local doctor?
Who invented the music on the records you collect?
Who plays for the football team you support?
Who runs the foodery where you go after a night on the piss?
Who are the men and women you work next to every day?
Go buy yourself a book on the Holocaust, preferably one with lots of pictures.
Stop spewing shit and start thinking — SW
SLAGGING AIN'T CENSORSHIP
Wait a minute.
This is one US citizen who believes very firmly in the uninhibited freedom of expression guaranteed in the First Amendment, while not considering Ice-T a ‘living martyr’.
I'd appreciate it if you'd refrain from speaking for me.
Ice-T should be free to record whatever he likes, and his record company should be free to market and distribute his work without threats or intimidation from the government, the police, or the religious right.
I firmly subscribe to the school of thought that says, ‘I may hate what you have to say, but I will defend your right to say it.’
This is the challenge of real democracy; it's very simple to espouse freedom of expression only for those you agree with.
that being said, I will reserve my right to my own opinions about ‘gangsta’ rap.
Personally, I think it's pure, unmitigated shit.
I see no trace of desire for a better world (at least Public Enemy, whatever their ideological shortcomings, hold out some kind of hope ); no sign of the basic (but increasingly unfashionable) humanistic values of tolerance, compassion, and respect for difference; and, artistically speaking, no mystery, imagination, or spirit.
Instead we get a pornographic fascination with violence (in a society that's already got more than enough of the real thing, thank you); hatred and fear of women and gays (ditto); and an aesthetic based on absolute infantile self-absorption.
I'll look elsewhere for my entertainment, thank you, and I will not have accusations of ‘censorship’ and ‘racism’levelled at me because I do so.
There is a great need for music and art that cries out for change in this sad, sick society.
As a gay man, I don't need a lecture from anybody about the bigotry and intolerance that run rampant here in the House Of The Brave.
Unfortunately, the articulate voices of anger get shouted down by the bad boys in the back of the room: NWA outsells Fishbone and the Disposable Heroes Of Hiphoprisy by about 50 to one over here.
And yet the fascination among (overwhelmingly white) rock music critics with the big, scary black man (talk about perpetrating stereotypes!) survives, to the point where NME is getting all teary-eyed about Brave Little Time-Warner, heroically standing up to the Huns of censorship.
Give me a  f—ing break.
GREASY GREASY!
As the ‘greasy little man’ from Today newspaper given such a glowing review by Steven Wells (Lust In Space,NME , August 22), I felt I should write offering some sound advice.
He really shouldn't feel bitter over his obvious inadequacies in the context of his interviewing technique.
A few more work experience spells on NME should stand you in jolly good stead for the future.
Sadly, during his attempt to secure a direct line or three from Ms Sigourney Weaver he failed to grasp some obvious points.
1)
Aliens 3 is a film.
2)
Ripley does NOT exist.
3)
This is called escapist ENTERTAINMENT.
Got it?
Good.
The problem Steve seems to have is that he can't stop himself asking banal, pretentious, inconsequential questions which produce zero (sic ) by way of an interesting response.
His  demenour (sic )— he resembled the poorest of travellers in the last  throes of sartorial disintegration — will also continue to present a massive career drawback for him.
He should pull himself together, buy himself a decent set of clothes and pop down to the Today (sic ) for a shift in the showbusiness department.
He might even end up writing something intelligible.
D'y'know, Squire, I think you're absolutely ruddy right!
I should have dressed up like a 1970s saloon bar Tory and asked Sigourney about her baby, her husband and her miscarriage.
By the way, I think you'll find it's spelt ‘demeanour’.
Respect — SW
Dr. Crawshaft's World Of Pop
A magic lantern for you, sur .
But be careful! 'TIS dangerous to play with imagery!
The game is up Mr Moz!
Your ancient animal is destined for the knacker's yard!
There is life in the beast yet!
I can get more mileage from her still.
And also my career!
Actually, don't go to any trouble.
I'll just have a bit of a lie down.
Mr. Moz In The Valley Of Doom
PUBLIC NME
Scraping the last of the Reading mud off our boots,Public NME says Hoorah! for the end of the festival season — now please can we get back to normal service with nice comfy bars to lig in and no acres of mud to wade through.
Still, that's what we all go for isn't it, to manfully plough through two foot deep mudholes in our be-trainered feet, to boldly stand in the pouring rain clad in only a T-shirt and to remain under canvas for three days whilst simultaneously holding both the tent and a beer can in a force nine gale!
Yes, this is the stuff real men are made of and let all those jessie pop stars who holed themselves up in the luxury of four star hotels hang their heads in shame!
We know who you are, and a list of names will be published without mercy unless the prerequisite remittances are put in the post pronto.
Despite washing our hands (not to mention our festering outdoor garb) of Reading, there are more indiscretions that simply must have a wider audience.
Seen taking snaps of the mud (yes, we said mud) divers on the Sunday was cult film-maker JIM JARMUSCH who seemed to be the only one interested in watching what was otherwise a truly sad spectacle.
Over in the blue tent (the roof of which unceremoniously blew off on Sunday just prior to kick off) the SMASHING PUMPKINS lived up to their name and managed to smash the MD of Hut Records, their record company, on the head with a flying guitar, courtesy of singer Billy Colgan.
Elsewhere, JESUS JONES’ jovial MIKE EDWARDS — a man never ashamed to fill his wallet up at the drop of a hat — could be heard regaling the select with details of his latest project, which we hear is a remix of a BON JOVI track.
Honestly, some people have no pride.
And let that be the last of Reading for oh, at least another year…next!
But lest we fear that party time is over, in comes news of a rather spiffing affair held last week in the rather gorgeous setting of the Rovers Return pub in Coronation Street .
What Bet and Alec thought of a packed house replete with Manc ravers is anyone's guess but we are told that this event, which was a joint Most Excellent and A Bit Ginger promotion, had the Mancunian cognoscenti rocking over the most famous beermats in Britain.
Present, if not correct, were a tired but not too emotional Tony, sorry ANTHONY H WILSON and various members of the INSPIRAL CARPETS  whom let's face it, would go to a party held in an empty crisp packet.
Meanwhile, over in Oxford, the man responsible for bringing such fainting lilacs as RIDE to public attention — MAC of the Jericho Tavern — celebrated his umpteenth birthday in fine style at that very infamous hostelry, beloved of so many hot young things.
Providing the entertainment were nubile new Nude signings THE JENNIFERS, who stunned the crowd with a rendition of a song from Walt Disney's Dumbo , while all-girl ‘fox-core’ specialists DEATH BY CRIMPERS tore into ‘Are Friends Electric’.
The final icing on the birthday cake came in the form of THE CANDYSKINS' immaculate rendition of ‘You Sexy Thing’, although whether or not this was addressed to their host, we are not told.
It's animals crackers this week, too, as news filters through of yet more groups doing silly things in connection with our four-footed and finned friends.
Not content with propping up the bar at the Rovers, the Inspiral Carpets, who have decided to call their latest meisterwerk ‘Revenge Of The Goldfish’ thought it would be a spiffing idea to promote aforementioned article with a series of displays in record shops featuring a fully inhabited fish tank.
Unfortunately for the antediluvian bowl-heads, a right-thinking retailer phoned the RSPCA on the grounds that it was cruel to goldfish and so the whole idea had to be binned.
More fishiness we hear, coming from the direction of the new NENEH CHERRY.
It would seem that the gal has gone and done a duet with REM mainman MICHAEL STIPE which is fetchingly entitled ‘Trout’.
The song is, it appears, about the lack of sex education in schools, a subject which we at Public NME feel is indeed worthy of airing, and what a shame more of our nation's pop stars haven't taken up the musical cudgel, so to speak.
On a lighter note, but still on the animal theme, rumbling Scottish popcore outfit EUGENIUS have rented a full-size cow from the Milk Marketing Board to go on display in the Glasgow Virgin Megastore to promote their debut album ‘Oomalama’.
What the connection is we can only hazard a guess at but it confirms all our worst suspicions about anything-core outfits once and for all.
Legally not strictly a cow, but just as strange and with a Glasgow connection is this next item.
Seems that THE SHAMEN have enlisted the services of an enigmatic character by the name of Ebeneezer Goode to pose about and gurn a bit in their latest video for the single of the same name.
Playing this strange gent, who is, we are told, an amalgam of different characters on the London house scene, is professional abuse merchant GERRY SADOWITZ.
The video features Eb, alias Gerry walking a dog and The Shamen around London doing very silly things indeed.
Do we detect a touch of bitterness here?
Seen outside the ‘homely’ Bull & Gate pub — just a few doors down from the Town & Country Club where your beloved NME is currently holding its superlative week of talent flaunting — a small sad notice fluttering in the wake of the jostling NICK CAVE-bound hordes, announcing: ‘HURRAH, onstage tonight at 10.30pm.
 F— the NME !’
Next week: Hurrah's tips on how to plan that successful comeback.
Meanwhile, over in Soho, a bemused MARY MARY (one-time Mary Byker and currently leading light in HYPERHEAD) found himself completely surrounded by young Japanese girls all screaming wildly and shaking autograph books at him.
Were they some strange, time-warped Gaye Bykers fans?
No, even stranger than that, they thought the hapless Mary was none other than KURT COBAIN!
Now why would Kurt be running around Soho with a big red woolly jumper on and having intense conversations with lampposts?
Still, it gave Mary five minutes of fame overtime which might not have been allocated otherwise.
The long silent DEPECHE MODE sprung into impromptu action the other week in their Hamburg hotel.
The boys were back in town to finish off their latest album of dinkety-bonk and decided to let their hair down a bit after a little light refreshment in the bar.
The evening turned into something of a  karaoke classic with MARTIN GORE at the piano and DAVE GAHAN turning in simply delightful renditions of such classics as ‘Drive In Saturday’, ‘I Will Survive’ and a host of Elvis covers.
This went on for three hours, by which time they'd attracted a sizeable body of fans into the hotel foyer, much to the consternation of the management who had to call the police to break up the party.
That didn't stop the enthusiastic chaps from giving them a sneak preview of three tracks hot off the tapes, so to speak.
However, the exclusivity of the evening didn't cut any ice with the police, who promptly ordered them to shut up or get charged with disturbing the peace…
To return to the T&C (yet again) NICK CAVE, mid-blistering set, was joined by a disgustingly fit looking SHANE MACGOWAN, who wove his way through the old Louis Armstrong classic ‘Wonderful World’ with tricky Nick.
Maybe a Christmas single, hints one who should know.
And who are we to argue with such a fine prospect?
Among the celebs busting to catch a glimpse of Nick's end-of-the-pier nostalgia show were CLING POPPIE, JOHN from the NED'S, SUEDE drummer SIMON, PAVEMENT, SEAN HUGHES (cor, haven't seen him out for ages), ALAN and DAVE from the ROCKING BIRDS (Hey!
Controversial!
The ‘Birds were due to play, but thanks to ‘the wrong kind of snow’ or something erm, didn't), a tired and emotional GRAHAM from BLUR, JUSTIN from SPITFIRE and BOBBY GILLESPIE, who, frankly, impressed no-one when he turned up surrounded by a bevy of rock lovelies, swanned through onto the T&C balcony, watched Nick C for a full 12 seconds and then swanned back out again.
Wanker.
Lastly, positively the last Reading gossip…après gig, KINKY MACHINE got goaded by THE WONDER STUFF into having a series of marathon challenges which involved one roadie eating 70 pickled onions in an hour.
Needless to say, he was soon talking to God on the big white telephone but that didn't stop his band-mates from trying to drink seven pints of water in 30 minutes, followed by a dry Weetabix race upon which the Kinkies nearly choked to death, thus depriving the world of a hot new item.
The evening ended, predictably enough, with police intervention and Kinky Machine's tour manager having his collar felt rather severely.
CAST YOUR minds back, readers, to the Reading Festival.
Yes, we know it's only a dim and distant memory now, but, hey, nostalgia's all the rage, isn't it?
Here we see sensible ROY BOULTER and MAD KEITH from THE FARM arguing with MARK from EMF about who's the most unfashionable.
‘Gerraway, la!
Our last record only got to 78 in the charts!
We're dead in the water, small children laugh in our faces!’
‘That's nuthin', loik!
We haven' [t written a song that anyone can sing since 1990!
We're all washed up!’
TURD AND emotional…
You've heard all the jokes about how shit the food is at festivals — well, heeeeere's The Old Man Of Reading (remember Reading) JOHN PEEL enjoying what NME food experts have successfully identified as police horse dung.
Yummmmm!
CUT: THE CRAP
SOME LATE  news just in from the cutting edge of tabloid journalism.
Damn!
Seems we've been beaten to the week's top rock'n'roll scoop yet again by The Star 's ever-incisive pop columnist LINDA DUFF.
It seems that hordes of MANICS fans up and down the land, calling themselves ‘Hardcore Preachers’, are currently ‘marking their devotion in blood by slashing their arms with razor blades’.
Bloody hell.
Well, let's hope:
a)
They can spell RICHEY's name — something sadly beyond the journalistic powers of Ms Duff, and
b)
They know which one Richey actually is , since the above cutting (ha ha) suggests that The Scar , sorry,Star , are a tad confused.
The Duffer, who celebrated her 100th birthday last week in lavish style, also seems to think that CAPTAIN AMERICA were forced to change their name to C&A after Marvel Comics sued them, only to be injuncted by the clothes store and forced to change their name again.
Irritating inaccuracies?
The Star 's got ‘em.
GREAT POP THINGS
THE BRAIN EMO story PART 2: ‘He tried to change the world by turning it on  its side and calling it something else’
MUSIC MONITOR ADS PAGE
Name synthesizer non-player seeks band interested in art as a process.
Has own ostrich suit, knows many big words…attended ART COLLEGE etc…
Non time wasters
With his ostrich outfit, make-up and deliberately not playing the synthesizer in order to question playing the synthesizer, Brain soon found he was stealing the scenery from Bryan, the suave debonair bloke who led Roxy music…
EMO was walking out of a studio one day when he was struck by a taxi.
This caused him to invent Ambivalent Music, which you can't quite tell if you are listening to or not (see Ambulance house music…)
IT SAYS ‘HOOVERTICAL AMBIVALENT MUSIC: YOU HAVE TO HAVE A  FROG'S EAR TO HEAR IT: NOW FORM A BAND…’
Oh that's nice dear, I wonder who it's from?
Also he invented obscure postcards, which he sent to people chosen at random from out of the telephone directory in a deliberate act to question the postmanship that his dada had done…
Here lies Brain Peter Garage St. John Lee Baptist Tra La etc. etc.
EMO
Not dead, only decaying (rapidly at first then rather slowly in an interesting way)…
Brain became the King of avant-rock, making ‘my mouth on the bun of ghosts’ putting ‘found’tapes over rich rhythms (an almost totally unique idea except Can had already done it) and is currently chief apologist for Bongo of U2.
THE END