

CONTENTS
REGULARS
5 Editorial
Can the Labour Party manage an open debate without tearing itself apart?
7 Shoreditch,
Roger Woddis
8 Diary
Sean French fingers his typewriter as the main culprit in the singular case of the missing shoe (sorry —‘show’)
9 John Cole
How much longer can we tolerate mass starvation?
10 Political column
Sarah Baxter on Major, the party manager
11 Political sketch
Edward Pearce on letters and leaders
14 American diary
Can Libya re-elect George Bush, asks Alexander Cockburn
28 Letters
31 Fringe benefits
Colin Ward discovers 100 people reducing their dependency on cash
45 Endgames
Competition, Cryptic Quiz, Chess
47 Backchat
Mat Coward on the real John Smith
47 Forteana
Paul Sieveking on the revenge of the hunted
FEATURES
12 Rocky road to Rio
June's earth summit may appease the rich nations, but what will it do for the world's poor, asks Jeremy Seabrook
16 Full circle
Fred Halliday claims Afghanistan's history is coming back to haunt it
17 I am what I read
Can the tabloids really have affected the outcome of the election, asks Bill Miller
18 Race to Westminster
What did the parties offer Britain's ethnic minorities?
Very little, concludes Julie Flint
19 The Union strikes back
Lack of support for the Scottish Nationalists, says Brian Wilson, has confounded both pundits and parties alike
20 Together and apart
Plaid Cymru MP Dafydd Elis Thomas believes there must be an end to the UK, based on understanding not division
21 Hate in a cold climate
The recent resurgence of the European extreme right is much weaker in Britain.
Christopher Husbands asks why
23 Whose fault-line is it anyway?
The ideological division of Europe's population into nations and ethnic groups is a recent invention that dangerously simplifies the realities, says Eric Hobsbawm
27 When the music's over
Who organises vast acid-house raves?
Conor did, and it killed him.
Laurie Taylor was at the funeral
ARTS & MEDIA 33
The mind of the masters
Toni Morrison uncovers the racial secrets of classic American literature
Film
Anne Billson swallows Cronenberg's tasteful Naked Lunch 
Theatre
Andy Lavender looks for signs of life in the Shaw corpus
Art
Orientalism lives on in the tourist's gaze, says Nigel Whiteley
BOOKS 37
Speak for Scotland
Has Iain Banks passed the Scottish writer's mid-life crisis?
With distinction, says Brian Morton
Crime
Nick Fielding catches up with the Bank of Crooks and Conmen International
Lives
Kenneth O Morgan on the mixed-up Macmillan dynasty; Valentine Cunningham on the decline and fall of Evelyn Waugh; Veronica Groocock on Chad Varah, still the good Samaritan
Fiction
Bryan Cheyette raises Cain with Howard Jacobson
Travel
Dea Birkett on a debunking of desert island myths
PrintOut
Britain's debt to Europe
EDITORIAL
Rocking the boat Can Labour manage an open debate without tearing itself apart?
How long ago it all seems.
‘You Can't Trust Labour.’
‘Tory Health Policy: More Plastic Surgeons.’
The election posters that still litter our cities are like the documentary fragments of some remote and arcane historical dispute.
From a distance of two weeks, the initial reaction to defeat also seems unnecessarily despondent.
Far from being the end of politics, defeat should mark the resumption of politics for the Labour movement; or at any rate, political thought.
No disrespect is meant to Neil Kinnock to say that his departure from the leadership has opened up a space for debate that simply could not have existed under his regime.
The loyalty that he inspired was genuine, but in the end it became self-defeating, as Kinnock himself realised — witness his damaging refusal to state his own position on electoral reform, lest it should close off discussion.
In this context, Bryan Gould's decision to challenge John Smith for the Labour leadership, as our political correspondent wrote last week, is welcome — not because he will win, but because it forces a debate to take place.
Already, the Smith camp has made the right noises — about reform of the trade union block vote, about an openness to electoral reform, and about a wide-ranging policy review — that might not have happened had Gould not intervened.
Smith supporters have been forced to confront the allegations of a union stitch-up; as a result, he will probably be the last leader to be elected under the current rules.
For his part, Gould has voiced a degree of scepticism about Europe that has not been heard from a Labour frontbencher for many a long year, and has rescued ‘devaluation’ from the party's dictionary of forbidden words.
Roy Hattersley's simultaneous resignation as deputy leader also opens up the increasingly sterile debate on constitutional reform.
Hattersley was against proportional representation for the Commons, and against a bill of rights as the term is normally understood.
While he remained shadow home secretary, that was how matters were destined to remain.
The Plant Commission on electoral reform did not stimulate an internal debate in the party, because its real function was to do precisely the opposite.
Likewise, on a bill of rights, being against Hattersley was, in some quarters, almost an end in itself.
The debate there has hardly started: for example, when John Smith says he is in favour of a bill, he needs to be pressed on what it will contain (social and economic rights as well as political ones?); and whether it will be repealable by a simple majority of the Commons.
Similarly, when Gould says he is prepared to be persuaded about electoral reform, he needs to say what it would take to persuade him.
In theory, there are three months of leadership contest in which to explore these and other interesting questions; and one would hope that, even with a new leader, the party would still be able to discuss fundamental issues without turning them into questions of loyalty.
But, already, some party members are wondering whether, far from being too short, three months is much too long.
Can the party really survive much more of the rancour that has broken out in the past few days over Labour's tax policy?
The central problem is that a political party is ill-equipped to debate policy or philosophy because unity, not intellectual openness, is its highest virtue.
The traditional solution is to hold any debate within closed party committees.
That was how the policy review that followed the 1987 defeat was conducted, although a series of ‘Labour listens’ public meetings was contrived to give the appearance of glasnost .
The results were not very impressive: traditional policies were simply abandoned, while, for every intractable problem, a new quango was proposed.
Some of the eventual reports were frankly amateurish, and none was remotely visionary.
Other drawbacks are inherent in the method.
Only the members of a particular committee are likely to have any proper grasp of a subject (has anyone outside the Plant Committee actually read its report?) while the rest remain blissfully, and dogmatically, ignorant.
It presents the public with a take-it-or-leave-it set of policies.
It places all the power in the hands of the party machine, which appoints the committee members.
Somehow, the party is going to have to find a better way of operating this time round.
The problems are more intractable than five years ago.
The Kinnock reforms were mostly negative — divesting the party of its unsaleable policies.
But striptease is not a practice that can continue forever, and nudity is not a good camouflage.
At the last conference, Neil Kinnock set in motion a plan to institute a National Policy Forum, which would meet four times a year, and produce a two-year rolling review of policy to be (if all went well) rubber-stamped by the annual conference.
It would be made up of local councillors (increasingly, the only people in the party with experience of ruling), MPs, MEPs and trade unionists.
But there are doubts about how quickly it can be set up, given the party's lack of money.
Part of the answer is a party leader who has a collegiate, rather than presidential, style — one who signals a willingness to be disagreed with, and to hell with the press.
Another part is to take debate outside the party machinery.
The Conservatives have been lucky to have a plethora of external think tanks, which come up with the ideas, while being strictly deniable (the IPPR has somehow not done quite the same for Labour).
On many issues, the convergence with the Liberal Democrats is so marked that there may be mileage in cross-party initiatives.
The answer is not a wholesale buttoning-up, either now or later.
That would be to concede total defeat.
Bone Dries meet the arch-Wet
Mrs Thatcher's anguished warning to John Major in Newsweek is understandable.
Notwithstanding Major's valiant efforts to balance pro- and anti-Thatcher elements in his new ministerial appointments, the right must be feeling increasingly uneasy about the broad thrust of what is happening.
A particular oddity is the Department of the Environment, which, with the departure of Michael Heseltine, now has two staunch Thatcherites at the helm — Michael Howard (secretary of state) and John Redwood (minister of state).
Redwood will be in charge of inner-city policy.
But he will have to deal with the new Urban Regeneration Agency, whose chairman is the former cabinet minister, Peter Walker, a Tory wet, who pursued a blatantly interventionist and un-Thatcherite policy while secretary of state for Wales.
It looks as though Heseltine secured Walker's appointment before he left the DoE, in order to have his own man in place.
Walker has a very wide remit.
He is to take over not only the redevelopment of derelict inner-city sites, a major initiative in itself, but also the overlordship of the ten (soon to be 12) Urban Development Corporations, as well as acting as an English development agency, attracting foreign companies to English towns and cities in the same way as he did for Wales.
The URA, according to Michael Heseltine, will have a ‘very substantial proportion of the DoE's budget’ transferred to it.
One can only guess at how Howard and Redwood must feel about taking over a department, only to find that one of their political opponents has walked off with the money.
Walker says he will adopt a ‘total approach’ to inner-city problems: ‘If you simply improve the infrastructure, but do nothing about jobs, you still have all the problems of crime and unemployment.
If you try to do something about jobs, and the infrastructure is lousy, the regeneration still does not work.
Only if you bring a total approach of building, infrastructure, job creation, education and training, can you change the environment in the way you want.’
This sounds suspiciously like planning , one of those un-Thatcher evils.
She is right to be worried.
Too many people?
Prince Charles' contribution to the debate on the environment and development in London this week is to make a speech on the ‘population explosion’.
To some, that looks like an act of wilful provocation.
‘People in the south don't want lectures from us about population growth,’ growled a letter in the Guardian .
Yet the environmental consequences of unchecked population growth will be devastating.
The UN population fund, in a report published this month, shows that, under the most likely scenario, world population will nearly double to 10 billion by 2050.
Growth of this order ‘is a major factor in environmental impact.
It is responsible for around 79 per cent of deforestation, 72 per cent of arable land expansion, and 69 per cent of growth in livestock numbers…some 4.5 million square kilometres of additional wildlife habitat will have to be converted to human uses — equivalent to four-fifths of the total area of nature reserves in the world in 1990.’
Paradoxically, one key to warding off this environmental disaster is economic growth.
Thailand, with one of the fastest growth rates in the world over the past 25 years, has also seen one of the most rapid declines in fertility, leading to better health and education for the country's children.
During the 1980s, the global link between population and development has become stronger.
Countries with slower population growth saw their average per capita incomes grow 2.5 per cent more than those with more rapid population growth.
True, the next task is to stop growth itself damaging the environment — Thailand's farmers are using more chemicals than before, for example.
But no good comes from ignoring the connections.
FOURTH ESTATE A regular monitor of the Tory press
16 April:The tabloids all show a keen interest in the Labour leadership race.
The Sun reports: ‘Girls in fight to be no 2 — Two leftie women bared their claws in Labour's deputy leadership battle yesterday…
Miss Clwyd, 55, the party's spokesman for third world aid is the party's big spender who would raise taxes.
Mrs Beckett, 49, a Kinnock ally, made her name as a meanie.’
Elsewhere, the Sun reports that Linda Bellos, the former leader of Lambeth council (remember her?) is making £228 a day as a housing consultant to Hackney council, having taken redundancy in January.
Bernard Ingham in the Express tips Tony Blair for the Labour leadership.
The job needs ‘someone determined to have a fair day's work for a fair day's pay, whether in wages or welfare.
Someone resolved to escape from the rainboy alliance of layabouts, conmen and weird minorities who have given Labour such a bad name.’
The Mail keeps up the relentless post-election good news: ‘Birds are nesting.
Househunters are eyeing the estate agents' windows with new, predatory enthusiasm…there is an unmistakeable scent of recovery in the air.’
17 April:Strange news: the Sun is sponsoring one of the challengers for the Labour leadership: ‘Sun man's bid to be Labour leader’.
Ken Livingstone, of course, writes a column for the paper, and so gets its unstinting support: ‘We're right behind Ken Livingstone…we reckon he's just the man for the job.
And to prove it, we're giving away stickers and badges so you can back him too.’
Send them a sturdy stamped addressed envelope if you want one.
20 April:More Labour news.
The Express reports: ‘Labour's battle for power erupted into open civil war yesterday…the party's fragile unity began to crumble…’
The paper's columnist, Robert Kilroy-Silk backs John Cunningham, for leader of the party, even though he's not standing.
He thinks that Bryan Gould, by contrast, is ‘very clever and ambitious, but he has no real roots in Britain or its culture.’
In other words, he's a foreigner.
The Sun reports ‘Quitter' Kinnock left us in lurch, storms Prescott.’
Sniping at the BBC continues.
John Gummer's attack on it for promoting ‘heresy’ by broadcasting discussion about the truth, or otherwise, of the resurrection is given full coverage.
The Star reports the accusation by a Tory MP that the corporation has wasted money by filming a show in Australia (it needed guaranteed sunshine, says the BBC).
21 April:‘I STICK BY TAX GRAB SAYS LABOUR'S SMITH — rival Gould backing down’ is the Sun 's latest gloss on the leadership race.
Today has the quaintly ambiguous headline: ‘I MADE BRITAIN GREAT NOT MAJOR CLAIMS THATCHER’.
SHOREDITCH
There have been dark mutterings by conspiracy theorists about the election result.
Just why was Major ‘stone cold certain’ of winning an overall majority, when all the opinion polls showed that he wouldn't?
Why did he say he would rather resign than do a deal over PR, unless he knew he wouldn't have to?
In short, was the whole thing rigged?
Until now, the only problem with this theory has been the lack of evidence, apart from the impossibility of finding anyone who admits to having voted Tory.
But word reaches Shoreditch from Exeter of some very odd goings on.
In at least two areas of the city, voters were misdirected by official polling cards to the wrong polling stations — a clever way of discouraging them from voting without actually disenfranchising them — and when the final count was made, 1,000 votes were added to the Tory candidate's total.
‘By mistake’.
The real swing to Labour was 8.45 per cent, but the newspapers and television had it as a mere 7.5 per cent .
In how many constituencies was the ‘mistake’ not discovered?
Another factor not taken into account before the election was the number of expatriate Tory voters registered in marginal constituencies.
Thanks to an amendment in 1989 to the 1985 Representation of the People Act, Britons may continue to vote by proxy for up to 20 years after they leave the country.
(Inexplicably, Labour supported this amendment, even though it could only benefit the Tories.)
Expats are supposed to register in the constituency where they last lived, but there doesn't seem to be much checking of bona fides.
(It is bizarre that people who have no intention of ever returning to Britain have more democratic rights than those living rough on its streets.)
In two constituencies, Vale of Glamorgan and Bristol North West, the Tory majority was less than the number of expat voters.
Wouldn't it be a good idea for the Labour Party in those places to check whether all the expats were legitimately registered?
Despite his election triumph, John Major is already looking like a mug.
In this matter, at least, he is following in the footsteps of his predecessor.
A Wakefield-based china and crystal chain, Peter Jones China, is already manufacturing a £25 fine bone china commemorative mug to mark the ‘historical landmark in our political history’, viz, John's recent scrape home.
The vessel features Major giving a toothy grin, considerably broader than the one on the Thatcher mug.
The portrait is surrounded by an ornate design.
The parliamentary portcullis is featured above his head.
The symbols of state, including the mace and the sword, lie crossed at the foot.
Production began soon after the election result was known, but the design work was completed well in advance.
No Neil Kinnock mug was even contemplated.
The left-wing Campaign Group is displaying a suicidal sectarianism in the battle for the Labour leadership.
Till now, Ken Livingstone had been putting up a good show, joking about John Smith serving as his deputy and arguing for defence cuts to pay for benefits rather than tax increases.
Suddenly, the group has hijacked his campaign; nominated Bernie Grant as his running mate (sinking Ann Clwyd's bid for the deputy leadership in in the process); and put out a policy programme that reeks of the old 1970s left.
It is anti-proportional representation (favoured by Livingstone) and anti-membership of the ERM (Livingstone believes in devaluation but is a firm Euro-federalist).
It also defends redistributive taxation in order to pay for child benefit and pensions and calls for strengthening the trade union link with the party.
Grant told Shoreditch, ‘It's a slate.
Ken's agreed to run on our policies and our ticket,’ even though he acknowledges that they suit him better than Ken.
‘He's flexible enough to accept what we're saying, even though he has his own position,’ says Grant.
Too flexible by half, Shoreditch suggests.
Livingstone's not going to win anyway, so why kow-tow like this?
What is this ‘shoe in’ that the unions are alleged to be arranging for John Smith?
Shoreditch eventually found it in a dictionary of American slang: ‘A horse who wins a race by prearrangement; a person, team, candidate, etc, who will or did win easily.’
Apparently, the proper spelling is ‘shoo-in’.
It comes ‘from the notion that the beast, not caring to run and not needing to, can be shooed over the finish line, and win’.
Imagine John Smith being shooed along by Bill Morris and John Edmunds, and you get the picture.
Fingers are being kept firmly crossed at British Coal HQ as it waits to see if faulty roof bolts led to the recent accident at the Stillingfleet colliery, part of the new Selby complex, when the collapse of a roof trapped five miners underground for over a day.
If the bolts were responsible, then a further question mark will hang over the future of the industry.
Roof-bolt technology is the key to the leap in productivity that BC will need if it is to beat off the challenge from gas and imported coal and prevent the industry being reduced to a handful of pits.
Both Selby and the new Asfordby super-pit could be closed overnight if roof-bolt techniques have to be abandoned.
ROGER WODDIS Doctor on the go
Dr David Owen wanted the job, offered to Chris Patten, of Governor of Hong Kong on a tax-free salary of £152,000
When I was in the public eye
And headed the FO,
They knew my face in every place
As doctor on the go.
My remedies were always right,
But where did I go wrong?
And what is this? can it be Chris
Who's governing Hong Kong?
Once it was doctor on the job,
More glamorous than Dirk's;
I might have had a splendid pad,
Aside from all the perks.
I might have risen to the heights,
Instead of being flat,
A perfect heaven till '97,
And worn a funny hat.
They call me vain and arrogant,
Obsessed by fame and power;
I don't know why, I simply fly
From flower to nectared flower.
There's always sugar to be sucked,
If you're a busy bee;
I'm still around, and hope to found
A Chinese SDP.
DIARY Sean French fingers his typewriter as the main culprit in the singular case of the missing shoe (sorry —‘show’)
Auden once wrote that the only honest method of reviewing new poetry would be for the critic to select representative quotations and reproduce them without comment.
Faced with the absurdity of British public life, I sometimes think I ought to do the same, turning this space into a museum of grotesque items displayed without comment.
Take for instance the current edition of the British Medical Journal .
It has always been puzzling enough that the proportion of men in gynaecology is higher than in any virtually any other specialty, as if detachment were an advantage in this field.
Now James Drife, professor of obstetrics and gynaecology at Leeds General Infirmary, demonstrates this by recommending that healthy women past childbearing age with anxieties about breast cancer should simply have a double mastectomy as a precautionary measure.
After all, he claims, for such women, the breast is ‘a redundant gland’.
To demonstrate his empathy with the women whom he spends his life treating, he adds that: ‘If my beard had a 6 per cent chance of turning malignant I would shave it off.’
Then, when questioned by the press, he asserts in his defence that ‘obviously’ he wasn't making the point absolutely seriously.
No comment is worth making on this bizarre suggestion, except perhaps pointing out to Professor Drife that a beard isn't precisely the right analogy.
An appropriate response might be for four strong women to hold him down while a fifth administers a local anaesthetic and removes his balls.
Not only would this be an effective riposte —‘Touché,’ he might validly say on his release — but he would be safe in the reassuring knowledge that he need no longer worry about testicular cancer.
Then there was the debate at the National Union of Teachers' conference about the response to government plans for teacher assessment.
The seriously debated motion, which demanded non-cooperation unless teachers were allowed to choose their own appraisers and then to keep the resulting reports as their personal property, left me dumbfounded.
I know that we're all in a state of shock and wondering where to place ourselves on the spectrum between quietism at one end and terrorism on the other, but, as a response to an altered environment, this reminded me appallingly of the turtles who, so the legend goes, were hatched on a Pacific atoll where a nuclear blast had been carried out.
Instead of immediately heading for the ocean, as they are genetically programmed to do, they headed inland, and all perished.
The rights and wrongs of government policy are irrelevant.
What did the delegates think when they composed that Gogolian policy of assessment in which results are first faked and then suppressed?
Would we accept this if it were proposed as the means by which we controlled, say, the operations of our secret services.
Hang on.
That is the means by which we control the operations of our secret services.
Perhaps this would be a way of persuading the government to accept the proposal.
Last week, I received a touching postcard from a recently divorced friend in Bonn thanking me for a letter.
I know that Robert Lowell got into terrible trouble for quoting private letters in his poetry, but all this happened abroad, so let me quote a phrase from it: ‘The earthquake was awful.
I have never been so scared in my life.
Grabbed both children and ran, but realised soon there was no place to hide…’
I thought that was a beautiful, moving, poetic evocation of the pain and fear of suddenly finding yourself deserted and then having to pull yourself together.
Then about four days later it was pointed out to me that a real earthquake actually hit Germany last week, and she wasn't being poetic at all, and I actually felt cheated of the wave of emotion I had felt towards her.
I still prefer my original state of having been deceived.
It reminded me of a diary that Bruce Page, the last editor of the New Statesman but five, wrote in these pages years ago.
I remember him saying that the person in the anecdote had to remain anonymous since it was still not done for a woman to confess she enjoyed promiscuous, recreational sex.
(Interesting how it has now become problematic for another reason.)
On one of her adventures, she was in Tokyo having sex with a local man in her flat when a friend rang up asking, ‘Did you feel the earth move?’
She was surprised, but replied, ‘It wasn't that good.’
Then her friend told her that there had just been an earthquake, so the woman concluded that it must have been that good.
After last week's edition of ‘NSS’ appeared, a relation told me that my column was all right, ‘apart from the misprint, of course ’.
‘Don't tell me,’ I protested, ‘I don't want to know.’
I should say at this point that I never read my own articles once they have appeared in print.
(‘Neither do we!’,
I can hear NSS readers crying as with one voice across the world.)
The only possible result of doing so is to discover mistakes that it is too late to correct.
But last week, I was informed, the point of my anecdote about the documentary Werner Herzog Eats His Shoe — in which the German film director fulfilled a promise to eat the aforementioned footwear if a friend of his raised the money to complete a long cherished project — was rather lost since ‘shoe’ appeared on the page twice as ‘show’.
I railed at the NSS typesetters and then happened to look at my own copy and saw that the mistake was entirely mine.
One of the few skills I possess is the ability to type with ten fingers.
My year between school and university was about as creative as the period Terry Waite spent in captivity staring at a concrete wall with only his postcard of John Bunyan for reading matter, but I did spend the first few weeks of it in the typing class of a comprehensive school in Hackney.
Five 15-year-old girls and I sat clattering away while they giggled and nudged each other.
‘Lucky me,’ I ought to say at this point with whatever the typographical symbol for a wink and a leer is.
Perhaps a  could be arbitrarily chosen for the purpose.
However this would not be strictly accurate since my principal method of dealing with that, or virtually any other situation, in the years of my youth, was to do my brilliantly accurate impersonation of Helen Keller.
Anyway, last week I seemed to have typed my diary much in the style that Ms Keller would have.
The ‘w’ key happens to be beside the ‘e’key and my finger happening to have struck it once, then struck it once more.
It's always risky writing about misprints.
The first book collection of articles from the London Review of Books contains an entertaining assault on literary theory by Christopher Ricks.
For some time I was baffled by a sentence in his argument that the theoretical removal of the authority of the author by the critic, Stanley Fish, has no way of dealing with misprints: ‘His book happens to be full of misprints.
I acknowledge that Fish's enterprise in [his book]Is There a Text in this Class?, unlike Joyce's in Finnegans Wake , makes it so unlikely that he intended to call the word ‘pleasurably' an ‘adverb' that I'd feel bound — if I were his executor and he dead — to change it.
Of course, he could want the word ‘abverb' (as in ‘pleasur ab ly'), but I so much doubt it that I'd bet on it.’
Quicker thinking readers will probably have noticed what I didn't, which is that the first appearance of ‘adverb’ is a mistaken correction by a typesetter or proofreader of the correctly wrong ‘abverb’.
I now have the inescapable anxiety that someone will now diligently correct every word of the above, perhaps by using some computerised method for checking spelling.
Well, that's shoe business [sic as a parrot].
John Cole It really takes the biscuit How much longer can we tolerate mass starvation?
Not a lot of domestic politics about, thank goodness!
So why not step back a pace, and discuss values?
This idea was implanted in my mind by the coincidence, at Easter, of two experiences, one involving the advertising industry, the other famine.
Not a probable coupling.
Famine first.
Reports come from Sudan, where the harshness of nature is compounded by man's inhumanity to man — or rather to women and children; and from Zimbabwe, where drought is putting many lives at risk, especially, as usual, those of young children.
My former BBC colleague at Westminster, John Harrison, reporting from Zimbabwe on Maundy Thursday, caught the horror of it in a memorable phrase: the cost of an Easter egg, he said, would keep a child alive for a month or more.
I hope everyone who bought Easter eggs for their own children last week will match what these cost — at least— with a contribution to one of the aid agencies.
For it does seem, in the final decade of the second millennium, that hopes of political action are fading.
The world's most awful human problem, third-world poverty, appears to have hardened the hearts of the prosperous.
It is now 16 years since I wrote a book,The Poor of the Earth , to popularise one of the huge international conferences that were common during the seventies, the United Nations' Second Development Decade.
This one, sponsored by the International Labour Organisation, dealt with world employment, which really meant third-world unemployment or under-employment.
At that time, 300 million people were either unemployed or performed such unproductive work that they could not support themselves and their families.
The figure was predicted to rise to one billion by the year 2000.
The attitude of the rich world to such appalling figures has always been ambiguous.
I suppose the only excuse is the enormity of the tragedy that mankind faces.
The developed nations have been lavish with advice.
Some of it, at the level of young European or American agriculture graduates, working and teaching in the fields of Kenya, Sri Lanka or the Philippines, good advice.
We are somewhat less generous with our wealth.
No doubt it would be unthinkable to raise the taxes of a Briton earning £22,000 a year to help people in the poorest countries of all, where the average annual per capita incomes can be below US$200.
There was a time when the rich world seemed to understand its ethical duty to the poor of the earth.
It had begun the seventies with the declared intention of contributing 0.7 per cent of the gross national product in official aid.
At the time I wrote my book, mid-way through the decade, the average aid from the industrialised countries was 0.33 per cent.
The latest figures available for official development assistance from members of the OECD, the rich man's club of nations, are for 1989.
They range from 0.98 in Sweden and 0.93 in Denmark, through 0.72 (France), 0.50 (Canada), 0.41 (Germany) and 0.39 (Italy), to 0.32 (Japan), 0.31 (Britain) and 0.21 (United States).
Britain fulfilled just half its 1970 promise in 1979, but its contributions in official aid have fallen ever since.
In the recent election, politicians of all shades seemed reluctant to commit themselves to higher spending on aid, and there is more talk nowadays about the west's obligations to nations emerging from communist dictatorship in eastern and central Europe.
Yet in the middle years of the Thatcher government, I recall Sir Geoffrey Howe telling me how impressed he was by the number of letters he was receiving, especially from young people, about the crisis in the third world.
This seemed to him, and to me, to have become a great issue of conscience.
Since then, we have had Live Aid, and other remarkable efforts of charity, by performers and the public.
But what is needed to achieve an attack on the causes of poverty, a democratic will in the rich countries to let their political leaders spend more on fighting want, seems further off than ever.
Often governments in the third world do not help their people's cause.
A mixture of muddle-headedness and corruption offers an excuse for do-nothing politics in the west.
The latest horror is the moral blindness that allows governments and insurgents in the Horn of Africa to continue their civil wars for years, while their people starve.
It would be easy to direct our moral indignation in that direction.
One might rhetorically ask whether, if the United States or Britain assumes the role of international policeman from time to time, it is not an odd sense of police priorities to protect an oil sheikh from a military tyrant, but to ignore the plight of Sudanese children when military commanders forbid landing rights to aircraft bringing in food that could save their lives.
But moral indignation ought principally to be reserved for ourselves.
We cannot afford to concentrate on the mote in the eye of the Sudanese military, or in those of the inadequate political leaders in Harare, until we have removed the beam from our own eye.
The fact is that starvation will get worse and worse, right into the 21st century, unless the rich world contemplates a real assault on the causes of third-world poverty, rather than occasional crisis management.
The scale of operation that would be needed has been on the world's agenda twice in modern times, but in both cases for the benefit of white nations.
The US secretary of state, George Marshall, displayed such imagination for the stricken continent of Europe after the second world war.
And there has been talk, though not yet enough action, to help people in the former Soviet Union and other ex-communist countries.
Again, the west often prefers to offer so-called ‘know-how’, rather than money.
Something on that scale, or beyond, will be needed if the lethal cocktail of growing populations and diminishing harvests is not to create further tragedy in much of the third world.
It is a political tragedy that this whole subject has all but disappeared from the world's agenda under the impact of the past three astonishing years in Europe.
Perhaps it is inevitable that the west empathises more with countries whose cultures it comprehends better than those of Africa and Asia.
Yet their plight is apocalyptic.
You were promised, many paragraphs ago, that there would be something about advertising, always a jollier subject than starvation.
The link is values.
Just before Easter, I received a letter about a series of television advertisements.
These were to involve a cartoon animal, which would commend a chocolate biscuit, in the voices of some people who appear on television, the voices done by actors.
In my case, this animal would have stood outside the House of Commons, chipping away at the chocolate with a microphone, while uttering the pregnant words, ‘it always gets my vote’.
The fee for permission — not writing, or speaking, or doing anything mildly useful — was £10,000, £2,000 a word, a rate for the job that, I can now reveal, not even the NSS matches.
Now I have never ‘done’ advertising, on the simple, self-interested principle that if television viewers knew I could be paid to recommend biscuits, however vicariously, they might reasonably conclude that the Conservative, Labour or Liberal Democrat parties also come up with occasional help with my household expenses.
Apart from passing regret at the thought of losing so much money for old rope, my immediate reaction was to compare the fee for writing a letter of consent with what my 47 years of toil in journalism will soon produce by way of a pension.
But on second thoughts, that comparison also seemed obscenely trite when set against the greater contrasts in values affecting millions of fellow-inhabitants of this planet.
It scarcely needs to be said that these are equations without solutions.
Yet amid the babble over Scottish devolution, poll tax, or the privatisation of British Rail, it is occasionally worth raising the question of the values by which we live.
Political column Major, the party manager, hands out favours Sarah Baxter
‘I don't accept the idea that all of a sudden Major is his own man,’ Margaret Thatcher pronounced firmly in Newsweek this week.
After behaving with notable restraint during the election, she had been building up to this.
Was it mere petulance on the part of a former leader who remains unreconciled to her overthrow?
Was it sheer arrogance to insist, ‘There isn't such a thing as Majorism’?
By winning the election, Major has entered phase two of his premiership.
Since he arrived at Number Ten, back in November 1990, friends have been insisting that he is his own man, sometimes protesting too much in the process.
Now he rules at Downing Street in his own right.
So what was Thatcher going on about?
In her article, she explained that Major had been Prime Minister for only 17 months.
She had run the country for 11 years; and he had coasted along to a fourth Conservative victory on the back of her achievements.
The omens for the future, she suggested, were none too good.
There were ‘one or two straws in the wind’ to watch for.
One was excessive public borrowing; another was intervention in industry.
She warned her successors ‘to be jolly careful they don't give government too many extra powers and undo what I've done’.
It is hard to tell what these powers might be from the 1992 Conservative manifesto, a model of vagueness.
Revealingly, its opening section was devoted to foreign affairs; in all three Thatcher manifestos, including the one in 1983 following the Falklands war, they were relegated to the back, and domestic policy took pride of place.
Right in the middle of this year's manifesto, however, was Major's own personal initiative, the Citizen's Charter.
As promised, a minister of cabinet rank has now been appointed to supervise its operation: William Waldegrave.
The former health secretary brushed aside talk of a demotion by referring to himself as the new Minister for Majorism.
Proof that at least one person in the cabinet thinks it exists, anyway.
‘This is [incomprehensible name ]of the Citizen's Charter Unit press office.
I'm afraid I'm not available to answer your call at the moment.
I'll get back to you as soon as possible…’
Earlier this week, this was how the Citizen's Charter Unit was dealing with enquiries.
In all, the unit has a staff of 18 and no budget to speak of.
Its chief task is to ensure that the charter and its offspring are being implemented by other departments.
The Citizen's Charter Unit is a close cousin of Labour's proposed ministry for women.
They are both the product of good intentions: old-Etonian William Waldegrave has promised to speak up for the ‘little guy’.
Inevitably, that means he will have to be meddlesome.
He is guaranteed to find his plans frustrated by the more powerful departments of state, unless he runs constantly to Major for backing.
As the Tory manifesto boasts, there are 18 mini-charters, covering health, public transport, education, local government and so on.
It will be up to Waldegrave to ‘kick ass’ when ministerial colleagues fail to deliver — a far-fetched scenario.
Waldegrave's allotted question times at Westminster could be embarrassing occasions: any queries of substance will have to be referred to the ministries that matter.
If the Citizen's Charter Unit really is the Ministry of Majorism, one can see it fading away gently.
By the time of the next cabinet reshuffle, the Prime Minister will probably announce that all the departments are operating so splendidly that there is no more need for it.
The latest reshuffle, immediately following victory, was supposed to confirm, once and for all, that Major was his own man.
Instead, it proved that he still has the political antennae of a party whip.
Thatcher also used to parcel out jobs to representatives of different interest groups in the party.
But, as she wrote in Newsweek , ‘In my time, we ran a very firm policy; people knew I would say no.
They didn't necessarily like it, but they respected it.’
Major, in contrast, has opted for the quiet life.
Michael Heseltine had his own way at the Department of the Environment and will continue to do so at Trade and Industry, where supporters of his during the leadership contest have been given junior positions.
Heseltine is determined to make the DTI pro-active, although there was no hint of this in the Tory manifesto.
The section on industry was written as though Peter Lilley was going to retain his post: to have spiced it with ideas would have given the game away.
Thatcherites have been rewarded with the rapid promotion of Michael Portillo, who is expected to keep public spending in check as Chief Secretary to the Treasury.
At best, this can only be in relative terms, since the Red Book already forecasts a public sector borrowing requirement for 1993-94 of £32 billion.
However, his presence at the Treasury keeps the Thatcherite torch alive: he was once tipped to be the next leader but two; now he could the next leader but one.
The right will also be satisfied that Norman Lamont remains Chancellor.
He is thought to have had high public spending and membership of the exchange rate mechanism foisted upon him and, at root, is considered to be a Euro-sceptic and sound money man.
Michael Howard at Environment, assisted by John Redwood, will be compromised by the need to make the council tax work, a useful means of keeping them in tow; and Peter Lilley has been kept on board, though demoted, to Social Security.
All Major's appointments display careful calculation.
Thatcherites and One Nation Tories have been dispersed throughout the departments as junior ministers, so that they can ‘spy’ on their different masters.
Two women, Gillian Shephard and Virginia Bottomley, have been promoted to the cabinet, in order to put an end to previous criticism of insensitivity and new fears of tokenism simultaneously.
Jonathan Aitken has been taken off the back benches and made minister of state for defence, in the hope that he can continue to rally the Euro-sceptics as he did over Maastricht.
Michael Heseltine has at last secured a job for his leadership campaign manager, Michael Mates, in Northern Ireland.
Cynics have noted that the Northern Ireland team under the former attorney general, Sir Patrick Mayhew, is well-placed to forge friendly relations with the Ulster Unionists, should by-elections nibble away at the government's majority.
The Welsh Office remains wet; the Scottish Office damp; and Douglas Hurd has the team of his choice at the Foreign Office.
Major's sporting friend, David Mellor, has been given the Ministry of National Heritage, which covers broadcasting, tourism, sport, and the arts, and thus has rather more to it than Waldegrave's new outfit.
Kenneth Clarke, who did not quite take the country by storm during the election, as predicted, has nonetheless been rewarded with one of the great offices of state: the Home Office.
Sideways moves for ministers such as John MacGregor apart, one of the few appointments not to smack of some form of pay-off is that of John Patten as Secretary of State for Education.
He is a former academic, whose five-year-old daughter attends state school and will apparently continue to do so.
If he can be persuaded to keep religion out of politics, he could prove an inspired choice.
Major's first chance to show that he is his own man has been squandered on favours.
But there again, not everyone cares to lead from the front, like Thatcher.He may lack his own philosophy, but he is a shrewd party manager.
Edward Pearce's Sketch Some people really should put a sock in it
When I worked for the Daily Telegraph , the editor, Bill Deedes, would say that he never missed the letters column of the Guardian .
He had a great respect for his rival, but its letters simply cheered him up.
Actually,Guardian letters are divisible.
The best of them are brilliant, one rejoices in the great Keith Flett, and there are all sorts of old-fashioned, warm, radical sentiments.
But there are also the letters of purse-mouthed socialist literalists, lecturers in colleges of further education.
Behind them flicker George Weberish faces with small beards and women in dungarees, people who ought to have been expensively invented by Saatchi and Saatchi, but who have a menacing life of their own.
The letter to the Guardian of Colin Byrne immediately after John Smith's candidacy, was the expression of something else, the rage of an outgoing apparatchik, now detached from outer-office authority, denouncing authority and the doings of apparatchiks.
One recalls the short career of John Underwood, one of the few straightforwardly pleasant men ever involved with that office.
And one recalls that people not well-disposed to Mr Byrne accused him of a measure of unhelpfulness.
I don't say that this is so, only that the allegation was widely made at the time.
Certainly the reputation of the outer office then was that it conspired the way other offices make tea.
But here is Mr Byrne denouncing conspiratorial ways, calling for open government, denouncing trade-union paymasters and in every way giving help and succour to the tabloid Conservative press.
‘Labour war breaks out,’ said one paper.
‘Struggle over Smith,’ said others.
One sees the pleasure Bill Deedes will have got, pleasure enough to last for months.
‘The comrades are at it again — more brotherly love I see.’
I am very fond of my ex-editor, but on the whole I would sooner Bill got his pleasure from watching Fred Couples play golf than from reading open-razor letters to the Guardian .
The entire dispute is bogus from start to finish.
‘Union paymasters’ is a Daily Mail propaganda term.
The reality is that the present intelligent and moderate leaderships of the unions pay up money out of a mixture of sentiment, good will and habit.
They command and order nothing.
As for the party's electoral system, it is a compromise clumsily put together by that decent man, Terry Duffy, to minimise union power at its most triumphalist and overbearing.
It isn't a good system, and we have now heard both Jimmy Airlie and John Edmunds say that they hope it will be the last time it is used.
Certainly it will not in any way help John Smith to any sort of unfair advantage.
What Mr Byrne's unpleasant and excitable letter omitted, and what has been omitted from all subsequent debate, is that Mr Smith is unanswerably the only serious contender offering himself for the leadership.
Mr Gould's candidacy is healthy and desirable.
He himself is extremely likeable and full of ideas, though rarely a force in debate.
But he isn't going to become leader.
The brutal, underlining truth of this contest is that, though Labour was bitterly disappointed by the election, the Kinnock line of disciplined moderation has earned 41 more seats and the stone, so far from rolling to the bottom of the mountain, is two thirds of the way up.
Every consideration of soothing the electorate, persuading it and, above all, combating the Conservative weapon of fear and manipulated anxiety, means more of the same, more assurance, more confidence-building, more patience.
The plainer truth is that this is so obvious, as obvious as Leeds Town Hall, that Mr Smith would be elected by any Labour Party forum, by a ballotted union membership, a ballotted constituency membership, or that secret vote of MPs to which Labour will do well to return.
He would be chosen thus, and he will be chosen under the present system, as the man most likely to win.
The trouble with the entire left is that it talks too much.
This is a decently boring contest in which Mr Gould will sensibly make some points of principle and Mr Smith will be elected, but already it has been turned into an eisteddfod of exegesis.
But if Bill Deedes is enjoying himself, there is only one consolation for the left.
Mrs Thatcher has just attacked the government, John Major and Michael Heseltine in her best, first-person plural, Americanplatform style.
I think that, like Bill, Labour should be cheered up.
THE DISPOSSESSED Rocky road to Rio June's Earth Summit may appease the rich nations, but what will it do for the world's poor, asks Jeremy Seabrook
The crack of gunfire disturbs the night in the northern suburbs of Rio; shots echo from the favelas (shanty towns) of Casa Branco and Borel across the spectacular urban Tijuca Forest, part of the United Nations-designated human heritage.
After a few nights, silence again.
Control over the distribution of cocaine has been settled in the hillside slum communities.
Rio, until recently synonymous with perpetual pleasure and carnival, now rivals Johannesburg and Lagos in the number of murders per 100,000 people.
More bodies of street children — over 200 so far this year — are found in a stagnant ditch in a place called Nove Gerusaleme; killed by extermination squads paid by city businesses that believe they frighten away the tourists.
Cocaine is traded openly in the favelas , which are ruled by the semi-fascist authorities of drug dealers.
Copacabana's tourist hotels are nearly empty.
People are afraid to use the buses because of armed hold-ups.
And it is only a question of time before cholera, raging in northern Brazil, reaches Rio.
The rich, in their gilded enclaves in the south of the city, are troubled.
Spiked cages surround baroque colonial villas; apartment doors are reinforced and guarded at gunpoint.
In antique Portuguese interiors, silent maidservants serve nervous guests under the ornamental shadow of grilles whose fancy design mocks their function.
People remove watches, jewellery and chains before venturing into the menacing streets.
Sixty per cent of the people of Brazil now live below the poverty line defined by the UN.
The top 10 per cent of the people receive half the annual revenue.
One per cent of Brazilians hold 53 per cent of the wealth: distribution is more unequal than in India.
Rio is a city of environmental refugees, of developmentally displaced persons; people uprooted by the extension of agribusiness, plantations and ranching, by deforestation, by the laying waste of the Amazon, drought and intolerable social injustice.
These upheavals have created a society in which more than 75 per cent of the people are now urban.
From the 1960s to the 1980s, they came from the impoverished north-eastern states — Paraiba, Pernambuco, Bahia and Minas Gerais — to find shelter, food and livelihood in a city that has expelled them.
For Rio has indeed been cleaned up; not only through the grisly environmental ‘improvements’— the murder of its street-children — but by constant clearances of the poor, exiled to vast cities on the periphery: down the long, dangerous ten-lane concrete canyon of the Avenida do Brasil.
This violent thoroughfare, with its fumes, speed and bandits at the traffic lights, is like a medieval allegory of the pathway to hell.
It leads to Nova Iguacu, one of the satellite cities of Rio, and itself now the eighth largest city in the country, with a population of 1.2 million.
A bleak settlement; arcades of desolate shops, loops of power cables and dim lighting, hectares of shanty towns and tenements, devoid of basic facilities, without amenity or grace of any kind.
Its streets are haunted by the wraiths of former country-people, the uprooted and dislocated, desperate to sell — cigarette lighters, sweets, biscuits, pornographic magazines, offal, second-hand junk, themselves, even their children.
The bus from the centre announces its destination starkly: INDUSTRIAL.
It goes to the edge of Nova Iguacu, the periphery of the periphery; a landscape of deforested hills, wide shallow valleys and industrial buildings bearing the logos of transnationals — Volkswagen, Fiat, Coca-Cola/Kaiser Beer.
Santo Expedito is a township of about 4,000 people; off the main road, a bumpy track where the buses kick up hot clouds of red dust.
Small plantations of beans, avocados, aipim (a kind of potato) and the pale yellow flowers of kiapo, okra.
The single-storey houses have roofs of corrugated cardboard, and are built of hollow red bricks called tejole , which the people make themselves with crude machines.
Here, the only water is from artesian wells, now contaminated by the industrial effluent and the huge garbage-dump, where the rubbish from Nova Iguacu has been partly ploughed back into the disturbed hillside.
A gaseous stench of decay hangs over the township.
There are no medical facilities, no public drainage.
The only public services are electricity — not for street lighting, but as power for television, the most important bearer of promises to those whose lives are lived at the limit of endurance; and of course, buses, to get the people to work.
Many of the houses bear handwritten notices offering manicure/pedicure, basic literacy, hairdressing; some are selling a few tins of Coca-Cola, candy, combs and trinkets.
For the men, work means construction or security — one of the few areas of economic expansion.
Ismael sits in the dust outside his house.
He is working in a sweet factory for the bare minimum wage — 96,000 cruzeiros (about US$50).
He was in Rio, but came here because it is safer.
‘The streets of Ipanema and Copacabana, that is where the danger is.
We are quiet here, because we all know our neighbours.’
This is the mirror-image of what the people who live in Copacabana say about Nova Iguacu.
‘Nobody goes there.
It is dangerous, full of desperate people.
They will kill you.’
Here, you can see another side of Nova Iguacu.
The people have worked together to construct a health centre; a substantial whitewashed building, cool and clean.
But they have no equipment, no drugs and no one to staff it.
The residents' leader is Israel Vicente da Silva from Recife.
He says it is difficult to sustain solidarity here: the daily attrition of labour, exhaustion and hunger undermine the will of even the most committed.
Santo Expedito is affiliated to the Federação Municipal das Associaçãoes de Bairros de Nova Iguacu (MAB), the city-wide residents' organisation fighting for basic facilities, water, public health, literacy, livelihood, security from crime, violence and drugs.
Bartejeia is from Manaus in Amazonia.
She says: ‘You see few women in the favelas in the daytime.
They have gone to Rio to work as maids.
Their labour is taken from their own homes, where it is desperately needed, to serve in houses where people already have everything.’
If Nova Iguacu is a melancholy place, Duque de Caxias is infernal.
In the centre of this smaller city, the cathedral is locked, a cage-like barrier preventing access to the baroque interior.
Under the portico, bodies are sprawled, a tangle of limbs of malnourished young men.
It looks like a battle ground or a visitation of plague; and indeed, it is something of both of these.
Close to the cathedral is the triumphal yellow double arch of a McDonald's.
A rootless, needy humanity wanders through the dusty streets, unemployed, small vendors, the addicted, whose hunger is now for money to nourish the desire for cocaine.
A little girl of about eight works, threading minute beads onto a string, and then spreading them for sale on a coarse blanket on the sidewalk.
Her father, a man in his 30s, rocks to and fro in despair.
From time to time, she pauses from her work to comfort him.
Josenaldo's family came from Paraiba when he was a child.
There, as landless plantation workers, the children grew up undernourished; many lost their teeth, and still suffer from stomach disorders and limited growth.
Jose and his wife, Iara, live in the shanty town of Jacarezinha in Caxias, which has the reputation of being one of the most violent in Rio.
A number of recent kidnappings were traced to its labyrinthine streets and alleys.
Between a fetid canal and a railway line, under the bleaching afternoon sun, a dozen or so young men stand in line, waiting to buy cocaine.
The dealers wear silver and gold medallions, rings, earrings, fashionable shorts and trainers.
They sell small packets wrapped in white paper, tied with cotton.
The money given in exchange is in US$5 and US$10 bills.
This parallel economy generates more energy than anything else in the favela .
An earlier alternative economy was based on the jogo de bicho , an illegal lottery that became big business.
This traditionally financed the samba schools, which spend six months preparing for carnival.
This older informal economy now co-exists with the more vibrant drug economy.
Once the dominant drug gang is established, its members become the effective authority in the favela.
When a child is sick, the people will go to the druglords for money, and they will give.
This means, says Jose, that people become tied to the drug culture, not only through fear but also through gratitude.
This makes it harder for the people's movement to make headway.
And the workers in the popular struggle work under constant threat, like Jose, under unofficial sentence of death.
‘We cannot run away,’ says Iara, ‘there is nowhere to run to.’
‘Marx spoke of socialism or barbarism.
The choice has already been made for us.
This is not some future prophecy.
It is here and now in Brazil, one of the richest countries in the world.
How can such misery and fear have been created out of the vast natural wealth of our country?’
On the edge of Caxias, close to the Petrobras refinery — the largest in South America — is the small settlement where Iara's mother lives.
Sunday afternoon, and the women sit under the shade of amandouera trees, a moment of peace at the end of a long week.
Yvonete, who works in the nearby cigarette factory, takes us to her husband's workshop, where he makes wooden effigies of the Christ of Rio for sale to tourists.
He is subcontracted to a factory, and receives 150 cruzeiros for each one (about 10 cents); these are sold to tourists at 100 times as much.
Most of the people here are working; and this is reflected in the improvements they have made to their houses — extra rooms, more comfortable furniture, televisions, fridges.
Patricia, 17, goes to a sweatshop in Rio to work for a less than minimum wage.
Vanya works in a supermarket at Uzina, 40 kilometres away.
Travel takes two and a half hours each way.
She is up at 4.30am, and returns at 7.30pm.
Many men do double shifts as security guards, day and night.
Emilio came here in 1957 from north-eastern Brazil.
His family had land, but as the forests were cleared, the rain ran off and no longer watered the earth.
Life, he insists, is better here, even though scarred by violence and injustice.
Walter, 17, has just come from Paraiba, where his mother died.
He scarcely attended school and has no skills.
He works as a helper on building sites, casual, low-paid labour.
He hates the city and longs to go back home.
Here, you can feel the violent reshaping of the country sensibility in the image of urban life; only in the end, there is no going back.
What remains is regret, a persistent idea that they might have been happy in the homeplace, if only they could have survived there.
The hot wind blows a storm of dust and leaves, and the women retreat into their houses.
The road peters out in a mass of marshy grass and stagnant water.
The silver chimney of the Petrobras refinery sends a perpetual flame into the afternoon sky.
Clouds like brassy cauliflowers form over the steel-blue blades of the distant mountain range that borders the plain.
There are dumps of toxic chemicals that seep into the earth.
The dump, close to the cowshed that provides people here with milk, is browsed by fowls and pigs, which rummage among the poisoned wastes.
The pipeline from Petrobras passes beneath the houses; an explosion could occur at any time.
Yet by comparison with the fate of most people in Caxias, this is a haven of relative calm and well-being.
About two kilometres from Caxias is the railway station of Gramacho.
Behind it is a raw new settlement, plots of land demarcated by barbed wire.
This is land recently occupied by 16 families.
Occupations always take place on Friday night, so that by the time legal action can be taken, people have already constructed shelters.
There are now more than 100 families here.
Some houses remain frail structures of cardboard and plywood, but most are the scenes of energetic activity: people bring loads of red-tile bricks, mix cement, fetch stone chips and sand.
Aurelio pauses in his work: already his house is the biggest in the community.
Two rooms are habitable, with a battered fridge, bedding, sofa, and gas-stove.
Inside, beneath the roofs of corrugated metal, the afternoon heat is suffocating.
Illegal light connections have been made, loops of wire with bare bulbs.
Some people are digging a trench to bury a waterpipe that will divert water from the mains.
This is an urgent task, because people know once the cholera comes, the poor communities will suffer.
Aurelio comes from the north-east of the country.
He knew Chico Mendes, leader of the rubber-tappers and social activist, whose murderers have recently been released from jail.
He works as a cook in the local prison, and his wife is a maid.
In the north he worked on sugar and tobacco plantations, where the monthly wage was US$25 — less than half the legal minimum.
Wando is a baker by trade, but is working on construction sites.
He comes from Paraiba, and is one of a new generation of community leaders.
They are planning another land-occupation for next weekend, about two kilometres from here.
They have researched the ownership of the land — it belongs to the government, and is therefore safer to occupy than private land.
Wando has a list of more than 50 families eager to take part, but once the favela is established, many others will find the courage to join them.
Selma sits in the shade of her house, enjoying a day's holiday because her employers are away.
She travels to Copacabana for domestic work.
Her fares are paid; without this she could not afford to work.
‘Women have a harder time than men.
We are up before dawn to prepare food, and when we come home, we have to look after the children, clean and cook.’
Selma has a son in Germany, but she has lost contact with him.
Candido Grzybowski is a human rights worker with the Brazilian Institute for Social and Economic Analysis in Rio.
He says that, whatever the heads of government may say in Rio in June, the realities of western financial institutions will override the fine words and resounding declarations.
‘We have entered the most destructive phase of colonial occupation in our entire history.
The mechanisms are more transparently in place for the transfer of resources from poor to rich.
There has been a vast impoverishment of people over the past decades.
‘If we take 100 as the base of the purchasing power of the minimum salary in 1956, the equivalent today is 30.
This is after the economic miracle, drastic military government, unserviceable debt.
Because there is no alternative local model of development, there is little resistance to what is imposed upon us, with its resulting social disintegration and violence.
The killing of street children is just the most internationally visible part of this process.
‘At the same time, however, we are also seeing the beginnings of a new internationalism, a solidarity which is not yet systematised; but we can see the emerging shape of a new global struggle — of humanism against the free market.
This is what we must build on.
‘What we see in the favelas is social hope being recuperated by the only source of wealth there — drugs; so those who control the drugs traffic become rulers of ‘autonomous' enclaves governed by fear.
These alternatives are a threat to the popular consciousness of the people's movements and the radical elements in the Catholic church, which are in danger of being overtaken by consciousness of the power of money and guns.’
This, then, is the Rio that the Earth Summit will not see, the Rio of violent dispossession, of uncelebrated courage and desperate efforts to survive.
In the favelas , the poor will have their own alternative meetings in June.
In Nova Iguacu, the MAB is organising a carnival on the theme of human ecology.
Bartejeia speaks for the MAB: ‘The summit will talk about population.
We want to talk about people.
The rich see population control as the best way of conserving their environmental well-being.
We don't see it like that.
We know that basic social security is necessary before populations become stable.
The poor have children because they fear sickness, old age, unemployment.
Only when the poor feel safe will they reduce the size of families.
It is quite simple.
But this will never be on the agenda, because it would require levels of social justice and redistribution that the rich will not consider.’
In this sense, say the members of the MAB, the murder of street children is not an aberration.
It is the logical outcome of a desire to do away with the poor, just as the poor die in less dramatic ways, from sickness, malnutrition and drugs.
‘Look behind the display of Rio 92, with its 50,000 representatives.
They talk of ‘our’ planet, when they have no intention of sharing its wealth with us.
How can those people, whose system has filled Rio with refugees, be expected to solve the problems of social injustice and development which they have caused?’
In any case, with the dismissal of the ecologist Jose Lutzenberger as Minister of Environment just before the summit and with the hesitations of George Bush over the electoral advantage to him of appearing here, it seems that the Earth Summit may not quite turn out to be the intended PR success for the western approach to planetary salvation.
Thanks to the efforts of the people's movements, the connection between the environmental clean-up of Rio and western proposals for the clean-up of the planet is becoming a little too clear.
The poor are firm: why should they be forced to solve the contradictions of a system of which they have never been the beneficiaries?
The outstretched arms of the great statue of Christ overlooking Rio no longer appear to the inhabitants of the favelas below to be open in benediction or welcome; in this city of violence, insecurity and ravaged humanity, it appears to be rather a gesture of resignation and despair.
LIBYA International piracy Alexander Cockburn on how Libya has been hijacked in an attempt to get George Bush re-elected
Retail sales here in the US were off 0.4 per cent in March, which spelled bad news for Libya.
Another couple of months' worth of poor economic numbers and the bombs surely fall on Tripoli.
Even by the brazen standards established in the Iraq affair, the United States' and hence the UN Security Council's breaches of international treaties and laws are astonishing.
As an Egyptian columnist recently remarked in the Cairo newspaper Al Ahram:‘What this shows is that the new world order is a system of codified international piracy.’
Libya is acting in accord with international laws and treaties.
Having instituted proceedings against its two citizens, it is under no obligation to extradite them to either the US or UK.
In fact Libya's only legal infraction came when it offered to release the two to the Arab League.
Francis Boyle, a well-known and distinguished professor of law at the University of Illinois, has dealt trenchantly (see accompanying piece, right) with the legal issues.
As he points out, Libya has repeatedly offered to submit this dispute to international arbitration, to the International Court of Justice, to an international commission of investigation, or to some other type of ad hoc international institutional arrangement for the impartial investigation and adjudication of these allegations.
So far, both the United States and the United Kingdom have rejected all of these good faith efforts by Libya to resolve this dispute in a peaceful manner.
Moreover, Boyle also demonstrates that the Security Council violated its own charter through the adoption of Resolution 731.
But, so far as the US and its poodles in the UN Security Council are concerned, law is not the issue.
As US Ambassador to the UN, Thomas Pickering, so brusquely proclaimed: ‘The issue at hand is not some difference of opinion and approach that can be mediated or negotiated.’
These are the words of international brigandage.
Central to all the procedures, indeed to the very mandate of the United Nations is peaceful arbitration of disputes.
Pickering's is the language of Hitler.
As repulsive as this junking of the UN Charter is the moral and political hypocrisy of the US and its allies.
France is presently pressuring Switzerland to deny extradition of a French agent sought by New Zealand in connection with the bombing (with one death) of the Greenpeace ship,Rainbow Warrior .
Britain, a few years ago, denied extradition to Italy of a convicted terrorist, saying piously that ‘his personal conduct’ was not ‘such as to constitute a present threat to one of the fundamental interests of society’.
The Air India plane that blew up off Ireland in 1985, with 329 people killed, had been targeted by men trained in a paramilitary camp.
A few months later, in India, the then Attorney General Ed Meese conceded obliquely that there was some truth to these charges.
That was the end of it.
In the US, there was no intense Lockerbie-type investigation and almost no press interest.
No one called for sanctions against the US or the bombing of Washington.
For years, Costa Rica has been calling for the extradition of US citizen John Hull, charged with premeditated homicide, drugs and arms trafficking, along with other criminal acts including participation in the 1984 bombing of a news conference at La Penca, in which six died.
The request, made as recently as last November, when the uproar about Libya's refusal to hand over its two suspects was at its height, was duly ingored.
Libyan laws on extradition are similar to those of the US, which confer the power to extradite only during the existence of any treaty of extradition with such foreign government.
There is no extradition treaty between the United States and Libya.
It's likely that the decision to blow up Pan Am Flight 103 was made in Tehran, in revenge for the downing of an Iranian Airbus over the Persian Gulf by the USS Vincennes in 1988, killing 290 civilians.
There is strong evidence suggesting the Vincennes was inside Iranian territorial waters at the time.
US Navy Commander David Carlson wrote a year after the episode, in the US Naval Institute's Proceedings for September 1989, that he ‘wondered aloud in disbelief’ as from his nearby vessel USS Sides he observed the Vincennes shoot down what was plainly a commercial airliner in a commercial corridor, perhaps out of‘a need to prove the visibility of Aegis’, the missile system abroad the Vincennes .
Carlson described the Vincennes as a ‘Robo Cruiser’ looking for a fight.
In April of 1990, George Bush conferred upon the brave Airbus-slaying Captain Will Rogers the Legion of Merit, an honour also bestowed upon the officer abroad the Vincennes responsible for anti-aircraft warfare.
The captain's citation, which made no mention of the fatal rendezvous between missiles and 290 civilians, commended the captain for ‘exceptionally meritorious conduct in the performance of outstanding service’ and for the ‘calm and professional atmosphere’prevailing aboard the Vincennes.
Reverse it.
A Libyan vessel inside US waters, eager to test its equipment, shoots down a US civilian airliner.
On return to its home port in Tripoli, the ship is given a huge welcome.
Later, Qaddafi honours the captain in a moving public ceremony.
Most people I meet wag their heads in agreement at the proposition that Libya is a cornerstone in Bush's re-election bid.
On the evidence of opinion-swings when the bombing of Iraq began, this won't prevent the public from cheering lustily when Bush orders the bombers to take off.
Better pray for good economic numbers and not a triple dip recession here.
Otherwise, those folks in Libya are going to pay the price.
LIBYA Double standards Francis A Boyle explains how the US and UK have broken all the rules
Libya and all members of the Security Council are parties to the 1971 Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation — the so-called Montreal Sabotage Convention.
The US, the UK, and Libya are all parties to the convention without any reservations.
The two Libyan nationals accused by the US and UK of the Libya bombing are alleged to have committed what would amount to offences under the Montreal Convention.
Article 5 of the convention makes it quite clear that a contracting state such as Libya must either extradite an alleged offender, or prosecute the alleged offender itself.
As far as the Lockerbie allegations go, Libya has plainly discharged its obligations under Article 5 by instituting criminal proceedings against its two accused nationals.
There is no obligation whatsoever for it to extradite them either to the US or UK.
Article 6 provides that a contracting state such as Libya must take suspects into custody or take other measures to ensure their presence ‘as provided in the domestic law of that state’— as Libya has done.
It continues by stating that the suspects shall be detained ‘for such time as is necessary to enable any criminal or extradition proceedings to be instituted’.
Note the use of the word ‘or’.
There is no obligation to extradite if there is to be a prosecution instead.
It then requires that a contracting state ‘shall immediately make a preliminary enquiry into the facts’— which Libya is also doing.
Next, it must notify the concerned states of what it has done — another condition that Libya has fulfilled.
Finally, it provides that ‘the state which makes the preliminary enquiry…shall promptly report its findings to the said states and shall indicate whether it intends to exercise jurisdiction’— in other words, whether to prosecute or extradite.
In this case, Libya has indicated that it intends to prosecute.
Hence, so far, Libya has fulfilled all its obligations under the Convention.
It is under no obligation to extradite the two suspects.
Britain and America, by contrast, have not fulfilled their obligations.
The Montreal Convention, which provides that contracting states shall afford one another the greatest measure of assistance in connection with criminal proceedings brought in respect of the offences charged.
In other words, both the US and UK are obliged to cooperate with Libya when it comes to the prosecution of these two Libyan nationals.
So far, both have refused.
The Convention also includes, in Article 14, a provision for the compulsory settlement of disputes by arbitration, at the request of either of the parties in dispute.
If, within six months of the request, the parties cannot agree on an arbitration procedure, either party may refer the dispute to the International Court of Justice.
So if America and Britain have any objection to the way Libya is handling the Lockerbie allegations, then it is incumbent on them to demand international arbitration.
So far, both have refused to do so.
By contrast, Libya has repeatedly offered to submit the dispute to international arbitration.
All these offers have been rebuffed.
Hence, both the US and UK have effectively violated most of the provisions of the Montreal Convention when it comes to handling the Lockerbie dispute.
The US ambassador to the UN, Thomas Pickering, has claimed that ‘the matter is not some difference of opinion or approach that can be mediated or negotiated.’
In other words, the US government has admitted that it will pay no attention whatsoever to its obligations mandating the peaceful resolution of international disputes.
This brings the US into direct conflict with the UN Charter, which states (Article 2, paragraph 3) that: ‘All members shall settle their international disputes by peaceful means in such a manner that international peace and security are not endangered.’
In turn, the UN Security Council is acting unlawfully in adopting Resolution 731, which applies sanctions to Libya, since the UN Charter (article 36, paragraph 2) states that: ‘The Security Council should take into consideration any procedures for the settlement of the dispute which have already been adopted by the parties.’
Since all the parties to this dispute had already agreed to Article 14 of the Montreal Convention, the Security Council had no lawful authority to adopt any resolution that failed to call for the arbitration of this dispute.
According to the UN Charter, ‘Decisions of the Security Council on all other matters shall be made by an affirmative vote of nine members, including the concurring votes of the permanent members; provided that, in decisions under Chapter VI, and under paragraph 3 of Article 52, a party to a dispute shall abstain from voting.’
The United States, the United Kingdom, and France were obliged to abstain from the vote on Resolution 731 (1992) because they are parties to this dispute with Libya over allegations surrounding the Lockerbie and UIA bombings that were the very subject matter of this resolution.
The conclusion is inescapable that the reason why the US and UK have illegally rejected all means for the peaceful resolution of this dispute with Libya is that both states know full well that Libya was not responsible for the Lockerbie bombing.
AFGHANISTAN Full circle Kabul's history is coming back to haunt it, claims Fred Halliday
The drama of the past few days in Kabul has highlighted the two central problems of modern Afghanistan: one is the difficulty of finding a balance between the dominant Pathans and the array of other ethnic groups, Tajiks, Uzbeks, Hazaras and others who occupy the northern and western parts of the country; the other is the tension between modernising élites in Kabul and the largely tribal rural population.
If these conflicts dominated the past, they look set equally to overshadow the future.
In January 1929, Kabul was seized by tribal forces under the leadership of a Tajik insurgent Bacha-i Saqqo.
The incumbent monarch, Amanullah, whom the Bolsheviks had supported a decade before in his campaign against the British, was despatched into exile.
The Tajik regime did not last for long: it was opposed by Pathans, and the latter rose up to install a regime that lasted, with some changes at the top, till the communist seizure of power in 1978.
The fall of Amanullah showed how reforms introduced from the top provoke rural, tribal-based, resistance that in the end engulfs the reformers.
Amanullah had been influenced by what he saw as the modernising reforms introduced in Turkey and Iran: he tried to build up a central army, organised a parliament, and decreed that women should wear western dress: the final straw for the tribes came when he made their leaders listen to a five-day speech.
The communist regime that finally fell from power last week was, in many respects, a repetition of Amanullah on a grander, and far bloodier, scale: the war provoked by the 1978 ‘revolution’, and the reaction to it have left up to a million dead, a third of the 16-million population displaced.
Yet for all the Soviet and western involvement, it was, above all, a civil war, one between a small and reckless modernising élite in Kabul and the rural population.
In common with other countries that evaded colonial domination, such as Ethiopia, Afghanistan bred within its intelligentsia and military élite a sense of deep resentment at the country's backwardness, and an impatient, often brutal, determination to modernise the country.
The vehicle of this modernisation was the People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan, a dogmatic communist group founded only in 1965.
A few thousand people with secondary education, based in the civil service and the armed forces, the PDPA seized power in April 1978 and set about enforcing their view of progress.
A red national flag was chosen, no alliances with non-party forces were envisaged, the country was said to be on the road to socialism.
There was widespread resistance to reform, but the PDPA made things worse.
In villages, educational workers would drag women out of their houses to attend mass literacy classes, in others the cadres of the party kidnapped the wife of the mullah on the grounds that, wherever she went, other women would follow.
In pursuit of land reform, in a country without large inequalities in ownership, party militants shot any old man they could find who had a few more acres than the rest, or whose social position, as arbiter of disputes, set him apart from others.
Although most of the PDPA members were originally from rural backgrounds, they had acquired an extreme dogmatism in the secondary schools they attended in Kabul; the result was a country-wide revolt against the central government, assisted by arms from Pakistan and the west.
The leader of the more radical Khalqi faction in the PDPA, Hafizullah Amin, declared that although Afghanistan had virtually no proletariat, its vanguard party, the PDPA, was a proletarian party because of its internationalist connnections.
The connections were, of course, the Red Army: after 18 months of disastrous and brutal reforms, carried out in an overly reckless spirit because the PDPA leaders believed the Russians would always bale them out, Moscow decided in late 1979 that it had had enough.
Soviet forces entered the country, shot Amin, who had himself murdered his predecessor Taraki, and installed a more moderate regime under Babrak Karmal.
The hope was that the Soviet ‘limited contingent’ would stabilise the situation, allow the PDPA to sort itself out and regain some popular support, and then allow a decent withdrawal.
It was not, however, to be.
The ‘limited contingent’, did not crush the opposition, now in receipt of the largest US covert operations support in the world.
In 1986, Babrak was replaced by Najibullah, until then head of the secret police, who set out to implement a policy of ‘national reconciliation’, hoping to unite the PDPA, renamed the Homeland Party, with some sections of the opposition.
Under a UN agreement, the Soviet forces, who had lost 14,000 dead, withdrew in 1989.
While the Russians kept their side of the bargain by pulling out, the Pakistanis and the Americans took no notice of the UN agreement and continued to send in arms.
Contrary to almost all predictions, however, the regime did not fall, because of the backing it continued to receive from the army and part of the educated urban population: it was only the collapse of the USSR in late 1991 that ended military and economic backing for the Kabul regime.
The fall of the Kabul regime may, in fact, yield a rough version of the ‘national reconciliation’ advocated by Najibullah, through a coalition of Tajik and other rebels with the main body of the regime's armed forces and administration.
It may, however, lead to a new civil war between rival mujaheddin factions, a Pathan coalition around Hekmatyar, the Islamic Pol Pot, and the Tajik alliance led by Ahmed Shah Massoud.
The fall of the regime will force into the open an enigma that most western coverage, left and right, has been too indulgent to probe, namely what the political programme of ‘Islam’ is, beyond the seizure of power by one or other armed tribal group.
There was widespread international sympathy for the mujaheddin as opponents of Soviet invasion: but this obscured the internal, civil war, origins of the conflict and led too few observers to ask what the programme of the tribal insurgents was, not least with regard to women.
The failure of the PDPA's vision of ‘progress’ may presage yet another long night for the Afghan people.
THE TABLOIDS A am what I read Can the tabloids really have affected the election's outcome, asks Bill Miller
Following the surprise Tory victory on 9 April, the tabloids are once again on trial.
They stand accused of two sins: first, that they intrude unreasonably into people's private lives; second, that they are unacceptably biased and pursue that bias with scant regard for the truth.
After this election, the tabloids can mount some defence against the charge of unwarranted intrusion into private lives.
Fears that they would repeat their behaviour in the 1987 campaign were not realised.
But they have more difficulty defending themselves on the second and more serious charge.
When Labour won its landslide in 1945, Tory papers had 52 per cent of sales and Labour 35 per cent(the rest were Liberal or neutral).
So Labour suffered from a ‘circulation gap’ of 17 percentage points.
When it won its next large majority in 1966, the circulation gap had narrowed to 13 points.
Since then, Labour has never won a secure working majority at any election.
In February 1974, the circulation gap widened to 38 points as Murdoch switched the Sun to the Tory camp, as well as pushing up its circulation.
At the October election that year, the Sun advocated a non-Tory government for the last time.
Instead, it proposed an all-party coalition.
So the circulation gap between Tory and Labour fell briefly to 18 points.
That was the last time Labour won any kind of majority.
The Sun switched back to the Tories in 1979, and the circulation gap doubled.
It widened still further in the 1980s as sales of the Mirror fell.
Those who argue that the press cannot be influential because Labour won elections in the past against a hostile press have inaccurate memories.
Labour has never won a majority in parliament against a press so tilted against it as now.
All that can be said is that Labour has lost elections in the past when the press was more favourable than it now is.
Bias is a matter of quality as well as quantity.
Until 1959, television avoided coverage of election campaigns, which left the press an important role as news-providers.
According to election analyst David Butler: ‘Snippets from speeches formed the staple of reporting, even in the tabloids.’
Thereafter, radio and television increasingly became the media for straight news, which left the press searching for a distinctive role.
Broadsheets turned to long articles about general themes, campaign strategies and sophisticated analysis of opinion polls.
The tabloids went for sensations, scandals, gossip and, especially, opinion.
They no longer separate news from opinion and have become increasingly partisan.
At first it seemed as if the 1992 campaign might reverse longer-term trends towards greater press partisanship.
Mori figures suggest that, until the middle of the campaign, readers saw the Telegraph , the Times , the Mirror and even the Express as less biased in 1992 than in 1987.
Tabloid support for John Major was half-hearted and equivocal.
There was speculation that the tabloids were preparing for life under a Labour government.
But that all changed in the final week with the Sun 's nine-page ‘Nightmare on Kinnock Street’, the Mail 's front page ‘WARNING’ of higher mortgage rates, and similar attacks in the Express .
They coincided with what appears to have been a sharp last-minute swing to the Tories — a swing of between 2 and 4 per cent in the final week of the campaign.
Sceptics doubt the influence of the press, however, and especially whether it could have so much influence in so short a time.
In Glasgow University's study of the last election campaign, we followed a panel of voters through the year preceding the election — that is from the summer of 1986 to the summer of 1987.
Because we reinterviewed the same people at different times throughout the year, we were able to divide them into persistent readers of Tory tabloids, persistent readers of Labour tabloids, persistent readers of broadsheets and, finally, those who changed papers or read no paper regularly.
(About half our panel fell into one or other category of persistent reader.)
Overall, the swing in our panel over the year leading up to the 1987 election was 5 per cent, but among persistent readers of Tory tabloids it was 12 per cent , and among persistent readers of Labour tabloids only 1 per cent .
Tabloids clearly influenced their readers.
But what was the influence of the Tory tabloids on the overall swing in the panel as a whole?
The answer to that seemingly simple question depends on what Tory tabloid readers might have done if they had not read Tory tabloids.
If all the persistent readers of Tory tabloids had behaved like those who read Labour tabloids, Labour would have benefited from a 3 per cent swing (compared to the actual election result).
If tabloids had not existed, and all those who read Labour and Tory tabloids had behaved like those who read no paper regularly (and depended exclusively on television for their news), then Labour would still have benefited from a 2 per cent swing.
Finally, if the imbalance between Labour and Tory tabloids had been eliminated — so that equal numbers read Tory and Labour tabloids, then Labour would still have benefited from a 1 per cent swing.
So even on this minimal change scenario, eliminating the imbalance in tabloid partisanship would be worth a 1 per cent swing to Labour.
That translates into about a dozen seats in parliament and would be enough to cost the government its overall majority.
Our 1986-87 panel study has not been repeated, but we can get some idea of the impact of the press in 1991-92 by comparing Mori polls of newspaper readers' voting intentions in 1991 with votes in 1992.
Comparing different samples on different occasions in this way probably understates the influence of the press.
So the real influence of the press is likely to be greater than the Mori data indicates.
Nonetheless, Mori figures show that between the second half of 1991 and 9 April 1992, the swing to the Tories was 9 per cent among Sun readers and 6 per cent among Star readers, compared to just 1 per cent among Mirror readers — evidence that the press influenced its readers in 1992 as in 1987.
(On Mori figures, the swing was relatively low among Express and Mail readers, but this may be due to sampling variability.
But the core of Labour's complaint is that the press influenced its readers by lies and distortions rather than by persuasive argument.
Labour could not complain if the press pointed out that higher-rate taxpayers would be worse off under John Smith's budget plans.
It does complain that the tabloids put the fear of tax increases into readers who had not been targeted by Smith's budget.
Proof of that complaint depends on an analysis of tabloid content as well as tabloid readers voting behaviour.
THE ETHNIC VOTE Race to Westminster What did the parties offer Britain's ethnic minorities?
Very little concludes Julie Flint
On election day in Dewsbury, an elderly lady approached the Labour MP, Ann Taylor, to explain her defection.
‘I'd normally vote Labour,’ she said, ‘but I don't think I can this time.’
Mrs Taylor asked why.
‘Immigration,’ she replied.
‘Letting all those people in.’
Racial prejudice, laid bare in 1987 in attacks on the integrity of Labour's black candidates and their alleged attachment to ‘loony left’ policies, dogged the 1992 campaign through subtle manipulation of the immigration issue.
‘Nazi riots will hit Britain,’ the Sun declared on the eve of polling.
‘Major stands firm against migrants,’ cried the Daily Mail .
The Conservative challenger in Dewsbury, John Whitfield, played the immigration card strongly and, although narrowly defeated, saw his vote increase by 1.1 per cent.
His election releases asked: ‘What future would there be…if Labour were in control of government…immigration controls abandoned?’
Literature distributed in areas adjacent to large Asian populations warned that: ‘Labour is set to relax rules…
Hattersley promises change in immigration laws…
Kinnock ‘won't curb flood of bogus refugees'.’
In other parts of Britain, the far right distributed newspaper collages blaming blacks and Asians for rape and violent crime under the headline: ‘Immigrant mothers top baby tables’.
Racist material in Cheltenham showed John Taylor, the Conservative candidate of Afro-Caribbean origin, surrounded by six evil-looking men holding spears, petrol bombs and packets of drugs.
A vote for Taylor was portrayed as a vote for ‘Brixton…
Toxteth, Birmingham, Bradford etc’.
If smears from the far right were predictable, the campaign trail theme, echoed in the Liberal Democrats' campaign against Ashok Kumar in Langbaurgh, that Taylor was not ‘a local man’, was not.
Given the still-simmering controversy over a fellow Tory's ‘bloody nigger’ insult, the argument was indefensible.
But it hurt the candidate: whatever they say publicly, Tory officials acknowledge privately that Taylor received ‘a substantial amount’ of racist hate mail.
In the last three days of the campaign, the Tory tabloids brought in a BNP-style vote.
And not only the tabloids: with the exception of Lord Whitelaw, Tory leaders did little to distance themselves from the racist comments of Sir Nicholas Fairbairn and instead came back with very similar language — from ‘swamping’ to ‘Mongol hordes’.
From the very beginning of the campaign, it was clear that racial issues were not on any party's agenda.
Posters and manifestos ignored the fact that at least one in 20 of the population is black.
Declaring ‘It's Time to Get Britain Working Again’, Labour featured the Union Jack.
The Liberal Democrats depicted a large crowd —‘Britain's People’— in which three of 300 people appeared to be of Afro-Caribbean origin.
‘The message,’ says Robin Richardson of the race relations charity Runnymede Trust, ‘seems to be there is no place for black ethnic minority people in the centuries-old history evoked by this picture — and, by implication, in the historic work ahead of us’.
In a pre-election report entitled Politics for All , Runnymede had already drawn attention to the painful gap between…the fine statements and aspirations of official policy statements on the one hand and the painful realities of discrimination and exclusion on the other.
Thus only 24 black and Asian candidates represented the major parties in the general election — five fewer than in 1987.
Only the Tories increased the number of their ethnic minority candidates, selecting two, moreover, for winnable seats.
Despite the parties' failure to promote black candidates, the vast majority of voters were unaffected by ethnicity.
Thus six ethnic minority MPs were elected — a 50 per cent increase over 1987 — and Labour's four sitting black MPs all increased the size of their vote.
The two newcomers to Westminster — Niranjan Deva for the Tories in Brentford and Isleworth, and Piara Khabra for Labour in Ealing Southall — retained seats previously held by white MPs.
The disregard of minorities, combined with what Hugo Young has called ‘the politics of admissible ethnic sneering or loathing’, is of special concern to the Muslim community — the main victim of traditional racists as well as of the unresolved antagonism of the intelligentsia in the wake of the Rushdie affair.
Thus a taxi driver, voting Conservative ‘to keep the Muslims out of this country’, argues that ‘with the blacks you can at least identify with Kenny Lynch’, while, at the other end of the social spectrum, a sketch accompanying a Bernard Levin column in the Times shows a Muslim wiping a blood-stained sword with the Union Jack.
Britain's current race relations legislation was framed, in the mid-1970s, on the assumption that all people aspired to the white indigenous way of life.
But the situation today is far more complex, with a new assertion of cultural identity.
‘Ethnic communities are reproducing a culture which the majority of British people haven't yet accepted as part of the British landscape,’ says Dr Tariq Madood, a fellow at Nuffield College currently writing on the changing character of racism.
‘Just asking for more legal powers is not good enough: we need more debate about what we understand by racial equality and multi-culturalism.
We need to develop an understanding of Britain and Britishness in which racial and religious minorities cannot be written off as being alien.’
In the unholy trinity of class, culture and colour, it is the Muslim community that suffers most — being at the bottom of the economic heap, widely perceived as the fanatical enemy within, and, of course, not white.
As Rushdie and recession deepen hostility to race equality legislation, few believe the new government will do more than seek greater managerial competence from the Commission for Racial Equality while encouraging those blacks who can be multicultural Tory role models.
There is no sign of serious thinking other than tightening immigration controls and re-introducing the Asylum Bill; no discussion of the rise of Islamophobia and right-wing extremism in Europe; no strategy for fighting this growth.
Britain's black community — especially young people unable to find employment — is becoming increasingly disillusioned and restless.
In Bradford, where more than 60 per cent of Bangladeshis are unemployed, Muslim youths are, for the first time, forming gangs in the deprived Manningham district.
Community leaders have little expectation that the new government will do anything about the inner-city areas where most blacks and Asians live.
They pin little hope on the new Home Secretary, Kenneth Clarke.
They doubt John Major will make his mark.
‘Despite what Major calls his very humble background, we as a community haven't heard anything except rhetoric,’ says Ishtiaq Ahmad of Bradford's Council for Mosques and Racial Equality Council.
‘There must be serious doubts as to whether he is strong enough to shift the party behind him.’
Voting over, there is an urgent need for serious debate on the nature of race relations in the nineties: analysis of requirements in employment, housing, health care and the courts.
Not more of the same — a narrowing down of what it is to be British, and a belief that to promote good race relations you have to keep black people out.
NORTH OF THE BORDER The Union strikes back Lack of support for the Scottish Nationalists, says Brian Wilson, has confounded both pundits and parties alike
In its post-election issue, the Independent on Sunday offered a list of phrases that it never wanted to hear again.
High up on it were the words: ‘And now over to Scotland, where a very different general election campaign is being fought.’
In a rare act of editorial humility, the paper acknowledged that it had made the same mistake itself.
The truth was that, while large sections of the media were insisting that it was all terribly different in Scotland, and while some politicians managed to convince themselves that the constitution was the issue above all others in the minds of Scotland's electorate, most Scottish voters were declining to have their agenda set for them.
Every time the pollsters asked them to list the issues that most concerned them, the Scots obstinately placed those matters that fail to excite emissaries from the London media at the top — unemployment, the NHS, education — just as in comparable parts of the UK.
Constitutional change usually came about tenth, nominated by around 12 per cent of the electorate.
These conclusions were consigned to the inside pages, since they did not fit the script that had been written on Scotland's behalf.
They suggested that constitutional change was something that most Scottish electors might, when invited, approve of.
But it was not keeping many of them awake at night, and it certainly wasn't the major influence on how they were going to vote.
On 9 April, this neglected reality had the last laugh.
Against all predictions, the Tories increased support to 25.7 per cent and won back a couple of seats.
Against all predic-tions, the Nationalists lost two seats and gained none.
Against most predictions, Labour held all its total of 49 seats on a slightly reduced share of the vote.
In constituencies where the Tories were supposed to be at their most discredited, and thus most vulnerable to the Nationalists, they actually increased their votes and their majorities.
Yes, even Sir Nicholas Fairbairn.
It became evident that there was more reality in Brigadoon than in the myth that Scotland is, or is likely to become, a Tory-free zone.
Tactical voting appeared to have taken the form of latent Tories turning out to see off the much-advertised threat to the Union.
It is possible to separate pseudo-nationalist rhetoric from more sober reality.
The arithmetic shows that Scotland is a part of Britain in which there is an above-average Labour vote and a below-average Tory vote.
But these excellent characteristics are less emphatic than in, say, Wales or the north of England.
They are not sufficient to justify the portrayal of Scotland as being out on a limb from the rest of Britain, either in its voting behaviour or the thinking that produces it.
True, the Nationalist vote is an additional factor.
But anyone who knows anything about it understands that it is very far removed from being an ‘interchangeable with Labour’ vote.
Much of it can represent an alternative brand of rural Conservatism or ‘the only way to beat the Tory’.
A good deal of its urban manifestation, as espoused by Mr Sillars, often seems to owe more to hatred of Labour — the barrier to its ambitions — than love of Scotland.
There is also the ‘to-hell-with-them-all’ vote of the dispossessed, increasingly common throughout Europe, which has precious little to do with specific constitutional demands.
And it all added up to 21 per cent and three seats.
We then move on to the post-election scene.
As in other parts of the country where Labour had ‘won’ the election, the sense of disappointment and frustration was intense.
There was clearly a need for a fundamental reappraisal of future strategies, policies and perhaps even alignments.
Equally clearly, there was a need, generally observed, to avoid rushes to judgment or apocalyptic statements about Labour's future prospects.
In Scotland, however, the headless chickens were soon out and running.
Something had to be done.
Great.
What was to be done?
A united front was to be formed with the Nationalists.
Why?
Because 74.3 per cent of the Scottish people who voted, opted for parties that supported constitutional change, and if they all blew hard enough in the direction of St Andrew's House, the walls were eventually bound to fall down.
The possible objections to this analysis, if that is not too strong a word, are many.
First, there is the surprising fact, for a country in alleged constitutional ferment, that the turn-out in Scotland was rather low — 73.8 per cent.
Second, there is the wholly unsustainable assumption that constitutional change was the motivating factor in all, or even most, of these votes.
Third, if the crude mechanism of totting up the votes for different parties is to be employed for the purpose of supporting a specific contention, there is the inconvenient fact that 79 per cent of those who voted in Scotland backed parties that wish to maintain the Union.
It seems that the Tories did rather well in the general election by portraying devolu-tion and independence as being two heads of the same monster.
This was, of course, dismissed by supporters of devolution as a grossly unfair caricature.
Rather, Labour and Liberal Democrats protested, it was the Tories who were threatening the Union through their gross intransigence.
That latter case can still be argued.
But the spectacle of a few Labour MPs begging for Nationalist arms to link with, on the grounds that ‘we're all on the same side, really’ gives a degree of credibility to the Tory scare-story that it previously lacked.
I am, however, less concerned about Tory claims of vindication than about what Labour voters — the great majority of whom have no wish to embrace the SNP as prodigal brothers — make of it.
My own experience suggests that, the further one moves away from television studios and other hot-houses, where the thrill of constitutional debate has ousted boring subjects like poverty and unemployment, the less enthused the populace becomes.
Labour voters who observed the anti-Labour virulence of the SNP campaigns are puzzled as to why a few Labour MPs and trade union luminaries have made it their mission to resuscitate a force that the electorate had efficiently reduced to three seats.
Time will doubtless provide the answer to that conundrum.
It may have been inevitable that the fringes of Labour and the Nationalists would intersect in the aftermath of the election.
It is also, in my view, perfectly reasonable to support the proposition that a referendum should be held in Scotland in order to determine what constitutional status people actually want.
I don't think that this is a challenge that the government should necessarily shy away from, since there is a shared interest in putting some reality into the debate.
But the bottom line remains that Labour is not, and cannot become, a nationalist party in Scotland or anywhere else.
The abuse heaped upon Labour's devolution proposals by the SNP during the general election is a recent-enough reminder that the SNP is a party of no compromise.
Therefore, in any dealings, the only movement would come from Labour, and it would be movement in the direction of a no-entry sign.
Labour's job is to defend its people and communities to the best of its collective abilities, and prepare for the next time.
It's an onerous and unglamorous path to follow in Scotland — but so it is, too, in England and Wales.
And when all the hype is stripped away, it is the one that people expect and demand of us.
If we refuse to recognise it, while maintaining an obsession with constitutional policies, they will continue to set their own agenda — and judge us harshly for refusing to respect it.
NATION STATES Together and apart Plaid Cymru MP Dafydd Elis Thomas believes there must be an end to the UK, based on understanding not division
Most writing about nationalism starts back to front.
Or, putting it another way, it describes the symptoms, the effects, rather than the cause.
Or the direction of the train rather than the motion of the engine.
In this vein, nationalism is described as if it were some independent ideology, strangely based upon a sense of belonging to a particular national or ethnic group, with its traditions and a so-called common history.
The nation as a society is seen as the begetter of nationalism, with belonging to a nation seen as some part of the natural order, characterised by something called national identity, and susceptible to climatic changes known as ‘nationalist revivals’.
This way of writing about nationalism pervades most discussions within the UK.
Indeed UK political culture is, without doubt, the most nationalistic in western Europe, and probably beyond.
But those who trap themselves inside nationalist thinking, which includes most political journalists and politicians in the UK, prefer not to reckon with the historical fact that most of recorded human history managed fairly well, indeed probably much better, without nationalism.
In most historical cultures, we discover peoplehood, ethnicity, kinship, certainly placehood, various bindings and unbinding: the people from here, and the people from over there.
But it is only with the development of the nation state that nationalism comes into existence.
Others will argue that it was the other way about.
I will argue that nationalism is the vocabulary that legitimises the function of the modern nation state, and the sooner we can dispense with it, the better for all of us.
The first reason to dispense with it is that the nation state itself is an expensive fiction, particularly in terms of its loss of human life.
There are no nation states, or if there are, then Iceland might be the exception that proves the rule: where territorial state boundaries are coterminous with what might be described as a ‘nation’.
Virtually all nation states are multi-national, multi-ethnic, multi-lingual, multi-cultural.
State boundaries are haphazardly drawn across land masses and linguistic, cultural and ethnic lines.
What seems to be a regular feature, however, is that a leading élite, often in the name of the culture of one dominant ethnic group within a state, will peddle its own notion of homogeneity.
Anglophone domination of the off-shore west European islands might serve as a useful example.
But no sooner has one power élite asserted cultural power through the ideology of national hegemony, than another would-be élite, speaking out of a sense of power exclusion, sets up alternative demands.
It is thus that ‘national liberation’, or the breakaway movements, so often take on the colour and rhetoric of the group they see as dominating them.
The argument runs something like this, whether in the territories that were once Yugoslavia or the islands that will one day no longer be the United Kingdom: since the state mainly belongs to them, we others are excluded, and therefore want to seek to establish our own state.
From this, we will not be excluded, but will in turn exclude them, including some of those who might find themselves in the terrain of our state because their being on our state threatens the unity of our state, just as they perceive us to be a threat to their unity, and so on and so on.
The ultimate sanction of oppositional nationalism is to claim legitimation for its own armed force against the armed force of the allegedly containing state.
It is also to assert an ethnically, or nationality-based citizenship to the exclusion of those who do not share that particular cultural tendency.
Nationalism and its vocabulary, then, is, in my view, best seen as the mobilising talk of located élites, over the structures of the political state in their regions.
The advantage the nationalist rhetoric and the nation statehood confers is that it is always legitimate, liquidating the nationals of other nation states, particularly in contention over a piece of territory.
Basic citizenship — that is the right to have certain privileges regardless of ethnicity or nationality — makes those rights actually impossible to achieve.
And although international processes are moving towards notions of citizenship not based in ethnicity, this is still the norm in international law.
Indeed, the divergent people or region cannot be ‘recognised’ in international law except through making bizzare claims to be a ‘nation state’.
This seems to me to be at the root of the false notion of ‘independence’ being pursued by so many local élites throughout Europe and beyond.
Independence is as fictitious as the homogenous nation state, yet is is thought of as an ‘objective’, because it is not possible at the moment to separate from an existing dominant state without making your own alternative.
We may one day achieve a position where a region may elect to disaffiliate from a dominant state, and become a European region without feeling it encumbent upon itself to apply for membership of the United Nations.
And although the head count of ‘nation states’ within that organisation is increasing by the year, it is unlikely ever to encompass all the 4,000 or so distinct peoples that UN-sponsored studies have identified as existing in the world.
Where does this debate take us?
It certainly takes us away from the notion of a centre of power claiming alleged sovereignty over supposedly homogeneous territory.
In place of that, we need to think of centres of power having power relations with localities, places and regions, which in their turn are also cross-linked and networked with multiple connections.
In that model, sovereignty exists everywhere and nowhere.
Competences of certain powers — cultural, economic, environmental, security (previously known as military)— might interrelate and intersect.
Federal (or confederal) relations, with subsidiarity, will form the lines of political decision-taking.
Interdependence within a global/local environment will replace independence as a goal, and cultural diversity within and without open borders will become a cause of celebration not a threat.
Fear of domination by aliens, so encouraged by nation-state nationalism, will be replaced by an understanding of the ever-historical diversity of all human societies.
Rather than national liberation, it seems to be liberation from nationalism that must be the goal for the 21st century.
We have the possibilities of a postmodern, post-nationalist way of relating, but it seems to me that the prerequisite of that in these islands is the end of the United Kingdom as we have known it.
RACIST REVIVAL Hate in a cold climate The recent resurgence of the European extreme right is much weaker in Britain.
Christopher Husbands asks why
Neither before, nor after, the second world war, has there been in Great Britain an extreme-right movement comparable to those elsewhere in Europe.
In the 1930s, there was the British Union of Fascists (BUF), led by Sir Oswald Mosley, and, in the 1960s and 1970s, there was the National Front (NF).
Both of these, however, were small beer.
In the 1950s and early 1960s, there was, it is true, a slightly revitalised extreme right in Britain, represented by Mosley's postwar reincarnation of the BUF, the Union Movement, and by the British National Party (not the same as the group currently bearing this name).
Then, after its founding in early 1967, the NF mobilised to become a significant, if localised, force during the early and mid-1970s, especially in 1972-73, after the arrival in Britain of displaced Ugandan Asians, and again in 1976, when Malawian Asians arrived as refugees and were greeted by a moral panic about immigrants, legal and illegal, that continued into 1977, and gave some local impetus to the NF's electoral attempts at that time.
However, after its failure in the 1979 general election, the NF dissolved into fission and acrimony; the leaders of the 1970s departed or were expelled.
As the NF declined in the early 1980s, a hitherto lesser rival, the British Movement, looked set to assume the street-presence mantle until then held by the NF.
The BNP (British National Party), founded by John Tyndall in 1982 after his departure from the NF, long laboured in the wilderness; in 1992, it has become the most important of the extreme-right groupings in Britain but it nonetheless remains a peripheral phenomenon.
Still, despite the undoubted marginality in the contemporary European scene of the British extreme right, there can be little doubt that its experience was important as a model.
For the NF from the late 1960s set the pattern for successful mobilisation based on anti-black/anti-immigrant appeals, which numerous commentators have said were explicitly copied by other extreme-right groupings in western Europe.
The turning to an anti-immigrant position by the French FN (Front National) in the late 1970s, the adoption of an anti-foreign-worker stance by the German NPD (Nationaldemokratische Partei Deutschlands) after 1979, the basis of the appeal of the Dutch NVU (Nederlandse Volksunie) from 1974, even the turning from mere Flemish nationalism to anti-immigration propaganda by the Belgian VB (Vlaams Blok) in the early 1980s — all these are examples of movements that, sometimes explicitly and self-confessedly, followed the example of the NF in moving to anti-immigrant/anti-foreign worker appeals and away from an exclusive focus on anti-Semitism, anti-communism and the other traditional concerns of postwar European neo-fascism.
There are four principal theories used to account for the failure of the extreme right in Britain.
The major explanations might be labelled as: economic; cultural; political; and organisational.
Of course, within these broad classifications are subtypes of explanation.
A major theory under the economic heading argues that the material forces that produced fascism in other countries (whatever one's views about the social base of such movements) were insufficiently rigorous to operate in Great Britain, even though the 1930s brought severe hardship in certain areas.
A variant of this general theory is that the balance of class forces was different and less confrontational in Britain than elsewhere, hence there was less of the resentment that produced extreme-right reactions.
Among culture-based arguments is the simplistic one that the British are by nature more tolerant than other nationalities.
It would be difficult genuinely to sustain this argument in its crudest form but a more serious case can be made that, for other reasons, the British are culturally resistant to fascism and to neo-fascism.
With Britain's long history of civic integration of all but the most marginal social classes (or at least their male members), there was — so some have claimed — less of the cultural marginality affecting significant social groups from which fascism could draw strength; by extension, there was supposedly more of a commitment to the rules of the ‘democratic game’.
Some of the culture-based arguments clearly have political ingredients, but one strictly political argument, or rather political-system argument, is equally applicable to any new political movement (whether left, right or centrist) seeking long-term viability — that the British first-past-the-post electoral system has features that make it extremely difficult for a new party to ‘break through’.
An aspect of the purported effects of the political system is the policy co-option argument — that the extreme right, at least in recent years, has been unsuccessful because of the ease with which some of its appeals (or some attenuated version of them) can be adopted by major parties, after the former parties have shown themselves unable to break into the political system.
It has been said that the Conservative Party's deliberately tough stand on immigration has removed the raison d'être of the extreme right, even if the former's stance is based on exclusionism rather than on the expulsionism of the latter.
The final set of arguments emphasises the limited leadership qualities and organisational deficiencies that have been a historic feature of the extreme right in Great Britain.
In general, those who have emerged to lead it have often been unsuitable in personality terms and are readily to be seen as incompetent or inappropriate, even by the least perspicacious.
Thus, those who led the NF in the 1970s had, in many cases, a background in the most nutty forms of postwar extremism, despite claims to have seen the democratic light after these youthful indiscretions.
Also, below the surface among the grass-roots leadership, it was usually plain to see that the party was scraping the barrel for competent politicians.
Many such leaders were locally well-known, even notorious, but had little political experience or skill, or even interest.
It is fair to say that the British extreme right has not been able to draw on specific traditions of activism that have assisted, say, the French FN or the Belgian VB in extending their influences so widely.
Perhaps the closer example is the Dutch case, where both the CD (Centrumdemocraten and the CP 86 (Centrum Partij '86) suffer from organisational weakness, as is revealed when the vagaries of electoral success oblige them to seek competent individuals to fill council seats that they have won.
The British extreme right has also been particularly plagued by schism, exacerbated in part by political failure, after it has become impossible for the party to hide inherent divisions and tensions among its leaders.
Such divisions have sometimes been based upon arguments about strategy and policy but, as often as not, they have emerged from personality differences among individuals with volatile and opposing temperaments.
Such examples of the extreme right as have emerged in contemporary Great Britain have been almost exclusively urban-based, often (though not exclusively) within parts of London.
This urban base once distinguished these movements from such parties in Europe, although extreme-right phenomena there in the 1980s have (with exceptions) now taken on some of the distributional features of the British extreme right's support.
The Dutch case, for example, with the concentration of CD and CP '86 support in the country's three or four principal cities, has clear analogies with the British example in the 1970s.
It should be realised that the explosion of extreme-right support that has been a feature of most western European countries in greater or lesser degree throughout the 1980s is far from a totally homogeneous phenomenon.
The cyclicity of support has varied between countries, as has the depth and persistence of that support.
On the other hand, there has been one almost universal factor behind the emergence of the extreme right.
During the late 1980s in a number of countries — West Germany, The Netherlands, Switzerland, Austria, the Scandinavian countries, and France (though there only quite recently)— there was a purported threat posed by the arrival of increasing numbers of third-world asylum-seekers.
In all these countries there have been major debates about what policy to adopt in order to restrict the arrival of such people.
Although the furore about asylum has been more recent in Great Britain than elsewhere in Europe, it has on occasion been as fierce, particularly as orchestrated by parts of the right-wing tabloid press.
In late 1991, the Asylum Bill was introduced into parliament as a Home Office initiative with the intention of making various aspects of the asylumapplication process more difficult.
Although it was a casualty of the timing of the general election, it is likely to be reintroduced in some form in the current parliament by the new Home Secretary, Kenneth Clarke.
Intending to increase sensitivity to the supposed threat, the right-wing tabloids have been regaling the public with anti-refugee stories during 1991 and 1992.
For example, the Sunday Express of 20 October 1991 headlined its front-page lead article: ‘SCANDAL OF THE BOGUS REFUGEES — 80% cheat their way into Britain and the good life’.
At the beginning of October 1991, the Daily Mail ran a five-day series on ‘The Invasion of Europe’, whose opening article was entitled ‘Out of Africa and onto our doorstep’.
A sub-theme of many such articles has been the supposed toughness of the British government's proposals or policies compared with alleged sloppiness or ineffectiveness elsewhere in Europe.
The pre-Maastricht debates offered a field-day for this sort of claim, which surfaced again in the general-election campaign, on this occasion as an anti-Labour weapon.
In fact, the electoral effects of scare-stories about immigration and asylum may be one of the so-far unrecognised aspects of the campaign, partly because such stories have not so far featured prominently among the factors of mass-media coverage to which the Labour Party has attributed its own defeat.
The right-wing press was given a modest initial opportunity for an immigration hype with the discovery of a lorryload of illegal immigrants on 23 March.
However, it was a little later in the campaign when the asylum card was really played, particularly by Kenneth Baker (whose swan-song had been predicted by many observers as being just this), but also by Douglas Hurd and the Prime Minister.
Hurd raised the issue in a speech on 25 March, and Baker pitched in more stridently a day later.
For the Evening Standard of 2 April, Baker penned a piece on ‘Why we must not allow our tolerance to be abused’.
Then on 6 April, speaking in Stroud, he achieved his own double-whammy, managing to include in the same speech attacks both on proportional representation and also on Labour's purportedly lax asylum policy.
The support given the previous day to German neo-Nazis in two regional elections there was the starting point for his attack on PR; a first-past-the-post system and stringent policies on asylum and immigration were preventing an extreme-right emergence in Britain, so he argued.
‘BAKER'S MIGRANT FLOOD WARNING —‘Labour set to open doors'’, was how the front page of the Daily Express of 7 April reported his speech.
On 7 April, John Major himself spoke out in defence of what Baker had said; ‘MAJOR STANDS FIRM AGAINST MIGRANT FLOOD’, as the Daily Mail chose on 8 April to headline the story.
Four days earlier the Sun had also helped to set the tone with a centre-spread report, ‘HUMAN TIDE LABOUR WOULD LET IN — Bogus refugees will grab state handouts’, complete with coloured maps representing the locations of intending immigrants to Britain from Africa, Asia, eastern Europe and the Middle East.
Given the clear evidence of the effects of immigration as an issue in some earlier general elections, who can be certain that this coverage did not switch votes away from Labour, or at least re-attached previously deserting Tories?
Of course, sensitising the public to such an issue in this provocative way may have its dangers, especially when the mainstream party intended to benefit is weak, unpopular or lacking credibility for other reasons.
Thus, in France it seems that the general beneficiary of attempts by politicians or organs of the mainstream right to appear restrictionist on immigration has as often as not been the FN.
In Britain, however, there has been only a modest and localised recent recovery by the extreme right.
After the collapse and division of the NF, the BNP began in late 1989 and early 1990 to take on some of the former's street-presence.
In the East End of London, the BNP has dared to re-emerge, selling newspapers at a weekly meeting in Brick Lane, a location made notorious for battles between the NF and anti-fascists in the late 1970s.
There have been numerous suggestions of increased numbers of racial attacks, many supposedly attributable directly or indirectly to the BNP's presence, although racial attacks in many parts of London are, and have long been, so numerous (and usually unreported) that only a tiny fraction even of the most serious could ever be laid at the BNP's door.
There have been occasional sorties by the BNP in local by-elections, but none has been a particularly significant performance.
This hardly compares with what has happened even in The Netherlands, let alone in France, Belgium, Germany, Austria or Switzerland.
The BNP averaged 1 per cent in 13 constituencies fought in the general election, including 3.3 per cent in the two Tower Hamlets constituencies.
The NF averaged 0.7 per cent in 14 seats fought.
Some of the traditional theories used to account for the failure of the extreme right in Great Britain do have something to say about the reasons for this.
The recent very modest resurgence to the benefit of the BNP in fact predates the obsession in the right-wing press with bogus asylum-seekers, which began in earnest only in 1991.
Instead, economic privation as the recession bit deeper, and lasted longer than previous downturns in the economy, has surely contributed to the extreme right's so-far limited recovery.
By contrast with France, where Jean-Marie Le Pen can say of his party that ‘the original is better than the copy’, in Britain most regard the Conservative Party as the original, especially as now confirmed by the election campaign.
The argument about deficiencies of extreme-right leadership also remains as strong as ever.
On the street, the BNP looks like what it is: a bootboys' party that mobilises within a small number of inner-city areas from those sections of disaffected white working-class male youth who otherwise engage in football violence and similar activities.
NATIONALISM Whose fault-line is it anyway?
The ideological division of Europe's population into nations and ethnic groups is a recent invention that dangerously simplifies the realities, says Eric Hobsbawm
Historians are to nationalism what poppy-growers in Pakistan are to heroin-addicts: we supply the essential raw material for the market.
Nations without a past are contradictions in terms.
What makes a nation is the past, what justifies one nation against others is the past, and historians are the people who produce it.
So my profession, which has always been mixed up in politics, becomes an essential component of nationalism.
More so even than the ethnographers, philologists and other suppliers of ethnic and national services who have usually also been mobilised.
In what terms do Armenians and Azeris argue about who has the right to Mountain Karabakh, which is in Azerbaijan, but inhabited mainly by Armenians?
In terms of arguments about the Caucasian Albanians, a people which no longer exists but which in the Middle Ages inhabited the disputed region.
Were they more like, or unlike the Armenians who are there now?
This is essentially a problem for historical research, in this case endlessly speculative historical debates.
(I take this example from Nora Dudwick of the University of Pennsylvania).
Unfortunately, the history that nationalists want is not the history that professional academic historians, even ideologically committed ones, ought to supply.
It is a retrospective mythology.
Let me repeat yet again the words of Ernest Renan in his famous lecture ‘What is a Nation’ in 1882: ‘Forgetting history, or even getting history wrong (l'erreur historique ) are an essential factor in the formation of a nation, which is why the progress of historical studies is often dangerous to a nationality.’
So a historian who writes about ethnicity or nationalism cannot but make a politically or ideologically explosive intervention.
Let me begin with a semantic query.
If there is any standard criterion today of what constitutes a nation with a claim to self-determination, meaning to setting up an independent territorial nation-state, it is ethnic-linguistic, since language is taken, wherever possible, to express and symbolise ethnicity.
But of course it is sometimes not possible, because historical research demonstrates conclusively that the kind of standardised written language which can be used to represent ethnicity or nationality is a rather late historic construction — mostly of the 19th century or even later — and in any case quite often it does not exist at all, as between Serbs and Croats.
Even then, however, the ethnic distinction, whatever it may signify, is made.
I spend my holidays in a cottage in Wales which is administratively and legally less distinct from England than Connecticut is from New York State.
Yet even though in my part Welsh has not been spoken for a long time, and indeed the natives have even forgotten the Welsh pronunciation of our Celtic place-names, it would not cross my neighbours' minds that just living there makes me Welsh.
Of course I must add that the concept of ethnicity is available to them, as it would not be available to my neighbours if I bought a cottage in Suffolk, unless they were anti-Semitic.
There, I would be just as much a stranger, but they would have to define themselves against me as natives against incomers, or in terms of social classification.
This would probably be a less effective form of making collective distinctions than ‘ethnicity’, but I am by no means clear why.
Every separatist movement in Europe that I can think of bases itself on ‘ethnicity’, linguistic or not, that is to say on the assumption that ‘we’— the Basques, Catalans, Scots, Croats, or Georgians are a different people from the Spaniards, the English, the Serbs or the Russians, and therefore we should not live in the same state with them.
This is not, by the way, the case, as yet, in most of Asia, Africa and the Americas south of the Canadian border.
Why then do we need two words, which help us to distinguish nationalism from ethnicity, though both are so closely identified today?
Because we are dealing with different, and indeed non-comparable, concepts.
Nationalism is a political programme, and in historic terms a fairly recent one.
It holds that groups defined as ‘nations’ have the right to, and therefore ought to, form territorial states of the kind that have become standard since the French Revolution.
Without this programme, realised or not, ‘nationalism’ is a meaningless term.
In practice the programme usually means exercising sovereign control over a, so far as possible, continuous stretch of territory with clearly defined borders, inhabited by a homogeneous population that forms its essential body of citizens.
Or rather, according to Mazzini, it includes the totality of such a population: ‘Every nation a state and only one state for the entire nation.’
Within such states a single language, that of the ‘nation’ in question, is dominant, or rather enjoys privileged official status or monopoly.
I observe in passing that probably not more than a dozen or so out of the 170-odd political entities in the world conform to even the first half of the Mazzinian programme, if nations are defined in ethnic-linguistic terms.
Nationalism, or rather, to use the more lucid 19th-century phrase ‘the principle of nationality’, assumes ‘the nation’ as given, just as democracy assumes ‘the people’as given.
In itself it tells us nothing about what constitutes such a nation, although since the late 19th century — but not, commonly, much before then — it has increasingly been defined in ethnic-linguistic terms.
However, I must remind you that earlier versions of the principle of nationality, which I describe in my book as the ‘revolutionary-democratic’ and ‘liberal’, are not so based, although there are overlaps.
Neither language nor ethnicity are essential to the original revolutionary nationalism, of which the USA is the major surviving version.
Classical 19th-century liberal nationalism was the opposite of the current search for a definition of group identity by separatism.
It aimed to extend the scale of human social, political and cultural units: to unify and expand rather than to restrict and separate.
This is one reason why third-world national liberation movements found the 19th-century traditions, both liberal and revolutionary-democratic, so congenial.
Anti-colonial nationalists dismissed, or at least subordinated, ‘tribalism’, ‘communalism’ or other sectional and regional identities as antinational, and serving the well-known imperialist interests of ‘divide and rule’.
Gandhi and Nehru, Mandela and Mugabe, or for that matter the late Zulfikhar Bhutto, who complained about the absence of a sense of Pakistani nationhood, are or were not nationalists in the sense of Landsbergis or Tudjman.
They were on exactly the same wavelength as Massim d'Azeglio who said, after Italy had been politically unified: ‘We have made Italy, now we have to make Italians’, that is out of the inhabitants of the peninsula who had all sorts of identities, but not one based on a language they did not speak, and a state that had come into existence over their heads.
There was nothing primordial about Italianness, just as there is not about the South Africanness of the ANC.
Ethnicity on the other hand, whatever it may be, is not programmatic and even less is it a political concept.
It may acquire political functions in certain circumstances, and may therefore find itself associated with programmes, including nationalist and separatist ones.
There are plenty of good reasons why nationalism thirsts for identification with ethnicity, if only because it provides the historical pedigree ‘the nation’ in the great majority of cases so obviously lacks.
At least it does so in regions of ancient written culture like Europe, where the same names for ethnic groups persist over long periods, even though they may describe quite different and changing social realities.
Ethnicity, whatever its basis, is a readily definable way of expressing a real sense of group identity which links the members of ‘we’ because it emphasises their differences from ‘them’.
What they actually have in common beyond not being ‘them’ is not so clear, especially today, and I shall return to this point.
Anyway, ethnicity is one way of filling the empty containers of nationalism.
Thus, Sabino Arana invents the name Euskadi for the country of the people who had long given themselves, and been given, a collective name (Basques, Gascons or whatever), but without feeling the need for the sort of country, state or nation Arana had in mind.
In other words, nationalism belongs with political theory, ethnicity with sociology or social anthropology.
It can take the state or any other form of political organisation or it can leave it alone.
If it becomes political, it has no special affinity for ethnically labelled politics.
All it requires is that the political label, whatever it is, should make a disproportionately strong appeal to the members of the ethnic group.
An extreme case, now long forgotten, is the appeal of the passionately non-ethnic Bolshevik party in the revolutionary period to the inhabitants of what has become Latvia.
The prominence of some Lettish names in the last days of Soviet communism is a reminder of the days when the Lettish riflemen were to Lenin what the Swiss guards are to the Pope.
There is Colonel Alksnis on the hard-line side and Otto Latsis of Kommunist and Izvestia on the reforming side.
If this is so, why then the general European mutation of ethnic politics into nationalist politics?
This mutation takes two forms, which have little or nothing in common except the need or desire to control state policy: national separatism and national xenophobia, which means being against foreigners by setting up ‘our’ own state, and being against them by excluding them from ‘our’already existing state.
The second variant I find more difficult to account for than the first, for which there are both specific and general explanations today.
But before I try to answer these questions, let me remind you once again that there are vast areas of the globe, where ethnic politics, however embittered, are not nationalist, sometimes because the idea of an ethnically homogeneous population has been abandoned at some time in the past, or never existed — as in the US — or because the programme of setting up separate territorial, ethnic-linguistic states is both irrelevant and impractical.
The US is once again a case in point, but the situation also arises in the majority of the decolonised third-world states.
Whatever the bitterness of interethnic and ghetto conflicts in the US, separatism is not a serious option, and serves no purpose for any ethnic or other groups.
To return to the main question.
The specific reason for the wave of nationalist separatism in Europe today is historical.
The chickens of the first world war are coming home to roost.
The explosive issues of 1989-91 are those created in Europe and, I am tempted to add, in the Middle East, by the collapse of the multi-ethnic Habsburg, Ottoman and Russian empires in 1917-18, and the nature of the postwar peace settlements in respect of their successor states.
The essence of these, you may recall, was the Wilsonian plan to divide Europe into ethnic-linguistic territorial states, a project as dangerous as it was impracticable, except at the cost of forcible mass expulsion, coercion and genocide which was subsequently paid.
Let me add that the Leninist theory of nations on which the USSR (and Yugoslavia) was subsequently constructed was essentially the same, though in practice — at least in the USSR — supplemented by the Austro-Marxist system of nationality as an individual choice, which every citizen has the right to make at the age of 16 wherever he or she comes from.
I don't want to document my thesis at length, but Slovak conflict with Czechs, Croat conflict with Serbs, could not exist before 1918 when these peoples were put into the same states.
Baltic nationalism, which had been the least of the Tsar's political worries and barely existed in 1917, was nurtured by setting up independent little states as part of the quarantine belt against the Bolshevist infection.
Conversely, national issues which were serious or even explosive before 1914 have receded: I am thinking of the famous ‘Macedonian Question’, the Ukraine, or even the demand for the restoration of historic Poland.
Ukraine (except in the formerly Habsburg part) and Macedonia showed no signs of wanting to break away until the USSR and Yugoslavia had been destroyed by other hands, and they found they had to take some action in self-defence.
It is therefore more important than ever to reject the ‘primordialist’ theory of ethnicity, let alone of national self-determination.
For anthropologists it may be assumed that this is an uncontroversial statement.
It is the historians who need to be reminded how easily ethnic identities can be changed, as witness the nationalist animus against ‘assimilation’, so familiar in Jewish debates about Judaism.
Early 20th-century Europe was full of men and women who, as their very names indicate, had chosen to be Germans or Magyars or French or Finns, and even today the name of President Landsbergis and a number of prominent Slovenes suggests German parents opting for another collective identity.
Conversely, a German anthropologist, Georg Elwert, reminds us that the concept of the Volksdeutsche , the ethnic German who, by the constitution of the Federal Republic, has a ‘right of return’ to his homeland as Jews have in Israel, is an ideological construct.
Some of those who have, like the east European Mennonites, were not Germans by origin at all(unless all speakers of Germanic languages are counted), but Flemings or Frisians.
And the only east European settlers from Germany who actually saw themselves, among other things, as cultural and linguistic Germans — to the point of organising the German schools teaching the standard German language — do not enjoy the ‘right of return’ except to Israel.
They were the upper- and middle-class eastern Jews, whose very choice of surnames — Deutscher, Ginsburg, Shapiro — echoes unforgotten origins.
Elwert even notes that there are Transylvanian villages where high German (as distinct from the Teutonic dialects actually spoken) was known before the Hitler period as Judendaitsch .
Such are the paradoxes of primordial ethnicity.
And yet there is no denying that ‘ethnic’ identities which had no political or even existential significance until yesterday (for instance being a ‘Lombard’, which is now the title of the xenophobic leagues in north Italy) can acquire a genuine hold as badges of group identity overnight.
In my book Nations and nationalism since 1780 I suggest that these short-term changes and shifts of ethnic identities constitute ‘the area of national studies in which thinking and research are most urgently needed today’, and I maintain this view.
There are good reasons why ethnicity (whatever it is) should be politicised in modern multi-ethnic societies, which characteristically take the form of a diaspora of mainly urban ghettoes, combined with a sharp increase in the occasions for friction between ethnic groups.
Electoral democracy produces a ready-made machine for minority groups to fight effectively for a share of central resources, once they learn to act as a group and are sufficiently concentrated for electoral purposes.
This gives ghettoised groups a lot of potential leverage.
At the same time, for reasons both of politics and ideology, and also of changing economic organisation, the mechanism for defusing interethnic tensions by assigning separate niches to different groups, atrophies.
They now compete, not for comparable resources (‘separate but equal’ as the phrase went) but for the same resources in the same labour or housing or educational or other markets.
And in this competition, at least for the disadvantaged, group pressure for special favours (‘affirmative action’) is the most powerful weapon available.
Where, for whatever reason, participation in elections is low, as in the US today, or traditional mass support weakens, as in the US Democratic and the British Labour parties, politicians pay even more attention to minorities, of which ethnic groups are one variant.
We can even see pseudo-ethnic groups being invented for political purposes, as in the attempt by some of the British left to classify all third-world immigrants as ‘black’ in order to give them more leverage within the Labour Party for which most of them vote.
So the new ‘black sections’ of the party that have been set up will include Bangladeshis, Pakistanis, West Indians, Indians, and presumably Chinese.
Yet the core of ethnic politicisation is not instrumental.
What we see very generally today is a retreat from social into group identity.
It is not necessarily political.
One thinks of the familiar nostalgia for ‘roots’ which makes the children of assimilated, secularised and anglicised Jews rediscover comfort in the ancestral rituals, and sentimentalise the memories of the shtetl,which they have never known.
Sometimes when it calls itself political it is so only by semantic innovation, as in the phrase ‘the personal is political’.
Yet, inevitably it has a political dimension.
But under what circumstances does it become politically separatist?
Miroslav Hroch has tried to answer this question for contemporary central and eastern Europe by comparison with 19th-century small-nation linguistic nationalism.
One element he stresses in both cases is that it is a lot easier to understand language demands than the theory and institutions of democracy and constitutional society, especially for people who lack both political education and political experience.
But more crucially he stresses social disorientation:
‘In a social situation where the old regime was collapsing, where old relations were in flux and general insecurity was growing, the members of the non-dominant ethnic group would see the community of language and culture as the ultimate certainty, the unambiguously demonstrable value.
Today, as the system or planned economy and social security breaks down, once again— the situation is analogous — language acts as a substitute for factors of integration in a disintegrating society.
When society fails, the nation appears as the ultimate guarantee.’
The situation in the ex-socialist societies and especially in the ex-USSR is clear.
Now that both the material framework and the routines of everyday life have broken down, now that all the established values are suddenly denied, what is the citizen of the USSR, what can he or she believe in?
Assuming the past is irrecoverable, the obvious fall-back positions are ethnicity and religion, singly or in combination.
And ethnicity turns into separatist nationalism for much the same reasons as colonial liberation movements establish their states within the frontiers of the preceding colonial empires.
They are the frontiers that exist.
Only more so, for the Soviet constitution itself had divided the country into theoretically ethnic territorial sub-units, ranging from autonomous areas to full federal republics.
Supposing the union fell to pieces, these were the fracture lines along which it would naturally break.
It is a curious joke of history that it was Stalin who gave Lithuania its capital city (between the wars it was in Poland), and Tito who, in order to weaken great-Serbian chauvinism, created a much larger Croatia with a much larger Serbian minority.
However, let us not — or not yet — infer mass nationalism from separatist movements in all cases.
So far the Yugoslav civil war has been waged mainly by activist minorities plus the professionals.
Has it yet become, will it become, a real peoples' war?
We don't know, but there are at least 2.8 million Yugoslav families — those who produced the 1.4 million mixed marriages, mostly Croat-Serb, for whom the choice of an exclusive ethnic identity must be complex.
If the roots of ethnic politics in social disorientation are plain in the ex-socialist countries, the same social disorientation is found for other reasons elsewhere.
Is it an accident that Quebec's separatism became a major force at the end of a decade during which the Quebec birthrate had virtually halved and (for the first time) fallen well below that of Canada?
The decades since 1950, the 40 most revolutionary years in the history of human society, should lead us to expect a massive disintegration of old values, a collapse of old certainties.
The ‘nation’ is not as obvious a fall-back position everywhere as it is in those parts of the globe whose frontiers were drawn on Wilsonian-Leninist lines after 1918, and neither is that old-time religion.
But it is one such position, and the demonstration effect of central and eastern Europe naturally encourages it, where local conditions are favourable.
However, separatism is exceptional in Europe outside the ex-Soviet zone.
National xenophobia shading into racism is almost universal.
And it poses a problem that I cannot solve.
What exactly is being defended against ‘the other’, identified with the immigrant strangers?
Who constitutes ‘us’ poses less of a problem, for the definition is usually in terms of existing states.
‘We’ are French, or Swedes, or Germans or even members of politically defined sub-units like Lombards, but distinguished from the invading ‘them’by being the ‘real’Frenchmen or Germans or Brits, as defined (usually) by putative descent or long residence.
Who ‘they’ are is also not difficult.
‘They’ are recognisable as ‘not we’, most usually by colour or other physical stigmata, or by language.
Where these signs are not obvious, subtler discriminations can be made: Quebecois who refuse to understand anglophones who talk in a Canadian accent, will respond to anglophones who talk with a British or US intonation, as Flemings who claim not to understand French spoken with a Belgian accent, understand French French.
I am not sure how far, without these visible or audible marks of strangeness, ‘they’ would be recognised by cultural differences, though in racist reactions much is made of such things: how good Frenchmen are insulted by the smells of North African cooking, or good Brits by that of curry emanating from their neighbours.
In fact, as the global expansion of Indian and Chinese restaurants suggests, xenophobia is directed against foreign people, not foreign cultural imports.
It would be tempting to say: what is being defended against strangers is jobs, and there is a certain truth in the proposition.
The major social base of European racist movements such as the French National Front appears to be in the native working class, the major activists or such movements appear to be working-class young men — skinheads and the like — and a long era of full or virtually guaranteed employment ended, in western Europe during the 1970s, in central and eastern Europe at the end of the 1980s.
Since then Europe is once again living in societies of mass unemployment and job uncertainty.
Moreover, as I already observed, the social mechanisms which assigned each group different and non-competitive niches, are eroding or are politically unacceptable.
The relatively sudden rise of xenophobic parties, or of the xenophobic issue in politics, is largely due to this.
Nevertheless, this is clearly only part of the answer.
What is being defended is not simply the position of individuals in group A against challenge by outsiders.
If this were so we would not find the genuine uneasiness about an influx of strangers (or outside influences) that cannot in any realistic sense threaten the members of the group as individuals , for instance, the insistence by sections of the US citizens that English — of all languages — has to be given protection against immigrant languages by the grant of an official monopoly of public use.
In some sense, it is the idea of ‘us’ as a body of people united by an unaccountable number of things ‘we’have in common— a ‘way of life’in the widest sense, a common territory of existence in which we live, whose landscape is familiar and recognisable.
It is the existence of this which the influx from outside threatens.
Virtually every single item on the list of what ‘we’ as English, French, Germans or Czechs are said to have in common, can be acquired by immigrants who wish to do so, except physical appearance, where this differs very markedly from the norm of the receiving population.
Moreover, some of the countries where xenophobia has been politically mobilised very powerfully are, like France, also countries which in the past received, even encouraged, and successfully assimilated mass immigration to an extent almost comparable at times to the US: Italians, Spaniards, Poles, even North Africans.
Some countries that are very much exercised about the alien danger actually have very little immigration.
Indeed, they do their best not to have any.
This is the case of the Scandinavian countries — I am thinking of Finland and Iceland in particular— though the prevailing liberal ideology in those parts makes it embarrassing to admit to this form of intolerance.
Finland virtually makes permanent immigration impossible, but until the collapse of the USSR it could hardly be described as a clear and present danger.
I am not, of course, denying that societies may exist within a specific set of habits and ways of life, which may be transformed by, among other things, excessive immigration.
Emotionally, most of us can understand the sentiments of the Pyrenean village which decided to block its public water fountain, so that not even the thirsty cyclists touring the region should have any incentive to pass through it.
It would be disingenuous, even for those of us who take another view, to pretend that we do not know what made an intelligent British traditionalist like Enoch Powell call for a halt to mass immigration some 20 years ago, and what made British governments of both parties follow his lead.
What is more, all of us apply the same criteria when it comes to saving our own favourite environments, human or non-human, from ‘being ruined’ by too many people or the wrong kind of people.
The point is not whether some places, or even some regions and countries should be, or could still be, protected from disruption by change, but whether this is what modern political xenophobia is actually trying to do.
In fact, fear of the alien today is rarely a traditional nationalist defence of old ways of life against the foreign virus.
This form of cultural xenophobia was indeed common in the 1950s, mainly in anti-American versions, but that battle has long been forgotten.
Culturally, the most militant gangs who beat up immigrants in the name of the nation belong to the international youth culture and reflect its modes and fashions, jeans, punk-rock, junk food and all.
Indeed, for most of the inhabitants of the countries in which xenophobia is now epidemic, the old ways of life have changed so drastically since the 1950s that there is very little of them left to defend.
It actually takes someone who has lived through the past 40 years as an adult to appreciate how extraordinarily the England of the 1970s differed from the England of the 1940s, and the France, Italy or Spain of the 1980s from those countries in the early 1950s.
And this seems to me to be the clue.
This is the point of contact with separatism, or the rush into fundamentalism (as we see it, for instance, in Latin America).
All are comprehensible as symptoms of social disorientation, of the fraying, and sometimes the snapping, of the threads of what used to be the network that bound people together in society.
The strength of this xenophobia is the fear of the unknown, of the darkness into which we may fall when the landmarks which seem to provide an objective, a permanent, a positive delimitation of our belonging together, disappear.
And belonging together, preferably in groupings with visible badges of membership and recognition signs, is more important than ever in societies in which everything combines to destroy what binds human beings together into communities.
A recent documentary film,Paris is Burning , presents a population of the most marginalised, excluded, anomic individuals imaginable: black drag queens in New York.
Nothing is more touching and sad than to see how these people — cast out and despised by everyone including their kin, living in and for their regular ‘balls’ where they compete to dress up to act out, for a moment, the roles they would like to play in real life, and know they can't — reconstruct their own human groups.
In these so-called ‘families’, individuals can feel that they are not entirely weak and alone.
But for those who can no longer rely on belonging anywhere else, there is at least one other imagined community to which one can belong: which is permanent, indestructible, and whose membership is certain.
Once again, ‘the nation’, or the ethnic group, ‘appears as the ultimate guarantee’ when society fails.
You don't have to do anything to belong to it.
You can't be thrown out.
You are born in it and stay in it.
As Eugene Roosens says in Creating Ethnicity , the book which, with Frederik Barth's Ethnic Groups I have found particularly helpful: ‘After all, nobody can change ‘the past’ from which one descends, and nobody can undo who one is’.
And how do men and women know that they belong to this community?
Because they can define the others who do not belong, who should not belong, who never can belong.
In other words, by xenophobia.
And because we live in an era when all other human relations and values are in crisis, or at least somewhere on a journey towards unknown and uncertain destinations, xenophobia looks like becoming the mass ideology of the 20th-century fin de siècle .
What holds humanity together today is the denial of what the human race has in common.
And where does that leave us historians, who are not only being told that only blacks and whites, or Basques, or Croats, can properly understand the history of these respective groups, but to invent the sort of history that they want to ‘understand’?
At least it leaves us, it should leave us, the freedom to be sceptical.
No good will come of it, but it won't last for ever.
DYING YOUNG When the music's over Who organises vast acid-house raves?
Conor did, and it killed him.
Laurie Taylor was at the funeral
Conor's chest pains started up again at about 6am.
He'd had them on and off for the past couple of weeks.
Across the chest and occasionally down the arms.
But now they were so bad that he did the unthinkable.
He asked his friend, Neil, to take over the wheel of the BMW.
That was a big enough clue for Neil.
He promptly turned off the by-pass and headed for the nearest hospital.
Ten minutes later, Conor lost consciousness.
There is an unwritten rule in their crowd.
If any sort of serious incident occurs, they simply drop the victim on the steps of Casualty and make a quick escape.
It reduces the chance of any awkward questions being asked.
But by the time they got to Maidstone that morning, Neil realised that his passenger was unlikely ever again to face any kind of questioning.
He stayed by his side.
At 8am, the hospital formally announced that Conor had died of a heart attack.
It was the day before Mother's Day, exactly a week before Conor's 26th birthday.
At first, it seemed that the family — mother, father and two sisters — were more or less alone in their grief.
On the day the news came through, they simply sat next to each other in the same room for 15 hours, taking turns at remembering Conor as a naughty boy and a belligerent adolescent.
Conor rarely did as he was told, was never on time, was always involved in some new scheme, but had absolutely no worries whatsoever about obligations, responsibilities or debts, because, as he always insisted, ‘it's all sorted’.
It was only on the second and third day after the tragedy that the family slowly began to realise how many other people had been sitting around in shocked disbelief at the news.
Young men began ringing up or arriving on the doorstep and announcing themselves as ‘Wedgie’ or ‘Snubs’or ‘Schizo’and saying that Conor was the best there was, and was there anything they could do?
A Mum and Dad who'd known vaguely for a long time that Conor liked holding parties were suddenly being told over cups of tea and Hobnobs about vast acid house raves in the middle of fields, about police chases across whole counties, about an entire organisation that Conor had run (Conor had run an organisation?), which could call a party and have 5,000 people turning up at £20 a ticket within 48 hours.
None of these friends knew much about funerals, but if it was something for Conor then, yes, they'd like to come along.
And would it be all right if they brought another couple of Conor's mates?
By the day of the funeral, numbers had swollen to about 80.
They stood uncomfortably outside Margate crematorium while the coffin was carried in and the relations eased themselves sadly out of hired limos.
They were mostly men of about 25.
But men who'd probably been men since the age of 14, when they decided that school was a wank and that, rather than hanging around waiting for a dead-end job, they'd go out and find their own way to make a living.
A bit of wheeling and dealing.
A little ducking and diving.
What was new was their confidence, their solidarity.
As soon as they began to talk, you realised that this was not a diffuse collection of misfits, suitable cases for treatment or counselling.
This was a small unapologetic army of working-class entrepreneurs equipped with a defiant sense of moral right-eousness and an absolute certainty that those like themselves who made money from their wits were the winners, the top men.
Thatcher's children.
All grown up and proud of it.
Some sat in the back rows of the chapel like recalcitrant fourth-formers.
Others simply stood around the door resisting every invitation to come forward and sit at the front among middle-aged relations and family friends.
My job was to say a few words that might comfort both groups.
I muttered something about not wanting to trample over the very different memories they must all have of Conor, talked a little about the family's surprise at finding that their son had such an extensive social and business life.
I said that they mustn't be sad because he had, after all, crammed so much into his short life, that his parties had given enormous pleasure to so many people, that Conor was the sort of person Jack Kerouac might have loved, he was one of the ones who are mad to live, desirous of everything at the same time, ‘the ones who never yawn or say a commonplace thing, but burn, burn, burn, like fabulous yellow roman candles exploding like spiders across the stars’.
I could, of course, have added that some of those crowded around the door were likely to end up like Conor unless they backed away from their relentless hedonism, from their incessant living for the moment.
I could have said that their way of life would slowly become less and less glamorous, more and more morally debilitating.
That one or two might make enough money to pass as legitimately successful, but that most would go on hoping for and talking about the ‘up for none touch’ that was just around the corner if only this and that fell into place until they became little more than saloon-bar bores.
But they'd asked me for an epitaph not an editorial and, in any case, I'd already got the clear impression that most of these unaccustomed mourners could recognise a tolling bell when they heard it, but that like so many of the other warnings that had been laid on them over the years by teachers, social workers and magistrates, they had simply decided that any other way of life was simply too dull, too straight, even to be contemplated.
Afterwards, we all trooped along the narrow path and inspected the flowers.
Someone had sent a pair of floral dancing shoes.
And there were two wreaths with a bottle of Dom Perignon at their centre.
Wedgie said, ‘He's done it again.
Conor's hit us with the big one.’
Conor's mother said that, for the first time in ten years, she knew exactly where he was.
LETTERS
Labour deserved to lose
In the soul-searching and breast-beating following the defeat, many statements will be made that Labour had the best campaign and was ‘winning the argument’.
However, as an economist and Labour supporter, I was never convinced by its campaign, or felt that it was winning or deserved to win.
First, the party had no answer to the simple, repeated lie, that it is the high tax party.
By not confronting its opponents' lies when and wherever uttered, it gave them credence.
Apparently, 48 per cent of manual workers believed that they would pay higher taxes under Labour, which speaks for itself.
Labour representatives also spoke often as if taxes comprise income taxes only, precisely what the Tories wished.
Moreover, they did not stress that a high burden of taxation is inevitable with high unemployment and, thus, the burden will always be higher under Tories.
Second, Labour conveyed the idea that social spending is its ‘agenda’, but not proper management of the economy.
No concerted attempt was made to rectify this major perceived weakness relative to the Tories, although they have a far worse record on unemployment, taxation, interest rates, economic growth, balance of payments and government borrowing relative to national income (taking into account privatisation proceeds) than the last Labour government.
The Tories were allowed successfully to shift blame for the recession to Lawson, foreigners and everyone but themselves.
Third, Labour suffered from its absurd belief that a general election could be a referendum on any single issue other than the economy or, perhaps, defence.
There was an incredible over-concentration on health, ignoring the fact that most people receive a pay packet every week or every month for certain, but few will be sick that often and even fewer wish to think they might be sick that often.
Fourth, it did not address the Tories' claim to be able to offer something for nothing (via ‘efficiency gains’) in the public sector.
Fifth, it offered targets, such as the minimum wage, that were impossible to defend in the current climate.
The shadow budget was also politically inept, although its positive features could have been defended much better than they were.
Sixth, the leadership demonstrated abysmal judgment, evinced by the distasteful triumphalism in Sheffield, which made many supporters cringe, and waverers recoil.
Despite the above, I voted for Labour although its victory would have hit my pocket.
However, I am not at all surprised that many who would have profited had they won did not so vote.
Popular rejection
As the implications of another disastrous election defeat begin to be analysed, it is clear that calls for the Labour Party to embrace PR as a way of breaking the Tory stranglehold are gaining in strength.
It is also clear that they are seriously mistaken.
The evidence suggests that, far from enhancing the anti-Tory campaign, the debate on PR helped John Major secure his unexpected victory.
Popular consciousness of PR had been limited until the last week of the campaign, underlining the argument that, while constitutional reform is popular among the chattering classes, it is not popular among the mass of voters.
Indeed, the election indicates that it is unpopular among the mass of voters, and the Tories' clear opposition to it helped their victory.
The decisive shift towards the Tories seems to have come once Major began to concede that a hung parliament was possible and that to want this would lead to coalition, weak government, and deals in back rooms.
The way to avoid this was to vote Tory and secure a majority government maintaining the existing system.
Labour's apparent shift towards PR to woo the Liberals, Ashdown's insistence that he would allow a government to function only if it gave way to PR, all seemed to point to a deal being hatched up behind the backs of the voters to secure power for the opposition parties.
This does not mean that constitutional reform is dead.
However, it does mean that reformers will have to have consistent answers to the arguments about instability, weak government and power to small or extremist parties.
And it certainly means that any debate will have to be open, and not tied to deals between politicians: the decision must, ultimately, be made by the people by referendum.
Paying the cost
A fourth term, the first since 1826.
The tragedy of it is it could have been avoided.
Even before the 1983 election, people such as Hobsbawm,Marxism Today and New Statesman said Labour could not win, and cross-party cooperation was needed.
This was the prevalent left view until Thatcher's third term destructed, and Labour triumphalism had one last go.
It sucked us in again and has cost us dear.
Proponents of such a view owe us an apology for three avoidable Tory victories.
Kinnock's modernisation did not go far enough, as it was based on old-style labourism and single-party arrogance.
Labour now not only has to embrace the new agenda of electoral reform, political decentralisation and power-sharing, and a new Britain in Europe.
What is needed is a positive Lib-Lab programme with common candidates starting in local and by-elections.
Labour was born in a secret Lib-Lab pact.
In the inter-war years, there were frequent Lib-Lab agreements and stand-downs.
Cross-party anti-Tory candidates were seen in the Munich by-election before the war, and constantly during the war.
The Attlee government drew on the ‘popular front of the mind’ of Keynes and Beveridge.
Labour and Liberals spring from the same radical roots and their greatest moments have come when they cooperate: 1906, 1945, and their worst when they split evenly: the 1920s and 1980s.
The worst fact of 1987 was that without the Foot and Falklands factors, Labour only reduced the Tory lead from 5 to 3¾ million.
In 1992, a 2½ million lead after recession and poll tax means unless we have a centre-left reconstruction, we are heading inexorably for a Tory fifth term.
Breakthrough for women
John Dugdale, in his article on TV election coverage (3 April), writes that Sue Lawley was ‘restricted to presenting Solve My Problem , and that women ‘of proven competence’ have been left on the margins of prestige programmes.
Perhaps we could put the record straight.
Mr Dugdale must have missed the Granada 500 transmitted in primetime on ITV — the only time during the campaign when the three party leaders were questioned by real voters on national television.
If the pages of press coverage, including a Times leader, were anything to go by, the Granada 500 could be considered to be one of the most prestigious and important election programmes of this campaign.
The presenter was not one of the ‘old male freemasonry’, but Sue Lawley.
The way forward
A very disappointing result.
I went to bed at 3am on 10 April with one question: how could the electorate of Britain be so stupid, once again?
I don't mean those who voted Conservative; I disagree with them, but it's their choice.
I'm referring to the Labour voters who allowed a Conservative to win by not voting Liberal Democrat, and the Liberal Democrat voters who allowed a Conservative to win by not voting Labour.
For the last couple of weeks, I had two posters in my windows, facing on to a fairly busy street.
One, a centre-spread from NSS , read: ‘Liberal Democrat supporter voting Labour in this constituency: Tactical voting for electoral reform and to get rid of the Tories.’
The other, hand-written, was similar: ‘Lib Dem supporter voting Labour to kick Tory out in Croydon NW and for electoral reform.’
I watched several hundred people stop and read these posters.
When there were two or more people together, often one would point them out to the other, and they then quite clearly discussed them.
In Croydon North West, alone among the Croydon constituencies, Malcolm Wicks won the seat for Labour from the Conservatives.
I have no idea how many voters in this constituency I influenced.
The point is, enough Lib Dems voted Labour here and ensured that John Major's new majority is two fewer than it would otherwise have been.
So what do we do now, now that the unimaginable has happened?
From now on, in every by-election that occurs in a Tory-held seat, the same strategy should be followed.
MPs die, resign, get elevated (especially Tory ones).
Every by-election from now on must be a Labour or Lib Dem victory.
John Major has a majority of 21.
Eleven by-elections are unlikely in the next few months — but if his majority is whittled down to five or six, he may call another election before too long.
This strategy must be explained clearly and positively to the public, and especially within by-election constituencies.
For a start, throw out the negative-sounding phrase ‘hung parliament’ and use ‘partnership parliament’instead.
It means PR.
It means Labour biting the bullet.
It probably means the Lib Dems compromising, not getting quite the system they want.
So what?
It means that the 55-60 per cent of the electorate who voted against the Conservatives will get what they voted for, instead of the 40-45 per cent who voted for the Tories, putting them in power for five more unfettered years.
When a Labour-Lib Dem partnership wins the next election, for the sake of the people and the country damn well work together .
The Good or the Bad?
I find that the front-runner for the Labour leadership, after some nifty trade union footwork, is John Smith.
His campaign image seems to be Clint Eastwood as the Good — strong but silent.
The Man With Not Much of a Name, perhaps.
I read on, and find that Bryan Gould, the ‘modern’ candidate, is sniping at John Smith's redistributive budget, one of Labour's few election promises that offered real benefits to the people of Tottenham.
He is Lee Van Cleef, elegant but Bad.
But the Tories will continue to crucify manufacturing industry, in pursuit of an absurdly high parity in the Exchange Rate Mechanism.
Interest rates will, therefore, remain high and unemployment continue to rise.
Britain's relative economic decline will accelerate.
However, Mr Smith — machismo on the line — has set his jaw against devaluation, an essential part of any alternative programme.
By the next election, the lot of the Tottenham poor will have got worse, and the chance of alleviating it through economic growth will have receded.
We will, therefore, require an even more redistributive economic policy than we have now.
Mr Gould thinks this is an election loser.
So what has he to offer the people of Tottenham instead?
Neither main candidate has defined his basic socialist aims and values.
Both could do worse than go back to Tony Crosland and update his ideas to allow for the issues of gender, race, environment, low growth and others of which he was ignorant.
That might help to produce a radical left-wing party with policies that could rebuild the shattered inner-city area of Tottenham.
We must end the individualism and competitiveness that characterises the use of the party's intellectual resources.
Shadow cabinet members and backbench MPs can no longer expect to have research staff who work for their interests alone.
Union researchers must be used more systematically to support the party's work.
The time for a Department of the Opposition is now.
We must also divert money from the expensive irrelevancies of poster campaigns and media triumphalism towards full-time agencies and local party-building.
In any case, the role of the Westminster parliament has diminished, is diminishing and will continue to diminish.
Political power will continue to move to Strasbourg and Brussels.
Apart from exporting the excellent Tony Banks, how will we organise to follow it?
Will we continue, alone among our European sister parties, to resist a pan-European socialist party?
Mr Gould, the Euro-sceptic is horrified at the idea.
Mr Smith, jaw set, is still silent.
Leadership shootouts are always exciting.
But which side should the people of Tottenham support and why?
So far, the characters are more poorly defined than in any spaghetti western.
If things don't improve, I suggest a write-in vote for Willy Brandt.
Activists needed
The subtext to your post-election editorial, ‘Starting again’(17 April), notes that ‘Labour needs to regain its working-class support’.
But then goes on to discuss the matter purely in electoral terms.
What Labour needs above all is the network of working-class activists, sympathisers and supporters that it had in workplaces and on housing estates even as recently as 20 years ago.
The big swing to the right since 1983 has seen some of these people expelled and a good many more departing, fed up, for premature retirement.
This explains the influence that the Tory media had in the election.
Labour simply did not have the people on the ground to counter their lies as it used to.
Labour is not finished.
But can it, as it swings even further to the right, be a vehicle for social change any more?
I doubt it.
The votes for Messrs Sheridan, Nellist and Fields, expelled from Labour and standing as socialists for a fightback against the Tories, shows that there is a large audience for a new socialist force outside the Labour Party.
Let the centre-right debate pacts and PR.
Socialists should now be addressing how to build a new organisation rooted in the offices, factories and communities as Labour once was.
Punch on the nose
Jolyon Jenkins' selective and tendentious ramblings through old news (‘Crying out for Argentina’, 3 April) do little to provide your readership with the sort of balanced and impartial view of the Falklands they surely deserve.
May I mention a selection of the many inaccuracies?
Young women now stay in the Islands not because there is limited opportunity to marry soldiers, but because they play a full and equal part in a full-employment economy.
Fisheries-licence revenue is £25m, not £40m.
There are no expatriate advisers.
As a self-sufficient economy we are spared the valuable advice of those we could have done without; we do employ those we need where local capability does not exist (medical staff, technicians, etc).
Capital expenditure over five years has averaged £13m per annum; taking out one major education project, the average would be £10m, and in neither case is it the £15m claimed.
Demands for capital are still high until our infrastructure is up to standard; that is why we are not all as rich as some would like to make out.
Reserves in 1986/87 were £2.8m, or five months' operating expenditure.
Now they are £47m, or 22 months expenditure.
How can Mr Jenkins claim nothing is being put away?
So keen is he to criticise, that even a more cautious approach to development expenditure by the current management of the Falkland Islands Development Corporation, and failure to waste money on glossy brochures, is brought into question.
Doesn't it make sense not to repeat the mistakes of others?
We enjoy a full employment economy, and it is not uncommon for folks to have two jobs; there are few freeloaders here.
If Mr Jenkins cared to explain his view that the Falklands has a rentier economy to the hard-working farmers and workers of the Islands, he might get the punch in the mouth he so richly deserves.
What we can agree, however, is that Argentina is the great unmentionable.
When Argentina recognises the right to self-determination and freedom of association of the Falklands people, and gives up her claim to sovereignty over the territory, we might be more amenable to trade and contact.
In the meantime, we would be grateful not to be shoved off in her direction by campaigns of misinformation and innuendo by the uninformed.
Jolyon Jenkins replies:
While researching my article, I was given a long briefing at Falkland House in London, by a Falkland Islands councillor nominated by the Islands' London representative.
My article closely followed that briefing: expatriate advisers, soldiers, ‘old news’(usually known as ‘history’) and all.
I also asked for government accounts, and was given the summary of estimates of revenue and expenditure for 1991-2.
However, I did make a slip, which Mr Summers points out: total government revenue is about £40m, of which fisheries licence revenue is £25m.
My apologies for that, but the central thrust of the article stands.
The approved estimates for 1991-92 show revenue at £39m, current expenditure at £25m, and capital expenditure at £14m.
Nothing is left over.
The reserves are shown to increase by £1m that year, but only because of the sale of some farms and houses.
The projections tell a similar story.
From 1989-90 to 1993-94, reserves are forecast to increase by just £7m, of which £4m comes from capital revenue (ie, disposal of assets).
In any case, the essential point is that the government's running costs greatly exceed its income, if you exclude the money gained from selling fishing licences.
The cost of simply keeping the Falklands going is approximately £20,000 per person per year (compared with Britain, where the figure is about £4,500 per person).
But it is arguable that the fishing licence money should be treated as a one-off bonanza, since there is no guarantee that it will continue.
Whether Falkland farmers are lazy or not — of course they are not — is not the issue.
Spin-doctors in a spin
I agree with all of Stephen Howe's postmortem (‘I told you so’, 17 April), but I think he is unfair on the GMB's Tom Burlison.
There is no evidence at all that Tom was placed on the Plant Commission to ‘block change’.
Not only has Burlison never made any verbal contribution to the committee's workings, there has to date (and I've attended the whole of every meeting) never been a vote in the Plant Committee.
I venture that the real reason Labour's spin-doctors raised electoral reform in a clumsy and cynical way on Democracy Day, and then let it get out of control, was that none of them had actually read the Plant report.
The evidence for this has to be the deafening silence when, after the French and German elections, connections were made about PR letting the Nazis in.
This line was peddled without challenge by Kenneth Baker, and it was used by Tories in inner-city constituencies.
Our spin-doctors believed this to be so.
If they had bothered to think first, and read Raymond Plant's report, the answer is there.
Indeed, it is in a single sentence.
I am not disclosing the page number.
They should read the report and find it for themselves.
They might learn something.
Bully-boy tactics
The day before the election I was treated to an unsolicited political speech on behalf of the Conservative Party.
Under any other circumstances, I would have heckled and walked out.
On this occasion I was frozen by anger and fear.
The location was unusual: the consulting room of a medical specialist where I was to learn the cause of the unacceptably high level of pain from which my sister has suffered for the past five years.
Because of the after-effects of meningitis she had as a baby, I usually accompany her whenever she sees a doctor.
Our worst fears were realised.
We were informed she has a rare, incurable disease.
Her one hope was an operation to ease the pain.
At this point, the specialist launched into a passionate party-political speech.
If the Conservatives continued in power, because her GP belongs to a fund-holding practice — a superb Tory system, he insisted — there would be no problem; he could put her on the waiting list and do the operation next autumn.
If Labour won, however, he could not say how long she would continue to suffer, since the practice's funds would be transferred to the local health authority and some sort of delay-inducing chaos would ensue.
We would have to hope for a Tory victory, but, because of the uncertainty about the outcome of the election, he could not put her on the waiting list.
On a day when it seemed as if every floating vote was going to prove crucial, I detected a strong whiff of electoral blackmail.
Even if I had been sufficiently knowledgeable about the NHS funding system to counter his arguments, I still wouldn't have felt up to political sparring.
The quality of my sister's life was in his hands: we felt intimidated and powerless.
Eventually, I muttered that we were Labour supporters.
At the time it felt brave.
In retrospect, it felt foolhardy.
The next day, careful not to appear complaining, I phoned my sister's GP.
I was told that the outcome of the election would have no effect on either the funding or the speed with which a bed could be found, and that even if a Labour government dismantled the existing system there would be no adverse consequences for my sister.
The specialist's bully-boy tactics were referred to as a ‘hobby horse’.
I still don't know which doctor to believe.
I do know that my sister is in the hands of the only person who can perform this highly skilled operation, and that he is someone who saw fit to increase his patient's fears at a time when she most needed reassurance.
The words ‘I'll put you on the waiting list’ would have had an entirely beneficial effect on her health.
Many doctors obviously hold strong views about politics and the NHS — this much was exploited by the election campaign.
If doctors choose to make their opinions public, even if I disagree, that's fine by me.
But to subject a patient to political propaganda within the context of a consulting-room discussion about treatment is both unprofessional and cruel.
Missing issues
To comment on the missing issues from the general election, as do the various articles in your issue of 17 April, without recognition that at least some of the parties tried to widen the political agenda, is to provide a very incomplete analysis for finding the way forward.
The Liberal Party devoted a significant part of its one-party election broadcast to the Trident programme, the Gulf war and the role of the UN.
The broadcast opened with a clear statement of the Liberal Party's principled opposition to the National Curriculum; Colin Ward writes that ‘no party opposes it’.
The voices of dissent were effectively smothered.
The 73 candidates of the Liberal Party averaged 1.7 per cent of the vote in their constituencies.
If our policies had achieved wider media coverage, we may have achieved greater support, but there is a foundation there on which we intend to build.
It will not be easy to launch a new radical programme, but it is a more promising process than that of re-alignment between Labour and the LibDems.
Argument with the ANL
John Cable (Letters, 10 April) has got his facts totally wrong.
The ‘March for Justice’, on 28 March in Newham, was not organised by the Anti-Racist Alliance, but by the Deane Family/i Campaign and the Sahitharan Memorial Committee in conjunction with Newham Monitoring Project.
It was a march against racist policing and racist violence.
Neither was it organised to recruit members for the Anti Nazi League/SP.
There were arguments with the ANL on the day; these stemmed from the ANL's total disregard for Mr Sahitharan's family (murdered by racists) and the Deane family (brutalised by the police).
Tony Deane was told to fuck off by members of the ANL.
At no stage did our stewards say that people carrying ANL placards would be prevented from joining the march.
We simply asked the ANL not to block the entrances to the park, and only to hand its placards to their own members.
We did not want the ANL to claim credit for the march by swamping it with its placards (as it has done in the past) when it played no part in the march's organisation.
Mr Cable should get his facts straight before he makes false allegations.
FRINGE BENEFITS Colin Ward discovers 100 people reducing their dependencies on cash
I bumped into LETS at the Community Office in the middle of Totnes, Devon, but I could have found it in Wiltshire or Gloucestershire, and no doubt in other places, if I'd bothered to look.
It stands for Local Exchange Trading System, and it's a way of overcoming your lack of money without the incompatibilities of barter.
Ever since Robert Owen or Proudhon, people have been inventing alternatives to cash; and the lesson of the failure of them all is that, to have the slightest chance of being useful, they should be local, mutual, voluntary, and, above all, simple.
A LETS system is a group of people agreeing to acquire or sell goods and services using a notional currency instead of the equivalent in ‘real’ money.
In Totnes, the unit is called ‘Acorns’, in Gloucestershire ‘Strouds’, in West Wiltshire ‘Links’.
The more members there are, and the more that everyday essentials like veget-ables can be bought that way, the better the system becomes.
People are more likely to need car repairs, home-made bread or baby-sitting, than architectural services or psychotherapy.
The Totnes LETS now has 100 members who pay £7.50 for an Acorn chequebook and to cover overheads.
Administration can be done by double-entry book-keeping, but is quicker and cheaper if the core group has access to a computer.
Goods and services are advertised without charge in the local Small Ads Magazine .
Why bother?
Sarah Strong of the LETS core group in Totnes is eloquent on the reason.
‘Because of the uneven distribution of sterling,’ she says, ‘money no longer does what it was intended to do.’
And as the retail trade knows all too well, there is a surplus of goods that we haven't the purchasing power to acquire.
The paradox is that ‘poor communities are full of people with skills and energy to sell, and no one is buying’.
If you go back far enough, of course, all our ancestors lived in basic subsistence economies where cash never changed hands.
The price of prosperity is that, even to be poor, you must have access to cash for essential serv-ices and taxes.
The British introd-uced the poll tax to colonial Kenya precisely to drive self-sufficient villagers into the plantation economy to earn the real money to pay it.
This urgent need for real cash is a continual threat to LETS initiatives, as it tempts people to devalue the notional currency.
A correspon-dent of the Small Ads Magazine complains: ‘My eye was caught by an advert offering a locally made manufactured item, payment part cash, part Acorns.
I ordered the item and reached for my chequebook: disillusion.
Although the cash price was £100, the LETS price was £80 plus 40 Acorns, an apparent price rise.
Puzzled, I was told that Acorns were that amount ‘because of the energy that goes into them', and ‘anyway we really need cash at the moment'.’
So do most of us, but the LETS group stresses that this devaluation is extremely destructive of the system, and caused the failure of an earlier scheme in Totnes.
The magazine will refuse future ads with a higher Acorn than sterling price.
It is fatally easy to ridic-ule these attempts to trade outside the market, but the first snags that people raise aren't to do with the mutual trust involved, but relate to the attitudes of the Inland Revenue (which insists that payment in kind is taxable) and of the Department of Social Security with its Minimum Earnings Rule.
But the people involved are not naive, and know how such systems have worked abroad.
(For information send an sae to Letslink UK Network, 61 Woodstock Road, Warminster, Wiltshire.)
My own misgivings are confined to the sobering thought that I would have so little to offer, either in products or services.
Who would want to spend their Acorns, Links or Strouds on a pile of unsold books?
ARTS & MEDIA
The mind of the masters What does racism mean to people who profit from it?
Toni Morrison, whose new novel ‘Jazz’ is published next week, looks for clues among the classics of white American literature
A good deal of time and intelligence has been invested in the exposure of racism and the horrific results on its objects.
There are constant, if erratic, liberalising efforts to legislate these matters.
There are also powerful and persuasive attempts to analyse the origin and fabrication of racism itself, contesting the assumption that it is an inevitable, permanent, and eternal part of all social landscapes.
I do not wish to disparage these inquiries.
It is precisely because of them that any progress at all has been accomplished in matters of racial discourse.
But that well-established study should be joined with another, equally important one: the impact of racism on those who perpetuate it.
It seems both poignant and striking how avoided and unanalysed is the effect of racist inflection on the subject.
What I propose is to examine the impact of notions of racial hierarchy, racial exclusion, and racial vulnerability and availability on non-blacks who held, resisted, explored, or altered those notions.
The scholarship that looks into the mind, imagination, and behaviour of slaves is valuable.
But equally valuable is a serious intellectual effort to see what racial ideology does to the mind, imagination, and behaviour of masters.
Historians have approached these areas, as have social scientists, anthropologists, psychiatrists, and some students of comparative literature.
Literary scholars have begun to pose these questions of various national literatures.
Urgently needed is the same kind of attention paid to the literature of the western country that has one of the most resilient Africanist populations in the world — a population that has always had a curiously intimate and unhingingly separate existence within the dominant one.
When matters of race are located and called attention to in American literature, critical response has tended to be on the order of a humanistic nostrum — or a dismissal mandated by the label ‘political’.
Excising the political from the life of the mind isaa sacrifice that has proven costly.
I think oftahis erasure as a kind of trembling hypochondria always curing itself with unnecessary surgery.
A criticism that needs to insist that literature is not only ‘universal’ but also ‘race-free’risks lobotomising that literature, and diminishes both the art and the artist.
I am vulnerable to the inference here that my inquiry has vested interests; that because I am an African-American and a writer I stand to benefit in ways not limited to intellectual fulfilment from this line of questioning.
I will have to risk the accusation because the point is too important: for both black and white American writers, in a wholly racialised society, there is no escape from racially inflected language, and the work writers do to unhobble the imagination from the demands of that language is complicated, interesting, and definitive.
Like thousands of avid but non-academic readers, some powerful literary critics in the United States have never read, and are proud to say so,any African-American text.
It seems to have done them no harm, presented them with no discernible limitations in the scope of their work or influence.
I suspect, with much evidence to support the suspicion, that they will continue to flourish without any knowledge whatsoever of African-American literature.
What is fascinating, however, is to observe how their lavish exploration of literature manages not to see meaning in the thunderous, theatrical presence of black surrogacy — an informing, stabilising, and disturbing element — in the literature they do study.
It is interesting, not surprising, that the arbiters of critical power in American literature seem to take pleasure in, indeed relish, their ignorance of African-American texts.
What is surprising is that their refusal to read black texts — a refusal that makes no disturbance in their intellectual life — repeats itself when they reread the traditional, established works of literature worthy of their attention.
It is possible, for example, to read Henry James scholarship exhaustively and never arrive at a nodding mention, much less a satisfactory treatment, of the black woman who lubricates the turn of the plot and becomes the agency of moral choice and meaning in What Maisie Knew .
Never are we invited to a reading of ‘The Beast in the Jungle’ in which that figuration is followed to what seems to me its logical conclusion.
It is hard to think of any aspect of Gertrude Stein's Three Lives that has not been covered, except the exploratory and explanatory uses to which she puts the black woman who holds centre stage in that work.
The urgency and anxiety in Willa Cather's rendering of black characters are liable to be missed entirely; no mention is made of the problem that race causes in the technique and credibility of her last novel,Sapphira and the Slave Girl .
These critics see no excitement or meaning in the tropes of darkness, sexuality and desire in Ernest Hemingway or in his cast of black men.
They see no connection between God's grace and Africanist ‘othering’ in Flannery O'Connor.
With few exceptions, Faulkner criticism collapses the major themes of that writer into discursive ‘mythologies’ and treats the later works — whose focus is race and class — as minor, superficial, marked by decline.
An instructive parallel to this willed scholarly indifference is the centuries-long, hysterical blindness to feminist discourse and the way in which women and women's issues were read (or unread).
Blatant sexist readings are on the decline, and where they still exist they have little effect because of the successful appropriation by women of their own discourse.
National literatures, like writers, get along the best way they can, and with what they can.
Yet they do seem to end up describing and inscribing what is really on the national mind.
For the most part, the literature of the United States has taken as its concern the architecture of a new white man .
If I am disenchanted by the indifference of literary criticism toward examining the range of that concern, I do have a lasting resort: the writers themselves.
Writers are among the most sensitive, the most intellectually anarchic, most representative, most probing of artists.
The ability of writers to imagine what is not the self, to familiarise the strange and mystify the familiar, is the test of their power.
The languages they use and the social and historical context in which these languages signify are indirect and direct revelations of that power and its limitations.
So it is to them, the creators of American literature, that I look for clarification about the invention and effect of Africanism in the United States.
My early assumptions as a reader were that black people signified little or nothing in the imagination of white American writers.
Other than as the objects of an occasional bout of jungle fever, other than to provide local colour or to lend some touch of verisimilitude or to supply a needed moral gesture, humour, or bit of pathos, blacks made no appearance at all.
This was a reflection, I thought, of the marginal impact that blacks had on the lives of the characters in the work as well as the creative imagination of the author.
To imagine or write otherwise, to situate black people throughout the pages and scenes of a book like some government quota, would be ludicrous and dishonest.
But then I stopped reading as a reader and began to read as a writer.
Living in a racially articulated and predicated world, I could not be alone in reacting to this aspect of the American cultural and historical condition.
I began to see how the literature I revered, the literature I loathed, behaved in its encounter with racial ideology.
American literature could not help being shaped by that encounter.
Yes, I wanted to identify those moments when American literature was complicit in the fabrication of racism, but equally important, I wanted to see when literature exploded and undermined it.
Still, those were minor concerns.
Much more important was to contemplate how Africanist personae, narrative, and idiom moved and enriched the text in self-conscious ways, to consider what the engagement meant for the work of the writer's imagination.
How does literary utterance arrange itself when it tries to imagine an Africanist other?
What are the signs, the codes, the literary strategies designed to accommodate this encounter?
What does the inclusion of Africans or African-Americans do to and for the work?
As a reader my assumption has always been that nothing ‘happens’: Africans and their descendants were not, in any sense that matters,there ; and when they were there, they were decorative — displays of the agile writer's technical expertise.
I assumed that since the author was not black, the appearance of Africanist characters or narrative or idiom in a work could never be about anything other than the ‘normal’, unracialised, illusory white world that provided the fictional backdrop.
Certainly no American text of the sort I am discussing was ever written for black people — no more than Uncle Tom's Cabin was written for Uncle Tom to read or be persuaded by.
As a writer reading, I came to realise the obvious: the subject of the dream is the dreamer.
The fabrication of an African persona is reflexive; an extraordinary meditation on the self; a powerful exploration of the fears and desires that reside in the writerly conscious.
It is an astonishing revelation of longing, of terror, of perplexity, of shame, of magnanimity.
It requires hard work not to see this.
Film A meal in the best of taste Anne Billson finds David Cronenberg's Lunch surprisingly easy to digest
David Cronenberg loves gloop.
Some critics have interpreted this as evidence that he finds the human body disgusting, but the opposite is true.
Cronenberg loves the human body in all its permutations: surgically altered or diseased, inside-out, mutated into radical new forms.
His films explore the effect physical changes have on the mind, and vice versa.
The psychosomatic killer midgets of The Brood , the exploding head in Scanners , Jeff Goldblum's detached observation of his own genetic mutation in The Fly are all instances of Mind and Body meeting in a welter of goo.
When Martin Scorsese tackled The Last Temptation of Christ , the result was a formal-ity.
He had told the story so often that such a literal-minded version seemed unnecessary.
Now Cronenberg has finally realised his long-cherished project of making a movie out of The Naked Lunch (London cinemas from 24 April)— but he has already been filming William Burroughs for years.
Videodrome , in which sleazy TV programmer James Woods developed a VCR slot in his stomach, was about as Burroughsian as you can get.
But Naked Lunch bid fair to be the ultimate amalgamation of mind and body, the gloop-fest of the century.
Cronenberg maintains that a literal visualisation would have cost US$400 million and been banned in every country in the world.
But the most problematic aspect of the novel, from an adaptor's viewpoint, seems to have been the absence of a coherent story.
Cronenberg's way of filming the unfilmable has been to arrange his material in a pulp noir format, laced with hallucinations, corrupt characters, and local colour (local being studio-recreated Tangier).
There are also biographical details from the author's life, especially the accidental shooting of his own wife in 1951, for which he spent 13 days in a Mexican jail.
Burroughs fans discuss this incident as though it enhances the writer's mythical status.
I bet you they wouldn't find it quite so glamorous if, instead of getting drunk and shooting her, he'd got drunk and accidentally beaten her to death.
There are some scary production photos showing Burroughs, Cronenberg and leading actor Peter Weller staring, bespectacled and unblinking, into the camera, as though they were three different generations of the same person.
Weller plays the Burroughs character, a roach-exterminator whose wife, played by Judy Davis, turns him on to his own insecticide.
‘It's a Kafka high,’ she says, ‘You feel like a bug.’
Then their William Tell game goes wrong, he flees to Interzone, and reality gets very virtual indeed.
He gets hooked on giant centipede meat and encounters rubber monsters called ‘mugwumps’.
His typewriter unfurls metallic insectoid wings and talks to him through a sphincter-like aperture.
He is in the instrument's thrall, instructed to compile ‘reports’ that turn into a novel called The Naked Lunch .
These act-of-creation in-jokes make the film a worthy addition to the writers-at-work sub-genre, to be placed alongside The Shining, Misery and Barton Fink .
Julian Sands plays a dissipated Swiss; Ian Holm an American writer; and Judy Davis pops up in the second leg of her dual role as Holm's wife, with whom Weller has incredibly kinky rubber-monster sex.
Davis is deliberately made up to resemble Debra Winger/Jane Bowles/Kit Moresby in The Sheltering Sky — a reminder that one of the guiding lights behind this literary adaptation was that film's producer, Jeremy Thomas.
Thomas has taken the outré directors Oshima and Bertolucci in hand, and presented them in a more ‘respectable’ form.
Now, one gets the feeling that some of Cronenberg's gloopy vigour has been wiped away to provide acceptable international art-house fodder.
It may seem odd to complain of an excess of refinement in a film that features talking anuses and rubber monsters shaped like bottoms, but it does all seem to have been done in the best possible taste.
Naked Lunch is the first Cronenberg film I have sat through without being reduced to a state of rigid terror.
I almost dozed off once or twice, lulled by the sounds of the souk .
It's a film that appeals more to the intellect than to the gut — definitely a Kafka high.
But there is enough to suggest one could be hailing it as a masterpiece in future.
The performances are all good, but Weller's is one to take home and treasure forever.
I will race out to buy the video, because I think it may be more digestible chopped into bite-size pieces and perused in terminally sleazy surroundings when one is tanked up on Sol and takeaway Chinese.
Yes, already I can hear the sound of Naked Lunch parties taking place in my head.
And I wouldn't mind getting my hands on one of those typewriters that does all the work for you.
Theatre Still the man of destiny?
Anne Lavender regrets that tricksy productions breathe no new life into the Shaw corpus
Is Bernard Shaw dead?
Of course, the man himself died on 2 November 1950.
But a writer, they say, lives on in his works.
It has to be admitted that Shaw's plays have not claimed the stage over the past few years — until recently, that is.
We are in the middle of a small Shaw revival, with recent productions of Caesar and Cleopatra, The Philanderer , and now Heartbreak House at the Theatre Royal, Haymarket, and Pygmalion at the National Theatre.
The final volume of Michael Holroyd's massive biography has just appeared (The Last Laugh , Chatto & Windus, £10.99), detailing what happened to Shaw's money and memory after his death.
And an exhibition of Shaviana,In Close-up , is currently on display at the National Portrait Gallery.
Is all this enthusiasm just the work of a few ardent Shavians, exhuming the corpse for further public titillation?
Holroyd points out that in his time Shaw appealed to young people.
Mention ‘Shaw’ to a young person now, and they might just remember Martin, who used to be in The Professionals .
Who, apart from a few latter-day Edwardians, is interested in a windbag with a funny beard, who wrote (at great length) about socialism, and whose (long) plays are comedies of ill-manners, featuring semi-melodramatic characters from a forgotten age?
In Close-up is a partial redress.
The exhibition shows our man painted, sculpted, caricatured and photographed by any number of famous artists, including himself.
There are pictures that catch Shaw in a sports car, in his celebrated shed, in a folk dance with a Fabian, and in the nude.
The central image is of a man in full control of himself and determined to enjoy the experience.
Shaw, then, was alive when he lived, which is more than you can say of some people.
Even so, while being ahead of his time and younger than his age, the form of theatre he produced remains rooted in the past, owing infinitely more to Victorian and Edwardian styles than to the mainstream of 20th-century modernism.
There's another reason for him to seem dated.
Shaw's intent was always to challenge the conventional, which he did through dialogue-based plays of ideas.
This is not a style currently in vogue; indeed, in some productions today the designer's teaboy is more important than the playwright.
Pygmalion and Heartbreak House are the work of a writer at the peak of his powers: the former written just before the first world war, the latter just after it.
Heartbreak House is the eccentric residence of Captain Shotover.
While the characters flirt with each other in improbable configurations, love, marriage and money come under the microscope.
Pygmalion , from which My Fair Lady was derived, attempts to show how easily England's class system can be subverted by the acquisition of the correct accent and attitude.
It is sad to report, then, that both shows are utterly conventional pieces of theatre.
Heartbreak House boasts a glammy West End cast.
It is unquestionably a pleasure to see Paul Scofield wrap his voice round a sentence; Vanessa Redgrave laugh as if she's just been caught off guard; and Daniel Massey inflect his expression just so, to suggest a man on the cusp between debonair and disintegrating.
Fine acting abounds, but glosses over other pleasures.
Shaw always had something to say, and Heartbreak House , for all its posturings, addresses the state of England.
Trevor Nunn's production, full of so many finely turned words, ends up saying nothing.
Instead, the effect is to prettify the whole thing, something for which designer William Dudley needs no second invitation.
He works the same trick in Pygmalion .
What emerges in Howard Davies' production is a Shaw played for laughs, dressed to impress, and similarly short on ideas.
Alan Howard as Henry Higgins, called on to abandon subtlety, seems uncomfortable.
Frances Barber as Eliza Doolittle rises more capably on the currents of caricature, but both are unable to swoop for the kill in the ambiguous and difficult closing scene.
The best laughs are earned by a fine supporting cast, including Alison Fiske as an acerbic Mrs Pearce, and Michael Bryant, one of the best actors in London, as Alfred Doolittle, stealing his scenes as shamelessly as his character extracts money from Professor Higgins.
The show-stealer is the set, which performs an act of real larceny.
Fussily revolving, backdrops coming down, windows and lamps flying in and out, it is a feast of irrelevant attractiveness.
There is more nonsense wrapped inside.
The Covent Garden scene is all gorblimey corn, and Shaw's reinstated passages, bridging between scenes, seem like an excuse for the kind of business — Eliza running along stairs or surrounded by dancing couples — that would look more at home in a sixties musical.
Which, of course, is how the play is best known.
They haven't managed to lay that particular ghost.
Governments, said Shaw, get the people they deserve.
The same is true of theatre productions, which get the audiences they deserve.
There is no sense that the audience at either play represents the cutting edge of unorthodoxy, buzzing with the enjoyment of dissent.
But this is not the age for that kind of drama.
‘I wish I could find a country to live in where the facts were not brutal and the dreams not unreal,’ wrote Shaw.
If he were alive today, he might not wish to change a word.
But he isn't.
He is dead.
And so, on current evidence, are his plays.
But it needn't be a terminal decease.
Art The east is read The values of Orientalist art survive in the tourist gaze, argues Nigel Whiteley
Edward Said's seminal study Orientalism (1978) made us face our cultural prejudices about the Orient.
More recent work from Samir Amin, Rana Kabbani and Linda Nochlin has taken the consciousness-raising further.
Fine material for a dream…?, an exhibition that reappraises Orientalism in 19th- and 20th-century fine art and popular culture, builds on these earlier critiques.
It confirms their arguments by showing us a wealth of British paintings and prints, and allows the ‘victims’— in the form of contemporary artists from the Lebanon, India, Iran and Iraq — to answer back, which they do with uncomfortable success.
Fine material for a dream…?is organised by the Harris Museum and Art Gallery in Preston, and Emma Anderson, the exhibitions officer, deserves much credit.
It continues in Preston until 14 May, then moves to the Ferens Art Gallery, Hull, from 23 May to 28 June, and to Oldham Art Gallery from 18 July to 29 August.
At least try to purchase the catalogue if none of these towns is on your tourist itinerary.
Indeed, tourism has been one of the crucial components in the west's construction of the east, and a passage from Thomas Cook's brochure for tours of Egypt and Palestine in 1925 encapsulates the Orientalist attitude: ‘Native life and manners as seen from the steamer are as quaint a study as can well be imagined.
You see sailing boats gliding along, their huge sails gracefully bending to the wind.
Now pyramids spring into view, wondrous and ancient temples, strings of camels wending their way through the desert — ever picturesque, ever supercilious.
The inter-village life of the banks is revealed in a series of old world tableaux…
You watch the bronze figure of the man working the shadoof , which he has done since the time of the Pharaohs.
Presently the sun begins to set, palms and camels make silhouettes against the sky.
Soon a lovely glow spreads over all, giving place to deep shadows and a mysterious haze disappearing into the distance into deep blue.’
Here is the Orient as an apolitical picturesque environment.
With its literal and figurative local colour, it is viewed as an intrinsically picturesque scene waiting to be recorded by the western artist.
One can readily imagine those pleasing composi-tions, with their graceful lines, rugged buildings, anthropomorphised animals, and quaint villagers suffused in a mellow light or mysterious haze.
Such paintings, generously represented in the exhibition, proved enormously popular in the 19th century to the picture-buyer seeking a painting flavoured with exoticism — perhaps to hang alongside the painting flavoured with the alternative exoticism of a medieval theme.
Beyond the ‘innocent’ picturesqueness lurk the more sinister aspects of Orientalism.
The inter-village life that resembles an old-world tableau, and the bronzed figure lab-ouring as he had done ‘since the time of the Pharaohs’, present an image of timelessness and changelessness.
Development and struggle are alien features in the Orientalist's world.
Even history exists only as a generalised past that provides the backdrop of a living museum.
There is never any indication of the resistance to colonialism, or of nationalist struggles for self-determination.
What is equally powerful in Orientalism is the sense of implicit contrast or significant absence.
In terms of Oriental changelessness, the contrast implied is with western progressivism: the key value that has ensured science, technology, world leadership, imperialism, and the achievements of a materialistic civilisation.
The viewer may be physically absent, but remains psychologically present.
The importance of the voyeur or ‘invisible’ spectator in western art has been comprehensively examined in the art history of the past 25 years, but it matters even more when the scene is exotic.
If the picture is a window on the world, its surface is the outer surface of the voyeur's eye.
The scenes and people depicted all lead back to one position: the voyeur's.
All are there to serve and entertain the (almost invariably) male viewer.
The voyeur, in controlling the gaze, is to some extent in control of the action before his eyes, especially if the action relates to a supposedly inferior or primitive civilisation.
The only reference in Cook's brochure to an individual was to ‘the bronze figure of the man’, working as he had done since time immemorial.
One prevalent Orientalist value in the art of the 19th century was the male as noble savage, a manual labourer working honestly and humbly, albeit heroically.
Delacroix saw the Bedouin in that light, remarking that: ‘They are closer to nature in a thousand ways, and so beauty has a share in everything they make.’
More commonly, the male was depicted in Orientalist art as untrustworthy, dishonest, ruthless, animalistic or lazy.
The Pre-Raphaelite painter William Holman Hunt had little sympathy for the Arabs he painted in the mid-19th century: ‘Speaking generally I regard these people as the most detestable in existence.’
Women fared even worse.
At a time when Victorian women had to conform to Ruskin-ian notions of purity and virtue, the Oriental woman was often a symbol of rampant, animalistic sexuality.
Scenes of harems and slave markets — placed outside western eth-ical norms and Christian religious strictures — reveal barely concealed undertones of domination and sadism.
These pictures are an extreme form of Orientalism, and permitted an expression of voluptuousness and cruelty otherwise unacceptable to Victorian sensibilities.
Compared to their French counterparts, British Orientalists underplayed violence, drama and sexuality.
But the good old repression and guilt of the British male surface in these paintings, and it is not a picturesque sight.
As Amrit Wilson points out in the catalogue, Orientalism allows the artist to project on to the Orient ‘all those aspects of his nature which he has learnt to hate and fear: the contradictions between Judaeo-Christian morality and his own sexuality, between the work ethic and his longing for intense aesthetic and sensuous experiences…’
Some of the excellent contemporary work included reminds us that the historical Orientalism on display is the basis of our current society's attitude to the east.
Jananne Al-Ani's Untitled Gulf War Piece cuts through the Orientalist propaganda of that war, and Mitra Tabrizian's Surveillance makes us question national and social power relations.
And Sutapa Biswas' The Pied Piper of Hamlyn, Put Your Money Where Your Mouth is reminds us that tourism and the tourist gaze perpetuate unhealthy values.
Holiday brochures, as well as television travel programmes and magazine fashion features, now use images where Thomas Cook once used only words.
Tourism is still a form of colonisation, and our real holiday souvenir is, all too often, an attitude of superiority and control.
BOOKS
Speak for Scotland THE CROW ROAD Iain Banks Scribners, £15.99 Brian Morton
A particular crisis, easily mistaken for a failure of nerve, overtakes Scottish writers at a certain stage in their careers.
One saw it in extreme form in the 1960s, with Alan Sharp and Archie Hind, and in a quiet way with William McIlvanney.
It can be traced back to Hogg and Barke and Lewis Grassic Gibbon.
It coincides with a dramatic uncertainty about the feasibility of pastoral as a literary philosophy.
Scotland's accelerated industrial development, within what was still in many respects a primitive agrarian society, meant that the archetypes of country and town, nature and manufacture, adopted an almost grotesquely heightened stance as they entered literary language.
The first two parts of Alan Sharp's extraordinary trilogy,A Green Tree in Gedde and The Wind Shifts , gave that opposition its densest and most historically self-conscious elaboration.
Part three,The Apple Pickers , withered on the bough and never appeared, though Sharp went on telling the story in an American accent, hints of it piercing the fog of half a dozen Hollywood scripts.
In The Dear Green Place , Archie Hind exposed the sap and pulp that was hidden under the hard shell of that surprisingly literary construct, ‘Glasgow’, and then ‘fell silent’(by which the literary world apologised for Hind's decision to communicate more directly with the city's damaged youth).
One thinks, too, of James Kelman's struggle in The Burn and A Disaffection with the pastoral mode, and realises that a basic response to this crisis is to place increased reliance on the voice — not the stylised authorial ‘voice’ for which critics search, but actual voices which, as in classic pastoral, can interact against the most conventional of backdrops.
Iain Banks is a thoroughly Scottish writer, and The Crow Road has already been identified as his ‘crisis’ novel: a notable softening of the baroque violence and elaboration of the earlier books and the sideline science fiction (where Banks hides under the minimal false moustache and wig of a middle initial).
The Wasp Factory , his astonishing debut, was a kind of perverted pastoral.
The Bridge , to summarise no less arrogantly, was a complex metaphor for literary manufacture.
Espedair Street and the less well-known Walking On Glass and Canal Dreams were largely about the performance of the imagination.
The Crow Road , which masquerades as a comfortably sequential Bildungsroman (it's none of those), is also very much about the imagination and its processes.
Leaving him and a host of incidental tale-spinners aside, there are two main storytellers in the life of Prentice McHoan.
Perhaps the less important, but more symbolically potent, is his father Kenneth.
He gives up a day job to write down the stories — of the Secret Mountain, the Sound that could be Seen, the Slow Children and the Magic Duvet — that he once told for free to a rabble of offspring and other kin and friends.
Writing is made to seem a small betrayal, as it may have been in the life of Prentice's Uncle Rory, who makes a prize-winning living as the author of travel books about ‘unlikely destinations’ and who is absent from the grandmother's funeral where the story begins (with a predictable bang).
Whether Rory is merely loose in the world or ‘away the crow road’(dead) only Kenneth seems to know, but Prentice's uncle has left him a sign and a promise.
Crow Road is also a dingily respectable thoroughfare in Glasgow, and it is there that Prentice beds his uncle's former lover, his own ‘Aunty’ Janice.
Instead of the usual embarrassed note next morning, she leaves him the fragmentary manuscript of Rory's own Crow Road : a folder of gnomic jottings and descriptions that represents a more substantial legacy than his father's.
One suspects that the ‘old’ Banks might have put Prentice in the arms of a real aunt, rather than a politely honoured friend of the family, and there are fewer than usual Gothic touches.
Grandmother Margot's pacemaker explodes in the crematorium oven, a minor atomic blast in a country trying to go non-nuclear; a local urchin loses an eye in a fight at the cousin Urvill's restored castle (and has it replaced with an artificial one cast at the McHoans' Gallansch glass works); Rory and brother-in-law Fergus pass a nightmare night in a hill-top bothy with cannabis, whisky, a rat, two guns and one shattering revelation as props.
These apart, the atmosphere is a great deal less Grand Guignol and Roger Corman than before.
The tense horror of the book (which is, after all, mainly about death) is done with considerable imaginative subtlety and a fine touch.
It serves as a dramatic confirmation of Joan Didion's belief that ‘We tell one another stories in order to live’, with the corollary that a failure of storytelling is a kind of death.
What one remembers, in the hopping back and forth between generations and time-frames, is the sheer verbal energy, itself very Scottish, with which characters keep the dark at bay.
In conversation, hardly a word is left unpunned or reference untapped.
Given the generation of Prentice and his friends (and Banks' own interests), rock provides many of the allusions.
But given, too, Prentice's age, much of the conversation centres on a raw, adolescent metaphysics.
His brother Lewis, a successful alternative comedian (another who betrays the treasured privacy of his humour; Scots regard jokes as intimate gifts between friends) does a routine about the rest of the universe lying outside one's own front door.
Kenneth is an atheist and Uncle Hamish, who has a reflecting telescope cast and ground at the glass works but never uses his private observatory, espouses a brand of condemnationist Christianity that replaces caritas with anathemata .
Banks' concerns are dark, and no less profound for being seen through the glass of adolescence — for that is the much underrated emotional and cultural condition in which Scotland still finds itself.
This is as fine and ambitious a novel as any from a Scottish writer since the 1960s.
It is also unquestionably Banks' best work to date.
First namer THE VERY MODEL OF A MAN Howard Jacobson Viking, £14.99 Bryan Cheyette
Howard Jacobson's latest novel takes the Biblical Cain as its hero.
On hearing this news, Viking — which is also Salman Rushdie's ex-publisher — sent the novel to a rabbi and an imam for their approval.
Such is the level of religious censorship generated by the Satanic Verses affair.
Unlike the Koran, however, the Bible has long been fair game for spirited literary re-readings.
Joseph Heller's God Knows uses the shorthand ‘schmuck’ for his eponymous deity, and Harold Bloom recently tried to ‘prove’that the Book of Genesis was written by a woman.
What price a death-threat from the Pope, the Chief Rabbi, or the Archbishop of Canterbury?
Jacobson's rehabilitation of Cain is in a literary tradition that goes back to the Romantic poets, who identified with Cain as an outsider.
Not that The Very Model of a Man is particularly romantic.
Split into two interweaving parts, it recreates the Creation and also has the outlaw Cain tell his fratricidal story, East of Eden in the Tower of Babel.
The ‘story-tellers’ and ‘story-listeners’who have accumulated in Babel sound eerily familiar: ‘Mythologising is afoot in every rationally laid-out square.
An elfin grandiloquence pipes upon the precisely engineered canals.
In short, the entire plain of Shimar is jabbering, and Cain is jabbering with it’.
This lambast, which occurs at the beginning of the novel, is not just another Jacobsonian account of the too easy reverence paid to writers of ‘magic realism’.
As The Very Model of a Man is full of angels and story-tellers — two essential ingredients of ‘magic realism’— there is clearly a strong hint that Jacobson is attempting to rewrite not just the Bible but our contemporary literary orthodoxies, which are in danger of assuming the status of a surrogate religion.
Cain, significantly, despises his brother's ‘angelolatory’.
Many of the preoccupations of Jacobson's previous novels are used to demythologise the book of Genesis.
Adam is the familiar inarticulate father-figure, in stark contrast to his son, Cain, the first namer.
The fluency and superabundance of Cain's naming is contrasted with Adam's passive silence: ‘the primordial dejection of fathers makes no sound’.
But this is also the story of any group of ‘outsiders’ whose assimilation into a dominant culture separates parents from their children.
Cain the ‘word-man’ can no longer speak to his father.
As well as being the first assimilator, Cain is also, of course, the first to feel envy.
In this he is not unlike Sefton Goldberg in Coming from Behind , Jacobson's earlier novel.
But Cain's epic envy of his brother is portrayed as a deadly struggle.
Abel is also a ‘murderer’, according to the Babel-based retelling of his story, because he denies Cain a say in his future.
The Very Model of a Man is at is best when Cain justifies his fratricide with this lethal logic.
The novel is weaker on the re-enaction of Exodus, which seems to be an unnecessary diversion from Jacobson's central concerns.
Many of the novel's legendary figures, however, do successfully complement an obsessively Cainite outlook.
The mordant prophecy of Sisobyk the Scryer and the many ‘openings’ of Zilpah give the novel, always on the edge of domination by a single voice, a welcome variousness.
At the end, Cain concludes that his banishment has been caused by his refusal to sink his identity into a higher form.
‘You are, Cain as good as told him, what you are not’.
This negative self-definition is certainly the key to Jacobson's fiction.
All of his previous protagonists are shaped by conflicting forces with which they, supposedly, have little or nothing in common.
Similarly, this novel seems to have been written in reaction to Jacobson's enforced designation as a ‘comic novelist’: a sort of cross between Kingsley Amis, Tom Sharpe and Woody Allen.
Perhaps because of the kidding tone of Heller's God Knows , Jacobson has studiously reined in his comic instinct in this work.
Instead, he has ambitiously attempted an updating of the Biblical myths that have always informed the act of literary creation.
His refusal to take the easy option is admirable.
But I suspect that his profound restlessness needs less metaphyical weight to achieve its fullest expression.
Party poopers A FULL SERVICE BANK: HOW BCCI STOLE BILLIONS AROUND THE WORLD James Ring Adams and Douglas Frantz Simon & Schuster, £16.99 Nick Fielding
Rober Mazur can reasonably claim to have done more than anyone else to bring down the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
As an undercover customs agent based in Tampa, Florida, it was his suggestion to target a small-time Colombian drug-money launderer called Gonzalo Mora Jnr that eventually led to the uncovering of a huge laundering operation centred on BCCI.
That, in turn, first led US regulators to take a close interest in this remarkable bank.
For more than two years from mid-1986, Mazur — known as Musella to his drug world contacts — risked his life as he sought to infiltrate the smugglers in an operation known as C-Chase.
Not surprisingly, his whereabouts and appearance are a close secret today.
As Mazur got closer to the big players in the Colombian drug world, one name began to come up more and more often: that of BCCI.
Before long, he had made his first links with staff in the bank's Florida and Panama branches.
Later he would travel to France and England, where he met with more senior BCCI officials as he tried to make arrangements to launder millions of dollars a month.
Mazur's story, which will undoubtedly feature one day on the silver screen, is as good a tale of derring-do as one could ever wish for.
Coded messages, huge sums of money, nail-biting coincidences — like the time in a hotel lobby when, accompanied by one of his biggest targets, he bumped into someone he had previously arrested — and genuine humour run through it.
The operation came to an end on 8 October 1988, when Mazur faked his own wedding stag night.
As the dozens of guests arrived at Macbeth's restaurant in Tampa, they were greeted and arrested by customs agents.
Some clearly thought it was all part of the night's entertainment.
‘All right, let's party!’ shouted BCCI official Sibte Hassan as the handcuffs snapped on.
A Full Service Bank started out as a book about Operation C-Chase, and was commissioned well before the collapse of BCCI last July.
More than half the book is based on material from the ensuing trial, which resulted in six BCCI staff being sentenced to terms of up to 14 years and BCCI being fined US$14 million.
It goes on, correctly, to show how Jack Blum, an investigator who worked for Democratic Senator John Kerry's subcommittee on terrorism, narcotics and international Relations, played a key role in persuading the New York district attorney, Robert Morgenthau, to take an interest in BCCI and begin his own investigation.
The authors, respected journalists who covered the Tampa trial, have been able to weave a convincing and tight narrative out of hundreds of interviews, tape transcripts and other material.
One subject that possibly deserves more coverage — and makes Mazur's achievements all the more remarkable — is the extent of the inter-agency rivalry that dogged the investigation and was the subject of a Senate Banking Committee report published last October.
There was no love lost between Mazur and his boss Bonni Tischler, nor between US Customs and the Drug Enforcement Administration; nor between any any of the many other agencies with a peripheral interest in BCCI.
It was this rivalry that allowed the bank to continue to function after the Tampa arrests, much to Mazur's disgust.
The authors' efforts to extend the book out of Operation C-Chase into a more comprehensive study of BCCI do not exhibit the same grasp of detail, nor contain the same level of tension as their best chapters.
From this book one might assume that BCCI was primarily a US operation.
Why did the Bank of England order its closure and not the US Federal Reserve?
It is not apparent that the authors could answer that question.
In reality, BCCI was run from London.
All the senior figures lived in London and their frauds were planned at BCCI's headquarters in Leadenhall Street in the City.
The complex series of financial switches, deceptions and double deals they concocted were far more extensive than any of the comparatively small scams that took place in the US.
It is a case of billions versus millions.
 Desipte this limitation,A Full Service Bank is well-written and largely accurate.
The authors have benefitted from a flying start, but have only chosen to run part of the way round the track.
Life lines BEFORE I DIE AGAIN Chad Varah Constable, £17.50 Veronica Groocock
Most pioneers, by their very nature, are mavericks and rebels, daring to be different, challenging established norms.
Chad Varah's name has become synonymous with the Samaritans, which he founded in 1953 after learning that there were three suicides a day in London alone.
His autobiography is characteristically forthright and idiosyncratic, reflecting the vision and energy of a man whose innovative ‘listening therapy’ has helped to save thousands of lives.
He recounts his childhood as the eldest son of a parson, undergraduate days at Oxford, work as a scriptwriter and visualiser for Eagle and Girl magazines, marriage (to Susan, a leading member of the Mothers Union) and ordination.
After expressing doubts to a friend about his moral fitness for the priesthood (‘having had unspecified sexual relations with an unspecified number of unmarried girls’), both decided that he was ‘properly penitent’, and so he went ahead.
His first task as a clergyman was to bury a 13-year-old girl who had killed herself when her periods started, not understanding what was ‘wrong’ with her.
This, indeed, was the main spark that ignited the launch of the Samaritans.
From its roots at MANsion House 9000 (the initial emergency telephone line at St Stephen Walbrook in the City of London) it has grown into a huge international movement with branches in 20 countries, most of which Varah, an inveterate traveller, has visited.
Once a tiny organisation staffed by four people, the Samaritans now have nearly 200 branches in Britain and take 2.5 million calls a year.
The first was from a destitute young woman about to be evicted and threatening to gas her four children, then herself.
Varah intervened and, in finding her alternative accommodation, averted a family tragedy — proof of the crucial role played by his brainchild.
Befriending, he stresses, is not about giving advice.
‘It does not seek to change, reform, improve people.
Those exposed to it often make changes in themselves, but that is because they want to, not because we are dissatisfied with them as they are.
They have a right to be themselves.’
And he castigates the Church for its lack of compassion, its ‘destructive’ standards.
‘Church people were all too often narrow-minded, censorious, judgemental, intolerant, conventional…so the people for whom the world was too harsh would never think of turning to the Church…
’ This is a staggering indictment of Christian orthodoxy.
A turbulent priest who ‘did his best to reduce guilt in the confessional,’ Chad Varah clearly despises hypocrisy or humbug, especially in sexual matters, evincing contempt for the ‘guilt spreading’moral majority.
From reassuring teenage youths about masturbation to his work as a sex therapist dealing with all shades of sexual and emotional problem (and as a consultant to Forum magazine), he has remained totally unshockable.
The only clients for whom he has little or no sympathy are psychopaths (‘a real bugbear’): he believes they waste volunteers' time and cannot be helped.
In the 1950s, male homosexuality was a frequent cause of suicidal attempts or feelings, because of the pre-Woolfenden potential for blackmail.
Even in the so-called ‘permissive’ 1960s, there were no gay switchboards or lesbian lines, and Chad Varah made it part of his mission to encourage self-acceptance in lesbians, most of whom at that time felt ‘guilty or freakish’.
I should like to have known more about his views on possible links between social deprivation and suicidal intent, but perhaps that would be a different kind of book.
This is the story of one man who, at 80, still works a 50-hour week despite having retired from all Samaritan offices except that of Founder, and who still cares ‘very passionately about human suffering, and would like to continue to do something to alleviate it, on however modest a scale’.
The decent dynasts THE MACMILLANS Richard Davenport-Hines Heinemann, £18.50 Kenneth O Morgan
Even in the age of Major, much of British politics remains dynastic.
Industrial bosses, bourgeois professionals and trade union leaders all exemplify what Lloyd George called ‘the principle of the first of the litter’.
Dynastic publishers mirror this aspect of our public affairs more obliquely, and Richard Davenport-Hines's study of the Macmillans down the centuries, from the crofts of Arran to the corridors of Downing Street, offers a fascinating examination of the genre .
His book is a study in disenchantment.
In particular, Harold Macmillan, who occupies two-thirds of these pages, is presented in singularly wry fashion.
This approach has aroused the anger of the present Earl of Stockton, who apparently refused the author permission to quote from the family archives on the grounds that Davenport-Hines has written ‘psycho-history’.
For all the author's disavowals, there is evidence of this, with heavy emphasis on the contrived ‘false self’ that led Macmillan into a career of theatricality, self-deception and general bathos.
There is a curious passage on the precise psychological significance of Macmillan's habit of baring his teeth.
The author also quotes, with apparent approval, Cyril Connolly's remark that ‘those with an irrational fear of life become publishers,’ which certainly adds a new dimension to Freud.
The book is distinctly impressionistic in its handling of evidence, with random observations from cranks such as Evelyn Waugh and the vacuous Anne Fleming used uncritically to point a moral or to adorn a treason.
Nevertheless, the book is undoubtedly a good, racy read, especially in its first 100 pages.
They vividly describe the rise of the Macmillan publishing house from the lush world of the mid-Victorian men of letters.
The house had Tom Brown's Schooldays, Westward Ho!and Motley's Rise of the Dutch Republic on its early lists, and Carlyle, Kingsley and Lewis Carroll among its authors, so it could hardly fail.
The Macmillans were evidently an odd family down the years.
Alcoholism, depression and an intensity of Presbyterian self-chastisement were abundantly in evidence, with the occasional nervous collapse or suicide.
But quite new pressures shaped the unhappy youth of Harold Macmillan at Eton and Balliol.
An oppressively dominant all-American mother was followed by the horrors of the first world war and, later, the traumas of marriage to Dorothy Cavendish.
Her lengthy affair with Robert Boothby, and the burdens of the Devonshire family alcoholism and general eccentricity, were further crosses to bear.
Macmillan's inner torments, we gather, were there early on.
‘He was not sexually adamant,’ Davenport-Hines tells us, with a certainty many biographers might envy.
In the circumstances, it seems remarkable that Macmillan survived to enjoy any kind of normal life at all, let alone become a prime minister and a nonagenarian.
The account of Macmillan's political career is clear but patchy.
His pioneering role as a proto-Keynesian champion of the ‘middle way’ and a critic of Munich in the 1930s is surely understated.
However, the treatment of his work in early 1945, with the forced repatriation of White Russians back to Stalin's régime, is full of zest.
At least, it leaves key questions to be re-answered by Macmillian's apologists.
The post-war career has a somewhat familiar periodicity: success at housing, double-dealing over Suez, the ‘never had it so good’ heyday as premier, the ‘night of the long knives’, Christine Keeler and the trauma of the resignation.
No ‘Supermac’ here.
But the narrative has plenty of life and is enlivened by aperçus of Butler, Kennedy and other contemporaries.
The final long twilight sees the author more sympathetic and Macmillan himself attaining a plateau of tranquillity (though the Oxford Chancellorship is curiously ignored).
In the 1980s, the Whig-gish exponent of a ‘middle way’ or ‘one nation’solidarity looked like a good deed in a naughty Thatcherite world.
In politics, Harold Macmillan only partially reflected his publisher origins.
He was hardly the paradigm of the bookish politicians in the vein of Michael Foot or Enoch Powell.
For all the contrived patrician, grouse-moor image, his style perhaps owed more to his American than to his Arran forbears.
He left Downing Street in 1963 almost an object of ridicule, condemned in Gibbonian terms as the symbol of national decay.
Thirty years on, his achievement seems more credible.
The impact of the trenches and of mass unemployment in 1930s Stockton gave him decent enough values.
In any case, the consensual Conservatism of the bookmen seems morally preferable to that of the stock-jobbers and estate agents.
Not least over Europe, Macmillan had his sense of vision.
His vivid persona might have been contrived, but it chimed in with the national mood.
His colourless, speaking-clock successors might emulate it with advantage.
Dream on TRANSIT OF VENUS: TRAVELS IN THE PACIFIC Julian Evans Secker & Warburg, £16.99 Dea Birkett
The Pacific is a place of dreams.
The Noble Savage, the Polynesian Beauty, the Paradise Isle were all conceived in the world's largest ocean.
For centuries, from Captain Cook and Conrad to Gauguin and Robert Louis Stevenson, westerners have fed upon and nurtured these myths.
It takes a brave book to challenge them, and Transit of Venus promises just that.
Julian Evans shatters our dreams.
He is refreshingly unromantic about the Pacific islands through which he wandered.
Fiji was ‘shamelessly dreary’, and its capital ‘reeked of the London suburbs’.
Evans took a taxi out to a forest just to get away from every islander asking him how much he liked the place.
Majuro in the Marshall Islands was ‘the most unspeakable dump I had ever seen’.
The monotony, boredom and endless waiting gnawed away at the author.
He inevitably became a sunset watcher; there was nothing else to do.
The most animated creatures he met, he wrote, were the pigeons.
Evans has a wry insight into the disjunction of dreams and reality.
He notes that Fiji boasted immaculate seaside thatched villages — for tourist accommodation.
The real Fijian villages, on the land side of the roads, were breezeblock and tin, and decorated with huge billboards for Benson and Hedges.
We are reminded that the romance we seek is constructed for the outsider.
Transit of Venus is more a diary of Evans' disappointments and disillusion than a straightforward travel narrative.
It is a sad, gentle book, with the pace of a lullaby.
But the style is sometimes so impressionistic that we lose track of which island we are on, and to whom we are talking.
And the brutal honesty of his observations is sometimes lost in the attempt to make the words themselves beautiful.
For scratch at his sceptical facade and underneath, the author, like all of us, yearns to find some place in which the dream lives on.
However much he refuses to shy away from the hopeless, endless horror of what he sees, he cannot give up that quest for the perfect paradise.
In the end, even Evans succumbs to the Pacific myth.
As his 12-seater plane makes an unscheduled stop at a tiny atoll in the Marshall Islands, he spots that there are no tin roofs and lets the plane go on without him.
Here at last was paradise.
Pandanus thatch rustled in the wind.
Everywhere was the rank smell of copra drying.
There were banana gardens and pawpaw trees, and outriggers lazed on the lagoon.
There were no cars and no electricity.
Evans fed on breadfruit, fish balls and rice, and found the place of his dreams after all.
But in the finding, perhaps he loses the poignancy of all that has gone before.
Transit of Venus starts by challenging the quest for paradise, and ends by succumbing to it.
A braver man may have returned home with his disillusions.
Welfaria rejected NO ABIDING CITY: EVELYN WAUGH, 1939-1966 Martin Stannard Weidenfeld & Nicolson, £25 Valentine Cunningham
The second volume of Martin Stannard's marvellously racy and unflinching life of Evelyn Waugh resumes its terrible story at the outbreak of the second world war, when the much-travelled, twice-married, Catholic dandy and snob, cynic and satirist, was 36.
He looked and probably felt older.
He was not wearing all that well.
The great self-blotting-out piss-ups across Clubland, all that self-indulgence in comestibles and drinkables and endless smokes, were already taking their toll.
Now a podgy, desperately unfit bar-fly, he simply wasn't up to taking on the Man of Action role that he craved.
He was certainly not the man for the various blue-blood, hard-man, gangsterish marine and commando outfits that he used every social connection to wangle his way into.
The owner of that viperous tongue, so useful in producing Decline and Fall ,Black Mischief and the rest, didn't take to receiving marching orders.
Waugh prided himself on clowning his way out of trouble as ‘the likeable Chinaman of the mess,’ but he was tetchier and more dislikeable than he supposed.
Brave as could be in the cocked-up invasion of Crete and in the Yugoslavian mountains with Tito, he was still just the sort of awkward squaddie no army likes.
So he fell back into civvy street, heartily pushed by his wearied superiors.
The harshly defeated Catholic crusader, without high rank and honour-less, had nothing before him except scrabbling for cash with his pen, an unhappy family life, and coating the intransigent permanence of his adolescence in premature and cranky old-bufferism.
He would be the archetypal Young Fogey.
Having failed at playing God's warrior against modernity and communism in the field, he turned his prose to revisiting Brideshead, inventing fictional survivals of a mythic Catholic-aristocratic past.
The Household of Faith was Brideshead 's working title.
Waugh bent every effort to head a version of that household — an oikos , an economy — that the Old Catholics would be proud of.
And a nasty place it was: jammed with junk Victorian furnishings and attitudes, squirearchical, male, fascistic (Waugh was as keen on the Croatian Ustashe as he had been on Franco), anti-Jewish, bitter against the ‘common man’, devoted to cranky equations between social hierarchy and linguistic purity.
It was all a kind of madness, and Waugh did indeed go mad in the mid-1950s.
He heard dementing voices.
He tried publicly to acknowledge and exorcise them in The Ordeal of Gilbert Pinfold .
The voices were, in one sense, the price paid for the saeva indignatio that had fired his greatest fiction.
Satirists are often not right in the head.
Now the cruel biter was being cruelly bitten.
And the revenge was hatefully modern in form.
Waugh heard BBC Third Programme discussions about himself, a form of torture he came to feel peculiarly representative of the modern age he despised.
He didn't like journalists, but he needed the money they brought in.
Now the probings of the BBC interviewers, those secular confessors who stood for all the modern torturers goading and vexing him — the critics, the reviewers, the Stroud tax-man who sniffed out Waugh's lucrative tax-dodges — were inside.
Waugh hated visions of himself in the mirror.
Fat, red-faced, angry, he terrified himself.
And the voices were the essence of a frightful self-mirroring, hurtfully bringing home charges of fascism, snobbery, élitism, lack of charity.
Unable to concede just how disturbed he had become, Waugh put the whole affair down to temporary pharmaceutical poisoning and too much alcohol.
Martin Stannard won't let him get away so lightly.
He talks, rightly, about paranoia, and schizophrenia.
Among the many good things in this life is that it exacts a full look at the worst of Waugh.
There is no softening of the man's sheer awfulness here.
This prig, a dogmatic fundamentalist cocooned in a wealthy, reactionary, churchy upper-class, was a terrible hypocrite, who preached to others the old Catholic family virtues while being vicious to his wife and selectively hateful to his children.
Stannard also works impressively hard, though far less convincingly, at making us dig up some sympathy with the private agony of Waugh.
The devout man assuaged guilt at lacking Christian charity, or any other kind, in acts of financial generosity to Jesuits and other needy folk.
He slid inexorably into despair over the Church's modernisings and his lack of a knighthood, and feared that he was losing his writing power.
The modest, Catholicised selves of the later fiction — Pinfold, Guy Crouchback from the Sword of Honour trilogy, St Helena — indeed lack the power of the victims in his earlier novels: Paul Pennyfeather, say, or Tony Last.
Devoutness seems to have drawn the old satiric sting.
The constant, troubled eggings-on to be charitable had perhaps paid off too well.
Something had gone wrong.
In his letters (and the many unpublished letters are one of the great coups and pleasures of this life) the tetchy assaults on the fornications and adulteries of his old friends represent the spry youthful satirist sunk into broody dogmatism.
Survivals of the old fun, such as the playful doubting of Tito's gender, persisted now as a dismally obsessive pursuit of this representative enemy of Catholics across the pages of the right-wing press: a mere settling of old scores.
Even in the last of the great satires,The Loved One , about California burial customs, Waugh had to watch his step because he was relying so heavily on dollars to pay the school fees and keep him in booze.
Where possible, he would be paid in untaxable kind, especially champagne — the quickest route, he said, out of Welfaria.
No wonder he fumed against the new, freer-handed satiric writers, Kingsley Amis and John Wain.
Worst for him, of course, was that they stood precisely for Welfaria: the hated era of the common man that this great beached whale of strident English traditionalism had come to feel so ineffectual against.
And for all Martin Stannard's fair-minded efforts to encourage our pity, it's very difficult to stir up much regret about that.
PrintOut A time of gifts Boyd Tonkin
When parliament returns, Home Secretary Clarke will rescue the Asylum Bill from limbo.
Unlike recent migration laws, this one may put almost as many Bosnians and Balts as Tamils and Kurds on the plane home.
For the first time since 1939, part of the human tide that Tory politicians invoke has a pale face and flows from those faraway lands of which Neville Chamberlain knew little.
This is a good moment to recall the last trickle of white immigration to arouse official panic.
The prewar refugees from Nazi central Europe dribbled into Britain through a thick filter of red tape.
It's a historical commonplace that this extraordinary cohort of Hitler's unwanted transformed their adopted country.
From government statistics (Claus Moser) and social theory (Ernest Gellner) to art history (Ernst Gombrich) and the Freudian legacy, a few thousand men and women born in the cities of Mitteleuropa in the first quarter of this century quickened the pulse of a smug and sluggish culture.
They are slowly disappearing.
At the end of last year, the Prague-born critic and cultural historian J P Stern died.
Blackwell has just published a posthumous collection of his articles (The Heart of Europe: essays on literature and ideology , £15.95).
Stern wrote wisely and beautifully in his third language (after German and Czech).
His study of Hitler's appeal,The Fuhrer and the People , explains that old black magic better than any other.
He debunked racial fantasies and punctured cruel dogma.
Stern's ironic and humane gaze can stand as a tiny but glowing symbol of everything that Britain gained from his generation of migrants.
In fact, they had less in common than their persecutors, or their hosts, believed.
For many, even Jewish descent only started to matter when the Nazi racial madness decreed that it should define them.
Some were radical, some conservative; some theorists, some activists; some populists, some snobs.
And sometimes their influence ran down dubious channels.
One could argue, for example, that the truculent empiricism of the historian Geoffrey Elton (born in Prague in 1921; and Ben's uncle) warped the growth of his subject in Britain.
Positive or not, its impact was profound.
‘The theory behind these essays is that there is no theory,’ writes Stern, sounding like an Elton — or even a Wittgenstein.
This is partly a joke (he can glide effortlessly among concepts when required); partly a nod towards the carnage that, in central Europe at least, lies at the end of the a priori road.
Stern lived to witness and welcome the end of the reign of doctrine in and around his homeland.
Now the British response to the makers of those velvet revolutions will be an iron hand that signals ‘Keep Out’.
ENDGAMES WEEKEND COMPETITION
No 3223 set by Katie Mallett
We asked you for a letter written by a father to his son admitting that he has some embarrassing or socially undesirable condition.
Report by Ms de Meaner
What imaginations you all have.
Kevin Irving's ‘father’ writes to admit that he's Pope, Chas F Garvey's that he has been faithful to his wife for 42 years, and Mark Ambrose's that he has a dash of myxomatosis (to be fair, the father is a rabbit).
A very large number came up with the same idea: that Mummy or Daddy has had a sex change.
I only picked the one, as ‘…so I am really your mother [signed]your loving father’ or ‘…your loving father [signed]your new Auntie Dora’repeated ad nauseam loses its sparkle.
Two people sent in letters from the father to the son informing the son that he (the son) has an embarrassing condition.
Since Basil Ransome-Davies has written a sharp note saying that either interpretation was possible, either interpretation was allowed.
Unfortunately, only those who chose the father's condition won, including Basil Ransome-Davies.
However, I quite liked Horace Joseph's idea of having the father bravely inform his son that the lad is, in fact, Kenneth Clarke, with all that that entails.
Twelve pounds to the winners, plus an extra three to Basil Ransome-Davies.
Doesn't that just show how fair and disinterested we are in the Comp Complex?
My dear son,
For many years, I have wished more than words can say that I could unburden myself, unbutton my secret.
Now that time has come, as the Labour Party say, and I feel trepidation at what you may feel to have been my shameful silence.
Gervase, you have perhaps noticed that I have never removed my underpants in your presence.
The same was true for your mother until her recent, fatal heart attack.
What Shakespeare calls the ‘act of darkness’ was always precisely that with us: under covers, and under cover of night.
But now that you are reaching voting age and puberty, and will inevitably soon experience the same condition, I must tell you that my penis is fluorescent green and that I have five foreskins.
This is because I am from the planet Bzargl in galaxy E-220, and arrived in your solar system in 1962, disguised as a salesman for Rolls Razor.
Now I must return to my people, for their molecular codes are suffering indigital chancre, and only I can save them.
By the time you read this, I will spiling zop picaliqi inzermito, zop bram Bzargl vorwish sauri zop sauri.
Crudiq masto no antidote.
O lipa!
My dear Rodney,
We much enjoyed your visit during the vacation, and your mother and I were pleased to hear that you are attending to your studies and making a circle of friends.
I wish my news was as good.
Unfortunately, I have a bad blow on the medical front to report, you fuckbrained little parasite.
I've had as much pleasure raising you as I did screwing your clapped-out tart of a mother.
The consultant has explained that Tourette's Syndrome is a rare and unfortunate condition, and he should fucking well know about those, he's right off the Christmas tree, probably spent half his life sucking strange men's cocks or taking it up the arsehole in a public loo in the Charing Cross Road.
Apparently it means that while for most of the time I will behave normally I shall be prone to sudden ourbursts of rage and obscenity.
I feel obliged to tell this to you as a warning, and in the hope that you will be able to understand and not judge me when attacks strike.
It's as though the superego suddenly stops functioning, though why I should describe it in the kind of shit jargon dreamed up by that Jewish prick Freud is beyond me.
We both look forward to seeing you at the end of this term, and to those warm family evenings of good food, relaxation and talk.
So fuck off and die, Rodney.
You're such a waste of space you make a crab-louse look like Mother Teresa.
Your loving father.
Dear Jeremy,
You will be surprised to hear from me, as your mother usually writes our weekly letter.
However, old chap, I have some news that may prove unsettling.
I understand you're now doing Human Biology — that should help.
Do you remember how disappointed you were last hols?
When I wouldn't help you strip down Alan's engine?
Well, I started, but packed up when I broke a fingernail.
Does that give you a clue?
Do you recall that nice Mr Spurgeon who came to dinner?
(Spurgeon the surgeon, yes?)
Well, he's performed some radical surgery on me.
Have you guessed yet, darling?
(Sorry! that slipped out.)
Really, it's rather exciting.
Daddy's had a sex change!
You may have suspected something when you caught me using that heavenly perfume you bought for Mummy's birthday.
I wouldn't mention this to your chums — boys can be so cruel — but I shall be coming down on Sports Day.
I shan't disgrace you.
I've bought a ducky little suit and matching hat.
With fondest love, your new Auntie Roberta.
My Dearest Son,
You have made the choice to travel alone to those far-flung parts of the world that many of us will never visit.
My wish for you is that in your travels you will discover in yourself a truer meaning of life, and will one day return to us enriched and mature from your experiences.
When that time comes, I'm sure that you will return home to make your future, satisfied that you have quenched the thirst that has driven you on this journey, and be ready to take up your permanent place in the world.
Your Loving Father.
PS: Things are not too good at home — your Mother is well, but the house has been repossessed after I lost my job.
We suggest you go on to Patagonia.
(With apologies to a well-known building society)
Dear Tom,
I must prepare you for a surprise that will not, I hope, upset you too much.
Having assisted an old woman at a zebra crossing, I was granted three wishes.
I'm afraid I didn't think the thing through, and must tell you, therefore, to expect me looking both younger and handsomer than you remember me.
As a matter of fact, you may not recognise me, as I appear some decades younger than you.
I mention this, as I am planning to visit you next week, to continue our discussion on euthanasia (although I hope you will not be disappointed to discover that my views have altered).
I may not be alone.
In fact, if you value your domestic happiness, it might be advisable for Jenny to absent herself during my visit, as I am, in fact, I regret to say, irresistible to all women.
As things have turned out it hasn't proved to be a serious drawback so far; and your mother, who has temporarily left home, is very happy for me.
I'll call at the usual time next Tues.
To assist identification, I'll be wearing a cobalt shell-suit and Nikes.
I remain, believe me, your ever-loving Father.
My dear son,
I am dictating this letter to the Matron of the Royal Victoria Infirmary.
Your mother could explain what happened but I have not seen her since she dialled 999 and packed her suitcase.
Hilary (your fiancée) is also aware of these bizarre events but is under heavy sedation in the same hospital, in fact, the same ward (to be quite precise the same bed).
This has nothing to do with NHS reforms but rather with an excess of tender concern on my part.
Hilary was depressed at your long absence; I was cheering her up with photographs of your sporting exploits, which hang, as you know, in the master bedroom.
This proved too much for her; she burst into tears; I comforted her.
My recollection of what happened then is hazy, except that at some stage I went into spasm, with the two of us locked tight in a tangle of arms and legs.
Quite why we were undressed at the time is a mystery, though I do recall your mother being uncharacteristically excitable and an unseemly display of mirth by the ambulance men.
They say that a domestic crisis brings a family closer together.
Pray God this is true.
Your loving father.
No 3226 Set by Margaret Rogers
Can we have a diatribe in verse from Neil Kinnock against the Tory press, the short-sighted public, or anyone or anything else he might be against at the moment.
To be in by 7 May.
BACKCHAT Mat Coward
From an anonymous profile of John Smith, in the Important on Sunday , May 1992:
Gravitas .
That's it in one word — John Smith, surely the next leader of the Labour Party, has gravitas the way other people have niceness.
Where Neil Kinnock is fiery, verbose, excitable, Mr Smith is calm, believable, dependable.
Indeed, the contrast between the two men, yesterday's man and tomorrow's, could hardly be greater.
Those wavering voters who were made nervous by Kinnock's Boyo Valley exuberance are comforted by the dignified but determined way in which Mr Smith, the Edinburgh attorney par excellence, reassures them that, as it were , not only will they get the house, they'll get custody of the children as well .
Nor is ‘bottom’ the only foundation on which Mr Smith's claim to the succession rests: a heart attack may not, on the face of it, appear to be an especially useful item in a would-be prime minister's CV.
It is a measure of Mr Smith's extraordinarily well-starred political horoscope that it was his quiet, determined recovery from his illness — rather than illness itself — that leaves the more lasting impression in one's mind.
Labour strategists are well aware that, at most, they have just one more chance to ‘get it sorted’.
And that, undoubtedly, means John Smith; as one senior source put it: ‘If John can't do it, nobody can.’
Significantly, this is an analysis shared by Conservative Central Office; Tory ministers continue to watch Mr Smith's ascendant star with considerable nervousness.
From an anonymous profile of John Smith, in the Important on Sunday , May 1993:
As a potential chancellor, says the Walworth Road whispering campaign, John Smith was an immense asset to his party.
By electing him leader, Labour has gained a so-so number one, and lost an unbeatable number two.
Mr Kinnock, for all his perceived faults, was, at his best, a true leader of men: inspirational, passionate, committed, and as tough as nails.
Smith, by contrast, appears almost drab; greyer than John Major, fatter than Ken Clarke, more smug than Chris Patten.
At a time of unprecedented challenge in the political arena, many of Smith's colleagues worry that his will-reading Morningside manner is hardly designed to energise the faithful, let alone excite the doubtful.
And then there is the question of the heart attack.
It may seem uncharitable, even tasteless, to raise the matter; but the fact remains that the life of a modern head of state is not the leisurely affair it was a century ago.
If Britain is to compete successfully in the frightening new post-Tokyo world, it must have at its helm a captain over the health of whom no niggling question marks hover.
If Smith were to fall under a bus — or, let us be blunt, drop dead during a European heads of government meeting — the effect on the nation's stability and standing could be devastating.
All in all, the people's party may not have played quite the ace it thought it had when it chose Smith as its leader.
This weekend, senior opposition figures are beginning to admit, off the record, that in electing John Smith instead of, say, Gordon Brown or Ken Livingstone, Labour has possibly made its greatest error since it passed over Dennis Healey in favour of Michael Foot.
To change horses yet again would be, admittedly, an extraordinary admission of failure; but to cling stubbornly to the neck of an ailing nag might be worse.
It might be little short of suicide.
The Tories, meanwhile, must hope and pray that Smith stays put.
FORTEANA A hand-picked review of the weird and wonderful by ‘Fortean Times’ editor Paul Sieveking
A large sub-section in our ‘animal behaviour’ files concerns the revenge of the hunted, when beleaguered fish, pheasants and rabbits turn the tables on their tormentors.
Let me present a medley of these edifying yarns.
Ron Canny, 45, was crouching in a ditch on one side of a field near Osage, Iowa, when about seven deer were flushed out from the other side of the field.
One of them tried to jump the ditch and landed on Canny, breaking his neck (Lincoln Journal , Nebraska 28 December 1987).
Poacher Marino Malerba, 35, shot a stag dead as it stood on an overhanging rock in Trento, Italy.
The stag fell on top of him and broke his neck (European , 23 August 1991).
This story was also reported in the Sun and Daily Star .
Curiously, 11 months earlier,exactly the same thing happened in Trento to a poacher called Giacomo Montara, aged 40 (Daily Star , 29 September;Weekly News , 13 October 1990).
A good story is always worth repeating (changing the odd detail, of course).
Rabbit-hunting farmer Vincent Caroggio of Chartres, France, paused for a rest and laid his gun down.
He was immediately shot dead by a rabbit, which rushed from its burrow and bumped against the trigger (Sunday Mail , Scotland, 14 April 1991).
Dog-Shoots-Master is the most common type of incident.
Here's a recent one: Gennady Danilov, 33, was found dead in snowy woods near Novgorod with his hunting rifle in his left hand.
The Soviet police concluded that he had been shot in the stomach by his dog as he tried to free it from a trap (Reuters, etc, 6 March 1992).
Ali-Ashgar Ahani, 27, an Iranian hunter, tried to catch a snake alive near Tehran by pressing the butt of his shotgun behind its head.
The snake coiled around the butt and pulled the trigger with its thrashing tail, firing one of the barrels and shooting Ahani fatally in the head.
His colleague tried to grab the shotgun, but the writhing reptile triggered the other barrel, according to the Islamic Republic News Agency (AP, Reuters, 24 April 1990).
Lou Wiezai, 71, reeled in his line on the fishing boat Royal Star , about 250 miles south of the tip of Mexico's Baja California.
A large wahoo, a game fish in the mackerel family, leapt out of the water and sunk its teeth into his left hand and forearm, cutting him to the bone (Pawtucket Valley Daily Times , Rhode Island, 2 March 1987).
Fisherman Anthony Fernando, 21, died off Sri Lanka when a garfish (like a swordfish) jumped out of the water and speared his neck (Sun , 9 March 1988).
Gilbert Fenwick, 39, was out grouse-shooting on Lord Bolton's estate at Wensley, near Leyburn, in the Yorkshire Dales.
He had shot one grouse and was aiming at a second when the first bird hit him in the face at 60mph, flinging him unconscious into the heather.
He left the moor, nursing a cut lip and two black eyes.
A spokesman for the British Field Sports Society said it was the first time he had heard of this happening; which prompted Chapman Pincher to write in saying that the same thing had happened to him in 1961 (Daily Telegraph , 21 and 24 December 1987).
We have notes on two hunter's wives severely injured by plummeting pheasants.
One was a 50-year-old woman sitting on a shooting stick who had her spleen ruptured when the bird hit her in the back; the other was the pregnant wife of Swiss businessman Luc Argand, who was knocked off a wall at the Floors Castle estate near Kelso in the Scottish Borders.
She was paralysed from the waist down, but the baby survived.
‘One is frequently hit by birds,’ mused Douglas Sutherland, author of The Good Shooting Guide , who himself once had three ribs broken by a falling grouse (Daily Mirror , 1 January 1988;Daily Express ,Sun ,Daily Telegraph , 19 November 1991).