

New Technology at Work: The Issues
There is hardly any need to begin a book on new technology with an explanation of why the topic is of such significance.
The Microelectronics Revolution , an edited collection of papers providing one of the earliest and most comprehensive overviews of the impact of new technology, opens with the editor, Tom Forester, quoting Sir Ieuan Maddock's description of microelectronics as ‘The most remarkable technology ever to confront mankind’(Forester 1980, xiii).
The heart of this new technology is, of course, a small chip of silicon, measuring less than 10 mm. square, containing extremely complex electronic circuitry which can be used either as the central processing unit or the memory of a computer.
The technological breakthrough allowing primitive versions of such chips to be made came in the 1960s, and it was in 1969 that M. E. Hoff at the Intel Corp. in California developed the idea of a computer on a chip.
It was not until the late 1970s, however, that public awareness of the far-reaching implications of this technology developed and the debate about its social implications began.
In 1977 both Science and Scientific American published special issues on the so-called microelectronic revolution and in April 1978 the BBC screened the TV documentary Now the Chips are Down .
This film was widely acclaimed, became a BBC worldwide bestseller, and was the event that really sparked widespread interest in the new technology in Britain.
The reasons for believing the silicon chip to be the cause of another industrial revolution are to do with its cost, capability, and versatility.
The facts on cost alone are staggering.
To quote from a definitive article on the technology, written by one of the founders of the Intel Corp. for the 1977 special issue of Scientific American ,
Today's microcomputer, at a cost of perhaps $300, has more computing capacity than the first large electronic computer, ENIAC [Electronic Numerical Integrator and Computer].
It is twenty times faster, has a larger memory, is thousands of times more reliable, consumes the power of a light bulb rather than that of a locomotive, occupies 1/30,000 the volume and costs 1/10,000 as much.
It is available by mail order or at your local hobby shop.
As a result of these developments in microelectronics, the annual use of computing power increased by about 2000 times in the twenty years between 1960 and 1980.
The ENIAC was a contemporary of the famed Morris Minor car.
If automobile technology had advanced as fast as computer technology over the same period then the current equivalent BL car, the Metro, would now cost 45 pence to buy, and run for over a year on a gallon of petrol.
Every man, woman, and child in the country would own about 100 of them, but garaging them would be no problem as each car would be little bigger than a matchbox.
It is, however, extremely unlikely that any of us could find a use for a hundred of these cars, even if we could solve the problem of getting into them, and this illustrates a fundamental difference between the car and the computer, and another reason for speaking of a microelectronics revolution.
This is because of the microchip's wide variety of applications.
As I sit at home, typing this book into a word processor, I can count over thirty devices around me which contain an integrated circuit of some kind.
These include all the watches and calculators that each member of the household has (10), the laundry equipment (3), an electric drill with electronic control, two radios, the hi-fi equipment (3), two TVs, and video recorder, and two remote controllers for them, a home computer, word processor, and printer, three electronic alarm clocks, a food mixer, toaster, vacuum cleaner, and three dimmer switches for the lights.
Moreover, many of these devices containing microelectronics would themselves have been designed and manufactured using processes incorporating microchips.
Were I to own a new BMW car, another ten microcomputers would be at my command, so their advertisements claim.
Beyond this the microelectronics technology is being used on a massive scale in shops, offices, banks, hospitals, and factories.
Within shops there are computer-readable price tags to enable the retailer to exercise control over stock and financial transactions, and there are an increasing number of electronic point of sale (EPOS) terminals.
Offices are rapidly being automated.
Automated telling machines outside banks —‘through the wall banking’ as it is picturesquely called — are now a familiar part of the High Street scene.
Computers are now widely used in hospitals for running machines performing diagnostic services, and increasingly used for patient and hospital management.
Within factories major developments have been the applications of computers to process and production control, the introduction of computer-aided design and draughting (CAD), computer numerically controlled (CNC) machine tools, and robots.
We can observe, then, that the new technology has already had an impact on our lives in three major ways.
Firstly, it has led to the improvement of existing products, either in their specification or price, or both.
For example, quartz-crystal-based watches are both cheaper and more accurate than those driven by clockwork.
Electronic calculators can be produced at such a low cost that manufacturers of slide rules and of electro-mechanical calculators have completely lost their markets.
Secondly, it has allowed the creation of entirely new products and markets.
Electronic games, home computers, video recorders, and interactive cable or satellite TV are obvious examples of this.
Thirdly, the new technology is having a major impact at work, for a number of reasons.
One is the change in product mix brought about by the changing relative price of products which have had microelectronics incorporated into them.
As manufactured goods have become relatively cheaper owing to increased labour productivity in manufacturing, there has been a relative increase in consumer spending on services.
Hence employment has been shifting from the factory to offices, leisure-related industries, and so on.
The incorporation of microelectronics in products and manufacturing processes is likely to accelerate this trend.
Another impact of new technology at work is in the way in which products are manufactured.
Those incorporating microchips are made in a markedly different way from the more conventional products they have replaced.
As one microchip usually replaces many mechanical parts, the amount of labour needed in assembly is reduced.
Some of the remaining assembly tasks are more easily automated.
Hence there is less routine manual work to do and the relative proportion of white-collar workers within factories rises.
Finally, the new technology is itself incorporated into the production process, in the form of, for example, robots, CNC machine tools, or word processors, and so displaces various types of worker.
Commentators on the social and economic implications of the new technology have examined its impact on us as consumers, as citizens, and as workers.
With regard to our role as consumers the questions have been to do with patterns of expenditure, changes in life-style, and, in particular, changes in leisure patterns.
The questions regarding us as citizens have been about the likely impact of ‘the wired society’ on such matters as individual privacy; the distribution of income, wealth, and power within any one society; and relations between developed countries and the Third World.
In this book we focus solely on a third set of questions: What impact is the new technology having on people at work?
We have just noted that new technology has a major impact at work in accelerating the shift from manufacturing into services, in reducing the amount of routine work, and in job displacement.
This last is perhaps the most frequently discussed aspect of new technology at work.
To what extent does it destroy, and create, jobs?
The use of robots in manufacturing industry is an often-quoted example of job destruction (or, as we might have said in a more optimistic era, job saving).
Others are the use of computers in aiding designers and in controlling production processes.
Of even greater impact may be the introduction of word processors in the office and the move eventually to the ‘paperless office’ through full-scale office automation.
In a society such as the United Kingdom where over 50 per cent of workers are in the service sector compared with only 30 per cent in manufacturing, new technology in the office may have more consequences than robots in the factory for job loss.
We therefore begin, in Chapter 2, by examining the argument frequently put forward that the new technology is leading to wholesale job destruction and hence a permanently high level of unemployment.
The simple form of this argument is that new technology is so enormously labour-saving that we will never again need full employment to provide for all our needs.
We show that the argument is much more complex, emphasising that the overall level of employment in an economy is influenced by a number of factors.
It is subject partly to the normal economic mechanisms, some of which are under the control of central governments through fiscal and monetary instruments.
We argue that levels of unemployment are also influenced by a variety of social and economic processes surrounding the way the new technology is introduced and the way its impact is handled.
Some of these are amenable to government action and some are influenced by the behaviour of key groups in the society, including management and trade unions.
A second major debate about the effects of new technology concerns the impact on the skills which will be required of workers in the future.
Some argue that the dominant effect of the new technology will be to de-skill the workforce, destroying craft occupations and fragmenting jobs into meaningless elements which can be performed by unskilled operators controlled by large-scale bureaucracies run in the interests of international capital.
Others suggest that it will be the automated machinery and systems which will take over all the routine tasks, and thus the impact of the new technology will be to require a more highly educated and trained workforce to perform complex tasks which need a high level of human decision-making skill.
Such jobs will give autonomy and variety to the worker.
The debate is, in other words, about whether the new technology is likely to lead to proletarianisation or professionalisation of workers.
We tackle this question by looking first, in Chapter 3, at a number of case studies of work situations where new technology is being used, taking note of the experiences about effects on skill reported there.
We then move on, in Chapter 4, to examine in detail the various arguments put forward about the likely effects of technical change on workers' experience of their jobs.
In Chapter 5 the theoretical basis of the de-skilling thesis is examined and challenged.
Not only is there dispute about the long-term effects of new technology on skill level, but there is also, closely bound up with this issue, the question of how jobs of the future will be organised.
Will they continue to be concentrated in large companies or will there be a growth in the relative importance of small firms?
Virtually all large companies operate through a series of smaller establishments.
Will these establishments become larger or smaller?
In other words, will workers in the future be increasingly herded together in large factories or offices belonging to even larger corporations or will there be a shift towards work being carried out at a more local level within small groups, perhaps operating as independent companies, partnerships, or co-operatives?
In the past most white-collar workers, and particularly those belonging to ‘professional’ occupations, expected a long-term stable employment pattern, often with the one employer for a large part of their working life.
This expectation has taken a severe knock recently because of the effects of the recession leading employers to declare redundancy schemes, even for white collar staff.
The question now being asked is whether one of the effects of the new technology might be to lead employers in general to take an increasingly short-term view about employment, irrespective of an economic recession.
The ultimate situation would be that such as Rank Xerox are now operating on a small-scale experimental basis whereby some senior staff work for the company from home on a free-lance sub-contractor basis.
If the reason for travelling to work in the past was to get one's hands on the work being done, then in the future, as many people's work will be to deal primarily with information, the information can travel cheaply down the cables to the worker at home.
And if skills associated with the new technology are specific to a particular occupation rather than to a firm, why should either employer or employee prefer a long-term contract with one employer rather than a consultancy contract for a particular piece of work?
The answers to these questions are not obvious and require one to examine a number of assumptions implicit in the way the questions are asked.
Chapter 6 is devoted to this exercise.
In Chapter 7 we address the question of what the internal organisation of the office and factory of the future might look like.
For those people who are still employed under relatively conventional employment terms, how will they be managed?
Will those organisations operating the new technology continue to operate in the standard bureaucratic form or are we likely to see a continued increase in the use of more flexible, less hierarchical forms of organisation.
Will there be more use of peer-group, or clan-type, organisations?
By extrapolating from present trends, but also from applying the theoretical knowledge we have about typical organisational behaviour, we can engage in some informed speculation.
Any discussion of the possible impact of new technology must take account of the response from trade unions and others representing occupational groups.
Much has been written on this from a range of perspectives.
There are those who have written from a managerial perspective and concentrated on techniques for gaining acceptance from workers and their unions for the introduction of new technology.
Others have been concerned to examine ways in which trade unions can best develop their own interests and bargain most effectively to protect themselves and to share any advantages accruing from the introduction of new technology.
Most writers who have this latter perspective have been concerned, quite naturally, with ways in which unions can maintain the integrity of the occupations they represent, protect jobs, and reap some financial benefit.
Some, however, have considered ways in which workers and their unions might get involved in issues of job design and in shaping the direction of future technological developments.
Their concern has been to prevent de-skilling and to exert pressure to design jobs which give a higher quality of working life.
Some reference will be made, principally in Chapter 8, to these arguments.
We also discuss at some length the issue of occupational control — that is, that way of organising work where control over the work process resides in the hands of members of the occupational group rather than in the hands of a management hierarchy.
Traditional craft workers, and professional groups such as doctors, operate in this manner.
What are the limits on this form of organisation, in whose interests is it, and under what circumstances are claims for occupational control likely to be effective?
This leads on to a discussion about the way in which new occupations associated with the new technology are likely to emerge.
Whereas in the past technological developments led to the emergence of new occupational groups, often with some measure of occupational control and, in the most recent past, usually making claims to some professional standing (for example, the rise of the various branches of traditional engineering), we argue that in the future it is likely that employers will try to ensure that new jobs do not lead to the creation of new occupations as such, and especially not new occupations which will be allowed any measure of occupational control.
The central argument in the book is that there are a variety of ways of organising work, some of which may be more efficient than others, some of which will be preferred by workers, and others which may be preferred by managers.
New technology creates new opportunities and, in some cases, new requirements for the way things are organised.
By using the relatively new and rather powerful transactions cost analytical approach, combined with conventional and radical approaches within organisation theory, and insights from the sociology of work, combined with the results from recent empirical work on the introduction of new technology, the intention is to set out some of the possibilities and choices about the use of new technology at work, indicating the different pay-offs to particular groups, and suggesting that the outcomes in specific cases will depend not just on the technology itself but on the strategy and power of the various interested parties.
Effects on Overall Levels of Employment and Occupational Structure
Introduction
The aim of this chapter is to summarise the many arguments currently being canvassed about the effects of high technology on employment.
In the first part of the chapter we deal with those arguments concerned with the impact on the overall level of employment.
In the second part we begin to look at some of the arguments which have been developed about the possible effects of new technology on the kinds of jobs available in the future.
One view of the overall employment implications of new technology is that it is bringing about the collapse of work.
One result of this collapse, if it occurred, might be the creation of a two-class society with a small employed elite and and a large underclass of the long-term unemployed.
An alternative might be the new technology bringing us to the leisure society with machines doing all the productive work and people freed to follow their own leisure pursuits.
Others argue, however, that new technology need have no long-term effect on employment.
In their view the economy has the capacity to adjust to technological changes and maintain full employment, though some government action may be needed in order to aid the adjustment process.
Our response to these opposing arguments is to suggest that arguments that new technology is creating very large scale unemployment in the near future are alarmist, based on too simple a set of assumptions.
Moreover, they usually lay the blame where it is not warranted.
Technological change can affect the overall level of employment but the way it does so is complex and is influenced by many factors, not least by the economic and social policies of the government of the day.
Most of this chapter is a discussion of these complexities and of possible policy actions, and our emphasis is on the wide choice which should be available in the future over the pattern and intensity of work which people do.
The remainder of the chapter begins to open up the question of what impact new technology is having on whatever jobs may remain.
The arguments are not just about the possible extent of de-skilling.
There are questions about the possible effects on particular industrial sectors, especially the relative importance of the service compared to the manufacturing sector.
For example, will most of the workforce be short-order chefs in fast-food restaurants in the year 2000 while our manufactured products are being made for us by robots in unmanned factories?
What will be the effect on the size of firms: does the microchip signal the end of the giant corporation or will it speed up still further the process of concentration among the giant conglomerate multinationals?
What will happen to the individual's pattern of employment?
Will we all have long-term careers within one company, or will more of us become self-employed, maybe operating on a free-lance basis from electronic offices in our own homes?
What will new technology do to the location of employment around the country and across the world?
To these vitally important and profound questions there are no simple answers.
In this chapter we can only suggest some of the factors which ought to be considered in beginning to think of answers to them.
Later chapters will pursue in more depth some of these issues, particularly those dealing with the type of work people will be doing in the future.
The effect of high technology on the level of employment
The BBC documentary that alerted people in Britain to the implication of the silicon chip (Ed Goldwyn's Now the Chips are Down that we mentioned in Chapter 1) ended with the alarming questions:
What will happen to the men in today's jobs?
Can we all live on the wealth of automatic factories and the earnings of an elite band of 60,000 software engineers?.
If we do not [automate], won't our industry be disadvantaged by the automated industries abroad?
And if we do automate, will we be able to cope with the problems of large-scale unemployment?
Tom Stonier, Professor of Technology and Society at the University of Bradford and a well-known commentator on the impact of new technology, claims that
It is highly probable that by early in the next century it will require no more than ten per cent of the labour force to provide us with all our material needs — that is, all the food we eat, all the clothing we wear, all the textiles and furnishings in our houses, the houses themselves, the appliances, the automobiles, and so on .
However, despite the publicity given to the more extravagant claims about the impact of new technology on the level of unemployment, and the popular notion that the silicon chip is a job destroyer, a survey, published in 1979, of some 400 documents on the effect of the new information technologies on employment showed ‘how little foundation there is to existing studies, half of which are by pessimists (often with a trade union background) and the other half by optimists (who tend to be on the employers’ side)’(Institute for Research on Public Policy 1979).
An example of the pessimistic view is the study undertaken for the French Government by two of their senior civil servants (Nora and Minc 1980).
Their comprehensive examination of the likely social and economic impact of microelectronics technology concluded that with computerisation there had come an end to the creation of jobs in services and a standstill in the industrial labour force, the only industrial jobs created from now being in small and medium-sized businesses.
The Batelle Institute in West Germany, on the other hand, in a report published the same year as the original French version of Nora and Minc (1978), said that ‘no employment dump caused by technology seems likely’ within the report's time horizon of 1990 (Batelle Institute 1978).
Concern about technologically induced unemployment is not new.
In the 1950s there was a lively debate about the employment effects of the automation of mass-production processes, and by the mid-1960s the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) was holding a series of international conferences to discuss the problem.
During this period a number of alarming forecasts were made.
As early as 1950 Norbert Weiner had predicted that automation would result, within twenty-five years, in a depression that would make that of the 1930s seem like a pleasant joke, and in 1965 an Oxford University professor was quoted as saying at one of the OECD conferences:
There seems to the writer little doubt that unemployment due to automation will grow steadily over the next few decades, perhaps centuries, and in the end it is likely to reach a very high figure, say ninety per cent of the labour force, unless radical changes are made in the present pattern of working.
Radical changes were not made and yet unemployment rates remained more or less constant in single percentage figures throughout OECD countries until the oil price shock induced recession after 1973.
Concern about the employment effects of new technology began to re-emerge at the end of the 1970s.
Though many commentators drew attention to the job-displacing tendencies of microelectronics technology it is likely that the reason their gloomy forecasts were paid so much attention was because unemployment had been rising fairly fast in most industrialised countries following the two oil price hikes in the 1970s and the consequent world economic recession.
Economic forecasts in the late 1970s were for unemployment to continue to rise in the 1980s.
A book by Clive Jenkins, General Secretary of the white-collar union, the Association of Scientific, Technical, and Managerial Staffs (ASTMS), and the union's research director, Barry Sherman, apocalyptically entitled The Collapse of Work (1979), did much to reinforce the view of new technology as a job-killer.
However, their most alarming quantitative forecast, of 4.5 million unemployed in Britain by 1990, came from forecasts made by the Cambridge Economic Policy Group and was based on economic factors which had nothing to do with new technology.
The Cambridge forecasters had simply observed that up until 1986 there would be a substantial increase in the total number of people wanting work, and not enough new jobs being created, because of a low rate of national economic growth, to match that increase.
The forecast growth in numbers seeking employment was due to the increase in numbers of young people coming into the labour market, because of a bulge in the birth rate 16+ years ago, and a substantial increase in the number of married women returning to work.
In a separate study which Jenkins and Sherman quote, from the Institute of Manpower Studies at the University of Sussex, the estimate was that for there to be enough jobs created to keep unemployment down to the levels of the mid-1970s there would need to be growth in the gross domestic product (GDP) averaging 3.5 per cent per annum in the UK.
Not only would this be a post-war record rate of growth if it were achieved, it would have to occur in the face of a worldwide recession.
If one makes the more realistic assumption that the GDP growth rate would fall from 3 per cent to nearly zero over this decade then the figure of 4.5 million unemployed comes out of the Cambridge computer.
Contrary to the Jenkins and Sherman argument a group of academic economists (Stoneman et al.1981), in a study published by the OECD, claimed that ‘up to now there is no firm evidence that the current high levels of unemployment are due to technical progress’ and that ‘if account is taken of the offsetting effects that can be predicted, there will be little change in overall demand [for skills and jobs]’.
Those predictions which have been made about the impact of new technology on employment levels have come from two types of analysis.
The one is based at the level of the firm.
It estimates the number of jobs lost due to improved productivity through the use of microelectronics and then deducts from these losses an estimate of the jobs gained through increased competitiveness and new markets opened up through the use of microelectronics.
A particularly ambitious study of this kind, carried out over an entire geographic region, was that done by Ken Green, Rod Coombs, and K. Holroyd of the Tameside region, near Manchester (Green et al.1980).
Their conclusion was that if all the companies in that region introduced whatever new technology was available at the time of the study the net loss of jobs might be anything from 3 to 9 per cent of all jobs in the region.
The fundamental weakness of this approach is that it relies to some extent on the researchers' imagination as to what the future may hold, particularly about what new goods and services might emerge, either directly from the new technology or simply because its higher productivity may give consumers greater spending power and so create demands for hitherto undreamed-of goods and services.
One is reminded of the early expert, but possibly apocryphal, prediction that the maximum number of computers which could be envisaged as being necessary in the UK might be as much as two.
Nevertheless, studies about job losses are useful to the extent that they give some flavour of the rate of change associated with the new technology, and they are helpful for any social and economic planning to cope with these changes.
The second type of analysis is the macro-economic approach, deducing future developments from past quantitative macro-economic observations.
This approach uses models to deduce future trends in the volume of employment and unemployment from a comparison of expected improvements in productivity and volume of production.
There are a number of serious weaknesses with this approach, among them being the difficulty of establishing a correct connection between technical progress and growth, and the conservative assumptions made about the economic and social behaviour of the various parties involved in any technical change.
A third approach is that of scenario building, the approach adopted by Tom Stonier among others.
By extrapolating broad social trends such as the long-run shift in industrialised societies from employment in agriculture and manufacturing to employment in service industries he paints his picture of the future where all our material needs are catered for by 10 per cent of the labour force, and the remainder are employed in the service sector, many of them in education and subsidised by the government.
Charles Handy, whose work we describe later in this chapter, is another scenario builder.
Turning away from forecasts and towards theories about the relationship between technical change and employment we find a number of conflicting views.
The two extremes can be expressed in the form of two rhetorical questions.
The one, posed by those who believe that new technologies do not, in the long run, have any effect on the overall level of employment, is along the lines of ‘What happened to all the agricultural workers who left the land as new technology got applied to farming?’
In 1870, they would point out, 47 per cent of the population in the United States were employed on the land.
By 1970 this figure had dropped to 4 per cent.
Few would have imagined, a century ago, that so many new jobs could have been created, bearing in mind the growth in the country's overall population as well as the migration from the farms to the cities.
It would have required an enormously creative imagination to have foreseen the kinds of jobs that the children and grandchildren of those farmworkers would now be engaged in.
Another version of the same question is to ask what became of the ostlers, grooms, and blacksmiths as the horse gave way to the internal combustion engine.
They nearly all found alternative employment, eventually.
The economic theory underlying this optimistic view of technical change is termed ‘compensation theory’, and we will discuss this after we have looked at the competing rhetorical question.
This, posed by the Nobel Laureate economist Wassily Leontief, asks, not about the fate of stable-hands, ostlers, and grooms, but about the horses themselves.
Where are they now?
‘To argue that workers displaced by machines should necessarily be able to find work building those machines makes no more sense than to expect the horses displaced by mechanical vehicles to have been employed, directly or indirectly, in various branches of the expanding automotive industry,’ says Leontief (1978).
This pessimistic view, held by such an eminent economist, has to be given serious consideration.
But which of these two views, the optimistic or the pessimistic, is the more correct?
Let us first spell out what the theories underlying each of the two positions are saying.
Compensation theory argues that the level of employment in the economy is, in the long run, determined only by the overall level of demand in the economy.
If the level of demand is kept constant then savings made by productivity gains through the use of new technology in one sector will feed through into some other sector via lower prices, increased wages, or higher profits to investors.
Let us imagine, for the sake of illustration, a company being able to change its production process so that it can produce the same number of widgets but with half the number of people.
Let us also assume for simplicity that this change does not cost the company anything: it is the result, let us say, of a brainwave the production director had in his bath that morning.
(If the change in the production process did have a capital cost then some at least of the cost of that capital would go to pay the wages and salaries of those in the capital goods industry.
This then simply represents a transfer of jobs from the widget-making company to the company supplying the new more productive machinery for widget making.)
If the change to the new production process is costless, then halving the number employed to produce the widgets represents a commensurate saving in the wage bill.
This saving will then be passed on in a combination of three ways.
The widget-making company may increase the amount it pays the remaining workers; it may reduce the price of widgets (or not increase it as fast as prices in general rise); and it may be able to retain some of the saving as increased profits.
If the last is the case then those profits will either be retained in the company and reinvested, or they will be passed on to the shareholders as increased dividends.
The money saved gets passed on, therefore, to create new jobs in one way or another.
That going in the form of higher spending power to the workers themselves allows them to buy more goods or services.
Buyers of cheaper widgets now have money for other purchases.
Directors of the more profitable firm can invest in more capital equipment or, by increasing the dividend, put more money into the pockets of shareholders.
The shareholders can then either spend their increased dividends or invest the money.
If they spend then this creates more jobs in the consumer industry and if they invest then jobs are created in the capital goods industry.
In every case the money, unless it is stuffed into socks and put under the mattress, gets spent on some good or service and therefore, according to compensation theory, creates a series of new jobs in the industries providing these products.
While there are substantial objections to this argument which we put forward below, this approach offers a robust corrective to the popular myth that new technology per se is bound to destroy jobs on a grand scale.
According to compensation theory the leisure society only arrives when people's preference for extra leisure exceeds their preference for extra income.
The test for this comes when someone, or some group, is offered a pay rise (in real terms) and the choice either of working the same number of hours and taking home the extra money or of maintaining their real income but reducing the hours worked.
If leisure is preferred to income at this point then they will choose the latter alternative.
There appears to be little evidence that as a society we have become so rich that a substantial number of people are at this point.
In fact one study (Armstrong 1984) reports that over the last century in Britain each 4 per cent increase in hourly wage rates for males has been followed by a 1 per cent reduction in hours worked per year.
Some would argue, of course, that the reason why people still strongly prefer extra income over extra leisure is because they are manipulated by business interests or the ethos of a capitalist society.
Our values are distorted by the power of advertising and the ideology fed to us via the mass media, they would claim.
However much truth there is in this view, and it should not be discounted entirely, it is not relevant to the current debate as there is no reason why any such manipulation should be reduced as new technology is introduced.
A majority of economists would, therefore, argue that the present high level of unemployment has nothing to do with new technology.
Depending on their school of thought they would argue that it is due to the national, and world, recession; an adjustment problem caused by demographic changes bringing a substantial net increase of workers on to the labour market; particular problems within Britain at the moment (the unions, poor management, too much or too little intervention by government, North Sea oil, or whatever); or a failure in either fiscal or monetary management of the economy.
Unemployment could be reduced given proper economic management and the appropriate institutional reforms, they would claim.
There are, however, a number of problems with this approach.
One, especially relevant for the UK and for economically depressed regions of the country, is that there will certainly be international and regional differences in the rate at which new technology is taken up.
If there are relative differences in the extent to which labour is mobile between jobs, in the extent of provision for retraining and in the ability and willingness to engage in retraining, in the provision of entrepreneurs to seize new opportunities, and in any other of the factors which influence the rate at which a region or country can innovate, then those regions/nations which are slow are likely to import unemployment from faster-innovating areas.
In Chapter 9 we discuss some of the arguments which have been put forward to suggest that British companies are likely to be slower than their international competitors in taking up new technology based products and production processes.
There are, of course, devices available to the government to stimulate innovation, and we discuss some of these below.
A second problem with compensation theory is that it ignores the period during which any changes are taking place — the transitional period.
Even if in the long run ostlers and grooms become garage mechanics and assembly-line workers, this may take some time and the social dislocations could be very severe.
There are frictions in the markets for capital, labour, and products, and it may take a long time for changes in the pattern of demand to work their way through the system.
In the meantime the highest costs of these changes are borne by those made redundant as new technologies replace old.
A question for government is the extent to which it should rely simply on market mechanisms to steer through these changes or whether it should use, as do all large firms, planning mechanisms to handle changes of this likely magnitude.
A further problem with compensation theory is its neglect of the effect of unemployment benefit, not a factor needing to be taken into account by the earliest exponents of this theory, writing in the mid-eighteenth century.
If we return to the example of our widget-making factory after the introduction of the new production process, with half its workforce put on to the labour market (or, putting it more bluntly, sacked), then many of them are likely to be eligible for unemployment benefit.
If the unemployment benefit which they are paid is as much as the savings made from the productivity gains from the new production method, then the savings from the use of the new technology do not re-emerge elsewhere to create new demands and new jobs.
The savings are taken up by the government in the form of higher taxes and transferred to the redundant workers.
A new equilibrium position is established and the net effect is an increase in leisure in the society, forced onto the displaced workers in the form of unemployment.
This is not an argument for cutting unemployment benefit but for government action in the form of reflation, job creation, job subsidies, or whatever.
Leontief, whose concern for the horses faced by technical change we have already noted, advances two further arguments against compensation theory.
New machines, new technology introduced because it cuts production costs can indeed reduce the total demand for labor, that is, for the total number of jobs available in all sectors of the economy taken together at any given price of labor — in other words, at any given wage rate (Leontief 1978, 28).
One is that, as capital increases in productivity across a wide range of jobs, labour cannot compete with it on cost grounds.
The other is that so many jobs are likely to need a great deal of capital equipment behind them that there will be a shortage of capital equipment and jobs will therefore not be created quickly enough to maintain full employment.
A weak version of the first argument is that put forward by opponents of the trade union movement claiming that, if wage rates had not been maintained at what they call an artificially high level, the introduction of labour-saving equipment would have been retarded and the number of available jobs increased.
Leontief rejects this version, asking
by how much would the wages of telephone operators have to be cut in order to prevent the installation of modern, automatic switching equipment?
If the wage rate had fallen, say, by 10% and the total employment had increased, as a result, by 5%, there would still have been a net 5% loss in total labor income.
(1978, 29.)
A stronger version of the argument, not developed by Leontief himself but based on his theoretical foundations, is that the high level of productivity of capital may mean that in many instances it will be cheaper to use machines rather than people to perform jobs unless the wage rate is well below subsistence level.
This argument is only true, however, at the level of the individual firms.
It is fallacious at the level of the economy.
Unemployment only arises under these circumstances because the public interest cannot be coped with by private interests operating freely in the market place.
If, to return to our widget maker, these devices could be made more cheaply by robots unless the wage rate was, for example, half the level of unemployment benefit, the company, in the absence of any government ‘interference’ would almost certainly use robots.
Nevertheless, because those made redundant by the robots are now unemployed and paid unemployment benefit, the choice to use robots is more costly to the economy as a whole than that of using workers, because the total cost per widget is the cost of buying and operating the robot plus unemployment benefit.
It would be cheaper for the government to subsidise the employment of widget makers up to the cost of having that person registered unemployed, rather than the company using automated technology.
The conclusion is similar to that reached earlier in our argument about the effect of unemployment benefit on compensation theory.
The implication of this conclusion is that full employment could be maintained if the government operated an elaborate system of job subsidy schemes.
However, there is an even stronger version of the argument about high wage costs which implies even more extensive government involvement if full employment were to be regained.
The full-strength argument is that there are often substantial costs to employing someone which mean that a company might choose to employ a machine rather than a person even if that person's wages cost them nothing.
The costs of employing people, rather than machines, include those of selection and recruitment, training, transport to work, provision of a suitable working environment (clean air, good lighting, moderate temperature, and freedom from hazards), and supervision.
To take a trivial example, it is a cost rather than a benefit for me to pay my children to clean my car rather than to take it to the automatic car wash, even if the car wash charges more than my children.
The labour-intensive car-cleaning method involves either my supervising them carefully or running the risk of the paintwork being scratched by sponges full of grit because they have been dropped in the gutter, and the car bonnet dented by the smallest child climbing on it to reach the windscreen.
The implication of this strong argument is that it may become cheaper in straightforward labour cost terms at the level of the economy to pay some people to stay at home while automated machinery produces the goods and services.
Only if the social costs of such a strategy, in terms of mental illness, vandalism, etc., were deemed to be high enough, might it be economically efficient to subsidise firms to take on such labour.
Despite these various arguments suggesting high unemployment from rapid technical change which are based on the foundation laid by him, Leontief has himself, with a colleague (Leontief and Duchin 1983), recently published the results of a survey of the likely effects of new technology on the US economy up to the year 2000 which concludes that, far from there being net job losses, there will be a substantial rise in the aggregate labour force over this period due to the rapid take-up of the technology.
Another major theoretical objection to compensation theory concerns the investment behaviour of firms.
This argument is fully summarised by Cooper and Clark (1982) but, put briefly, it is that for full employment in the future businesses need to invest at a certain rate in new equipment.
The level of investment depends on business people's expectations of the future level of demand, but it has been demonstrated that there is an inherent instability in the economy.
If investors assume that the expected level of demand will be lower than the so-called equilibrium position (the position that yields what economists term ‘warranted growth’) then the level of savings in the economy will exceed investment, and therefore demand will be lower than expected.
Investors will, however, assume that their forecasts of demand were too high (whereas in fact they were too low) and revise their investment rates down still further.
Thus demand, and therefore employment, continues to fall.
Though a number of economists have made further assumptions about the behaviour of the economy — principally, that firms will substitute labour for capital if there is unemployment (because in those circumstances real wages will fall)— which remove some of the apparent instabilities, others have concluded that the instability still occurs because the actual rate of investment may still not necessarily coincide with the warranted rate of growth for full employment.
Nevertheless, Cooper and Clark conclude that government could overcome these instabilities by adjusting interest rates (to stimulate investment directly) or by expanding government expenditure (to raise the overall level of demand), if there were no other constraints upon them.
There is thus no technological reason for high levels of unemployment: however, because those actions which government could take to reduce unemployment may be contrary to policies aimed at controlling inflation and policies concerned with maintaining the balance of payments, rapid technological change (as it is likely to change the rate of investment by business) may in practice result in increased unemployment.
There are also those who claim to have identified a cyclical pattern to the way in which technical developments arise.
It is suggested that there are long waves, of perhaps fifty to sixty years periodicity, in the pattern of economic development of industrialised societies.
An explanation for the phenomenon (sometimes known as Kondratiev waves after the economist who first identified them in 1925) was proposed by Joseph Schumpeter and has since been adopted, extended, and supported by empirical studies by Christopher Freeman and some of his colleagues at the Science Policy Research Unit at Sussex University.
The notion is that a major innovation, or set of innovations, at a particular point in time is exploited by the ability and initiative of entrepreneurs to create new opportunities for profit.
These in turn attract a swarm of imitators who exploit the new opening with a wave of new investment, generating boom conditions.
As the innovations mature there will be a period of stagnation and depression, with consequent high unemployment, if or until a new wave of innovations comes along to compensate.
It has been suggested that the three previous waves were associated respectively with the steam engine, the railways, and then electric power and the automobile.
Barron and Curnow (1979) have suggested that electronics will be the technological development associated with the fourth wave, with the first, growth, phase being in the 1950s and 1960s and the second, recessive, phase now being moved into.
It is difficult to evaluate the long-wave argument.
The line of reasoning is logical, elegant, plausible, and advanced by highly respected scholars.
Nevertheless, attempting to detect a cyclical trend on the basis of just three cycles is a risky enterprise.
Moreover, the previous waves occurred during periods when the economy and economic theory were much less highly developed.
The question must for the moment remain open as to whether it is inevitable that the economy should move in this cyclical way as it copes with the new microelectronics technology.
Our own conclusion from these various debates about employment effects is that there is no reason why the new technology should inevitably mean a massive reduction in employment.
Current high levels of unemployment can be accounted for without recourse to an explanation from technology; consumer appetite for yet more goods and services still appears to be insatiable; and even those economists who advance reasons why new technology might cause unemployment at some point in the future acknowledge that just at present the likelihood is that it will cause labour shortages rather than an overall labour surplus.
Nevertheless, the rapid uptake of the technology, with the implications this has for very substantial job displacement in some sectors, even if matched in the longer term by job creation elsewhere, is highly likely to create further problems for the economy and for society to handle.
How well this will be done, in the midst of a world recession and current difficulties in most countries with high unemployment, remains to be seen.
Effects of new technology on the nature of work
A second area of concern about the effects of new technology has been centred around the question of what changes are likely to come about in the nature of those jobs that are left.
Just as the introduction of spinning and weaving machines at the time of the Industrial Revolution in Britain destroyed craft jobs and created fragmented tasks which were performed by unskilled workers, will the new technology also be used to de-skill work?
Alternatively, will the new technology improve the quality of work life by being used to perform routine tasks so that those jobs presently performed by unskilled and semi-skilled workers will be automated out of existence.
The introduction of this technology will thus lead, the optimists argue, to an increase in the overall level of skill and knowledge required by the working population.
Prominent among those taking the pessimistic view, but active in opposing what he sees to be an extremely undesirable trend, is Mike Cooley, for many years a development engineer and active trade unionist within Lucas Aerospace and one of the architects of the Alternative Corporate Plan put forward by the shop stewards' committee in that company.
He describes his fears for the future in his book,Architect or Bee?
(Cooley, n.d.):
Computerisation and automation will mean that smaller numbers will be required to run the large corporations.
These will be a separate elite from the rest of the community and highly organised on the ‘business Union’ basis as in the United States.
They will be true ‘Corporation Men’, satisfied economically with company cars, company houses and company medicare schemes.
There will be funds for the schooling of the Corporation Man's children, special superannuation schemes and of course expense accounts for overseas travel, entertaining and other corporation ‘responsibilities’.
A large sector of those who remain — the unemployed — will be left to fiddle around with ‘community work’.
These activities will be deliberately chosen because they yield no economic power.
Indeed it will be a sort of therapeutic, do-it-yourself social service.
In practice, this will mean that they will spend their time repairing, cleaning up, modifying and recycling the rubbish which the large corporations are imposing on them.
Whilst it is conceivable that some of these jobs will be craft based and thus provide an outlet for some initiative and self activism, the significant reality will be that they have no economic power and no industrial muscle.
So a significant proportion of the population seems destined to have no ‘real job’.
(Cooley, n.d., 85.)
A more measured view is taken in a report from the Council for Science and Society, a group of leading figures mainly from academia and industry.
Their conclusion is that:
The problems we shall face will not be wholly new ones, but those with which we are familiar; though perhaps intensified and extended.
There is likely, for example, to be a progression away from blue-collar jobs to white-collar or service occupations, but these could well take on more of the character which factory work has had in the past, if the tendency is not resisted.
(CSS 1981, 93.)
We examine in the next few chapters what evidence there is to support this particularly bleak view.
Charles Handy, an industrialist turned academic turned management guru, in his stimulating book The Future of Work (Handy 1984) elaborates four scenarios of the future, first put forward by Tony Watts (1983).
He labels them the Unemployment Society, the Leisure Society, the Employment Society, and the Work Society.
Underlying all four scenarios is a pessimistic view of the economy's ability to create jobs at a fast enough rate to match the growth in productivity brought about by new technology.
The Unemployment Society is what will come about, he suggests, if we merely follow present trends and if we persist, as a society, with our present views about what constitutes a full-time permanent job.
In this scenario present employment and income patterns continue, but at a higher level of unemployment.
Those in employment earn a relatively high income, but those out of work will continue to exist at rather low levels of unemployment benefit.
We would be even more a country of two societies than is already the case, with the divide being between the employed haves and the unemployed have-nots.
An alternative is that in which government takes much greater action to redistribute income.
In the Leisure Society the employed are an elite of highly educated and skilled professionals who work full-time, but the wealth created by the equipment they have designed and operate is dispersed rather widely so that the mass of the population are able to live reasonably well off the products of the automated machinery cared for by the core elite.
This is the vision foretold in Kurt Vonnegut's novel,Player Piano .
Such a society would be based on two extreme cultures and supported by highly divergent ideologies — the elite society valuing work and, presumably, awarding themselves status and power as compensation for their efforts, and the underclass valuing leisure and, accordingly, not accepting as legitimate the rewards the elite class have given themselves.
Handy rejects a full-blown version of this vision on the grounds that such a divergent society would be very unstable.
The Employment Society would be the continuation of the pattern that existed in industrialised countries up until the mid-1970s, with virtually all those who sought jobs being able to find them, and the typical lifetime employment totalling the 100,000 hours typically worked until recently.
For the reasons given above, Handy believes these days will never return if the economy is left to operate on normal market mechanisms.
He rejects the idea that industry ought to keep workers on simply to fulfil a responsibility for maintaining full employment and he also argues that it will be impossible to increase the tax base enough to create employment in labour-intensive services such as health and education.
There are, however, a couple of difficulties with this argument.
One is that, if there is going to be a high level of unemployment because productivity is rising faster than output, this means that the cost of goods and services is falling fast and either consumer demand is not increasing fast enough or industry cannot gear up production fast enough to create the demanded extra output.
If the former, then consumers have money in their bank accounts or pockets that they do not know what to do with and may therefore not mind increased taxation to pay for schools, hospitals, and the social services.
If the latter, then there is potential for demand-led inflation, for which one Government remedy would be to increase both spending and taxation.
The other weakness in Handy's argument is that there is every possibility that demand for more education and health care will be expressed in the market place as consumers choose to buy these commodities.
Thus quite considerable amounts of labour could be generated by demand for private health and education provision.
This is not an outcome that everyone would welcome, and it would bring a series of difficulties in its train as inequalities of income would lead to even greater inequalities in access to health care and education; but it is a plausible outcome, and would increase the likelihood of the continuance of the Employment Society.
The Work Society is Handy's preferred future.
In it those who want it have some paid employment, probably on a part-time, possibly job-sharing basis, and not for an entire lifetime.
People would spend much of the rest of their time doing other kinds of work, on a voluntary basis.
While advocating the Work Society, Handy is enough of a realist to suggest that the most likely outcome, if his assumption turns out to be correct, is some kind of muddled compromise between all four possibilities, with considerable unemployment, some measure of a divide between the haves in work and the ‘leisured’ have-lesses without jobs, some attempt at the maintenance of full employment as a policy goal, and an increase in the amount of ‘work’done on a ‘voluntary’basis.
Jonathan Gershuny, now a Professor at the University of Bath and previously a colleague of Chris Freeman at the Science Policy Research Unit at Sussex University, takes a particularly optimistic view of what work will be like in the future (Gershuny 1978).
He rejects any notion of de-skilling and suggests that the new technology will open up many opportunities for people to do meaningful work, either in the formal, employed, sector or the informal voluntary sector.
He notes that industrial societies, as they have become more affluent, have shifted employment first from the primary sector (principally agriculture and the extractive industries) to the secondary sector (manufacturing), and then from the secondary sector into the tertiary (service) sector.
We have already noted that in the UK, for example, over 50 per cent of those in work at present are employed in the service sector.
Gershuny cautions, though, against simply extrapolating these past trends.
In the past, the more affluent in society spent a high proportion of their income buying services provided by relatively poorly paid workers.
It is wrong to assume, claims Gershuny, that as levels of affluence rise more generally, as a result of technological developments, the pattern of consumption of the more recently affluent will mirror that of the the Victorian middle and landed classes.
Rather than buying in cheap services (no longer on offer because there are no longer very large numbers of an underclass prepared to offer extremely cheap labour) the newly affluent are buying manufactured goods which perform very similar services mechanically.
Automatically controlled gas-fired central heating rather than servant-maintained coal fires, dishwashers and automatic washing machines rather than scullery and laundry maids, and power tools and easily applied decorating materials rather than handymen and ‘ragged trousered philanthropists’ are classic examples of this switch.
Gershuny's conclusion is that as new technology continues to be introduced we are likely to move to a ‘dual economy’ in which there would still be a formal sector of the economy, where there was much use of high technology, a continuing drive for efficiency, and the production of standardised goods, but this sector would increasingly concentrate on the production of consumer durables — in essence capital goods for use in the home.
Final commodities and services would increasingly be produced in the home in the informal sector of the economy.
One possible implication of this, suggests Gershuny, is that there would be a substantial reduction in the overall numbers formally employed, with the unemployed making creative use of the opportunities these consumer durables make possible in the home — a more benign version of Cooley's vision described earlier.
The alternative implication Gershuny draws is that there could be a reduction in the average number of hours employed in the formal sector, with us all making more use of the our increased leisure by using our Black and Deckers, Moulinexs , and Sinclair products.
This scenario is in many ways similar to Charles Handy's Work Society, but, whereas Handy based his vision on his views about what values ought to prevail in post-industrial society, Gershuny's picture is built up from an analysis of economic trends.
A more plausible scenario emerging from Gershuny's analysis is, in my view, one in which many of the final commodities and services will actually be produced by individuals or smallish groups, using the mass-produced standardised home-based capital goods, for sale in the market place.
We would see the re-emergence of craft-based production, though such production would rely on high technology and large firms at one remove.
The implications of this for employment are that we would still expect to see large-scale manufacturing in developed countries, absorbing substantial amounts of labour (though this labour would be involved in knowledge work rather than metal-bashing); and we would expect to see more labour employed again in small firms producing semi-custom-made products or services using machinery produced by the large companies.
It is interesting to explore the philosophical and political underpinnings of these various types of scenario.
By and large, those taking a pessimistic view of the likely impact of new technology are those who have misgivings about the capacity of capitalism to produce outcomes that are fair to all citizens.
Those who take the view that capitalism operates to favour those with capital at the expense of those who merely have their labour to sell tend to believe that when new technology is developed and applied in a basically capitalist society the result is likely to be that jobs are degraded and the quality of working life of those in employment suffers.
Even the actions taken by governments may be inadequate to defend the position of the weak in society.
There are those who fear parallels between the Industrial Revolution and today in the way workers are treated as new technology is introduced.
As the Council for Science and Society Report (1981) concludes:
The Report has emphasised the inhumanity and injustice which accompanied the early stages of the Industrial Revolution.
These were not new things in England, but they had not previously been justified and defended by the prevailing philosophy.
So powerful were the effects of this philosophy that to those who looked down from a higher level in society, the suffering became invisible; or if not invisible, then transparent, and their view was not arrested by it but looked through it at what they took to be economic verities beyond.
We have not yet as a nation fully acknowledged the wrong that was done at that time, and we have not fully rejected it.
Until we do so, we are unlikely to recover our energy and self-confidence.
And until we do so, fresh shoots of the same philosophy will continually arise from its underground roots.
(CSS 1981, 93–4.)
Among those who share this view, some would seek to create change by attempting to influence the dominant values of the society.
Handy's work can be seen in this light.
Others believe that change is more likely to come from pressure being exerted on decision-makers by those with a vested interest in the likely outcomes of the introduction of new technology.
They would emphasise the involvement of trade unions at the place of work and the trade union movement as a whole at the national political level.
We discuss these arguments in Chapter 8.
The alternative, optimistic, view is taken by those who are confident that a suitable combination of market forces and judicial government action where market forces fail will provide a satisfactory outcome.
Gershuny's analysis seems to fall into this category.
The changing costs of capital and labour will result in industrial structural changes creating an acceptable society which has come about through the operation of market forces and not because powerful interests have adopted particular technologies which suit them but are detrimental to the interests of weaker groups in society.
Much of the rest of this book will be exploring and evaluating the various arguments put forward in elaboration of this position.
Effects of new technology in specific sectors
In addition to these rather heroic forecasts about the post-information-technology society there have been a number of more detailed studies of the impact of new technology on particular industrial sectors.
From these a consensus has emerged, which is probably reliable, that the main areas in which there are likely to be substantial effects due to new technology are in the engineering industry, with the increased use of CAD and computer-aided manufacturing (CAM), and the use of robots; in offices through office automation, in which the use of word processors with or without linkages via networks and data bases to form paperless offices is predicted to bring substantial improvements in productivity, though the effects on skills is at the moment quite unclear; and in the computer industry itself, where there is substantially increased demand for software engineers.
Swords-Isherwood and Senker (1980) provide an authoritative survey of the need for skills in the engineering industry.
Their conclusions run counter to any simple proletarianisation thesis about the effects of new technology on skill.
They argue that there are likely to be, in the UK at least, substantial shortages of electronics engineers, manufacturing engineers, technicians, craftsmen, and people with sales expertise.
The low status of manufacturing in Britain, something the UK shares with some other European countries and the United States according to Swords-Isherwood and Senker, has exacerbated the shortage of engineers.
To some extent, that shortage is being met by using consultants, particularly by firms in industries which graduates appear to find particularly unappealing, such as motor vehicles and mechanical engineering, but the use of consultants is fraught with difficulty.
They conclude that technicians are likely to be in increased demand for test and inspection work as more and more industries incorporate sophisticated electronics in their equipment.
However, the demand for people to do routine testing is likely to decrease as this task becomes increasingly automated, through the use of test equipment incorporating microelectronics.
Craft workers are likely to be in increased demand, at least over the next several years, to carry out maintenance on advanced equipment such as CNC machine tools and robots, though craft work is likely to change its context.
We discuss in Chapters 5 and 9 the experiences of BL with reorganising maintenance work when they installed an automated welding line for the Metro car.
Their experience well illustrates Swords-Isherwood and Senker's argument that the need will be for increased numbers of such workers, and that they should possess multiple skills: for example, electronics, electrical, and mechanical.
In the very long term, automated machinery is likely to incorporate automatic diagnostic equipment in order to simplify maintenance, but it is not obvious that this will necessarily reduce the skill content of craft maintenance work.
Already some automated office equipment is able automatically to phone the contract maintenance firm when it develops a fault.
The intention is to design equipment so that when the maintenance engineer then calls he, or she, should be able to read off from a display on the machine which circuit board has failed and then simply slip in a replacement.
Because of the relatively low cost of such boards, the faulty one would just be dumped.
This might possibly be an accurate forecast of the future, but anyone with experience of even a relatively simple up-to-date photocopier will know that the amount of maintenance support it requires goes far beyond this board-changing routine.
In the far more complex factory environment the skilled maintenance engineer is likely to have a role for some considerable time yet.
An area of particular weakness in British industry is in the sales and marketing function.
Swords-Isherwood and Senker conclude that industry continues to underestimate the significance of marketing and sales functions, and that this weakness, if it persists, will make companies even more vulnerable in the future as the incorporation of microelectronics into products makes these products more complex.
The increased need will be for ‘salesmen to have a deep technical knowledge of the products they are selling, as well as knowledge of the customers’ applications’.
Given the low base from which much UK industry starts, this implies substantial job generation for technical experts who can develop competence in selling and marketing.
There have been a number of surveys which have generated specific estimates of job-loss implications of particular technologies.
It now seems generally accepted that, for example, one CNC machining centre will replace three conventional machine tools.
Thus two machinists' jobs are lost, but CNC machine tools as they are presently used require support from white-collar workers who write the programs which drive them and from maintenance workers to keep them running.
Estimating that this totals half a person per machining centre, then the introduction of such machines halves the direct labour requirement.
Job-displacement estimates for CAD equipment are harder to establish.
A figure given common currency in the engineering industry is that the use of this equipment increases productivity by 300 per cent.
The straightforward application of this figure implies that a drawing office could get rid of two-thirds of its draughtsmen if it installed a CAD system.
I have heard of no report of this happening.
Estimates of actual job reductions seem to run at about 30 per cent.
There appear to be two main reasons for this factor of ten difference between estimate and practice.
One is that the figure of 300 per cent increase in productivity just happens to be that which would have had to occur to cost-justify the installation of CAD given capital and wage costs in the early 1980s in the UK when this figure gained currency.
The other is that draughtsmen do not spend all their time actually drawing.
If, as has been guestimated, a draughtsman spends two-thirds of his time doing conceptual thinking, looking up tables, doing calculations, checking, etc., and only one-third of his time with a pencil in his hand at the drawing-board, then an increase in productivity at the drawing-board itself of 300 per cent would mean an overall productivity increase in line with observed job reductions.
An implication of this, it should be noted, is that if firms need to justify the use of CAD on cost grounds then they cannot, at mid-1980s UK prices, give each draughtsman a work-station.
To utilise fully a CAD system requires only one work-station for three draughtsmen.
Each person then has to plan their work carefully and co-ordinate use of the equipment with the others.
This clearly represents a reduction in the autonomy of each worker and, to this extent, a reduction in the quality of their experience of work.
Estimates of the job-displacing effects of robots are highly subject to movements in the capital cost of that equipment and in local labour costs.
In 1978 and 1980 two independent German studies reported that, in German firms surveyed, robots had replaced workers at the rate of between two and four men per robot per shift.
The exact figures depended on whether the robot was used for material handling or for operating a tool, the former application displacing more workers than the latter.
It is hard to forecast trends here.
Though it is likely that the capital cost of a robot will continue to fall quite rapidly relative to wage costs, there are only a limited number of applications for robots of the current generation of capability.
Most assembly work is still too complex to be done by the present generation of relatively senseless machines.
Only when touch sensitivity and vision are added to them will they become capable of much wider application, but then, of course, their cost will be higher.
There have been few studies of office automation applications, but projections about specific skill requirements are extremely difficult to make at present because it is as yet quite unclear how office automation will be used.
Wainwright and Francis (1984), on the basis of four case studies, discuss some of the options.
Will secretaries, with powerful information technology literally at their fingertips, take over some of the tasks now done by managers or other office-based professional staff; or will managers, once they have a keyboard, have less need for secretarial staff?
Will new information technology jobs be created which will be staffed by those with a yet-to-be-designed occupational training?
It will be several years before these questions can be answered.
The difficulty with all these forecasts is that the type of skills required depends on decisions made by managers about the way in which work is organised around the technology, and we thus come back to the problem identified with forecasts made about the impact of new technology on society.
If managerial decisions are made on the basis of some logic implicit in the technology itself, or in its cost structure, then forecasts can be made with some confidence.
If, however, as we have already suggested, and shall be arguing at greater length below, choices about technology and how it is applied are the subject of a conflict of interests, and thus result in bargaining, then predictions about the outcome are more uncertain.
Impact on size of firms and stability of employment
The argument put forward above implies employment in a range of sizes of firm.
Now let us turn briefly to the implications of work done by Birch (1979) in the USA and the Science Policy Research Unit in Britain on changes in the size of firms.
Birch's work on where jobs were being generated in the US economy stirred up considerable interest around the time of the 1979 election in Britain when Margaret Thatcher's Conservative government first came to power.
It was widely misinterpreted as suggesting that small firms were particularly important in the process of job generation.
This was one of the more powerful myths leading to the present government's keen interest in policies geared towards the encouragement of small firms.
It has now become clear that large firms have remained extremely important in generating jobs and that policies to encourage job creation by large firms are more important, in terms of numbers of jobs created, than those helping small firms.
What is true is that large firms also destroy large numbers of jobs at much the same rate as they create them, whereas small firms have a lower rate of job destruction.
Thus there has been a net gain in jobs from the small-firm sector, in the USA at least.
What is also of interest in the Birch data is that the rate of job destruction and creation is higher in those industrial sectors and geographical areas (again the data relates to the USA) where the rate of economic growth is higher.
Thus high rates of job loss might be expected in areas where there is a high rate of technological innovation, but this may also be associated with an equally high rate of job creation.
A second important myth is the belief that small firms are more important than large firms in the process of technical innovation.
While the role of small firms should not be discounted, recent work at the Science Policy Research Unit at Sussex has shown just how many significant innovations have come out of large companies.
At least two things follow from this.
One is that policies which are focused primarily on small firms are likely to encourage only a relatively low level of technical innovation.
The other is that even if subsidiaries of large companies are attracted to a particular region, and the company decides to develop innovations in that location, there is always the possibility that the firm (likely to be a multinational corporation) will relocate its plant, or switch manufacturing to other plants, and the local/regional authority will be powerless to intervene.
Leaving aside the question of the importance of small firms for innovation and job creation, there is also the question as to whether the new technology contains a tendency to reduce or increase the size of firms or establishments.
We shall argue later in the book that the information processing capability of new technology may undermine many of the reasons why large firms came into being.
We may observe in the future a continued trend in the use of sub-contractors, consultants, and other external agencies, thus reducing the core size of currently large firms.
This trend may be accelerated by an increase in telecommuting (working from home via a telecommunications link).
However, there are countervailing pressures.
The detailed analysis is in Chapters 6 and 7.
New technology, employment, and geography
It has been suggested that microelectronics leads to much greater flexibility in the way in which work is organised, with real choices now being possible.
One set of scenarios for the engineering industry suggests that in a country such as Norway, with small communities at the heads of the many fiords, an appropriate use of the technology would be for each community to have some equipment to produce particular parts of a product or to engage in particular parts of a production process.
These could be linked up via an information system to form an integrated undertaking.
The system would be designed to be particularly user-friendly, emphasising the enhancement of worker skills rather than de-skilling.
In contrast there may be certain parts of the world — Siberia has been suggested — where it may be important, because of the presence of energy or raw materials or for other strategic reasons, to have integrated factories where the emphasis is on minimising the number of people employed at that location (Hatvany et al.n.d.).
An overview so far
We have put forward a series of arguments about the effects of new technology on employment levels.
If there is a theoretical argument justifying the view that microelectronics is a job-killer, it is less obvious and more complex than usually supposed, and by no means universally accepted.
In any event, a principal exponent of that theoretical position argues that in practice, in the United States up to the year 2000 at least, the technology will cause net job creation.
Nevertheless, there is bound to be substantial job displacement and creation, and the various tendencies highlighted by the Council for Science and Society (CSS 1981), and by such writers as Mike Cooley (n.d.) and Tony Watts (1983), have to be taken seriously.
The wide variety of scenarios should, we argue throughout this book, be treated as a series of options over which we as a society ought to be able to exercise some choice.
To do this we need to be alert to the processes going on within society and the economy, what range of alternatives is available, who can and should take part in the decision-making process, and what the effects of the various possible outcomes might be.
It is to these issues that the rest of the book is devoted.
New Technology and the Experience of Work
Charlie Chaplin's well-known film Modern Times portrayed work in modern mass-production factories as devoid of all skill or satisfaction, with workers merely cogs in some vast machine totally outside their control.
The new technology of automation had stripped them of any human dignity in their labour.
In this chapter we explore a variety of theories and research findings about the relationship between new technology and people's experience at work, concluding that such technology has the potential for improvement as well as for harm.
This means that it is important that all those likely to be affected by the introduction of new technology should be involved in the decisions about how it is to be used.
Moreover, the impact of new technology on people's experience of work will depend on how they perceive it and the meaning that technology has for them.
Despite the message of Modern Times and our images of modern factory work being influenced by our beliefs about what it must be like to work on, for example, the car assembly lines at Detroit or Dagenham, most people, when asked in social science surveys, say that they experience an acceptable level of job satisfaction at work.
Surveys over the last two decades, in America at least, have typically reported over 80 per cent of workers being ‘satisfied’ with their jobs (Hackman and Oldham 1980, 10).
To the many people who believe that much modern work is an alienating, tedious, even soul-destroying experience, this is a surprising finding.
Is it that different people are turned on by radically different things, and that many people get some enjoyment from performing routine and apparently undemanding jobs?
Rather than accepting this rather pessimistic view of human nature, social scientists have suggested two other reasons for surveys reporting such apparently high levels of satisfaction.
One is that it is culturally unacceptable to admit that one's job is not satisfying.
In a society in which achievement is highly valued, and where people compete for jobs in an apparently open market, people may feel a sense of failure if they admit they have ended up in a job with which they are dissatisfied.
Where the boss's response to a complaint might well be ‘If you don't like it you can always leave’, then sticking with a job you do not like implies that you lack the motivation to go and find something more satisfactory, or that you are incapable of finding anything better.
None of this may be objectively true — alternative, better, jobs simply may not exist even when there is not a high level of unemployment — but to the extent that individual workers believe the dominant achievement ideology in society then they will not wish to ‘confess failure’ by admitting that they do not enjoy an adequate level of job satisfaction.
A second reason for such high reported levels of satisfaction may be that respondents are answering the question in terms of their level of expectations.
Many will have learned that the kind of job that they will probably have to do for most of their working life will be semi-skilled, routine, undemanding, and tedious.
Someone with this expectation may therefore compare jobs in terms of level of wages and job security, and not in terms of how intrinsically rewarding the job is.
If so, then the response to a question about job satisfaction will be in these terms.
They are not dissatisfied with the job content because they did not expect the job to be intrinsically rewarding.
In the light of these difficulties with measuring job satisfaction, academic researchers have made two responses.
One is to attempt to devise more sophisticated questions about how workers are experiencing their work, and to give relatively more weight to comparative data: for example, differences in reported levels of satisfaction before and after the introduction of new technology, or between two samples of workers operating different technologies where other factors are constant.
The other is to rely on other data which it is hoped might serve as indicators of satisfaction.
Levels of labour turnover, absenteeism, and strike activity have been used, but for various reasons none of these measures are at all satisfactory.
The assumption is made that dissatisfied workers are more likely to leave the one job for another, take time off, or go on strike, but there has been considerable debate about all three measures, and there are cogent reasons for doubting that any of them serve as adequate indicators of job satisfaction.
There are, of course, a number of aspects of work about which a worker might be satisfied or dissatisfied.
We have already noted that many workers learn very quickly that the kind of job they are likely to get will not be very satisfying intrinsically: that is, the content of the job will not be particularly attractive.
But work involves a variety of factors.
It requires the application of effort and, to some degree at least, the exercise of skill and knowledge.
It also demands some level of participation in relationships with other workers, perhaps with customers, and, unless the worker is self-employed, with supervisors and management, and at the end of the day work also yields a wage or salary.
Each one of these four factors is a potential source of satisfaction and dissatisfaction.
Though people differ markedly, and to some extent systematically, in the relative importance they place on these various sources of satisfaction, our concern here is not with individual differences in sources of satisfaction but with the effect of new technology on the potential sources of satisfaction.
Moreover, though individuals may differ in the weight they assign to various aspects of a job, most individuals are prepared to make trade-offs between different sources of satisfaction.
An obvious trade-off is that between effort and reward.
Assuming that for most people a job which requires a high level of effort (or long hours) is less preferable than one requiring less effort, and that more pay is preferable to less pay, then people will make a trade-off, if they are allowed, between the effort they exert and the pay they are awarded.
A reduction in satisfaction on the effort front may be traded for more satisfaction on the pay front.
People may also trade good relations with their boss for better relations with their colleagues, or vice versa.
We discuss some of the implications of these potential trade-offs in detail in Chapter 6, but it is important to bear them in mind within this chapter as we discuss a variety of theories about the relationship between new technology and job satisfaction.
One further point which needs to be made at this stage concerns the question of ideology, class conflict, and class consciousness.
Those social scientists following the Marxist tradition emphasise the twin categories of capital and labour, and take the view that these two major factors of production are in fundamental conflict over the earnings of the enterprise.
Any profit accruing to capital is earnings forgone by labour, and vice versa.
One highly important way in which capital gains an advantage in this conflict is, they claim, through capital establishing and maintaining a dominant ideology which legitimates the status quo.
An important question for those with this Marxist perspective relates to the circumstances in which capital can maintain this ideology and prevent the raising of consciousness of labour as to its own class position.
A number of the writers we discuss below have as their primary concern the extent to which technological change will either increase or reduce class consciousness and class conflict.
Some of these writers have taken the view that as part of this class war management, on behalf of capital, have been able to steer the direction of technological change along a particular path, stimulating certain developments at the expense of others so that the interests of capital are better served, and the interests of labour are countered.
This approach is elaborated in Chapter 5.
Within this chapter our concern is with those, both Marxist and non-Marxist, who have taken as given the particular direction in which technology has developed, and with those who, while accepting that it is possible and desirable to exercise some social control over technology, have taken the view that there is no fundamental conflict at the work-place and that the system of organisation there can be optimised in the light of a set of objectives to which they assume all would be able to agree.
Of the various theories which have been proposed about the relationship between technical change and experience of work, an early and influential, though much criticised, study is that of Blauner (1964).
His concern is with the impact of technical change on two of the four factors we previously identified as potential sources of job satisfaction, namely social relations at work and the exercise of skill and knowledge.
He accepts the widely held view that the development of mass-production industry produced a sharp deterioration in the conditions of manual work and led to the emergence of a type of worker who combined a generalised hostility to the prevailing society with a primary preoccupation with militant economic action; but he suggests that, as technology continues to develop, the increased use of full automation will eliminate many of the deepest sources of resentment about work, and, in so doing, encourage normative integration within the existing social structure of the enterprise.
He develops his argument by identifying four phases in technological development.
Craft production is his first phase; followed by technologies which employ people primarily to mind machines; then mass (assembly-line) production; and finally continuous process production.
Examples of these technologies, in their chronological order, would be the pre-Industrial-Revolution spinning and weaving by craft workers; the machine-minders of the early cotton mills; the mass production of consumer goods such as cars and other domestic equipment; and finally the chemical industry.
Among the various characteristics of these technologies which Blauner identifies we highlight three here: the changing skill requirements, the worker's sense of control over the work process, and changes in the meaningfulness of work — these last two characteristics being, to a very large extent, a product of the social relationships which the worker has with management and the end-user of the product being made.
Blauner suggests a U-curve relationship against time for all of these characteristics.
For skill, both craft and continuous-flow production require a higher proportion of skilled workers than machine minding and mass production.
In the early period of industrialisation it was the skilled (craft) workers who actually carried out the production task, and in the late period the skilled workers constructed and maintained the fully automated continuous-flow production process.
In both craft and continuous-flow production the worker has a sense of control over the work process, claims Blauner.
In continuous-process plants workers are liberated from the rhythm of the machine and can set their own pace.
They are free to move around; they can plan their own work schedules; and they are free to use their own initiative.
Continuous-process technology offers more scope for self-actualisation than machine and assembly-line technologies.
The nature of the work encourages a scientific, technical orientation and the changing character of the technology results in opportunities for learning and personal development for a considerable section of the blue-collar force.
(Blauner 1964, 174.)
Automation also restores meaningfulness, says Blauner.
In the continuous-process plant the worker can get a picture of the complete sequence of operations, and automation reconstructs the collective nature of work, thus encouraging the worker to think in terms of the whole rather than the part.
Blauner also devotes considerable attention to features of technology which imply that workers are likely to feel a greater sense of belonging and identification with factories using highly automated processes.
He cites five such features of highly automated plants: the finely graded status structures of such organisations, arising from the more even balance than in other industries between skilled, semi-skilled, and unskilled workers; the relatively smaller size of plants and work units; the changed role of management (with the work units taking over quality supervision and the machinery controlling the level of output, management is left with the job of providing advice rather than instructions); there is blurring of the dividing line between manual and non-manual work; and the greater prosperity and lower proportion of labour costs allows management to offer higher pay levels, a wide range of fringe benefits, and a high level of job security.
A major criticism of Blauner's approach is his assumption that most of those working in highly automated plants have the kinds of jobs he describes: for example, jobs needing a high level of skill, giving considerable autonomy to the worker, and restoring meaningfulness to work.
James Bright (1958), writing at the time Blauner was conducting the bulk of his research, reached a radically different conclusion to Blauner, finding that’…automation had reduced the skill requirements of the operating work force, and occasionally of the entire factory force’(Bright 1958, 8), and a more recent study by Nichols and Armstrong (1976) of a chemical factory in Britain shows just how much routine unskilled labouring work such continuous-process factories still generate.
Nichols and Armstrong claimed that many workers in that factory experienced a high level of alienation from their work.
Bright's study was particularly detailed.
He set up a list of twelve components of skill, including such items as ‘mental effort’, ‘dexterity’, ‘responsibility’, and ‘decision making’, and a set of four broad levels of mechanisation.
Though he extended these four levels into seventeen very specific levels of mechanisation, we need not concern ourselves here with that level of detail.
His four broad categories he labelled: hand control; mechanical control; variable control, signal response; and variable control, action response.
These categories correspond closely to Blauner's, ranging from traditional craft work at the one end to a completely automated, cybernetic, system at the other.
The major difference between Bright and Blauner is that, while the latter deals only with total factory production systems, Bright focuses on the individual worker.
They agree that skill requirements are reduced as mechanisation moves through the first three stages, but part company in their interpretation of what happens in fully automated plants, Bright claiming that, because the machinery becomes virtually self-sufficient in terms of needing no worker input, such work that does remain is subject to more centralised control and closer supervision even though the tasks to be performed may have become more sophisticated.
A third, early, contribution to our understanding about the possible effects of new technology on people's experience of work comes from research conducted by Joan Woodward in the 1950s and 1960s.
Her major finding was that a relationship appeared to exist between the technology an enterprise operated and the organisational structure of that enterprise.
This research gave rise to the school of ‘contingency theory’ which is discussed at some length in Chapter 6.
Of particular significance to our discussion in this chapter is her conclusion about the way in which technology appears to influence organisational structure at the two ends of the scale of technological complexity.
She suggests that, whereas in the simplest forms of production the organisation was necessarily subservient to the needs of technical co-ordination, in process production technical co-ordination is incorporated in the machinery itself, and the organisation is subservient to the social needs of the people working in it.
’…in the technically advanced firm organization serves primarily social ends, its function being to define roles and relationships within a social system.
This means that the organisation planner can concentrate on establishing the network of relationships which is best for people’— Woodward (1965, 123), quoted, as is much of the above summary, from Gallie (1978, 14).
The chief executive of the continuous-process plant, claimed Woodward, is no longer preoccupied by technical matters, but issues of organisation, industrial relations, and public relations.
Moreover, process production produces a clearly defined primary task for both management and men — that of keeping the plant running as near full capacity as possible.
Another important element in Woodward's explanation, and one that we will be returning to in Chapter 6, is the impact of technology on the control system within the factory.
She defines control as the task of monitoring the outcome of activities and if necessary taking corrective action (Woodward 1970, 38).
Two main dimensions of control systems are distinguished: the extent to which they are unified or fragmented, and the degree of impersonality of the system.
Her theory is that the more that control is personalised, the more likely it is that there will be friction between management and the workforce, but that continuous-process plants, because they are so highly automated, have unified impersonal control systems which minimise conflict and lead to more satisfying working conditions.
Serge Mallet (1969), writing in the context of developments in political theory in France, and hence particularly concerned with issues of class consciousness and conflict, took a view directly contrary to Woodward, arguing that new technology was leading to the development of new forms of class conflict that would threaten fundamentally the stability of the existing structure of the capitalist enterprise.
Many aspects of his analysis were similar to those advanced by Blauner, but they led him to an opposite conclusion.
Workers, he claimed, would be objectively integrated within the enterprise for three reasons: a change in the character of the salary system, the nature of the worker's skill, and the high level of job security.
With automation, output from the plant does not depend directly on the effort of any individual worker, Mallet suggests.
Therefore individual work measurement becomes inappropriate and each worker's salary is determined primarily by the overall economic situation of the enterprise.
As Gallie puts it, summarising Mallet, ‘Integration, in the sense of identification with the enterprise and its overall performance, becomes then a necessary corollary of the desire to further one's own interests’(Gallie 1978, 18).
The change in the nature of the workers' skill comes about, claims Mallet, because old craft-based skills of general applicability are replaced by skills needed to operate specific pieces of machinery.
Again quoting Gallie's summary of Mallet:
The new emphasis is on attentiveness, and the ability to take responsibility for machinery that is both extremely expensive and highly dangerous.
It is a skill that can only be learned through experiences with a specific complex of machinery and, in contrast to that of traditional skilled work, it is specific to a particular enterprise.
(Gallie 1978, 18.)
Having developed such plant-specific skills, a worker will not be in a position to find a job of equivalent pay elsewhere, and so this factor, too, ‘integrates’ the worker into the plant, in the sense Mallet uses the term.
Mallet's third factor, job security, follows from his first two points.
With the company having invested heavily in plant-specific training for a particular worker, and output from the plant not being directly related to the number of workers in the plant, firms operating these technologies will be reluctant to hire and fire such highly trained workers in line with fluctuations in product demand.
Such reluctance is reinforced by the relatively small savings which would be made by reducing labour costs, as the capital intensity of production is so high, and also by the fact that there is less opportunity to shed labour in the downturn when using highly automated plant because running such plant at all usually requires a certain fixed minimum number of workers.
‘The workforce thus comes to view employment in the firm as a permanent career, and it sees its future as intimately tied up with the fate of the enterprise’(Gallie 1978, 18).
In sharp contrast to Blauner, who argues that this ‘objective integration’ will lead to social integration of workers and management, Mallet argues that this objective integration has the opposite effect, leading to a new form of revolutionary consciousness that aims at the overthrow of the existing pattern of social relations in the enterprise.
A major reason for this is that the high productivity of fully automated plants satisfies the basic consumption needs of workers but, instead of this leading to a high level of satisfaction, workers freed from the immediate concern of making ends meet are then able to pose what Mallet takes to be the more fundamental problem of their alienation from their work.
Their ability not only to begin to understand the nature of their alienation but to learn to do something about it is also enhanced by the development of automation.
The job security which Mallet, as we have already indicated, assumes will follow the introduction of fully automated plant gives workers the opportunity to develop a substantial knowledge about the firm and its activities.
Secondly, responsibility in such plants becomes decentralised as a consequence of the firm's dependence on the worker's use of his initiative.
This gives the workforce both a much greater capacity to coerce management and a consciousness of its collective power, claims Mallet.
Hence workers in plants using the most advanced technology have both the awareness and the ability to mount revolutionary demands, and, moreover, suggests Mallet, their activities will act as a model and inspiration for the wider working class.
A second French critique of the notion that new technology is likely to enhance people's experience of work is the work of Pierre Naville.
Where Mallet began in agreement with Blauner but came to different conclusions, Naville starts from a quite different position, arguing that work itself, under automated technology, is inherently unsatisfying.
It deprives the worker of any contact with the raw material, destroys any residual sense of a personalised relationship with the machine, and is frequently boring, lonely, and mentally stressful, he asserts.
In support of these assertions he compares the situation ‘in traditional industry’, where, for the worker arriving in the factory in the morning, ‘his individual machine is a bit like his child.
He goes to work, and when he arrives he gets it working; when he leaves, at the end of the day, it sleeps until the next morning.
It is his machine.’
The situation is altogether different in a continuous-process industry.
There ‘when…a worker arrives at work and replaces a colleague while the production line continues to operate, he feels that this machine is not really his.
He arrives, he checks it over; then he goes away, and the machine continues to go on running without him.’
(Gallie 1978, 21–2, quoting Naville 1963, 203–4.)
Naville also identified a series of problems with work with automated technology which he characterises as arising from a marked increase in mobility.
This comes about, he suggests, for three reasons: there is frequent movement of personnel between different posts; the supervision and direction of a complex set of machinery encourages the multi-functional use of individuals; and there is an increase in the use of shift work.
This increased mobility is seen by Naville as a source of great dissatisfaction.
Not only does automation lead to a heightened sense of alienation, it also, Naville suggests, enables workers to obtain a better understanding of the real determinants of the pattern of authority relations prevalent in the society, which Naville presumes to be dictated by social class rather than technocratic or efficiency considerations.
This is for two reasons.
Firstly, Naville argues, like Joan Woodward, that automation allows a high degree of autonomy to the system of social organisation of the plant.
For Naville, given his Marxist theoretical perspective, this visible autonomy sweeps aside the veil and reveals the nature of the existing patterns of hierarchical organisation in their true light — as patterns that are socially, and not technologically, determined.
Secondly, argues Naville, there is a growing contradiction between the requirements of the work process and the existing system of social relations:
Efficiency can no longer be achieved through the division of labour, but through the development of more efficient patterns of co-operation.
This requires a closer integration of the social organization of work, an integration not only at the level of relations between workers, but also between the different hierarchical levels.
The traditional patterns of social organisation with their emphasis on hierarchical differentiation then become a major obstacle to the most efficient use of the technology.
(Gallie 1978,24.)
Naville is more cautious than Mallet in the conclusions he draws from his analysis about the extent of conflict with management likely to be brought about as a result of extensive use of such automated technology.
The negotiating position taken up by the unions will be an important factor, and Naville recognises that the behaviour of the unions will be influenced by many factors additional to the technology used in some trade union members' firms.
He also suggests that
their demand for control cannot be restricted to one of self-government within the enterprise, but it will have to aim at the development of a complex institutional system that will be able to strike a balance between the need for worker autonomy within the enterprise on the one hand, and the need for economic co-ordination at higher economic levels on the other.
(Gallie 1978, 25.)
Gallie summarised the views of Blauner, Mallet, and Naville because he wished to set up an empirical test of their theses.
During 1971 and 1972 he surveyed four oil refineries — two each in France and Britain — interviewing a total of over 800 workers.
His conclusion was that his data ‘provided support for neither Mallet nor Blauner’(Gallie 1978, 298).
Their view that the main traditional sources of grievance in industry — salaries, and problems deriving from the nature of the work task and of work organisation — would cease to be of importance as a focus of grievance in continuous-process industries turned out to be unsupported.
He found that the cultural and institutional differences between France and Britain had a more important influence on people's experience of work than the common technology each factory used.
Thus, with regard to level of pay, ‘the British were broadly speaking content; the French dissatisfied.
This was not simply a marginal grievance for the French workers: it was the dominant source of their resentment about their situation as manual workers in French society.’
(Gallie 1978, 296.)
Moreover, whereas the British workers were also overwhelmingly satisfied with their payment structure, the French were deeply convinced that their payment structure was based on unfair principles.
Similarly with regard to attitudes to management, the British workers fitted the Blauner model, expressing a high level of contentment with existing procedures of decision making and a consensus about organisational goals, whereas the French saw their enterprises as socially dichotomous and exploitative.
Both Gallie, and Nichols and Beynon (1977), agree that the description of work in a  continuous -process plant given by Blauner and Mallet is misleading.
The technology does not create the almost Utopian working conditions they describe, and people's work tasks and conditions are not so very different in continuous-process industries as compared to earlier technologies.
If there are to be significant changes in people's experience of work in the future, these are, concludes Gallie, much more likely to be brought about by changes in cultural values, in institutional arrangements, or in management attitudes or trade union objectives (Gallie 1978, 317).
It may be that, in his desire to show how little support his findings give for the Blauner and Mallet theses about the determining influence of technology, Gallie underplays the role technology can play.
The design of his study, comparing plants in different cultures and countries rather than comparing plants operating different technologies, is bound to heighten the reader's awareness of cultural rather than technological influences.
Moreover, though he devotes several pages to a description of the work done in these oil refineries, Gallie does not address the question of whether the technology itself differs in the French as compared to the British plants, nor whether details of the work organisation itself differ in a non-random way between the two countries.
Clearly technology is not the only determinant of work organisation, or of people's level of satisfaction at work.
Cultural and institutional factors play an extremely important role.
It is, however, unlikely that such a central part of the production process as the production technology itself has no influence at all on how people experience work.
We therefore need to explore further, and at a more detailed level, what relation can be identified, within a given cultural and institutional milieu, between technology, work organisation, and people's experience of work.
Such knowledge would be useful not just to enable us to forecast when the revolution might happen, but also in helping us to know how to make choices between different versions of a particular technology, and how to organise work to operate that technology.
We turn now to those who have had this specific concern.
The socio-technical systems perspective
Immediately following the nationalisation of the coal-mines in Britain at the end of the Second World War a team of social scientists from the Tavistock Institute in London began an extensive series of studies of work organisation in that industry.
The significance of their research for our study of new technology at work is twofold.
Firstly, the results of their work are of enormous interest in themselves.
Secondly, this work diffused in a number of different geographic and theoretical directions.
It was the foundation of what became known as ‘socio-technical systems theory’ and had a direct influence on the Scandinavian experiments in work organisation, of which the SAAB and Volvo cases described in Chapter 5 are just two examples.
The Tavistock Institute, and in particular the lead researcher in the coal-mining studies, Eric Trist, were also founder-members of the so-called Quality of Working Life movement, the impact of which has been particularly great in North America.
The Tavistock study was of new ways of organising work as novel coal-getting technology was introduced into pits in the 1950s.
Although the technology was not microprocessor-based, and the events are now thirty years past, the study's theoretical approach and empirical findings are of such interest and relevance that it is worth describing them in some detail.
Their point of departure was the pre-mechanisation tradition of ‘single place’ working in the Durham and Northumberland coalfields.
Under this system of working a face was mined by a ‘marra group’ of between two and six men.
(’ Marra’is Geordie dialect for mate.
Readers of D. H. Lawrence will be more familiar with the word ‘butty’ which has the same meaning.)
Each man was a ‘complete miner’, carrying out all aspects of face work — the preparation work, the cutting of the coal itself, and the advancing of the face ready for the next cut.
If one person performed all these tasks then they were defined by the Tavistock group as having a ‘composite work role’.
Some faces would be worked by one man alone, others by two together — though each would have a ‘composite work role’.
In other words, there would be no division of labour.
Some mines operated a two-shift system, others had three shifts.
All those across the shifts who worked that face were members of the marra group.
They shared the same paynote and were self-selected.
Each group had the opportunity of changing its membership at quarterly ‘cavils’— events jointly supervised by management and union when faces were allocated to gangs by lot in order to even out differences in the ease of winning coal from particular seams.
The relationship between each group and management was akin to that of contractor and client.
There was a price agreement for a specific task, either coal-getting or doing the necessary stonework in preparation, and Trist et al.(1963) observe that management dealt with workers through the union to a far greater extent than in most industries.
As a result there was only a vestigial junior management system.
The first-level supervision, known as the deputy, stood in a service rather than an executive relation, his responsibilities being for safety, maintenance of supplies, and shot-firing rather than for direct supervision.
The next level up in the management hierarchy, the overman, did not often visit a man in his work-place.
Trist et al.'s explanation for this form of work organisation focuses on aspects of the task of coal-mining.
The production machinery has to be moved every day as the face moves, geological variations mean that the size and quality of the seam is unpredictable, and there is always the possibility of the collapse of the walls, roof, etc.
This ‘threat of instability from the environment makes the production task much more liable to disorganization’(Trist et al.1963, 20).
Also, because mobility in the pit is so difficult, supervisors can visit the operators only occasionally throughout the shift.
Hence there is much less control by management than in a factory yet far more events about which decisions have to be taken.
Therefore, argue Trist et al., the work group has to be given responsibility for the entire cycle of operations, and for handling the interdependence between those on different shifts.
The group has to be self-regulating.
Trist, in an earlier publication with Bamforth (1951), coined the term ‘responsible autonomy’ for this degree of self-regulation.
The introduction of face conveyors (an early stage of mechanisation in the pits) in the early part of the twentieth century led to the adoption of longwall cutting.
Rather than one or two men working at an isolated face, up to fifty men would be involved in winning coal by working at a face up to seventy to ninety metres in width.
The form of work organisation adopted by management in the Durham coalfield, at first, was to formally separate the three major production processes of preparation, coal-getting, and advancing (the props, conveyors, etc.) and to set up distinct groups, each working a whole shift, to perform each process.
The cyclical character of the work now acquires central importance; under this system a right balance is needed between manpower and task size, and there is a need to schedule operations so each process is completed in each shift.
Not only did management set up functionally differentiated work groups but they also split up jobs within each group into such constituent elements as cutting, scuffling, drilling, hewing, filling, pulling, and stonework.
It is not important to understand what each of these jobs entailed.
The point is that such an elaborate division of labour was set up despite, as Trist et al.observed, each job not being so ‘complex that the average faceworker could not, in a reasonably short time, be expected to become qualified in more than one’(1963, 47).
Moreover, the research team observed that the skills required for these jobs were much less than the skills needed to contend with interferences emanating from the underground situation.
In other words, there are many tacit skills of a general nature which faceworkers develop.
But the conventional longwall work organisation fails to build these tacit skills into the work groups.
With such an elaborate division of labour, the conventional longwall system requires much more integration than single-place systems but, claimed Trist and his colleagues, there were no mechanisms available to provide this.
It could not be done by direct supervision because of the inability of management to be present at the face frequently enough.
Also, each manager only had shift responsibility and so could not co-ordinate the work across shifts.
It was not possible to expect the group to act with ‘responsible autonomy’— to be self-regulating — because of the elaborate division of labour.
The third mechanism, that of the price agreement, upon which management placed much reliance in single-place working, also broke down because of the detailed breakdown of jobs.
A great deal of time was spent haggling over prices for specific tasks.
Also, with no common denominator for fixing rates, different criteria were used for measuring performance — tonnage, yardage, cubic measures, number of operations completed, etc. — and so contradictory interests developed.
In response to these difficulties a different form of work organisation, deriving from the single-place tradition, was developed.
Known as composite longwall working, it was based on a self-selected group of forty-one men, who allocated themselves to tasks and shifts and received a comprehensive payment on a common note (Trist et al.1963, 77).
This wage was split into two parts: 58 per cent was a basic wage to cover everything, so bargaining with the deputy was virtually eliminated, and the remaining 42 per cent was a bonus on output.
This form of work organisation, an attempt to reintroduce responsibility, autonomy, and the client ‘contractor element to the management’ worker relationship, had the following four aspects:
a
Composite work method — oncoming men take up the cycle at the point left by the previous shift.
b
Composite workmen — each person is multi-skilled.
Though all members of a cycle group do not need to be competent in all five of the recognised face skills, the team as a whole must be able to deploy sufficient resources on each shift to man the roles likely to arise.
c
Composite work groups — self-selection and internal allocation of roles.
d
Composite payment — common paynote in which all members share equally, comprising shift-rate covering all work done, plus bonus based on coal produced.
Provision is also made for payment when the bonus cannot be earned because of circumstances outside the workers' control.
As always with social science experiments, it proved exceedingly difficult to measure the effects of these changes.
The researchers reported a more positive attitude to work among those operating the composite longwall system, with a higher level of what they termed ‘mental health’— fewer symptoms of stress and less conflict.
They also reported a substantial increase in productivity.
There was an increase of 20 per cent in the number of cycles completed per unit time after reorganisation from the conventional to the composite longwall system (a cycle being the three processes of preparation, getting, and advancing), though they do note that, at the same time, better conveyors were introduced and on one face there was a change from hewing the coal to cutting it (Trist et al.1963, 256).
The researchers go on to draw some general conclusions from the results of this study.
One conclusion is that they note that further mechanisation (beyond the composite longwall described above) was having major effects on work organisation.
The higher level of automation involved fewer, less narrowly specialised, work roles and fewer task groups, each undertaking a large part of the cycle.
Therefore the problem of integration is lessened.
This results in a less complex work organisation with more in common with single-place and composite systems.
This is a conclusion to which we return, and challenge, in Chapter 6.
A second conclusion is that despite the findings from small-group research it is possible for relatively large primary work groups of up to fifty members to operate successfully.
The coal-mining studies provided evidence that groups of this size could be maintained and could sustain self-regulation.
It should be added, though the authors do not mention this, that the highly solidaristic ideology of mining communities in the North-East of Britain may well be of great importance in sustaining these egalitarian working groups and that they may not be viable in other areas where a more individualistic ideology is adhered to.
Their third conclusion is that ‘when new technology is introduced an inappropriate form of work organization — that associated with the technical trial of the machinery — tends to be carried over to subsequent operational units’(Trist et al.1963, 293).
Therefore there needs to be a period to allow exploration of satisfactory forms of internal work organisation when new technology is introduced, and this period may well need to be longer than that usually allowed for new skills acquisition.
The result of this research was the establishment by the Tavistock Institute of socio-technical systems theory.
As Trist defines it:
The concept of a socio-technical system arose from the consideration that any production system requires both a technological organization — equipment and process layout — and a work organization relating to each other those who carry out the necessary tasks.
The technological demands place limits on the type of work organization possible, but a work organization has social and psychological properties of its own that are independent of technology.
A socio-technical system must also satisfy the financial conditions of the industry of which it is a part.
(Trist et al.1963, 6.)
This perspective has had a remarkable impact on the development of our understanding of work organisation and job design, and is at the root of much of experiments and innovations in work organisation in Scandinavia.
It does, however, suffer from at least two weaknesses.
One is the lack of awareness that the technological organisation is itself subject to social forces.
The other is that no consideration is given to conflicting interests and the possibility that different forms of work organisation may be preferred by one group in the enterprise rather than another.
We explore both these points in the next chapter.
The quality of working life movement
Now an evangelistic organisation which includes governments, managers, and trade unions, the Quality of Working Life (QWL) movement has as one of its founding fathers Eric Trist, the principal investigator of the coal-mining study reported above.
Its most comprehensive statement of aims, theory, and practical guide-lines is given by J. Richard Hackman and Geoff R. Oldham in their book Work Redesign (Hackman and Oldham 1980).
In it they state their belief in motivation through the design of work and set out a model for good job design which is reproduced in Figure 3.1.
The model is developed from research they have conducted into the relationship between job characteristics, motivation, and job satisfaction.
They are particularly concerned with factors which lead to individuals wanting to do jobs well because of the intrinsic satisfaction from doing the work.
This they term ‘internal work motivation’ to distinguish it from motivation which arises from extrinsic factors such as a payment-by-results wage system.
Earlier work by Turner and Lawrence tested the theory that if jobs were carefully designed to incorporate specific features then high levels of satisfaction and motivation would result.
They predicted that the amount of variety in work, the level of employee autonomy in performing the work, the amount of interaction required in carrying out task activities, the level of knowledge and skill required, and the amount of responsibility entrusted to the job-holder would be positively associated with satisfaction and a low level of absenteeism.
They found, however, that this relationship only held up for workers in small-town settings.
Workers in urban areas displayed no relationship between these job factors and absenteeism and, perhaps more surprisingly, those jobs scoring high on variety, autonomy, responsibility, and so on were those providing least job satisfaction.
The Hackman and Oldham model therefore introduced two important refinements to the model.
What matters, they claim, is the psychological state of the worker and the skills he or she possesses.
High internal work motivation and satisfaction result from experiencing meaningfulness and responsibility from the work, and from obtaining knowledge about the actual results of the work activities.
This experience and knowledge can come, as the model in Figure 3.1 shows, from characteristics of the job, but only if certain ‘moderators’ are present.
If these moderators are present (we discuss what these are in a moment) then work will be experienced as meaningful if it requires a variety of skills from the worker, if a complete piece of work is done (task identity), and if the worker sees the task to be of significance.
Jobs which are designed to give the worker autonomy will produce the experience of responsibility, and designing in mechanisms to provide feedback from the job provides knowledge of the actual results of the work activities.
However, well-designed jobs will not give workers experience of meaningfulness or responsibility if the so-called moderating factors are not present.
If workers lack an appropriate level of knowledge and skill to complete the set task then they will experience frustration rather than meaningfulness in the face of demanding jobs.
A second important moderating factor is the strength of workers' need to ‘grow’ in the job.
Workers who have adapted to tedious and undemanding jobs and therefore have no desire to enhance their skills and knowledge are, it is suggested, likely to resist rather than welcome jobs with the suggested core characteristics.
Thirdly, if ‘context’ satisfactions are low (for example, there is poor pay or threats of redundancy) then performing a job which is well designed will not be enough to generate high motivation or intrinsic job satisfaction.
Using this model Hackman and Oldham claim to have had some success in redesigning jobs to give the outcomes they predict.
The implications of their model for the relationship between new technology and people's experience of work are of course clear.
They would suggest that, when new technologies are being introduced, care should be taken to design jobs associated with those technologies which have the core job characteristics they specify.
Hackman and Oldham are, however, pessimistic about the amount of attention that will be paid to job design considerations as new technology is introduced.
They suggest a number of reasons for this.
Firstly, they admit that, although there is now a substantial body of knowledge about what makes a job a good one, there is much less knowledge available so far about how to apply job design theories in real life settings.
Secondly, social scientists are only just beginning to develop procedures for evaluating the economic costs and benefits of innovative work design; and, thirdly, little is known about the conditions under which these innovative job designs persist across time and diffuse across companies and countries.
Moreover, say Hackman and Oldham, even if we had this knowledge, it would still be a struggle to implement good job design principles.
It will always be a battle between ‘hard’ engineering knowledge about the specific new technology being implemented and ‘soft’behavioural knowledge.
The styles and values of both employees and managers currently support a job design philosophy that has its roots in work study and industrial engineering practice, and it flies in the face of conventional wisdom to believe that jobs can actually be designed rather than simply be the result of technologically determined requirements.
Supporting Hackman and Oldham's pessimism are the results of a large-scale experiment in the United States, along the lines of the Tavistock study reported earlier in this chapter.
This, too, was in the coal-mining industry.
The programme began in 1973 as an attempt to incorporate the most recent findings about job design into the work organisation, and with the intention of improving the quality of work life.
By 1978, however, the programme had disappeared.
The social scientist charged with monitoring and evaluating the project (Goodman 1979) refused to answer the question as to whether or not the experiment had been a success, asserting that this was the wrong question.
What should be learned from the study is why certain things worked and others failed, so that other quality of working life programmes might do better.
Hackman and Oldham suggest that to reverse current trends and move towards good job design practice requires that organised labour should make QWL a high-priority item, that managers discover that QWL pays ‘in coins they value’, that government should decide that it requires, or is to encourage, organisations to improve QWL, or that the cultural climate must change.
In contrast to Mallet and Naville, they do not appear to believe that there is any fundamental conflict of interests between capital and labour which would lead to them expressing opposing preferences with regard to the taking up of the job design principles they advocate.
As we shall see in the next chapter, there are those who believe that management have often adopted forms of work organisation which give rise to unsatisfying jobs because it is cheaper for them so to do.
Hackman and Oldham admit that no piece of research has yet shown a positive relationship between high job satisfaction and high productivity.
One explanation for this may be that for many jobs it is high productivity which leads to low job satisfaction.
If management can obtain high levels of output from individual workers by designing jobs, such as those on assembly lines, which force people to work hard then output may be high at the expense of job satisfaction.
An element of job satisfaction for many may be the absence of coercive pressure from management and the ability to carry out one's job at one's own pace, a pace which may be slower than that which management would prefer.
It may therefore be that, if a technique were ever found to evaluate the economic costs and benefits of innovative work design, it might reveal that in a number of cases such innovation had net costs, to management, rather than net benefits.
The question then would be how unions assessed the costs and benefits and whether they would want to pressure management to bear this cost in order that their members could enjoy the benefit of higher job satisfaction — possibly at the expense of their receiving lower wages.
Fig. 3.1 The Job Characteristics Model.
(from Hackman & Oldham,Work Redesign , 1980, Addison-Wesley, Reading, Massachusetts; p.90, Fig. 4.6.
Reprinted with permission.)
New Technology, Work Organisation, and De-skilling: The Theory
Introduction
We now turn to an alternative, fairly recent, intellectual tradition which emphasises the conflict of interests in the work-place and suggests that management, on behalf of capitalist interests, have moulded technical developments so that they suit these interests and run counter to the interests of labour.
Technological developments have been used down the ages to fragment jobs and de-skill workers, they claim.
This has enabled management to get more effort out of labour and pay a lower wage.
Because management use the technology to exercise tight control over workers, managers have not needed to pay much attention to issues of job satisfaction and motivation because only when workers have autonomy does their level of motivation become a relevant consideration.
This form of analysis has been applied to various periods during the industrial revolution and to more modern developments.
Early industrialisation
Perhaps the most dramatic shift in the pattern of work associated with new technology was that which characterised the first industrial revolution, as thousands moved to the newly forming industrial towns to work in the mills.
For most of the two centuries since that phenomenon began the conventional explanation has been that it was the new technology (the spinning-jenny, the new weaving frames, and the steam engine) which gave rise to the factory.
More recently this argument has been stood on its head with the suggestion that it was the rise of factory production which caused the technological developments which have given us today's machinery.
Marx was wrong, it is now claimed, when he asserted that the steam engine gave us the capitalist.
It was the capitalist who gave us the steam engine.
This argument was first put forward by a Harvard economist, Steven Marglin, in an article he provocatively entitled ‘What do Bosses do?’.
It is a re-analysis of the reasons for the industrial revolution in Britain.
The cotton industry in Lancashire, in North-West England, was the seat of the industrial revolution and the birthplace of large-scale factory production.
Here were the archetypes of William Blake's ‘dark satanic mills’.
Before the rise of factory production, spinning and weaving were done on a putting-out basis, with individuals or groups of spinners and weavers working in their own cottages in country towns, villages, and hamlets dotted throughout rural Lancashire.
Merchants would travel around on a regular basis giving out raw materials and collecting the spun, or woven, product.
As the demand for cotton goods rose (partly owing to economic growth caused by advances in agricultural techniques and extended foreign trade) cotton production shifted from the putting-out system to mills being set up in the rapidly urbanising towns.
The reason for this shift, according to Marglin, was not the higher efficiency of factory production compared to home-working under the putting-out system, but because the merchants could not force the home-workers to work hard enough to meet the increased demand for cotton.
The merchants had a problem, claims Marglin, because the spinners and weavers had what the economists term a ‘leisure preference’.
In other words, they preferred, when they had earned a certain basic sum of money sufficient to meet their immediate needs, to spend the rest of their time in leisure rather than in work to increase their earnings.
As they were paid on a piece-work basis, this meant that there was a ceiling to the amount of output any one person would do.
Once a sufficient weight of cotton had been spun or woven to generate the needed income, work would stop.
If the piece-rate was raised in an attempt to persuade the workers to produce more output, exactly the opposite effect was obtained as individuals would only produce the (lower) quantity required to meet their cash target.
If piece-rates were lowered in an attempt to boost output then presumably workers would take other jobs, or would switch to another merchant.
Faced with this failure to raise output through the wage rate, it became advantageous to the manufacturer to set up central spinning and weaving factories in order to reduce the rising cost of merchants travelling ever more extensively in search of additional putting-out workers.
It also — and perhaps more importantly — gave much tighter control over workers, enabling the factory owner to offer an all-or-nothing contract to the mill-workers, such that they would be required to work the then standard fourteen-hour day, six-day week — a far more intensive work-rate than that chosen by the putting-out workers who could exercise their own preference in the trade-off between work and leisure.
It is in this context that many of the early technical innovations in the textile industry developed.
The millwrights and other inventors who were making these technical developments were not operating in a vacuum.
They were making and altering machines for specific customers, and the people who were prepared to pay for improved, labour-saving, machines at this time were the owners of the factories.
Hence, it is argued, the technology was developed to meet the requirements of large-scale factory production rather than of small-scale craft producers operating out of their own cottages.
The large-scale factory, it should be emphasised, had not emerged because there were economies of scale in spinning and weaving.
The factory was not necessarily more efficient than the home-based weaver.
The factory had come into being, Marglin argues, because it enabled the owner to force higher levels of output out of operators.
But, once there, the factory created the demand for technologies which were appropriate for factory production, and these technologies almost certainly enhanced efficiency.
As individual craftsmen neither had the desire nor the capital to pay for development work on machinery suitable for small-scale home-based use, factory-based manufacture would have become relatively more efficient over time as the technology was developed.
Evidence in support of this view is quoted by Charles Sabel (1982, 39):
The evidence is that the discovery of basic principles of machine design, their application to large- or small-scale industrial production, and the creation of efficient managerial techniques were all independent of the creation of the factory system by nineteenth-century capitalists.
The most basic principles of machine design, for example, were discovered by Renaissance and Baroque instrument makers, military engineers, and scientists.
Their application to such industries as spinning and weaving in seventeenth and eighteenth centuries often resulted in inventions suited to the circumstances of petty producers: The new machines required little capital and a family-sized labor force, and hence were well suited to the perpetuation of cottage industry.
It is clear from this that it was social and not technical factors which were responsible for the emergence of factory production.
Marglin argues that the organisation of work within factories was influenced by a further set of social factors — the need for the factory owners to maintain a monopoly over the knowledge needed to run the enterprise.
In any large-scale undertaking there is usually some advantage in subdividing the work so that individuals can develop special skills in particular tasks.
Marglin suggests that factory owners subdivided tasks way beyond what was necessary to maximise the development of individual skills and minimise time wasted by individual workers having to perform more than one operation.
They subdivided the work further in order to ensure that there were aspects of the job that only the owners knew how to do.
They could thus prevent any group of workers going off and setting up their own workshop in competition to the merchant and capitalist class.
He concludes, therefore, that for the twin reasons of the capitalist's desire to force high output from individual labourers and to prevent labourers from setting up in competition, a pattern of work organisation emerged in the early cotton industry that was characterised by intensive working in factories, with individuals performing fragmented tasks.
To suit this pattern of working, technology suitable for use in factories rather than workshops, and for use by unskilled workers rather than craftsmen, was developed.
Given the substantial investment in developing that technology over many years, this form of working is now probably the most efficient way of running this industry.
It does not, however, mean that this is the only way in which the industry could have developed.
The technology is not a neutral determining force, but is itself subject to human choice which is made by the powerful on the basis of what suits their interests.
How persuasive is this argument in explaining the development, use, and effects of technology now, in the microelectronics era?
An extremely influential protagonist of the view that these arguments still hold was Harry Braverman, whose book,Labor and Monopoly Capital: The Degradation of Work in the Twentieth Century (1974), gave birth to a sunrise industry of scholars engaging in development and critique of his argument.
Not an academic himself, Braverman began his working life as an apprentice coppersmith and spent much of the rest of it in socialist journalism and in publishing.
His arguments about the use of new technologies in the factory and the office are therefore based on a lifetime of work experience.
Braverman's thesis is that there has been a general and progressive de-skilling of jobs in the twentieth century, and that there is a long-term trend for jobs to be stripped of intrinsic content, and become more routine.
He argues that under capitalism the interests of workers and capitalists are fundamentally opposed so that the latter, in order to pursue their objective of profit maximisation, need to exercise tight control over the former.
One technique of central importance for doing this is Taylorism — the method of so-called ‘scientific management’ invented by Frederick Winslow Taylor at the turn of the century.
The essentials of Taylorism involve the use of work-study engineers to study in fine detail the work an individual is doing; through detailed analysis develop the most efficient method of doing that work and establish a ‘fair’ time for performing particular elements of the task; develop a specialised staff function whose task is to allocate jobs to individual workers; and monitor performance against the rated time for the job.
Elements of this technique have been widely adopted in manufacturing industry, and work study, time-and-motion analysis, and payments-by-results schemes are all children of this ‘scientific management’ approach.
Taylor himself argued that his methods operated in everyone's best interests.
No worker, he suggested, was clever enough to be able both to perform their own job and to analyse the best way of doing it.
It was therefore of benefit to any individual worker to have their job analysed by an expert and be shown the most efficient way to do it.
This would enable them to produce more, without a commensurate increase in effort, and thus earn a higher wage or salary.
Managers would have more predictable work flow, and owners would earn higher profits as their share from the increased efficiency of operation.
Braverman takes a contrary view.
He holds a rather higher view of individual intelligence than Taylor, arguing that the person who has to do that job every day is the one most likely to know how to do it.
Braverman's view is that work-study engineers are not contributing knowledge by their analysis of others' work: they are acting as eyes and ears of management to find out on their behalf how quickly a job can be done.
Just as the capitalist desires maximum output from labour for least cost, so does the labourer want maximum pay for the least effort.
Given this opposition of interests, management will desire better knowledge of worker performance in order to ensure higher output.
The fundamental task of the work-study engineer is to provide, in this battle of wits between management and workers, that knowledge for management so that they can exercise tighter control.
Braverman goes further and suggests, with Marglin, that management will also endeavour to develop methods of working that involve operators in fragmented, or short cycle time, tasks for reasons other than efficiency.
One reason for this is that it is easier to measure, and therefore control, performance if management can observe precisely what workers are doing.
Another is that unskilled or semi-skilled operators can be recruited to perform these fragmented tasks, replacing the skilled craft workers who had previously performed the unfragmented tasks.
Leaving aside the fact, to which we will return in a moment, that less skilled people can usually be paid less wages than those who are skilled, an important characteristic of craft workers is that they often exercise tight control as an occupation over the job that they do.
Skilled craft workers frequently establish their own methods and pace of work, and this control by the occupational group is usually backed up by the craft union.
Semi-skilled or unskilled workers usually find it harder to find a basis upon which to exercise occupational control and are more often either non-union or members of a general union which does not afford a platform to develop such control.
With regard to pay, the benefit to management of de-skilling so that the elements of a job are fragmented into their constituent elements is that those elemental jobs can be assigned to those with skills, and hence pay rates, to match them.
Braverman (1974, 81) quotes J. R. Commons' description of a meatpacking conveyor in the USA in the early part of this century to illustrate this point:
It would be difficult to find another industry where division of labor has been so ingeniously and microscopically worked out.
The animal has been surveyed and laid off like a map; and the men have been classified in over thirty specialties and twenty rates of pay, from 16 cents to 50 cents an hour.
The 50-cent man is restricted to using the knife on the most delicate parts of the hide (floorman) or to using the ax in splitting the backbone (splitter); and wherever a less-skilled man can be slipped in at 18 cents, 18½ cents, 20 cents, 21 cents, 22½ cents, 24 cents, 25 cents, and so on, a place is made for him, and an occupation mapped out.
In working on the hide alone there are nine positions, at eight different rates of pay.
A 20-cent man pulls off the tail, a 22½-cent man pounds off another part where good leather is not found, and the knife of the 40-cent man cuts a different texture and has a different ‘feel’ from that of the 50-cent man.
Another central element in Braverman's thesis is that management, in order to achieve their objective of tight control over labour, not only fragment jobs horizontally — in the sense that different physical elements of the same task are split off from each other to be done by separate individuals — but fragment jobs vertically, as well.
This vertical fragmentation splits the conception of the job from its execution.
Whereas a traditional craftsman would decide what should be done, how it should be done, when it should be done, and to what level of quality, as well as actually executing the task itself, modern management within capitalism takes on all these former conceptual functions, leaving labour merely to carry out the mechanical aspects of performing the manual task.
Braverman quotes the editorial of a 1918 edition of the International Molders Journal , noting that ‘A half-century of commentary on scientific management has not succeeded in producing a better formulation of the matter’(Braverman 1974, 136):
the gathering up of all this scattered craft knowledge, systematising it and concentrating it in the hands of the employer and then doling it out again only in the form of minute instructions, giving to each worker only the knowledge needed for the performance of a particular relatively minute task.
This process, it is evident, separates skill and knowledge even in their narrow relationship.
When it is completed, the worker is no longer a craftsman in any sense, but is an animated tool of the management.
The implications of Braverman's views about the de-skilling and fragmentation of work for the development of new technology parallel Marglin's: they would both agree that the pattern of technological development is profoundly influenced by managerial requirements.
While Marglin emphasises the way in which technology has been developed to meet the requirements of large-scale factory production, Braverman suggests that technological developments are also shaped by management's desire to split conception from execution.
The conceptual, thinking, aspects of the job are automated and incorporated into the machine, leaving the worker as a relatively mindless machine operator — a human, though merely mechanical, appendage to the machine.
He illustrates this with an historical account of the development of the computer controlled machine tool.
Conventional machine tools, such as lathes and milling machines, are frequently operated by highly skilled craft workers.
Working just from engineering drawings, the skilled machinist will decide the sequence of cuts to be made, how fast he will run the machine, and how much material to take off on each cut (the ‘speed and feed’), and will control manually each of the levers and screws on the machine which control each aspect of its operation.
An early exercise in ‘scientific management’ by Frederick Taylor was to investigate optimum speeds and feeds for various metals, machine tools, and cutting tips.
These were recorded on charts and he recommended the appointment of speed and feed men who would ensure that the optimum rates were adhered to.
This was an early example of the erosion of the skilled machinist's job.
The more major fragmentation occurred as developments were made in the control of the machine tools themselves.
In the 1950s a control system based on punched tape was developed.
This enabled someone to establish the numerical co-ordinates of the movement of the cutting tool over the entire sequence of operations and to transfer this to code on punched tape which was then fed into the machine.
The machine would read the punched tape and automatically move the tool, control the speed of rotation of the chuck of the lathe, or of the milling tool, and carry out the work while the operator stood by checking that no malfunctions occurred.
Such machines were described as ‘numerically controlled’ or NC machine tools.
The advent of relatively cheap microelectronics meant that by the late 1960s it had become possible to control these machines by dedicated mini- or micro-computers directly attached to them, such machines having ‘computer numerically control’ or CNC.
The vexed question has always been: Who should write the programs which control these machines?
Braverman, and many others following in his tradition since, have argued that machine tools should continue to be operated by skilled craftsmen after the introduction of CNC, and that the programs should be written by those who operate the machine.
In practice, in many instances companies have fragmented the machining tasks as CNC has been introduced, setting up separate programming departments, often staffed by people from a ‘white-collar’ background.
CNC machine tool manufacturers have often promoted their products with the claim that they can be operated by unskilled operators, and it was widely believed for some time that engineering companies were taking the opportunity given by the introduction of CNC machine tools to replace skilled craft workers by unskilled or semi-skilled operators on the shop-floor, and putting white-collared technicians in the programming office.
The advantages to management of so doing are claimed to be that wage costs are reduced, that the relatively powerful skilled craft union is replaced by the weaker general union, and, perhaps most importantly, management can exercise much tighter control over what happens on the shop-floor.
The tighter control is thought to come about because many of the decisions about how work should be done are now taken in the office rather than on the shop-floor.
An individual machinist might be tempted to choose feeds and speeds that were either faster or slower than those appropriate for the job in hand.
This might be to speed the job up to earn a larger bonus or to create some leisure time during the working shift, or to slow the job down so that an impression of busy-ness is created and he is not given further work.
There may also be short-cuts that the machinist could take in doing the work which may mean slight deviations from the specification in the drawing.
All these possibilities are reduced if the program is prepared off the shop-floor by those with no direct interest in shortening or lengthening the time taken to do the job for personal reasons.
David Noble (1977) takes this argument a stage further and argues not just that the use, but also the design, of the CNC machine tool has been influenced by these management control considerations.
In the early days of the development of control systems for machine tools, two rather different principles for control were being explored.
The first was the one we have just described, in which the path of the cutting tool is analysed by a technician from inspection of the engineering drawing, described in formal mathematical language, and recorded on punched tape.
The other system is known as record-playback and involves the skilled craft operator going through the physical motions of machining the first piece of the batch with the machine in record mode.
The control system of the machine tool records all the movements of the cutting tool and then, when put in playback mode, reproduces the actions previously performed by the skilled operator.
The latter type of control system thus retains the skill of the craftsman, does not interpose a technician into the work process, and thus does not fragment and de-skill the task.
Noble argues that the technical performance of the two systems in their development phase was similar but that the NC system was adopted in preference to the record-playback system because managements preferred the tighter control given to them by the NC system (Noble 1977).
An obvious criticism of the Braverman de-skilling thesis comes from the data showing a growing percentage of the workforce with formal qualifications.
Braverman himself presents figures (Braverman 1974, 379) showing the massive increase in the relative number of white-collar workers in the workforce.
In the United States they have moved, according to his figures, from 15 per cent of the workforce in 1900 to 35 per cent in 1970.
Even the number of craft workers has risen from 10.5 per cent to 13.9 per cent over the same period (1974, 427).
To these figures Braverman has two responses.
The one is that the use of white-collar staff rather than blue-collar workers does not imply that the former are doing ‘complete’ jobs over which they have full control.
We have already seen that white-collar staff were introduced into the engineering industry as programming adjuncts to CNC machine tools.
Their tasks are, in Braverman's terms, fragments of the previously integrated craft job of machining.
Many other white-collar jobs, claims Braverman, are similarly fragmented.
He describes as an example the large drafting and design rooms of engineering companies as having
been organized, in many instances, on the same principles as the factory or office production line, and’…staffed by serried ranks of detail workers whose pay scales, if they are better than those of factory operatives or clerical workers, are perhaps not so good as those of craftsmen, and who dispose of little more working independence and authority than the production worker.
(1974, 406.)
His second response to the apparent increase in the number of skilled and semi-skilled workers this century is to challenge the concept of skill implied in these data.
To some extent, the apparent general increase in skill levels of the working population is the result of bureaucratic reclassification of occupations — in the 1930s the US Bureau of Census decided that all machine workers should be termed operatives and deemed semi-skilled.
In addition, being termed ‘skilled’ often simply means that the worker is carrying out a job traditionally performed by someone who has undertaken an apprenticeship and is therefore a craft worker by training.
It is not necessarily an accurate description of the demands of the job, and the skill label may result more from the strength of the trade union or occupational group in maintaining that its members should continue to hold that position, than from a dispassionate assessment of the skill content of the job.
Jobs may thus, in many instances, have been de-skilled to the extent that management has tighter control through fragmenting the tasks and more tightly specifying what should be done, though not to the extent of eliminating craft workers from the job.
Implications for organisations
If there is an intrinsic conflict between capital and labour leading management to seek out means of exercising tight control over workers through fragmenting and de-skilling jobs, then this will have implications for the way in which whole enterprises are organised.
This in turn is likely to affect the development and use of new technology, not just at the work-place but throughout the enterprise as a whole.
Braverman's radical analysis of work organisation at the operational level has been extended by a number of writers concerned to explore its implications for these wider organisational issues.
They challenge two assumptions commonly made, either implicitly or explicitly, in conventional organisation theory:(a ) that an institution adopts that form of organisation which best fits its technology, environment, and other contingent factors, the ‘best fit’ being in terms of that organisation structure most suited to co-ordinating the tasks performed by members of that institution;(b ) that members of the institution have entered freely into a contract with that institution to provide a service to that institution in return for reward, and that they accept as legitimate both the institutional goals and the means of co-ordination used to achieve those goals (rational/legal authority).
The specific implications of these analyses for organisation theory have been developed by writers such as Benson (1977a, b), Goldman and Van Houten (1977), Heydebrand (1977), Clegg and Dunkerley (1980), and Clegg (1981), though in a rather general way.
The overall conclusion to these studies is that organisations under capitalism are likely to have a more elaborate division of labour, hence a more extensive organisational hierarchy, make greater use of rules and procedures, and generally have a more complex form of organisation than would be the case if there were not a fundamental conflict being worked out within the firm between capital and labour.
The argument is as follows, and emerges from the Braverman thesis.
Firstly, for the Tayloristic reasons discussed earlier in our exposition of Braverman, management is likely to fragment and de-skill tasks, splitting off conception from execution.
This implies a more elaborate division of labour: horizontally, in terms of there being larger numbers of people each doing different jobs at the work-place; and also vertically, as new jobs are created among white-collar workers to co-ordinate and control the various semi-skilled or unskilled workers — a task made necessary because of the deliberate fragmentation of that labour.
The operation of ‘scientific management’ through Taylorism itself creates a more complex organisational structure.
The operations of this scientific management structure itself need to be managed, and so a further management hierarchy has to be erected on top of the workshop-based organisation structure to manage the ‘scientific managers’.
Secondly, it has been suggested that a second organisational control device used by management in the face of potentially recalcitrant workers is the use of the internal labour market.
Kathleen Stone (1973) identifies this device in operation as early as the late nineteenth century, in the steel industry.
Up until that time much of the work in steel-making had been done by individuals or groups of steel-making master craftsmen on a jobbing or sub-contracting basis.
The owners of steelworks would contract with a master craftsman for a particular job to be done at a particular price.
That master craftsman would then himself employ helpers to assist him in the completion of that contract.
The position of the master craftsmen was maintained through a strong steelworkers' union.
The owners were not content for this much power and control to reside in the hands of the craftsmen, and Stone details the strategies they used to break the union and replace the jobbing/sub-contracting arrangement by an employment relationship.
Among these was the introduction of job ladders.
The work was fragmented and the various new jobs which were created in turn demanded different skill levels and responsibilities to be exercised.
The innovation was that management arranged these various jobs in such a way that an individual might expect to progress from one to another if their performance merited it.
Such progressions were termed ‘job ladders’, and economists describe the way in which people are selected and promoted up these ladders as internal labour markets.
The difference between the fragmentation described by Braverman and that analysed by Stone is that the former came about in order to de-skill and control through Tayloristic practices, while the latter came about partly in order to create a range of jobs which could be formed into a job ladder.
This is an additional reason for management to create an even more elaborate division of labour than might be warranted from mere technical considerations of the tasks to be done.
Both reasons for fragmenting work imply the creation of a managerial hierarchy to co-ordinate and control the various fragmented jobs.
Where job ladders are created, further managerial work is involved in managing the operation of the internal labour market.
Thirdly, it is suggested that other organisational devices, which we discuss in more detail in Chapter 6, are also used by management in order to extend their control over labour.
For example, it has for a long time been generally accepted by students of organisation that any organisation is likely to need a number of rules and procedures to guide the behaviour of organisational members.
There has been much debate about how much such rules and procedures should be used: too much, and the organisation becomes immobilised in bureaucratic red tape; too little, and the organisation descends into anarchic chaos.
The conventional wisdom has been that the nature of the job being done by the organisation determines the requisite amount of rules and procedures.
If tasks are usually routine and predictable, then management can co-ordinate matters most efficiently by setting up rules and procedures to instruct people what to do.
If the tasks to be done are more complex, and surrounded by a higher degree of uncertainty, then co-ordination may be done more efficiently through instructions and information passed down the managerial hierarchy.
There are implications from this analysis for the application of information technology within organisations which will be explored in Chapter 6.
The point of introducing these ideas here is to draw attention to the radical analysis which suggests that management may use rules and procedures, and other more complex organisational arrangements such as product groups or even matrix organisational structures, not just because they may be a more efficient means of co-ordination but because they are necessary if capital is to control recalcitrant labour.
They may, for example, be an adjunct to the use of Taylorism, where fragmented work leads t o the use of particular types of organisation structure, whereas co-ordination of the same overall task, if it were carried out by craft workers on an integrated basis, might be carried out by means of a much simpler organisation structure.
Fourthly, the problem is not just a mechanical one of co-ordinating and controlling the extra flows of information required when jobs are fragmented.
If organisations operated through the exercise of what Alan Fox has termed ‘high trust’ relationships between both managers and operators, and among operators themselves, then much of the necessary co-ordination and flow of information could be handled informally and on the basis of good will (Fox 1974).
It is the argument of Braverman and some other radicals (though not of most of Braverman's critics, as we shall see in the next chapter) that within capitalism the inherently antagonistic relationship between capital and labour inevitably generates a ‘low trust’ relationship.
The inability to operate with high levels of trust itself implies the use of more complex formal organisational arrangements as a replacement for the more informal co-ordination mechanisms which are possible when there is a higher level of good will.
We conclude, therefore, that the radical perspective on the labour process offers a far-reaching critique of conventional organisation theory.
As we intend to use this theory in Chapter 7 to explore the implications of new technology for the shape of organisations, it is important to develop our understanding of organisational processes in the light of this radical attack.
We attempt to do this in the next chapter, but before embarking on this task we must note some of the criticisms which have been made about the Braverman thesis and its implications.
The response to Braverman
Though the majority of those reviewing Braverman's work took a positive view of his thesis, there have been a significant number of detailed criticisms and revisions to his argument.
In the remainder of this chapter we deal with five of those that have been put forward by those who give general assent to his radical perspective.
These are: that Braverman ignores worker resistance; that management may be ignorant of the most effective ways of meeting worker recalcitrance; that there are more ways of killing a cat than skinning it (in other words, that there are mechanisms other than fragmentation and de-skilling which management can use to control recalcitrant labour); that technological and market opportunities vary across firms and that these influence the outcome of the struggle between capital and labour over the form of work organisation which is adopted; and that the tight control of labour and the need to maximise output from individual workers may not be management's most dominant concern in every case.
Additional criticisms, some from outside the radical perspective, have been made, but we deal with these in the next chapter where we put forward an alternative conceptual framework within which to consider the issues.
In the meantime, let us look at the above five sets of objections in more detail.
As Stephen Wood points out in his Introduction to his edited book discussing the de-skilling thesis (Wood 1982, 15), Braverman appears to assume ‘that prior to Taylorism control was not in the hands of management, but was rather a kind of management by neglect (the laissez-faire method, as Taylor called it), in which workers knew more than managers’.
In fact we now know that in many instances, for example in the steel-making industry that Kathleen Stone describes, control was firmly in the hands of the craftsmen themselves.
We should thus expect resistance from workers to attempts by management to wrest control from them, and the historical evidence for this is now forthcoming.
An implication of this is that the resulting forms of work organisation, and hence the type of technology developed, reflects the compromises management have had to negotiate with workers.
Edwards (1979, 16), for example, characterises the situation as one where for most of the twentieth century management have met ‘chronic resistance to their effort to compel production’ and consequently ‘have attempted to organize production in such a way as to minimise opportunities for resistance and even to alter workers’perceptions of the desirability of opposition’.
In the face of such opposition, those managements with the wit to explore alternative strategies have adopted a range of techniques.
In his study of labour relations in the motor industry in Coventry in the 1960s, Andy Friedman identified two dominant management control strategies.
In small firms doing sub-contract work for the large car assembly plants, where the level of unionisation was weak, and management hired and fired labour in line with demand as it rose and fell, the form of work organisation approximated more closely to that which Braverman describes.
Friedman termed this the ‘direct control’ strategy.
Within the large car plants themselves, where the unions were strong and the companies were able to offer a relatively stable employment policy by shifting the troughs and peaks in the work-load out to sub-contractors, management had adopted what Friedman termed the ‘responsible autonomy’ strategy.
This strategy
attempts to harness the adaptability of labour power by giving workers leeway and encouraging them to adapt to changing situations in a manner beneficial to the firm.
To do this top managers give workers status, authority and responsibility.
Top managers try to win their loyalty, and co-opt their organizations to the firm's ideals…ideologically.
(Friedman 1977, 78.)
Richard Edwards draws a more complex picture.
He argues that management has developed a range of responses and has attempted to maintain control through the use of industrial relations procedures, through bureaucratic rules which channel conflict into manageable and acceptable ways, and especially through the use of internal labour markets and dual labour markets which divide and segment the working class.
Even Edwards, according to Wood, still presents management ‘as omniscient, conspiratorial and able, at least for a certain period of time, to get its own way — that is, to solve successfully its problem of control’(Wood 1982, 16).
A more satisfactory perspective, Wood argues, is to view the resulting production system as the product of a struggle between contending groups, a struggle which, moreover, is conditioned by the particular product and labour markets, technology, and trade unions which are surrounding and are a part of the conflict.
Craig Littler and Graeme Salaman (1983) go further.
They suggest that in many circumstances, and particularly more recently, the central problems facing management are not so much to do with control over labour but are much more to do with such matters as obtaining orders for products, getting the design right, innovating, and handling their relations with the capital market.
Profits for the individual firm, they argue, often depend far more on these factors than on the surplus value to be exploited from their own workers.
They will thus not bother to pursue de-skilling strategies with great vigour as the return on vigorous managerial activity is greater in other areas of operation.
The conclusion we reach, which we share with Wood, is that ‘the quest for general trends, such as progressive deskilling of the work force, or general conclusions about the impact of new technologies are likely to be both theoretically and practically in vain’ and that ‘to incorporate worker resistance, labour and product markets and extra-economic factors involves more than simply extending one's analysis; it amounts to a theoretical reconsideration’(Wood 1982, 18, 22).
In the next chapter we review a number of recent empirical studies of the introduction of new technology and associated changes in work organisation, and these substantiate our conclusion that there is no general trend, either toward or away from de-skilling.
The introduction of new technology creates the opportunity for a wide range of choices to be made about how work should be organised.
The remainder of this book is devoted to putting forward further theoretical considerations and to suggesting ways in which analysis can be carried forward about some of these opportunities and effects of new technology at work.
What these effects eventually turn out to be will, of course, depend on the strategies which the various parties choose to pursue, the prevailing capital, product, and labour market circumstances, and the technological choices which the scientists and engineers make available.
New Technology, Work Organisation, and De-skilling: The Evidence
Having reviewed the theory and some descriptions of the impact of technical change in previous decades and centuries, we now turn to the results of current research into the impact of microelectronics-based technology on the work that people are doing today.
Most of this chapter is devoted to a description of five sets of case studies of the new technology, showing the wide variety of different impacts it can make on the nature of work.
Robots in West Germany
The first of the case studies we describe is of the use of robots in a West German factory and gives strong support to the de-skilling hypothesis described in the previous chapter.
The researcher conducting this case (Wobbe-Ohlenburg 1982) comments that much of the publicity about using robots in factories emphasises the way in which they can make life more pleasant for humans by taking over the dirty, dangerous, or monotonously repetitive jobs.
Viewed in this light, robots might well be seen favourably by workers and their trade unions, and thus welcomed onto the shop floor.
However, when the researchers reached the shop floor they discovered that robots were far too expensive for management to waste them on unskilled jobs.
Humans were still doing these jobs: the robots had taken over the skilled elements of the task.
A typical case was that of an arc welding operation.
The complete task involved lifting a number of panels from their storage racks, loading them on to a jig, clamping them into position, arc welding a seam to join them, and then transferring the welded sub-assembly from the jig to another storage rack so that it could be transported to the next production stage.
Rather than having the unskilled parts of the operation — the lifting and placing — performed by the robot, and the skilled part — the welding — performed by the welder, the opposite solution was adopted.
The robot did the arc welding, serviced by a human who lifted and carried for ‘him’.
In the pre-robotised days the job had a number of characteristics which job design experts would have recognised as leading to a reasonably high level of job satisfaction.
It involved a mixture of tasks and required a reasonable level of skill.
It was paced by the worker, and the person occupying that job belonged to a skilled occupational group strongly represented by a craft union.
After robotisation the job became less skilled, was machine paced in that the cycle time was dictated by the speed at which the robot did the welding, and the human part of the job was filled by a semi-skilled operator belonging to a general trades union.
This union had to represent a wide range of occupations and was therefore less able to protect that particular worker's specific set of interests.
This particular type of robot application was not untypical, the researchers found.
The researchers concluded that the decision to use robots in this way was because management was much more concerned with cost and product quality than with the quality of the working life of the welder.
Not only were robots, at the time of the study, uneconomic to use on routine unskilled work, but they were more reliable than humans in performing skilled tasks.
Therefore, not only were the more skilled elements of the tasks robotised first to save the wages of the more highly paid skilled labour, but by using robots management could be more certain that a critical weld on a critical component was being done to specification.
Robots, although they develop faults, do not usually miss out welds, or weld inaccurately, on a random basis, and it is possible to have them wired up so that when they do malfunction supervision can be immediately informed.
Moreover, it is also possible that management took the view that unskilled workers could be controlled more easily than skilled workers because they had less powerful union backing, and that they could be replaced more easily because there was a bigger pool of labour to draw from.
Eliminating skilled labour would thus give more power to management.
It is not surprising, perhaps, that management gave prime concern to the two factors of cost and product quality over that of work-life quality.
The important point to emphasise here is that, because of management's concerns with cost and quality, the application of robotics technology did not lead, as much publicity would suggest, to an improvement in work-life quality.
In fact it led to the opposite.
What this case also illustrates is that there are different possibilities in using the new technology and there may be a conflict of interests between workers and management in the way it is used.
There may therefore be bargaining about how the technology is used, and the outcome will depend to some extent on the bargaining strengths and skills of workers and their union representatives.
Biscuit making in Scotland
The second case study is reported by two Scottish researchers, David Boddy and David Buchanan of the University of Glasgow (Buchanan and Boddy 1983).
This provides less support for a simple de-skilling hypothesis, revealing more of the complexity and variety of outcomes associated with new technology.
Within a book detailing several fascinating cases of the implementation of new technology and its organisational impact, they detail two applications of computerised equipment controls to a biscuit making line in a United Biscuits factory in the UK.
One application was to the biscuit dough mixing process, the other to the weighing of packed biscuits.
Of particular interest is that these two applications, within the same factory and installed by the same management team, had radically different impacts on the experience of work of the operators.
This was not because of any difference in management intentions.
Indeed, there seems to have been no thought given at the design stage to the impact of the technology on people's work experience.
The sharp difference in impact on work experience between the two applications was an entirely fortuitous outcome.
The application with the particularly detrimental effect on operators' jobs was the biscuit dough mixing automation.
This automation took place in two stages, the first occurring in 1971 and the second, the focus of Buchanan and Boddy's study, ten years later.
It is a little difficult to disentangle from Buchanan and Boddy's description the particular effects at each stage of the automation, but the differences between the pre-1971 and post-1981 situation are clear.
Prior to 1971 the mixing was carried out under manual control by time-served master bakers controlling a team of operators.
Mixing was done in open vats like large domestic food mixers.
The doughmen could tell by the feel of the dough, and by the sound that it made during mixing, if it was too dry or too wet, and add small amounts of required ingredients to compensate.
If equipment failed then the nature of the fault was usually clear to the master bakers.
After 1981 the operation was controlled automatically and monitored by two semi-skilled mixer operators.
The computer stored biscuit recipes on punched paper tapes which, when fed into the computer, put the correct amounts of ingredients into the appropriate mixing machines.
The computer controlled not only the mix recipe but also the time, speed, temperature, and timing of all the mixing operations and indicated when the operator should add the various ‘sundry’ ingredients (those that had to be added in small quantities).
All mixing now took place in fully enclosed machines, and faults in the process were flashed onto a ‘mimic board’ by the computer.
The automation thus de-skilled the job both in terms of how the job was classified and in terms of how much knowledge was required to do it.
Semi-skilled operators were now used instead of master bakers and the computer took much of the knowledge element out of the job.
Also, the way in which the machinery was designed (by totally enclosing the mixing vessels) meant that operators lost much useful feedback about the state of the process.
Buchanan and Boddy conclude that:
The job of the mixer operator thus had the following characteristics:
1
the operators had no need of traditional baking skills and had an incomplete understanding of the production process and equipment;
2
the rest of the production process was dependent upon this stage, but the operators got only intermittent feedback on the performance of the mixing process and were unable to effect control over it;
3
the operators appeared to have difficulty visualizing the consequences of their action or inaction on later production stages;
4
the operators could not trace and diagnose equipment faults, skilled technicians were necessary, and repairs took longer;
5
it was repetitive and boring and the operators became apathetic and careless;
6
the operators did not develop knowledge or skills that would make them promotable.
(Buchanan and Boddy 1983, 189.)
Emphasising the judgement that the job was considerably worse after automation are quotes from both management and operators.
From management:
There was more variation in the things he did.
Now they seem to lose all interest.
There are three or four operators who've been here longer than the computer, and I can see they've really switched off.
I've seen it happen to new people coming in as well.
It destroys the human contact.
(1983, 187.)
And from an operator:
It's much less interesting, more routine, very little scope for human error now.
Initially, it's more skilled, till you get to know the set up, then there's a fair amount of boredom.
Except when something goes wrong.
(1983, 189.)
The other new technology application was to the weighing of packed biscuits.
The weight of packets of biscuits coming off the line was a matter of some importance to the company.
European Economic Community legislation allowed variation around the nominal weight (that printed on each packet) so long as the average for a particular production period equalled the nominal weight.
There was thus a legal obligation to ensure the packets did not fall below the required weight, but on the other hand the company did not want to give free biscuits to customers by making the packets heavier than necessary.
Prior to the installation of the new technology the biscuits, after being wrapped, went on to a ‘checkweighing’ device.
The biscuit packets travelled on a conveyor over this machine, and if a packet did not fall within pre-set weight limits it was pushed off the conveyor, later to be opened and good biscuits fed back into the line.
Because the checkweighing machine captured no information on packet weights someone from quality control took packets from the line at random and calculated their average weight.
If weights were seriously adrift, plant management were informed so that corrective action could be taken.
Such corrective action could take place at two points in the process.
At the baking stage the ovensman could adjust the temperatures in the zones of the oven to correct thickness, colour, and the moisture content of the biscuit, the first and last of these factors affecting the weight of the packet of biscuits.
Adjustments could also be made at the wrapping stage.
The wrapping machine was pre-set to wrap a given number of biscuits.
If the biscuits coming through were each rather heavy then the machine could be adjusted to wrap fewer biscuits per pack.
With the conventional weighing system it took some time for the information about packet weights to get to the point where decisions could be made to adjust either the oven or the wrapping machine.
The technological change made was to take a commercially available checkweigher and replace the standard electronics with a microprocessor controller.
Packets leaving the wrapping machine still passed over the checkweigher as before but now, instead of merely passing or rejecting each pack, the computer captured the data it measured and performed various analyses including the average weight and standard deviation for each hour.
This information could then be used by those controlling the production process to take appropriate corrective action.
The wrapper could be quickly adjusted to wrap more, or fewer, biscuits, and the ovensman had a video display unit (VDU) next to his control panel which gave a summary of the information from the checkweigher, updated every two minutes.
This enabled him to adjust his controls immediately the information had been captured.
As Buchanan and Boddy conclude:
The [microprocessor-based checkweighing]package only captured, processed and distributed information about packet weights.
It gave operators and management timely information that they used to alter the running characteristics of the line and make it more cost effective.
The package itself did not control the line, nor did it tell operators and management what action to take when things went wrong.
Operators and management still had to use their understanding of the process to control it.
(1983, 181.)
The ovensman felt that the new package had increased the interest and challenge in the job.
For the weighing machine operators the new technology had increased communication with the ovensman, and led to smoother production and less pressure from management.
Though there were some criticisms of the new technology, the general consensus was that it had improved the quality of the jobs people did.
Manufacturing in the Midlands
The third set of case studies we discuss here was carried out by Barry Wilkinson of the Technology Policy Unit at the University of Aston in Birmingham.
Four firms were studied: an electroplating plant; a rubber-extruding factory; a firm making optical lenses for spectacles; and a machine-tool maker.
Wilkinson takes issue with the view that new technology makes an impact on the work that people do.
He insists, rightly, that the way in which technology is used is the result of a number of factors, not least of which is the political process between management and workers.
The results he reports shows very wide variation in the way work was organised after new technology had been introduced on the shop-floor.
At one extreme was an electroplating plant where management took the view that operators were unintelligent and unreliable.
When the process was automated, management took care to place the controls on the other side of a brick wall from the process machinery, in a locked outhouse.
The keys for this were held by only three people — the works manager, the general manager, and the chief maintenance engineer.
At the other extreme, a machine tool company was considering the purchase of a (CNC) machine tool which would have the facility for manual data input (MDI).
With MDI the skilled craftsman operating this machine would be able to write his own program to control the machine and enter it directly into the machine's computer.
Both these examples illustrate particular choices made by management about the organisation of work after the introduction of new technology.
Wilkinson's third case, a rubber-moulding company, exemplifies his contention about the political nature of the process of establishing new patterns of work organisation.
In this factory, management had bought within the space of two years two new, more automated, sets of machinery.
In both cases the machinery was introduced straight from the supplier to the shop-floor.
This meant that all the necessary development and adjustments for full-scale production had to be carried out with the full involvement of the production workers.
Wilkinson records that:
In the manufacturing manager's own words: ‘Development in the production environment meant that the operator would productionise machinery, and rather than management giving production parameters to the operators, the operators would to some extent give them to management.
(1983, 50.)
Advocates of participative approaches to the introduction of new technology would applaud the involvement of production workers in ‘productionising’ the machinery, arguing that such involvement would mean that the particular knowledge of the workers, gained from their on-the-job experience, could be made good use of, and also that such involvement usually leads to greater commitment to the change.
However, in this case management saw such involvement as a disadvantage.
They would have preferred process control and development staff to have established the new processes, and would have preferred to recruit ‘green labour’ to the new machines so that‘bad habits’would not have been carried over from the old production process.
Management claimed that it was ‘difficult to convince the men that the new processes were far more ‘delicate’, and mistakes far more costly.
Bad habits on the old presses could be tolerated, but with the new ones ‘the whole process has to be just right’.
(Wilkinson 1983, 112.)
However, the major difficulty for management was that of re-establishing piece-work rates on the new machinery.
Because the operators had been so heavily involved in the ‘productionising’ of the new technology and were thus extremely familiar with the technical possibilities of the machinery, they were in a strong position to negotiate higher rates than the time-study person would normally allow.
For both these reasons, management in this company decided that in future productionisation would be carried out away from the shop-floor.
They built a separate development area, and Wilkinson reports that at the time he was writing his book three major new projects were being developed within it, but as none had reached completion there is no data about the effects of this new pattern of introducing new technology in that company.
Wilkinson's fourth case was that of an optical company, making spectacle lenses.
In this company, although management had an enlightened attitude to issues of work organisation, the pattern of work resulting from the introduction of new technology was particularly de-skilling.
Management's practice was to update machinery continually and to buy ‘the best and the most modern’(Wilkinson 1983, 43).
Decisions about the design of such machinery were made by the suppliers; there seemed little variation in the machines on offer in their implications for de-skilling; and the result was a gradual process of de-skilling of most of the production workers.
Management appeared to regret this, to some extent at least because they themselves were master craftsmen and committed to the notion of craft skill.
The production manager, for example, complained that,’…there's no training needed to operate this, so it's de-skilling the job and I don't like that, I like to train somebody…
’(Wilkinson 1983, 45).
Moreover, management did not take the opportunities presented by the new machinery to tighten control over production.
They could, for example, have easily concentrated skills into the hands of a very small elite of technicians, and transformed the operators into unskilled, cheaper, and replaceable labour, but they did not.
As compared with the way in which computing is usually taken out of the hands of machinists when CNC machine tools are introduced, consideration was given in the optical company to the idea of persuading the operators who cut the surfaces of the lenses to do some of their own computing, and even to the idea of installing computing facilities in the surfacing room itself.
Also, the speed of the production process could have been more tightly controlled.
The machines could have been used to pace the workers, or management could have monitored the utilisation rate of the various machines.
They did not even consider doing this.
Instead, management's response to the de-skilling effects of the new technology was to introduce a system of job rotation.
Within each section of the company workers were now rotated from job to job automatically, regularly, and compulsorily, and this system covered a range of levels, not just the most de-skilled of the jobs.
The system was introduced by the general manager who had arrived in the company only three or four years previously, bringing with him a strong philosophy of participation and involvement.
Wilkinson points out that not only did the system of job rotation create immediate psychological advantages (’…the staff like it, they like the change…’ was one comment), but there were also direct economic advantages for management.
Absences due to sickness and holidays could easily be covered because most people now knew most jobs and could easily be switched around.
Also, such a multi-skilled workforce meant, claimed Wilkinson, that a shiftwork system could be used with a minimum of supervision.
The firm was considering a two-shift system and the general manager considered that the introduction of job rotation was vital preparation for this.
One of Wilkinson's conclusions from his study was that there is enormous variation in the forms of work organisation possible with new technology.
Though firms go to considerable lengths in making calculations to justify the efficiency gains in introducing new technology, their post hoc evaluations are usually extremely vague.
They therefore cannot know the relative efficiency of different forms of work organisation, and these may in fact not have very much influence on levels of efficiency.
Therefore there is considerable room for choice in the form of work organisation to be adopted, and the one that suits management's often unexamined assumptions about the best way does not have to be chosen.
Wilkinson illustrates his conclusion by suggesting that a comparison of the optical company and the plating company displays the folly of the notion that de-skilling and increased management control over production processes necessarily leads to increases in efficiency.
He argues that in the case of the optical company the return of control to the workers ensured a more effective productive unit.
While his conclusions may be correct — and we discuss this at greater length in the next chapter — his evidence, unfortunately, does not go far enough to give weight to them.
We do not have any data about the performance or the market position of the two firms.
If, as is possible, the optical company was in a monopolistic or oligopolistic position, they could afford to adopt work practices which were actually rather costly even though they gave higher levels of satisfaction to both workers and management.
This does not mean that better forms of work organisation should not be introduced simply because they are more expensive.
That would be akin to justifying slavery on the grounds of economic efficiency.
What is in question is the comfortable argument that socially acceptable forms of work organisation always just happen to be those that are the most efficient.
It is more likely that in many situations there is a conflict of interest between capital and labour over this issue and thus a need to negotiate the outcome.
CNC machine tool use in Britain and West Germany
The first case we reported was from West Germany, and the next two from the UK.
We turn now to a series of cross-national comparative studies carried out with great care and detail by researchers from the Henley Management College in Britain, the International Institute of Management in Berlin, and the Laboratory for the Sociology of Work, Aix-en-Provence, comparing forms of work organisation in British, West German, and French factories.
In the case of Britain and West Germany the study was extended to include the relationship between new technology and work organisation.
The Anglo-French-German study was not principally about new technology, but its findings are of great relevance to the subsequent Anglo-German study specifically concerned with work organisation and CNC technology in manufacturing industry.
The former study compared carefully matched samples of British, French, and German factories, and having held as constant as possible factors such as size of enterprise, technology, and the firm's environment, discovered substantial differences in the way work was organised in the three countries, concluding that these could best be accounted for by features of each nation's culture, and in particular its educational and occupational structures.
Caricaturing their findings somewhat, they discovered that West German firms had flatter, more widely based pyramids of management hierarchy than French firms, and that British firms tended to have forms of work organisation that were not pyramidal because there was extensive use of line and staff relationships.
They attributed these differences primarily to the fact that in West Germany there was an extensive system of vocational training, further in-service training, awarding of qualifications, and positioning in the hierarchy on the basis of such qualifications.
This meant that management were able to push decision making well down the hierarchy, giving those actually operating the CNC machines much autonomy, and expecting a high level of integration of the various functions such as quality control, work planning, programming of the machine, and machine setting to take place via those operatives actually on the shop floor.
In France, by contrast, there was a polarisation of skills, characterised by a high level of expertise among the managerial cadres and technicians, and a very low proportion of skilled craftspeople among the shop-floor workers.
This led, they argue, to a situation where decisions were made by the elite at the top of the management hierarchy and then fed down the line of command.
Workers under this arrangement required much communication with management and close supervision, and hence rather narrow spans of control and a long managerial hierarchy.
The British case represents the kind of compromise commentators on our national characteristics have come to expect.
British factories contained an elaborate mix of skills and occupations.
There was in the UK only a moderate amount of vocational training and relatively few people with formal technical qualifications.
In particular, there are few highly qualified technical managers.
The result was that there was not the level of ability on the shop floor to sustain the German system of decentralisation and shop-floor level integration of work.
Neither was there the level of ability among an elite of managers for decision making to take place at that level in the organisation and then to be passed down by functionaries, as in the French system.
What happened was that the various decisions were taken by technicians and others in staff positions and fed into the line management structure.
We thus had what Sorge et al.termed a polarised and differentiated system (1983, 162) with the shop-floor and direct production functions having to relate to management supervision, maintenance, preparatory and planning functions, and technical design and development, who each gave instructions and advice from their staff positions.
The Anglo-German study of microelectronics in manufacturing (Sorge et al.1983) was a study of the use of CNC machine tools in the engineering industries of the two countries, and it showed the extreme flexibility of CNC technology.
‘There is’, Sorge et al.concluded, ‘no effect of CNC use as such’(1983, 147).
Instead, they suggested five different factors influencing the relationship between CNC use and work organisation.
These were:
1.
Company or plant size:
2.
Batch size, or time needed to machine a batch:
3.
Type of cutting and machinery:
4.
National institutions and habits of technical work, management, and training:
5.
Socio-economic conditions of the present situation, regarding shortage of natural resources, limitation of mass markets, and slow growth.
(Sorge et al.1983, 148.)
The relationship they found between work organisation and plant size was in line with that predicted by organisational contingency theory, namely that the small plants had very unbureaucratic, simple forms of organisation.
There was no systematic apprenticeship training in the plants, but a lot of pragmatic and flexible learning in how best to use CNC.
Larger companies had more systematic procedures and a greater division of labour.
This meant that programming was done away from the workshop, in specialised departments.
It was not the case, though, that large firms had the most sophisticated technology, nor that high technology itself signified greater bureaucratisation.
The reverse was found to be the case in some instances, with some larger companies being slowed down in their introduction of new technology because of bureaucratic organisations and industrial relations arrangements.
Processing large batches meant that firms tended to split programming from machine operating, but not necessarily to create separate departments for programming.
The explanation given for this splitting of conception from execution with large batch sizes was that ‘the smaller the batch size is, the greater is the need for frequent conversion of machines to new tools, fixtures and parts programmes, and the less is machine-setting expertise differentiated from operating’(Sorge et al.1983, 150).
This as it stands is not an adequate explanation unless the result of the differentiation is that less skilled labour can now be used for machine operating.
Then the total process would become cheaper and one can see the advantages to management in fragmenting the task.
It would presumably not be worth splitting the task into two for small batches because the communication costs between programmer and operator, with the frequent interaction needed given the small batch size, would outweigh the savings made in wage costs from hiring someone semi-skilled to do the machining.
The relations described above between batch size, company size, and work organisation were, however, modified by the type of cutting process and machinery used in fairly obvious ways.
Thus the more time it took to program a job, the more likely that programming and operating were differentiated.
This is because, at the time this study was done, a machine could not be programmed for the next job while it was engaged in cutting.
Thus to combine programming and operating would, it was believed, reduce machine utilisation.
It did not, however, lead to a polarisation of skills in every case.
With complex machinery like machining centres, where something like sixty tools may be used to machine a workpiece, and where the piece and the machining head can be rotated in a number of ways, separate programming was done — often by ex-machinists — and the machine would be operated by a skilled operator.
Polarisation tended to occur more on simpler machines, which could be programmed off the shop floor and operated by those with less skill than would have been required for conventional machines doing work of that complexity.
With advances in electronic control and programming, and also possibly in operator programming skill, it is likely that in future it will be feasible for many operators to program the next job on the machine while it is still cutting the present piece.
Experimental machines with this capability, and which are deliberately designed for operator programming, are already being developed by a group under the direction of Professor Howard Rosenbrock at the University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology.
The differences between countries, already described in the earlier Anglo-French-German study, were left intact by the introduction of new technology.
The German companies distinguished less than the British ones between careers and departments for production management and production engineering, work planning and work execution functions.
This meant that in the German companies programming was becoming a nucleus of integration, bringing together operators, planners, production engineers and managers, charge-hands, and foremen, while in Britain that work was more concentrated on planners and production engineers.
Moreover, in Britain such work was distinctive of white collar status, programming being the domain of planners and production engineers, while in Germany blue collar craft workers were used and there were instances of rotation between programming in the office and working on the shop floor.
Finally, Sorge and his colleagues observed that the relationship between this new technology and work organisation was influenced by the prevailing socio-economic conditions.
In particular, they felt that enterprises in both Britain and Germany were having to cater for increasingly small market niches rather than for homogeneous mass markets.
This was coupled with a move towards the manufacture of increasingly complex parts, requiring geometrically more demanding cuts and an increase in the number of cuts of different types to be performed on any one piece.
In addition, there are pressures on companies to keep a check on the growth of fixed working capital in stocks and intermediate stores (work-in-progress).
All these consideration imply smaller batch sizes and more frequent conversions from a small batch of one complex product to a small batch of another.
This increased variability is not one which can be handled bureaucratically, claim Sorge et al., and they have the weight of organisation theory on their side: it implies flexibility, autonomy, and high skill at the operator level.
Therefore, as they observed, companies were increasingly emphasising the conservation or increase of shop-floor skills, and recognising the merits of an approach which relied strongly on craft-worker skills.
This, they noted, was particularly so in the German companies which would presumably have a comparative advantage over British firms in this respect anyway.
The Scandinavian experiments
Perhaps the most well-known experiment in work organisation is the Volvo car assembly plant at Kalmar in Sweden where the company has made some attempt to break away from the traditional mass-production assembly line.
Much has been written about this plant, but many misconceptions remain, partly because a great deal of what has been written is itself misleading.
One of the major misconceptions concerns the scale of the enterprise.
Contrary to one popular view, it is not the case that at the Kalmar plant each group of workers builds up a complete car from a box of component parts.
In fact the Kalmar plant deals with only one stage of the production process, that of final assembly of the various components into the painted body.
Even this part of the production process is itself broken down into many different stages at Kalmar.
Moreover, Kalmar contains but a small part of the total final assembly facilities within the Volvo enterprise.
This is not to deny that Volvo has made a significant innovation in work organisation and production technology, but it is one evolutionary step and not a revolution.
Kalmar is a smallish (50,000 population) town in a largely rural area of Sweden on the east coast of the country about 300 km. from the main Volvo production facilities in the large industrial town of Gothenburg on the west coast.
The decision to locate an assembly plant at Kalmar was made in 1971 and seems to have been based on the need to expand the production facilities.
It is, however, also the case that at that time the company was facing very substantial difficulties in recruiting labour.
The Swedish economy was booming, there was very little unemployment, and routine assembly work was proving very unattractive to indigenous Swedish workers.
At that time about 40 per cent of production workers in assembly were non-Swedish, a situation the company found unattractive because of the costs of recruitment, training, and supervision.
To move to a rural area and to move away in some measure from traditional routine assembly techniques was seen as a partial answer to these problems.
The plant at Kalmar began production in 1974 with a planned capacity of 60,000 cars per year with two-shift working.
In fact there has never been two-shift working at Kalmar and, because of the downturn in the car market after the 1973 oil price rise, production has rarely reached 30,000 per year at that plant.
In 1980, for example, Kalmar assembled 22,800 cars.
This is only 8 per cent of total Volvo car production worldwide, and five times more cars are still assembled on traditional lines at Gothenburg.
Nevertheless, Kalmar is important as an example of what can be done by changing the technology of traditional assembly work.
Final assembly is the stage in the car production process when the welded steel car body, having already been painted, is brought together with the engine and transmission, and all the components and trim are attached to it to make up the completed car.
In a traditional plant the engine, transmission, and axles are placed onto ‘the track’— a chain-driven series of platforms which move continuously at a fixed pace while the operators work on the cars — and the painted body is lowered onto them.
As the car then goes down the line, past various work stations, all the components are fitted to the car in turn.
It will typically take several hours for the car to go down the line, hundreds of workers will be directly involved in fitting the various bits and pieces, and each will have a cycle time of perhaps 60 seconds to do their allotted task.
For the Kalmar project the company set itself the objective:
to build a plant which, without reducing efficiency, enables the employees to:
work in groups
exchange jobs through rotation
vary their working rate during the day
feel identification with the product
feel responsibility for quality
influence their working environment
communicate freely.
(Company Factsheet 1980.)
Two of the major innovations at Kalmar were the architecture of the plant and the production technology.
The plant comprises a series of four interlocking six-sided buildings designed to provide each work group with its own entrance, changing room, coffee room, and assembly area in an attempt to create a series of small workshops for each of the work groups and ‘to promote team spirit’(Company brochure).
The major production innovation at Kalmar has been to do away with the track.
Instead, the bodies are loaded onto individual carriers, known as automated guided vehicles (AGVs), which travel around the assembly plant under their own power and are individually guided by signals sent out through wires in the floor from a bank of central computers.
The carriers can also be controlled manually.
Carriers of this type are used in the building of the FIAT Strada/Ritmo cars and will be familiar to those who watch British television commercials.
These are derivatives from the AGVs developed for the Kalmar plant.
The assembly task is broken up into segments, each being performed by a group of operatives in one bay of the plant, and taking about 20 minutes.
Within each segment it was originally planned that work could be organised in either of two ways.
It was always intended that the more usual of the two would be what Volvo term ‘straight-line assembly’, where work in one team area is divided among four or five stations, placed one after the other in the direction of production flow.
The workers operate in pairs, following a car from station to station and carrying out the entire work assignment belonging to their team.
When the pair finish one car they go back to the beginning of their segment and start on another.
The other assembly approach which was originally planned for but has since been abandoned (Volvo 10 Years On ) was ‘dock assembly’, where the carrier would move sideways into a dock in an assembly area.
There, the team's entire assembly assignment would be carried out on the stationary vehicle.
Each dock was manned by two or three people, who could swap assignments between themselves.
The job cycle is thus about 20 minutes for any group of operators in either straight-line or dock assembly.
The flexibility introduced into the system by the carriers means that each group is able to operate with a degree of autonomy.
Although the carriers are normally fully under the control of the computer, there is the facility for the work group to give commands to the computer from one of 40 VDUs scattered throughout the plant.
They thus have some control over the speed with which the AGV moves through their section, and for those sections where the carrier does not move for the full 20 minutes there is the opportunity to pace their work over that span.
Each group is responsible for its own quality control, is treated by management as a team, and there are opportunities for job rotation throughout the team, though the rotated jobs exclude supervision and materials handling.
However, trade unionists and some managers indicate that the system is limited in its flexibility.
Partly this is because management has placed limitations on who can operate the VDUs, and partly the layout of the plant is such that there is only space for four cars between each work station.
This does not provide a big enough buffer stock to allow each group to vary its speed of working through the day to a significant enough degree.
It is difficult to evaluate these innovations.
To the casual observer the layout of the plant and the flexibility introduced by the carriers are striking improvements over the traditional assembly plant with the track making its inexorable progress past every fixed work station, and Volvo claim that the increased cost of building the plant in this way is covered by improvements in quality and productivity.
However, although absenteeism and turnover are lower, claim the company, than the average for Swedish industry as a whole, it must be borne in mind that the plant is in an area with a low level of industrialisation.
There has, moreover, been a continuously rising trend of absenteeism since the plant opened.
Also, no hard data appear to be available giving a detailed breakdown of costs and savings associated with this new form of technology and work organisation, and it appears that, although there is spare capacity at Kalmar in the form of a second, as yet unworked, shift, when the new 760 model car was introduced in 1982 a new assembly line using conventional technology was set up for it at Gothenburg.
A possible conclusion to be drawn from this is that management can provide alternative more attractive forms of work organisation but these may be at higher cost.
Management may be prepared to pay this higher cost when labour is scarce and has to be attracted from alternative employment, or when a union is making strong demands for a higher quality of working life.
A second, less publicised but in many ways more interesting and far-reaching, experiment in new forms of work organisation is that which has been conducted in the other Swedish car company, SAAB, at Trollhatten.
The location of the innovation there is not in final assembly but in the body shop where the various panels of pressed steel are welded together to form the body.
SAAB were faced with the same difficulties as Volvo in recruiting staff in the 1970s, and they too have moved to a system of group working with job rotation in many sections of the plant.
They have also developed the use of ‘self inspection’— each group responsible for inspecting its own work — and giving responsibility to work groups for minor routine maintenance such as changing tips of welding guns and making minor adjustments.
There has also been attention paid to the design of the automated welding equipment in order to remove particularly poor job design features, but we discuss these later when we compare SAAB with BL.
However, their most striking innovation is in the way work is now organised in the last stages of the production process in the body shop.
The final stage before the body leaves the body shop for the paint shop is normally for the completed welded body to pass down a line of welders and grinders.
At various stations a number of final spot and seam welds are made, and then power grinders are used to smooth down exposed welds and any high spots.
At SAAB this stage is removed from the line in what is termed a ‘line-out’ system.
Bodies come into the section on a conveyor and are directed automatically into a buffer store.
From there, a body will be directed into a dock where a pair of workers perform all the functions previously described.
This includes considerable inspection work, firstly to establish what grinding needs to be done, and then to ensure that the body is fit, after they have completed their welding and grinding, to go on into the paint shop.
When they have finished their work on one body, they activate the conveyor which carries off the completed body and pulls in another from the buffer store.
The work is therefore not paced by the track, and the job cycle time is extended from seconds to about 20 minutes.
The performance of this form of work organisation is interesting and impressive.
The company had expected it to show a quantifiable benefit by reducing absenteeism and labour turnover, and by easing the production control difficulties caused by the inflexibilities of the line system.
One of these is that of balancing the line — having just the right number of operatives for the various work stations on the line.
Another is that of maintaining production stability, because, for example, a hold-up at one work station may stop the whole line.
SAAB had estimated the costs and benefits of the line-out system and had calculated that the system would pay for itself within four years, with more than half of the savings coming from the increased production flexibility of the system and another 25 per cent coming from reduced labour turnover and absenteeism.
In the event, absenteeism in the body plant actually rose by over 20 per cent over the seven-year period spanning the installation of the line-out system, though this was a smaller rise than in the press and the paint plants adjacent to the body shop.
Turnover fell by over 60 per cent in the body plant in the same period, though it should be noted that unemployment was rising in Sweden and therefore turnover rates in SAAB as a whole were falling, though less fast than in the body shop.
The major saving from the line-out system came from the enhanced production stability brought about by the release from the inflexibility of line-working the system brought.
Overall the system appeared to be even more cost-effective than the estimates, with a pay-back period of 2.6 years.
Though one always has to treat figures such as these with caution, it does seem that the line-out project had considerable success both in terms of a reduction in operator dissatisfaction, reflected in lower turnover and a less rapid increase in absenteeism than other parts of the plant, and in terms of very substantial savings for management because of the increased flexibility of production it gave them.
Body assembly of the BL Metro at Longbridge
Our final case study is one conducted by the author and colleagues at the BL plant in Longbridge where the company had built an entire new plant containing much microelectronics technology to build the body of the new Metro small car.
Many of the details of this study are reported in Willman and Winch, with Francis and Snell (1984), and we describe in some detail the way in which the company introduced this technology in Chapter 9.
Of relevance to our discussion here are two choices facing the company about new forms of work organisation associated with the new technology.
The first was an attempt to break down demarcation between skilled trades doing maintenance work — the moving towards so-called ‘two-trades maintenance’.
The second was to do with the design of the machinery to increase job cycle times and to reduce the extent to which work would be machine paced.
Within BL, as with other UK car companies, there are a large number of different trade groups specialising in particular aspects of machinery maintenance and repair.
These include millwrights, pipefitters, sheet metal workers, electricians (only some of whom have electronics expertise), and machine-tool fitters.
Each group in the past has operated with generally accepted lines of demarcation so that fault-finding and repair of a particular machine may involve several trade groups and take some considerable time while the fault is correctly identified and the appropriate craftsworker brought to the machine.
With the introduction of more complex automated machinery, the difficulties posed by such a high level of demarcation became worse, and management attempted to negotiate an arrangement whereby maintenance crafts would be grouped into two broad areas — mechanical and electrical — with the understanding that demarcation within each group would be minimised.
They were not wholly successful in this, and the compromise reached was termed ‘two-trades response’.
This meant that all electrical faults would be attended to by the electricians, but that mechanical faults would be dealt with by the mechanical trade nominated to that machine.
By prior agreement some machines would be deemed to be the responsibility of millwrights and the others reserved for machine-tool fitters.
The pipefitters' main responsibilities were for aspects of the plant's infrastructure rather than for particular machines.
In other countries, notably West Germany whose history of having industry unions such as the Metalworkers' Union has meant less demarcation between crafts, a series of possibilities about the organisation of maintenance have been discussed.
To what extent might companies buy in maintenance from the machinery suppliers; to what extent might workers become skilled at the repair and maintenance of particular machines rather than skilled at a particular aspect of a machine's functioning, rather like the situation already obtaining with the repair and maintenance of household equipment such as washing machines, or office equipment such as photocopiers; and to what extent might companies take over the training of skilled workers, giving them courses specifically suited to the requirements of their own production systems and certificating them within house?
These have been possible questions to ask for some time.
Their pertinence is much increased by the rapidly increasing capitalisation of the work-place both in the factory and the office, and by the greatly increased complexity of the machinery.
If BL, with its strong union presence, is prepared to negotiate changes in the work organisation of maintenance when microelectronics-controlled machinery is first installed, and management makes some headway in breaking down the traditional craft structure, then presumably substantial changes are on their way in other companies.
The second point of interest here about the BL case is the possibilities opened up with the new technology for improved forms of work organisation.
Two aspects bear examination, and both can be related to the SAAB case outlined earlier.
As it happens, the automated machinery used to build the Metro body is very similar to that used at SAAB and comes from the same manufacturer.
BL, at the time the Metro facilities were being planned, was operating an extensive system of participation with joint management/union committees at several levels in the company and related to particular plants and projects.
One of these committees was specifically concerned with the introduction of the Metro, and members of that committee, management and unionists, visited a number of car plants belonging to other countries, including SAAB at Trollhatten.
Not only had SAAB innovated with their use of the line-out system, they had also, as previously mentioned, used group working to operate the welding machinery, and they had also taken care, in the light of union concern about the matter, to minimise the extent of machine-paced short job cycle time working.
One technological fix for this problem is to fit carousels onto the welding machines.
Automated welding machines need to be fed with the various pressed sheet steel panels and sub-assemblies which are then welded together under automatic control.
For a typical rate of working of these machines, panels need to be fed approximately every 50 seconds.
If they were fed in manually, this would imply exactly the kind of task objected to by the unions — namely, a task paced by the automatic welder and with a cycle time of less than a minute.
The solution adopted at SAAB was to fit carousels to each machine.
These carousels hold about twenty to thirty panels and feed the machine automatically.
The manual job thus reduces to filling the carousel with panels or sub-assemblies every 20 minutes or so, and is of course only loosely machine paced.
There is an advantage to management too, in that it reduces the dependence of the machine on consistent human performance.
However, the carousels are a substantial capital investment.
Although BL did attempt to operate a modified and simplified system of group working at the Metro plant, they did not, despite the visit to Trollhatten, either use the line-out system or make extensive use of carousels.
Moreover, there is no evidence of any discussion between management and unions about the possibility of doing so.
Given SAAB's very positive experience with line-out, it is surprising that BL did not consider emulating it in that it appeared to offer benefits both to management and workers.
BL have used carousels, but only to a limited degree and, it would appear, only where they were particularly vital to insulate the biggest machines from human variability.
Conclusions
These cases demonstrate that the simple de-skilling thesis, rejected at a theoretical level in Chapter 4, is also unsupported by the empirical evidence, and for the same reasons.
In some instances, such as in the robot-welding case, jobs are deliberately de-skilled as part of a management strategy to tighten control and reduce costs.
In others, as in the Scandinavian case and the optical factory described by Wilkinson (1983), management have deliberately reduced the tightness of their control and attempted to enhance skill levels.
In some instances, management have done this because they have believed that de-skilling is a counter-productive strategy in that it lowers morale, commitment, motivation, and optimum use of human resources.
In others, they have done it because they have felt they have had to: perhaps they would have failed to attract and keep labour if the jobs had been too fragmented.
And certain features of the job design in the Swedish car factories were incorporated explicitly because of trade union action, either at local level or, more generally, because legislation had been enacted to require management to provide jobs of a certain quality.
We now, in the next two chapters, try to assess the range of opportunities in particular technological contexts, and the costs and benefits to the various parties of particular strategies.