

Nursing Times
THE INDEPENDENT VOICE OF NURSING
NUMBER ONE FOR JOBS
HELPING THE DEAF MOTHER
Winner of the NT/3M National Nursing Award for Education
PLUS
Systems of Life
Beating bulimia
The nurse practitioner in A&E
Wound care supplement
OPEN LEARNING
Delivery of care
STANDARD CARD — FREE OFFER
IN NEXT WEEK'S ISSUE
YOUR VOTE, YOUR FUTURE
Over the next couple of weeks all nurses, midwives and health visitors in the UK will be receiving their ballot papers for the UKCC elections.
What are these elections about?
And why could their outcome be critical for the profession's future?
Next week we spell out what they mean for you as well as providing a full list of all the candidates standing for election.
Don't miss it.
Plus DIARY OF AN ALZHEIMER'S CARER
A wife's vivid account of how she cared for her declining husband.
MIDWIVE'S JOURNAL
NT's quarterly supplement of midwifery issues.
BACK PAIN
Continuing NT's back pain campaign, we examine practical ways in which nurses' own awareness of the problem can be raised.
OPEN LEARNING
Delivery of care — 3.
Conflicts in care.
COMMENT
TESTING TRENDS
Job evaluation and performance-related pay are not in themselves threatening, but is thought being given to the implications, and is anyone taking an overall view?
To live is to change.
There is no denying the truth of this.
But nursing could be forgiven for thinking that life — and thus the amount of change it has to cope with — is getting a bit too hectic.
Remember clinical grading?
If you thought that was less than perfectly thought-out and organised, wait until you see what job evaluation and performance-related have in store for all of us (see page 20).
In the health service, job evaluation systems already cover ancillary, administrative and technical staff.
The object of job evaluation is to provide a systematic approach to defining the relative worth of different jobs.
It is a process whereby jobs are placed in a rank order, according to the overall demands each one makes on a person doing it.
It is an evaluation of the job rather than the worker.
The argument is that it therefore provides a good basis for a fair and orderly grading structure.
Performance-related pay is obviously dear to the hearts of the authors of the Patient's Charter.
This document makes several specific recommendations on pay and the desire to link it to performance.
There are several different kinds of performance-related pay.
The basic idea, however, is simple: differences in performance can be measured; employees can therefore be rewarded differently and appropriately; employees will make the connection and work harder or more effectively.
How far has the NHS gone down this road?
No unit or trust has yet got a job evaluation scheme for nurses up and running.
A great deal of interest has bee expressed and COHSE detects what it calls ‘a lemming-like rush’ in this direction.
So far, only six NHS  trusts have introduced performance — related pay for nurses but it is clear almost all trusts want to introduce such a system.
These developments are not in themselves threatening but nurses have good reason to be worried.
The case has not been proved that job evaluation and performance-related pay can be applied to nursing.
Experience in other areas suggests they are complex, time-consuming and expensive to introduce.
Is sufficient thought being given to the implications, and is anyone taking an overall view?
There are real fears that they could be used to depress wages, that team work could be jeopardised and that women and staff from ethnic minorities will be further disadvantaged.
Taken in the context of a public sector pay freeze and the possible suspension of the Pay Review Body, these trends are even more disturbing.
They could spell the end of national wage agreements and the sinking of clinical grading before it has properly begun to swim.
THIS WEEK
Child abuse — professionals implicated
Primary Health-Care conference reports
Unit ‘downsizing’hits nurses in USA
Helen Zeitlin wins her appeal
HSC LAUNCHES GUIDELINES ON LIFTING
The Health and Safety Commission has released new guidance on lifting patients amid criticisms that previous guidance was not enforced.
The new document, which anticipates a new EC regulation on handling manual loads due to come into effect next January, calls for a thorough review of NHS lifting policies and procedures, including an examination of staffing levels.
Elizabeth Gyngell, chairwoman of the Health Services Advisory Committee that drew it up said: ‘The guidance reflects the widely held view that injuries are largely preventable.’
Back injuries were on the increase, particularly among nurses.
Mrs Gyngell defended the HSC after criticism from trade union representatives and back care coordinators at the launch who said the existing guidance, issued 10 years ago, had not been enforced.
She said; ‘We believe that you have to encourage people first of all.’
The new EC regulations would make enforcement easier, she said.
Ian Symington, occupational health adviser to Greater Glasgow Health Board and a member of HSAC said the guidance would benefit employers by preventing costly back injuries.
He stressed the need to mechanise.
The HSC has launched a competition for hospitals on the new guidance, set to coincide with Workplace Health and Safety Week, from November 23 to 27.
COST-CUTTING SCHEME HALVES DISTRICT JOBS
Danoli Carlisle reports on a move to dilute skill mix in community nursing
The number of G- and H-grade district nurses should be cut nationally by 50%, saving up to £40 million, the HS Management Executive has recommended.
A NHSME report says that district nurses are doing the same job as D- and E-grade community nurses.
In future they should carry out assessments and reassessments only.
The rest of clinical work should be left to ‘care practitioners’(qualified nurses) and ‘care assistants’(unqualified staff).
The recommendations are based on research carried out by the Value for Money (VFM) Unit of the Management Executive at three community units: South Sefton, Mid-Staffordshire and Macclesfield.
The work led to an industrial dispute in South Sefton and a ballot on action in Mid-Staffordshire.
Only these two units are implementing the proposed changes.
The disputes, by the RCN and HVA, centred on the research methods used.
Activity analysis carried out by the VFM team ‘highlights further evidence that the pattern of visits undertaken by G- and H-grades is similar in content and scale to that being conducted by grades D and E.’
The same work currently being done by a team with 62% G- and H-grade district nurses could be achieved by replacing 50% of them with RGNs and unqualified staff, says the report.
The figures calculated for the two pilot sites implementing the cuts should be a national benchmark.
There could be a national saving of between £31 million and £40 million with a cut from 9 000 to 4 600 DN posts.
The report, endorsed by chief nursing officer Yvonne Moores, says: ‘It is recommended that priority should be given to the achievement of change based on the systematic and structured methodology provided.’
But Lynn Young, RCN adviser in community health nursing, disagreed.
She said: ‘The methodology is oversimplistic and frankly crude.
Any blanket recommendation on skill mix is a waste of time.’
The recommendations did not take into account impending changes in community care.
An HVA spokesman added: ‘We deplore this attack on community nursing.
The starting point of this skill-mix review has not been the needs of the community but the need to make cuts in the service.’
NURSES EXPECT PRESSURE FROM DRUG GIANTS
Nurses who prescribe will find themselves under pressure from the pharmaceutical industry to use products inappropriately, community staff have been warned.
The NT/ Community Outlook Primary Healthcare Conference was told last week that potential nurse prescribers will come under the same pressure as doctors from an industry that spends £200 million a year promoting its products.
Joe Collier, reader in clinical pharmacology at St George's Hospital, London, said: ‘The drugs and products produced by the pharmaceutical industry are invaluable.
The question is to make sure they are used properly and that the industry does not abuse its power.’
He said staff had to be aware of and attempt to neutralise the promotional tactics used to give the impression that health-care professionals endorse products, for example the provision of free pens, mugs and calendars with company logos.
Demonstrators protest about the proposed closure of Birmingham Accident Hospital, famous for its specialist trauma care, and the city's Royal Orthopaedic Hospital.
The closures will mean the loss of some 600 jobs.
Protesters lobbied a South Birmingham Health Authority meeting last week.
SEX ABUSE NETWORKS OFTEN INVOLVE CHILD-CARE WORKERS
Men involved in organised sexual abuse of children are often professionally involved with youngsters, including one known case of a school nurse.
Superintendent Michael Hames of the obscene publications branch at Scotland Yard, last week told a joint Nursing Times/Social Work Today conference on protecting children how organised child abuse works.
In one case, a London school nurse recruited young boys who were then sexually abused and filmed.
Both the boys and the videos were passed on to a network of men which included school teachers and youth workers in Birmingham, Stoke on Trent, Holland and Belgium.
Marianne Tranter, a psychiatric social worker at the Hospital for Sick Children, Great Ormond Street, London, told the audience of nurses and social workers that abused children are ‘seduced’ by paedophiles who give them rewards and make threats about disclosure.
Often they hold the position of a ‘trusted uncle’ to whom the child feels loyalty.
She said: ‘You need to be aware of their behavioural presentation, their emotional and physical state.
You invariably find a teacher, social worker or school nurse who has already got concerns about the child.
Children picked by paedophiles were likely to be reabused or become abusers themselves.
Families also need support, she said, especially if they trusted the paedophile and felt responsible for allowing the abuse to occur.
Another speaker warned that children with disabilities were not being protected from abuse because people do not believe it occurs.
Margaret Kennedy, coordinator of the National Deaf Children's Society Keep Deaf Children Safe campaign, said: ‘There are 360 000 children with disabilities in the UK.
Very little in terms of child protection work is being done for them.’
She urged nurses to question authors of all material on child protection that did not include children with disabilities.
She hoped this would make them ‘more visible and safer’.
Dr Marietta Higgs, the consultant paediatrician at the centre of the Cleveland child abuse controversy, gave a personal account of the effects of the case and its aftermath.
She said the immense pressure she had been under took its toll and at times she was so emotionally and physically exhausted she was ‘just hanging on by my fingernails’.
Dr Higgs, now a consultant at the Queen Elizabeth Hospital in Gateshead, said she was heartened by the number of support groups springing up to help victims of child abuse.
US STAFF ‘ECSTATIC’ AT ELECTION
Nurses in the USA are expecting better time ahead after the election of Bill Clinton as president last week.
Mr Clinton's landslide victory has been hailed as a major step forward by the country's two biggest nursing organisations.
‘We're ecstatic’ said Patricia Moccia, executive vice-president of the National League for Nursing.
‘This should open up tremendous possibilities for health care in this country’.
Mr Clinton, whose mother Virginia Kelly is a nurse, made special mention of the nursing profession in his victory speech.
He has pledged to give greater state help to the estimated 37 million people not covered by health insurance in the USA.
Dr Barbara Redman, executive director of the American Nurses' Association, said: ‘Nursing was pushed to one side during the Bush era and there was hardly any acknowledgement that health care was an issue’.
In a class of their own…school nurses in City and Hackney Health Authority joined the centenary celebrations of their profession with a road show and health mobile during National School Nursing Week.
Pictured with Sandra Doore (left), are Rita Caroll Collins, aged 9, Nickie Wenn, aged 8 and Barry Wenn, 10.
SPECIAL PAYMENTS UNDER THREAT
Scottish nurses could face a cut in special duty payments if proposals now being considered go ahead, according to COHSE.
The union has obtained a document produced by Lothian health board which says that trusts could save over £5m if they cut unsocial hours payments.
‘These proposals will cause outrage in the profession,’ said Jim Devine, COHSE regional officer.
‘For full-time staff, unsocial hours payments represents between 9.2 and 12.7% of total earnings.’
A spokesman for Lothian health board said staff terms and conditions would be a matter for individual trusts.
IN BRIEF LOCAL AUTHORITIES drawing up plans for the community care reforms will have to consult with the private and voluntary sector, the new Department of Health guidelines say.
BRISTOL Cancer Help Centre is to publish new recommendations on diet for cancer patients early in the new year.
The centre used to recommend a strict vegetarian diet but now uses a more flexible approach.
LABOUR has set up a confidential hotline for NHS whistleblowers so that staff who want to raise concerns about standards of care can do so in confidence.
The number is 071 219 2744.
ASHWORTH Hospital has published its plan of action to deal with the recommendations of the public inquiry into conditions at the special hospital.
The 90 recommendations of the inquiry included the phasing out of seclusion, better staff training and the setting up of a patients' advocacy service.
NURSING STAFF and other public sector workers will find out tomorrow whether their pay will be frozen or if rises are to be pegged to 2% or less next year.
Meanwhile, a new report on NHS funding commissioned by the RNC and the Institute of Health Services Management complains that the way the Treasury forecasts spending is shrouded in secrecy.
POEMS on the importance of nursing were read in Iran last week to mark Nursing Day.
The Iranian celebration of nursing included ceremonies and prizes.
Ayatollah Khameneie, leader of Iran, said the nurse is a ‘teacher of patience’.
CUTS in the school nursing service are affecting the quality of care children receive, the RCN has claimed.
A survey of 151 school nurses showed that nearly two — thirds felt cut were undermining their quality of care.
Posts are frozen, some services have been reduced and skill mix is being used to downgrade or replace qualified staff, says the RNC which also claims school nurses' career paths are blocked.
PRIMARY HEALTH-CARE CONFERENCE, LONDON — PROFESSIONAL PRESSURES AND PRESCRIBING CARE
‘TIME-CONSUMING’ PROCEDURES MAY NEGATE PRESCRIBING GAINS
Time saved through nurses having prescribing powers could be taken up with extra paperwork created by its introduction.
That was the warning to the conference from Peter West, health economist with Touche Ross management consultants.
The firm was commissioned by the Department of Health to do a cost-benefit analysis of nurse prescribing.
‘Depending on the way nurse prescribing is introduced, there is a real danger that time saved may be used up on additional procedures.
For example, some GPs in our study indicated that they want all prescriptions to be entered on patient records,’ Mr West said.
‘Many nurses may find the task of entering the script onto the GP's computer is delegated to them so the time saved from being able to prescribe starts to disappear.’
Local arrangements would have to be introduced to make sure nurses are not obliged to take on time-consuming procedures when prescribing comes into force in October next year.
The cost-benefit analysis found community nurses would save about 48 minutes a week and health visitors 36 minutes.
Carers and families will also save time.
The increase in costs of prescribing including training will be £107 million over 10 years, but the overall benefit including time saved by nurses who will work more efficiently is estimated at £ 47.5 million, Mr West said.
Doreen Horridge, the DoH nursing officer who is responsible for the implementation of nurse prescribing, said the nurses' formulary would be published shortly but was subject to consultation under the Medicines Act 1968.
It will allow those with health visitor and district nurse qualifications to prescribe laxatives, stoma care products, analgesics such as aspirin and a wide range of appliances and dressings.
Antifungal preparations such as nystatin and clotrimazole; Iodosorb (a medicated dressing) and Varidase (a desloughing agent) are also included.
Peter West warned of the danger of increased paperwork with prescribing
POWERS COULD BE RESTRICTED
District nurses and health visitors who have been given the statutory power to prescribe treatments may not be given the authority to do so by their employers.
Andrew Andrews, a medical legal expert and legal adviser to Tunbridge Wells Health Authority, said it was not enough to be given legal powers and training.
‘If your employer does not allow you to undertake [prescribing]and you embark on it, then if you are negligent, you are on your own,’ he said.
Mr Andrews cited the example of an A&E nurse who had done suturing for many years.
But when she moved jobs, she was subject to a policy stating that nurses should not suture faces or hands.
When she ignored this policy, a patient she sutured later sued, but her employers would not back her.
Similarly, not all authorities would permit nurses to use their Mental Health Act powers to detain patients.
The same could happen with nurse prescribing.
NURSE TO SHARE GP PROFIT
A nurse practitioner working with GP fundholders is to enter into an unusual profit-share partnership with the doctors in his practice.
Lance Gardner, who works at the Castlefields Health Centre, Runcorn, in Cheshire, says the arrangement should give nurses the recognition they deserve for the work they do.
But the profit-sharing would have to be ‘informal’ as nurses are not legally able to enter into practice partnerships.
Mr Gardner said the move could mean he is on call at night, but this and other issues still need to be sorted out.
The health centre has a 12 000 practice population.
David Colin-Thome, one of the practice partners, told the conference he backed the idea because it ‘encouraged the concept of ownership’.
OPEN LEARNING MAKES UP HALF OF TRAINING COURSE
The national boards are now putting the finishing touches to training courses for district nurses and health visitors who want to prescribe.
Marion Balcombe, ENB director of primary health care, said that in England HVs and DNs will have to complete an open learning package of 10 to 12 hours and a lecture course of at least 15 hours.
Other boards are making their own arrangements but in each case the courses will lead to a recordable qualification.
The Department of Health has given the boards £60 a head to train 23 000 eligible HVs and DNs over the next two years.
Mrs Balcombe said: ‘We have been told that this is not nearly enough but it is all we have got and I think we are lucky to have it.’
One course in England has already received approval in principle to run 10 programmes of 40 places each starting next April.
Who goes first will be decided locally, said Mrs Balcombe.
‘It's up to you and your managers.’
The open learning pack should be launched formally in February and is now being tested by 30 practitioners.
Marion Balcombe
STAFF SLOWED DOWN BY P2000 PLACEMENTS
Project 2000 is putting extra pressure on community nursing staff, but practitioners are still highly committed to having students in the community, according to interim research findings.
The three-year research project funded by the English National Board to look at the learning experiences in the community found working with students was ‘time consuming’ and ‘slowed down the work of the nurse’.
Some visits could not be done with students and so work had to be reorganised.
Forty-eight per cent of staff arranging placements for common foundation students reported resistance from other agencies.
A quarter were concerned about the resource implication of placements.
But Jean Orr, Professor of Nursing, Queen's University Belfast and one of the authors of the report, emphasised community staff still had ‘a lot of energy’ for students and they agreed with the principles of Project 2000.
AMERICAN PSYCHIATRIC NURSES' ASSOCIATION CONFERENCE, ST LOUIS, MISSOURI — Reports by Ian McMillan
STAFF TRAUMA AS UNITS SHRINK
Nurses working in psychiatric units which are being reduced in size often experience severe emotional trauma, the American Psychiatric Nurses' Association's annual conference was told.
Catherine Pawlicki, a nurse manager from Kansas, said some nurses who worked in one hospital for lengthy periods established a strong bond with it.
Both their work and personal lives deteriorated sharply when that relationship was jeopardised.
Over the past three years, Ms Pawlicki's own clinic has shed 58 beds as three units have either been closed or merged.
For many staff this represents an overwhelming ‘traumatising experience’, she explained.
Nurses who have internalised the ‘values, beliefs and attitudes’ of their workplace often develop a ‘false sense of security’about its long-term prospects, she said.
And she stressed that managers ‘should pass on information to their staff as quickly as possible.
You want to promote anticipatory grieving and emphasise that everybody is going to be affected.’
Chester Woffard, director of in-patient services and chief nursing executive at the Institute of Living in Hartford, Connecticut, said ‘downsizing’ was a US ‘national phenomenon’.
The driving force was the expense of in-patient care, and both insurance companies and government agencies were seeking cheaper alternatives.
‘Unfortunately, in some areas, the patient trades hospitalisation for homelessness,’ he said.
Meanwhile, the average length of time patients spend in hospital was continually being shortened and staff dealt with more people in acute stages of mental illness.
Staff were working harder with hospitals receiving less money for more seriously ill patients, Mr Woffard explained.
FAMILIES HURT BY GULF WAR SEPARATION
American children whose mothers were called up during last year's Gulf War felt they had been abandoned, an in-depth study of their feelings showed.
Alicia Williams, an assistant professor at Memphis State University, Tennessee, said many of the mothers and their children found the experience of being separated ‘negative and traumatic’.
Ms Williams, who is a captain in the US Army Reserve and was separated from her own family during the conflict, asked 45 mothers and 61 children to describe what impact the hostilities had on them.
Most of the mothers were nurses who worked in a civilian hospital, but were part-time reservists in the US Army and were posted to Saudi Arabia at short notice in the run-up to the war.
‘The main finding was that the children expressed a lot of emotion towards their mother, like hate and distrust and abandonment,’ Ms Williams told NT 
‘They also expressed a lack of knowledge about what was going on at the time, and they blamed their mothers for that.
There were a lot of adverse feelings.’
Many of the mothers felt their children had been subjected to physical and emotional abuse by those caring for them during their absence, and were concerned about their lack of academic progress at school.
The mothers told her they had given their children, who ranged in age from six to 17, as much information as they could.
‘They felt they had abandoned their children — even though in actuality they didn't.
Many of the mothers had resigned from the US Army Reserve.
BEING MALE IS A MIXED BLESSING AT WORK
Over half the female nurses in a study presented at the meeting said members of the general public believed that male nurses were gay.
Almost one in five of them said male nurses were seen as ‘weak’.
One described male nurses as ‘effeminate, frustrated doctors’.
Another said they were ‘somewhere between weak and normal’.
A third noted: ‘A few years ago I would have said gay or weak, but it's improving,’
Most male nurses did not share these views, with only just over a third believing they were perceived as being gay.
But nurses of both sexes believe that male nurses receive more respect from doctors, according to James Hovey, a graduate nurse from the Frances Payne Bolton School of Nursing in Cleveland, Ohio, who carried out the work.
Mr Hovey's survey of 61 female nurses and senior student nurses, 39 male nurses and senior student nurses and 19 doctors highlighted concerns over how male nurses are viewed by the US public.
Around one in five of the nurses and 38% of the doctors felt that female patients discriminated against nurses who were male.
A smaller proportion of the respondents — 12% of the nurses and 6% of the doctors — suggested that male patients discriminated against male nurses.
A quarter of the male nurses felt they had ‘greater opportunities’ to advance their careers than female nurses.
CALLS FOR STRICTER GUN LAWS TO REDUCE NUMBER OF VIOLENT DEATHS
Lax gun control legislation in some US states should be reformed urgently in order to stem the tide of suicides and murders, according to Corrine Hatton, an expert on suicide who works in private practice in Los Angeles.
She pointed out that the states with the highest suicide rates were those in the Western US, such as Nevada Montana and New Mexico, where guns are more readily available than in the East.
‘Gun control laws may reduce suicides and homicides by one fourth,’ she said.
Ms Hatton suggested that many health workers were wary of becoming involved with those who had attempted suicide because they found the topic ‘frightening’.
But she stressed that death is not always the aim of those who make a suicide bid.
‘People who feel suicidal do not necessarily want to die.
They want to be out of their psychic pain.’
In 1989, 24 102 men and 6 130 women in the USA committed suicide.
WHISTLE-BLOWING DOCTOR TO GET JOB BACK
A consultant who was made redundant after she voiced concern about nurse staffing levels is to be reinstated on the order of health secretary Virginia Bottomley.
Helen Zeitlin, who worked in the haematology unit at the Alexandra Hospital in Redditch for five years, and was dismissed on the grounds of redundancy, has won her appeal against the decision.
Her case was heard by a special committee set up by the DoH, following calls for more openness in the NHS.
Ms Zeitlin, who had backed a report by a nurse highlighting staffing problems, said the result was a victory for free speech.
But she feared that when she returned to work at the unit, the problems she had complained about would still be there.
‘Nurses tell me little has changed with staffing levels.
That will be something I need to discuss when I meet with managers prior to my return to work.
It's quite a daunting prospect going back there after all the hostility, but I need a livelihood.’
Ms Zetlein said her case had some parallels with sacked charge nurse Graham Pink's.
‘I wish I could say my success bodes well for him, but I just don't know.
My case was more straightforward and quite honestly they had little choice but to uphold my appeal.
Graham's is much more complex.’
‘I think he was treated in a shoddy way, tried by a kangaroo court and found guilty by his own accusers.
But his sacking was an injustice and I wish him all the best in his appeal.’
His hearing has been set for March 15.
Both Ms Zeitlin and Mr Pink are attending the launch of a new group called Freedom to Care at the House of Commons this week.
It will campaign for the right of health staff to speak out about standards of care.
Mr Pink has thrown his hat into the ring as a COHSE-backed candidate in the forthcoming UKCC elections.
He has been a longstanding critic of the council, accusing it of failing to support him following his sacking by Stockport HA.
He said: ‘I realise I have been the bane of certain UKCC officers’ lives and I hope that if I am elected I will continue to act as a grain of sand in the oyster.
I would like to see a much more outspoken UKCC membership, with more support for nurses who get into trouble through upholding their code of conduct.
NURSES WON'T TOE MEDICAL LINE ANY MORE
Nurses will not take on tasks considered too menial to be done by medical staff, doctors have been warned.
Practitioners are now well educated and would not tolerate ‘taking the crumbs off the medical table’, Ray Rowden, chief executive of West Lambeth Community Unit, told a meeting of the National Association of Clinical Tutors in London last week.
‘Medicine has a problem — it has a history of sexism and classism.
Doctors think nursing is women's work and that the girls will take the crumbs from the medical table.
Well, I'm here to tell you that the girls and the boys will not.
There is an assumption that nurses will take anything that is thrown at them and that is dangerous,’ Mr Rowden said.
The picture was changing, he added.
Nurses were more highly educated and accountable for their actions as professionals than they used to be.
They could refuse to carry out tasks, because ultimately they were accountable to their professional body, the UKCC, Mr Rowden said.
He urged the meeting to adopt more shared training between doctors and nurses, as there were many opportunities for this in clinical settings.
UKCC TAKES ‘RN’ TITLE OFF BALLOT
The UKCC has had to change its plan to use the description ‘RN’ after candidates' names on ballot papers for the forthcoming council elections, following vociferous protest from one candidate.
Outspoken ENB member Jim McIntegart threatened the UKCC with a High Court Injunction if it did not allow him to describe himself as an RMN.
‘The decision to call practitioners RN was made without any consultation and was very arrogant,’ he said.
‘It is rather regrettable that candidates have to use their energy on this sort of thing, instead of working to get elected.’
The UKCC sent out a letter in August about the new title, which chief executive Colin Ralph wanted to use on the ballot form.
‘Because an objection was raised we decided to look at the matter again,’ said Reg Pyne, assistant registrar, standards and ethics.
Ballot papers are to be mailed out around November 20 and the closing date for voting is January 11, 1993.
Nurse peer Baroness Cox presented the awards at the RCN's Institute of Advanced Nursing Education annual ceremony at Westminster Central Hall in London.
She is pictured with students (l–r) Helen Allan, Tim Schaffer, Liz Still and Dee Burrows, who were among this year's 379 successful IANE graduates
IN BRIEF EDINBURGH could get a large new teaching hospital on the outskirts of the city if ministers approve a plan put forward by Lothian Health Board.
But it is believed the board's acute services review also proposes the closure of a number of inner-city sites including the Royal Infirmary.
THE PAEDIATRIC unit of the Queen's Medical Centre, Nottingham has won the Daily Telegraph Parent-Friendly award, which is designed to encourage businesses and organisations to adopt a more positive attitude to people with children.
SOTHEBY'S is to auction an icon used in 18th century Russia to assist women in childbirth.
The pear-shaped ‘image of the Holy Mother of God’, which was held by women in labour, is expected to be sold for around £1 500 on November 24.
DEMAND for the Nurses' Welfare Service is increasing, the charity revealed in its annual report.
The NWS, 20 years old last week, helps nurses, midwives and health visitors whose fitness to practise has been questioned.
Last year 185 new cases were opened and 109 closed.
Christine Hancock, chairwoman of the trustees, last week launched an appeal for more funds for the service.
EARLY DELIVERY AVERTED BY MEFENAMIC ACID
Mefenamic acid can prevent premature labour, thus reducing the risk of perinatal morbidity and mortality, suggests a randomised double-blind study in India.
Mefenamic acid is a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug that has been used for other gynaecological problems.
For this study 160 women at risk of premature delivery were randomly allocated to the trial drug or placebo (80 each).
Premature rupture of the membranes occurred in 10% of controls and 3.7% of the test group.
Term delivery was achieved by 50% of the control women and 82% of the mefenamic acid group; a highly significant difference.
The mean birth weight of the control group babies was 2.28kg, compared with 2.7kg for the experimental group.
All patients in the study completed the course and no fetal abnormalities were found.
While confident of the benefit of mefenamic acid, the authors advise more evaluation of its risks before recommending it to prevent pre-term labour.
TREATMENT DELAY EXTENDS DEPRESSION
The interval between the onset of major depression and receipt of treatment, and the degree of pre-morbid neuroticism seem to be significant predictors of how long the illness episode lasts.
In a Newcastle study, 55 patients who satisfied research diagnostic criteria for primary major depressive disorder were followed up until recovery from the episode, which lasted from four to 29 months.
Information obtained included socio-demographic characteristics, details of the episode, past history, life events in the six months before onset and pre-morbid personality.
‘No treatment’ interval was defined as the interval between date of onset and the date antidepressant therapy (equivalent to 75mg of tricyclic drugs) was prescribed; pre-morbid personality was assessed using the Eysenck Personality Questionnaire.
These were the only two factors which made a significant contribution to the persistence of symptoms.
The authors suggest that patients with high neuroticism scores require intensive early treatment to avoid chronic symptoms.
CPR TEACHERS NEED MORE WORK
Basic life-support skills in a group of 31 resuscitation trainers were poor before they attended a two-day training course, a study at London's Royal Free Hospital found.
The trainers, who included 21 nurses, two resuscitation training officers and one nurse tutor, were assessed in skills, confidence and experience.
None could perform external cardiac compression competently; only five could ventilate adequately.
The number of years qualified was unrelated to initial skills.
However, the longer since qualification, the greater their confidence in their skills.
Practical experience (number of arrests attended) was not related to skills before or after the course.
After completing the course, just three trainers were competent at compressions and only two could ventilate adequately.
They did improve in carrying out the correct sequence of treatment (assessment, open airway, check breathing, check pulse).
The authors accept that the course may not have given adequate time to practical skills, but the participants' inaccurate view of their own skills contributed to their lack of success.
Cardiac compression technique was universally poor
LOW LEVELS OF LEAD STILL HURT CHILDREN
Low-level exposure to lead during early childhood is associated with delays in neurophysical development during the first seven years of life, concludes a study of 494 children in a lead-smelting community in South Australia.
Reports at ages two and four also found developmental deficits.
Exposure to lead was calculated from antenatal and delivery maternal blood samples, and samples from the children at birth, six and 15 months, two years, then annually.
This study considered the progress of 494 children aged seven to eight.
Blood lead concentrations had been highest at age two, but had now fallen by over 40%.
The relation between lifetime average lead concentration and IQ showed an inverse gradient, with an increase in lead levels from 10µg/dl to 30µg/dl showing a decrease in IQ of 4–5%.
Many of the children who had poor scores in the early studies had not improved greatly by age seven.
The authors suggest that the social consequences of environmental lead may be serious, with a large increase in the proportion of children requiring educational assistance.
CLODRONATE FOR BONE DISEASE OF MYELOMA
Clodronate delays osteolytic bone lesions, reduces the degree of hypercalcaemia and decreases pain in patients with multiple myeloma, claim the authors of a 24-month multicentre study.
The drug was used in conjunction with a standard melphalan/prednisolone protocol in a controlled trial involving 350 patients in 23 centres in Finland.
(Standard systemic chemotherapy may not prevent progression of skeletal disease in myeloma.)
Statistically significant benefits in the clodronate group included an increase in those feeling no pain from 24 to 54%, compared with 29 to 44% in the controls.
Serum calcium and urinary calcium excretion decreased in both groups, but more so in the clodronate group.
The proportion of patients with progression of osteolytic lesions was twice as high in the control group.
No difference was found in the incidence of side-effects.
LOOKING AFTER LONDON'S HEALTH
I enjoyed Niall Dickson's article ‘Capital punishment’(Body Politic, October 28) and was especially pleased to see my views accurately represented.
So often defence of our hospitals is portrayed as a ‘reactionary’ defence of the status quo.
I think that the real way to improve the health of the capital city's people lies with such old-fashioned concepts as full employment, decent housing and good education.
These can only come in a planned economic system and will never come through the irrationalities of the market.
In the absence of these things, I seek to defend the present service as the best achievable.
We must defend every bed, every job and every hospital.
This government must not be allowed to dismantle our NHS while the academics and social scientists look on.
PRIVATE HOSPITAL DEFENDS SYSTEM
Following the News Focus ‘Private worries’(October 21), we feel it is important to challenge some of the claims made by Tom Osborne regarding the care of critically ill patients within the private health-care sector.
Mr Osborne claims that private hospitals do not have the necessary expertise when the need arises.
In our hospital, however, emergency cover is available 24 hours a day, 365 days a year.
The nursing team in the intensive care unit consists of experienced nurses, with over 90% possessing a relevant post-basic qualification.
Patients who suffer a cardiac arrest are treated by skilled practitioners.
Mr Osborne also says that private hospitals do not possess the facilities to care for critically ill patients.
Our purpose-built intensive care unit is well equipped.
The unit has a full range of centralised monitoring, its own blood gas analyser and facilities for haemofiltration and long- and short-term ventilation.
This hospital does have its own portable X-ray equipment and CT scanner.
There are, as Mr Osborne states, few regulations covering hospital operation or the minimum necessary equipment required.
This lack of regulation does, however, extend to all hospitals, not just those in the private sector.
Within this hospital all aspects of operation and service provision were recently subject to an audit by the King's Fund from which we subsequently received accreditation.
In short, those who are critical of the private sector must ensure that their facts are correct.
The abilities of staff and availability of facilities to care for critically ill patients vary in all areas of health care.
It is unjust to make sweeping condemnation of the private sector, as we know that this hospital compares favourably against many others.
CODE OF CONDUCT DEMANDED TO MAKE MANAGERS ACCOUNTABLE
My attention has been drawn to the item ‘Managers should have conduct code’(pg6, September 30).
I have previously advocated such a code in Hospital Doctor magazine (December 5, 1991).
Since then the proposal has featured in the Liberal Democrats' health policy document Restoring the Nation's Health .
and support has come from the hospital doctors' and NHS consultants' associations.
More recently Halifax Labour MP Alice Mahon has given backing for a code, and referred the matter to the parliamentary select health committee for consideration.
I believe there is an undeniable need for a code making managers accountable through an independent disciplinary body if they introduce measures detrimental to patient care, or attempt to suppress reasonable public criticism of such measures.
The need has not diminished following the government's whistle-blowers' charter, the inadequacies of which have been exposed by Dr Helen Zeitlin, vice-president of the NHS Support Federation (Guardian letters, October 22).
It is surely high time that the anomaly is ended whereby managers, alone among health service professionals, lack the discipline of defined ethical standards against which their actions can be judged.
STUDENTS FACE DISCRIMINATION
It would seem that once again nursing students are to be abused by this government.
In April of next year the council tax, the ‘fairer’ system of local funding will come into force.
One would have though a lesson would have been learnt from the community charge fiasco.
However, it would seem that nursing students are again to suffer blatant discrimination on the grounds of their type of nursing course.
On the face of it, government and council publications suggest that all nursing students will be exempt from paying the council tax.
Nothing could be further from the truth.
The most that a traditional student can hope to save is a 50% reduction if he or she lives alone.
Once again, traditional and Project 2000 nursing students will be split because of the present government's contempt for nursing students.
I hope that all nurses will once again join and fight to remove this barrier between traditional and Project 2000 students.
UKCC ELECTION PROCEDURES
The forthcoming elections to the reconstituted UKCC give nurses, for the first time, the chance to have a say in the membership of this body.
At a time when nursing and health care is subject to much change, both professionally and politically determined, it is a pity that these elections appear to have been organised with little concern for the democratic process.
The elections have been organised without the facility for the candidates to address the electorate directly, that is with more than mere biographical detail.
Democracy ought to entail the free exercise of informed choice.
The UKCC has failed in its organisation of the election to provide candidates with the opportunity to address their constituency.
This could have been accomplished through a special edition of The Register or accompanying literature sent out with the ballot papers.
The minimal information about the candidates that will actually be sent to those nurses on the electoral  roll can only enable people to make voting choices on the basis of assumptions or stereotypes.
It is well known that the UKCC has to this date been a bastion of conservatism, its appointments being made through the patronage of the secretary of state or the national boards.
Consequently, the make-up of the council has been largely unrepresentative of grass-roots nurses and comprised mainly of nurse managers and senior educationists.
It is, in my view, a pity that those candidates wishing to challenge this state of affairs and work towards a truly representative council will be unable to make this known.
Furthermore, it is likely that all the candidates will be indistinguishable from each other with respect to their views, as the electoral process itself denies the nurses the opportunity to be fully addressed.
In which other election claiming to be democratic would we make voting choices without canvassing the views of the candidates?
Editor's note:Nursing Times is publishing a full list of candidates in the election together with brief statements of intent on November 18
TEXT CRITICISED ON HOMOSEXUALITY
Christine Hardaker's defence of Anthony Storr's view of homosexuals as portrayed in his book The Integrity of the Personality just will not do (letters, October 7).
A little clarification is in order.
Allow me to paraphrase the Storr view point: ‘Mentally ill patients who are homosexual feel inadequate either as men or women,’ So what!
This tells us nothing about homosexuals per se.
We are everywhere.
Beware any book that takes its information about homosexuals from ‘clinical experience’.
Imagine a book which claimed that among heterosexual patients in psychiatric hospitals each had low personal self-esteem.
What's new?
As a former psychiatric nurse, now a general nurse, I see many psychiatric patients, most of them heterosexual, most of them suffering from low self-esteem.
It would be wrong to conclude a link between heterosexuality and low self-esteem because I know and work with many healthy heterosexuals.
THE START OF SCHIZOPHRENIA
The interesting Occasional Paper by Russell Ashmore regarding the use of Section 5(4) (August 26) refers to patients remaining in psychiatric institutions, and is a most welcome piece of research work.
However, there is still a very pressing problem of patients suffering from the onset of severe mental illness, particularly schizophrenia, in the community.
Because of the common age of onset being in the late teens it can easily be equated with the usual somewhat awkward behaviour and natural rebellion of teenagers, and initially be set aside by both relatives and professionals, resulting in great family trauma, and at times violence or suicide.
It would be interesting to have research into the period of initial onset of the illness and the ability of families to obtain specialist advice for the sick family member, particularly as in this illness the patient has rarely the insight to see the need for medical assistance.
Patients aged 18 or over are deemed legally responsible for their own actions, and it is often with great reluctance that they will agree to see a doctor and possibly begin treatment or undergo admission to hospital.
Presentation of such patients in A&E departments must cause havoc, and although the police have powers to use the Mental Health Act, they may well be unwilling to become involved.
I suggest that research into these problems of the onset of severe mental illness would help in coordination with the discharge of long-term patients from psychiatric hospitals.
OPEN LEARNING OPENS THE DOOR
I qualified as an enrolled nurse in 1977 in Northern Ireland.
In common with many ENs I constantly attempted to update my knowledge and improve my practice.
I proved my ability in further education and attempted to gain a position on a conversion course.
Again in common with many ENs, I was unsuccessful on numerous occasions.
Eventually came a glimmer of hope.
There was a chance of a place on the Nursing Times Open Learning conversion course, but I would have to fund myself.
With constant support from my nurse manager I secured a place, obtained a loan, and actually started to make my long-held ambition come true.
I have struggled to pay the loan and have now obtained a Smith and Nephew scholarship to pay my first year's course fees.
My message to all ENs is: ‘never give up, keep trying and you will eventually succeed’.
I am now in my second term.
The work is hard but I am enjoying every single minute and my peer support is excellent.
NOT JUST AN AUXILIARY
As a regular viewer of Casualty , I am delighted to see that at last television producers have acknowledged that nursing auxiliaries like myself (and health care assistants) do exist, as a health care assistant has now been introduced into the programme.
However, twice now I have heard the character state that she is not a nurse but just a care assistant.
I have made similar statements to patients in the past and then wondered why!
I know that, legally, a person must be qualified to call him/herself a nurse, but all nursing and health care assistant vacancies are classified as nursing posts.
We wear nurses' uniforms, perform basic nursing tasks and are still called ‘nurse’ by most patients, so sometimes I feel a bit confused by all this and wonder whether we undervalue ourselves a little.
Does anyone else feel the same?
THE NEEDS OF PALLIATIVE CARE
As a nurse bound by the code of conduct, I do not think Sister Roisin Hart had any alternative but to report Nigel Cox.
However, I feel that the ‘caring professions’ have a lot to answer for in terms of the attitude held by the general public.
If patients and relatives were confident that pain control would be established and maintained, requests to ‘finish it off quickly’ would diminish.
Unforgivably, all too often relatives who have been assured that their nearest and dearest will not suffer pain find this does not happen when the time comes.
Why are the hospices and Macmillan nurses able to control pain with precision, while in general wards it is still sometimes a case of hit-and-miss?
How often is the decision left to junior doctors in the small hours of the morning who hesitate to increase dosage on the grounds that they don't want to turn patients into addicts?
I feel for Sister Hart and the barrage of criticism she has come under, but in the wider context I feel for every nurse bearing patient advocacy in the face of medical inadequacy.
THE COST OF GRADING APPEALS
As a former clinical grading officer for my local COHSE branch, I was interested to read NT 's recent articles on clinical regrading and the cost of it all.
I noticed in particular the comment that at regional appeals, there were six members on the panel hearing the appeal, all paid.
I have served on three regional appeal panels as a COHSE representative and have certainly never been paid.
The only payment I received was for travelling expenses from COHSE.
I think it is important for trade unionists to realise this, so they know their fellow trade unionists are sitting on these appeal panels to try to ensure justice is done, and not for financial gain.
Editor's note: Where staff-side members are NHS employees, they receive paid time off to attend hearings.
They are not gaining financially but there is a cost involved and it falls to the NHS.
This is the point we were making in the article.
MEN'S HIDDEN ILLNESS
Four times as many people die from prostate cancer as from cervical cancer, yet it is under-recognised, under-researched and there is no screening programme.
Catharine Sadler reports
Frank Jessop was in his late 60's when he started needing to get up three or four times each night to pass urine, and he was referred to his local hospital's urology department.
But, says Frank, ‘a few weeks before I got to see a specialist I passed what looked like a bucket-full of blood into the toilet.
I was even more frightened the next morning, when I passed some large blood clots instead of urine, I became very agitated because I thought I must be dying’.
Jack Martin was also nearly 70 when he started to have difficulty in passing urine.
‘My GP told me not to worry and to drink more fluids.
But one evening I found I just couldn't go at all.
I was in agony until a doctor came and passed a catheter to drain the urine away.’
These incidents took place several years ago and fortunately, because both men received prompt expert treatment, both are continuing to enjoy a healthy active old age today.
Frank, whose prostate enlargement was benign, underwent microwave treatment, while Jack, who had prostatic cancer, had surgery and continues to receive monthly hormonal injections for the rest of his life.
Typically, neither Frank nor Jack knew too much about the prostate gland, nor that it could be affected by disease, until it happened to them.
Yet prostatic cancer is remarkably common; coming third in cancer incidence after lung cancer and skin cancer in men, cases have doubled over the past 30 years and, according to experts, look set to double again by the year 2020.
The Cancer Research Campaign (CRC) describes prostatic cancer as ‘the Cinderella of the cancers’.
Despite the fact that it kills 8 000 men each year — four times as many people as die from cervical cancer — it is under-recognised and under-researched.
Indeed, while the government's White Paper The Health of the Nation is full of targets for the screening of breast and cervical cancer, of which it spends about £54 million each year, it contains no such targets for reducing cancer of the prostate gland.
Why, then, does prostate disease, and particularly prostate cancer, remain such a taboo subject and receive such scant attention from health ministers, health educators and men themselves?
One reason might be that it is a case of ‘out of sight, out of mind’, because despite the fact that the chestnut-shaped prostate gland plays a vital secretory role in ejaculation, it is a very hidden organ, surrounding the upper part of the urethra and tucked away under the bladder and behind the rectum.
Most men are unaware of its existence until, around the age of 50, it normally starts to enlarge.
This enlargement may or may not be symptomatic.
However, if it presses on the urethra it will result in abnormal urinary symptoms, which untreated can result in bladder distention, overflow incontinence and possible kidney failure.
Unfortunately, it is impossible for a patient with mild or acute symptoms at this stage to know if he has benign or malignant prostate disease.
Worse still, almost half of those who do suffer from prostate cancer have no urinary symptoms and no inkling that they have anything wrong, until they experience bone pain linked with secondary malignant growth elsewhere in the body, which is likely to cause death within two-and-a-half years.
Amanda Lavelle, a urology ward sister at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, sees many patients with prostatic cancer: ‘Men tend not to go to their GP when they first have urinary symptoms, because they think it is a normal part of aging.
Publicity around President Mitterand's recent diagnosis may alert more men to the possibility of this form of cancer.
‘But unfortunately this condition affects a generation of men who are not well-informed about their bodies.
Consequently, they tend to become shy, embarrassed or jokey about it and are often too timid to report abnormal symptoms to their doctor.’
Felix Lunt, a health visitor working in Rotherham, with experience of running a well-man clinic, believes that men miss out when it comes to routine health screening and body awareness.
‘Women bear children — they have more opportunities for routine contact with health professionals than men.
In addition, the women's movement has tended to focus on women's health issues, while men's are seldom discussed publicly.’
Yet such sociological explanations for men's reticence at reporting abnormal symptoms only serves to underline the absence of a national prostate screening campaign, particularly so since a simple blood test has been available over the last four years which can detect the likely presence of prostate cancer.
Known as the prostatic-specific antigen test, it costs £15 and is currently used by about 20% of GPs.
Although it carries a slight risk of giving false positive results, if followed by a rectal examination it gives a good indication of the presence of prostate malignancy, which can be further confirmed by ultrasound and biopsy.
So why are men over 55 not being screened for prostatic cancer now if a reliable screening method is available?
A spokesperson for the CRF says: ‘The benefits of screening have yet to be proved by a massive random study.’
As the cost of a national screening programme has been estimated at £50 million, government reluctance is perhaps understandable.
But Roger Kirby, a Consultant Urologist at St Bartholomew's Hospital, is one of a group of urologists who earlier this year formed the British Prostate Group  in an attempt to persuade the DoH to fund such a study.
‘We were very disappointed that the Department turned down our group's request to fund a national study.
If we can show that screening reduces deaths by 20%, then a national screening programme is worthwhile.
We at St Bartholomew's are currently carrying out two small studies in another attempt to persuade the DoH.’
But not everyone agrees.
Simon Brewster, a research fellow in urology at Southmead Hospital, Bristol, is putting the finishing touches to another prostatic screening follow-up study to be presented next month.
‘The benefits of a mass screening programme have to prove that prolongation of survival as a result of early disease detection outweighs psychological and financial drawbacks.
Added to this is our awareness that prostate cancer is strange in that it sometimes never progresses.’
And so the argument rages.
Mr Amir Kaisary, consultant urologist at London's Royal Free Hospital NHS Trust, which is becoming a centre of excellence for the diagnosis and treatment of prostate disease, says: ‘To screen nationally or not to screen is very much open to debate.
Particularly as it has been discovered that about 30% of men who die from other causes are also found to have had prostate cancer.’
It is particularly appropriate that the Royal Free Hospital has some of the most up-to-date equipment in the country to evaluate and treat prostate disease, says Mr Kaisary.
Its catchment area encompasses the largest aging population in London, from which two to five new cases of prostatic cancer are diagnosed each week.
Some of the new treatments offered at the hospital, such as drug treatment for malignant conditions or transrectal hyperthermia for benign prostate disease are, the trust claims, particularly cost-effective and advantageous as they avoid the need for a hospital stay required by the traditional prostatectomy and preserve male potency.
But Mr Kaisary, in common with most other UK urologists and urology nurses, believes there is also a strong case for better health education and public information for men about prostate disease, for example, awareness of its inherited link.
‘We now know that a man whose father had prostate cancer is four times more likely to get it himself, and if his grandfather was also affected, it's 11 times more likely.’
he says.
Sister Clare Lewington, who runs the Royal Free Prostate  Laboratory where she helps conduct treatment trials, believes that increasing media coverage of prostate disease is resulting in more self-referrals to her hospital.
Such spontaneous male interest in available health screening was one of the encouraging signs Jeanette Day, clinical nurse manager for Epsom Health Care Trust noticed herself, when she recently ran three ‘well-men days’ during health visiting week.
‘We as nurses have a role in alerting men to abnormal symptoms and giving them information about their health without being too intrusive.
In the past it was felt that women and their health services were neglected, But now I think we are neglecting men's health needs.’
‘We as nurses have a role in alerting men to abnormal symptoms’
Above: Men over 50 are at risk of developing prostate disease.
Right: Enlarged prostate gland shown in dark violet, filling the gold-coloured bladder
MANAGEMENT FADS?
Job evaluation and performance-related pay are two concepts NHS managers seem enamoured with.
Do they have something to offer nursing, or are they just ‘flavour of the month’ Peter Mason investigates
JOB EVALUATION
With a third of all health authorities and trusts now thought to be entertaining the idea of introducing job evaluation schemes for nurses, warning noises are beginning to be sounded from all quarters.
The message: if you thought clinical grading was a mess, wait until you see this one.
Job evaluation has long been popular in the private sector as a way of formally assessing the relative value of different jobs — and it is frequently used as a basis for deciding pay.
In the health service, job evaluation systems already cover ancillary, administrative and technical staff, but in nursing, where Whitley pay and conditions of service have long been established and clinical grading is now under way, there are many who think job evaluation is unnecessary.
The NHS management executive, however, appears to have put job evaluation second only to skill mix on its list of priorities.
COHSE says trusts and units are joining a ‘lemming-like rush’ to abandon their current systems in favour of job evaluation, despite scant proof that the system works effectively or can be properly adapted to nursing.
As the nursing profession waits to hear how it will do in the next pay round, there are fears that job evaluation could be used to take significant numbers of nurses out of current pay and grading structures, creating new pay set-ups unique to each different trust or unit.
In the process, job evaluation could terminally undermine clinical grading, making a new system virtually redundant before it has even got off the ground.
Sue Hastings, of the Trade Union Research Unit at Ruskin College in Oxford, recently warned delegates at an RCN stewards' conference that clinical nurses — especially those in high-tech areas and with teaching roles — would lose out through job evaluation, She argues that existing job evaluation schemes are too often management-biased, with the danger that clinical specialists who did well out of clinical grading might find themselves downgraded.
And she warns that introducing job evaluation almost certainly means throwing out clinical grading.
‘On the basis of experience in other sectors we would advocate delay in the introduction of schemes while a programme of training in basic principles of job evaluation is provided,’ she says.
‘There is concern about the speed with which the trend towards job evaluation is occurring, especially in the light of the relatively low level of experience of job evaluation among health service personnel.’
Despite Ms Hastings warnings, there is little evidence that trusts and health authorities are taking time to think job evaluation through.
With positive encouragement from the DoH, many units are now considering what type of evaluation they should be introducing, not whether they should be introducing it at all.
Indeed, the key choice many managers now seem to be making is whether they develop their own system or buy one ‘off the shelf’ from several management consultants in the field.
Main players at the moment are KPMG, who are touting the ‘Medequate’ system, Hay Management Consultants, who have their own ‘Hay’system and the Wyatt Company.
COHSE researcher Steven Weeks say his main concern is that the schemes being marketed ‘are not designed to measure the type of jobs nurses do’.
Clinical grading was specifically drawn up for nurses, ‘yet it will start to break up as soon as job evaluation is introduced’.
So far COHSE has drawn encouragement from the fact that despite general interest no unit or trust has managed to get a job evaluation scheme off the ground.
But it knows it will only be a matter of time before unions have to become involved.
RCN labour relations officer Phil Gray says the college is committed to maintaining clinical grading but is nevertheless involved in talks about potential job evaluation schemes in various parts of the country.
Some of the half dozen job evaluation schemes being peddled in the NHS ‘should be given wealth warnings,’ he says.
But despite the college's fears, Mr Gray is surprisingly optimistic.
He argues that job evaluation is not the dire threat some make it out to be — simply because it may not catch on.
‘There's been evidence of naïvety among NHS managers who've been seduced by fashionable trends.’
he says, ‘But they've been brought up short when they've suddenly realised just how complex these job evaluation schemes are — and just how much care has to be taken when introducing them.
It may be that most managers decide job evaluation is very difficult, extremely time-consuming, and too expensive.
‘That's why we haven't adopted a position of being wholly for or against it.
I wouldn't say it will die a natural death, but I think the current burst of enthusiasm for looking at job evaluation may cool significantly when managers actually get close to it and start to assess what they have to do to introduce it.’
PERFORMANCE-RELATED PAY
Latest rumours on the government's forthcoming pay deal for health workers suggests that even if nurses get 0% pay rise there may still be a push for performance-related pay (PRP).
Yet as the health service steels itself to introduce PRP at the Department of Health's behest, two new reports have cast serious doubts on its effectiveness.
In the first study, carried out by the Institute of Manpower Studies and the RNC, researchers have concluded that the experience of PRP for nurses in the USA has produced ‘sufficient evidence to raise doubts about the efficiency of monetary incentives in raising employee performance in the public sector’.
Far from motivating nurses, PRP has tended to ‘undermine and destabilise’ what is essentially a job reliant on team spirit, says the report.
What is more, introducing PRP for nurses has added anything up to a billion dollars to administrative costs in the US public sector — a figure which may send shudders down the spine of Britain's cost-conscious NHS.
In the second report, also commissioned by the Institute of Manpower Studies but carried out jointly with the Equal Opportunities Commission, examination of merit pay schemes in Britain showed that PRP ‘can systematically disadvantage women employees’.
Evidence gathered from a cross section of different employers suggested that while the female-dominated nursing profession might fare no worse in the way its job performance is rated, bias is almost certain to enter the merit pay process when those ratings are translated into pay awards.
‘We found evidence that some women received lower pay increases than men even when their performance ratings were the same.’
says the institute.
‘Managers value different attributes in men than they do in women, which often reinforces gender stereotypes.’
Faced with such evidence, Marc Thompson — an IMS research fellow who worked on both studies — believes that the Department of Health should tone down its enthusiasm for PRP in the health service, despite the Citizens' Charter pledge to introduce merit pay into the public sector.
‘A lot of health service managers are scared out of their wits about having to introduce it,’ he says.
‘My experience is that units and trusts are often trying to run before they can walk when it comes to PRP, and there are many other things they haven't got right yet — like training — which are important if they're going to operate it successfully.
PRP can destroy an organisation's ability to achieve other things.’
Apart from the administrative and cost difficulties, linking nurses pay to performance is fraught with danger, says Mr Thompson.
‘Nurses are involved in jobs that require a lot of coordination and cooperation with others, so an individual's role is very much dependent on other people.
Systems which reward nurses individually can actually increase competition in what is essentially a cooperative work environment and that can be damaging to efficiency.
‘Gainsharing’ PRP systems, which reward groups rather than individuals for increased productivity, could be one solution, he says.
Gainsharing is favoured in many US hospitals, where surveys highlighted in the RNC report show that managers and nurses feel PRP is a potential demotivator.
Gainsharing is COHSE's favoured option if PRP is introduced ‘because it recognises team work and would be easier to monitor’— but the union has strong reservations.
‘It's not something we're opposed to in all circumstances, but for nurses we think there are major practical problems,’ said a spokesman.
‘There's the whole question of what measures of performance can be used, in particular whether quality of care can be properly measured and linked to pay.
And the evidence suggests that PRP is discriminatory against women and ethnic minorities, both of whom are strongly represented in nursing.’
Right now only six NHS trusts have actually introduced PRP for nurses, but almost all trusts have made it known they want to introduce the system at some point.
COHSE says experience in three West Dorset trusts, the South Devon Healthcare NHS Trust and the East Gloucestershire NHS Trust has not convinced it of PRP's worth.
COHSE argues that most trusts are waiting for a system to prove itself somewhere else before showing their hands — and that PRP will not work unless there is money to fund it.
‘There will definitely be an expansion of PRP,’ says a spokesman, ‘but it's difficult to speculate how far it will spread.
We believe the main motivation for bringing in PRP is to save on the wages bill, but evidence from the private sector shows that in the short term at least it actually increases costs.
Some managers are convinced that PRP will improve performance and raise income, but there's hardly any evidence that it produces any improvements.
It's basically just another management fad.’
Fad or not, the nurses' Pay Review Body may soon be forced to tackle PRP head on.
Last year the government said pay review bodies should encourage moves towards merit pay for the groups they covered and that they should get together with management and staff to produce a PRP system.
For various reasons that has not yet  happened .
LONDON'S FATE
Bernadette Friend summarises the rationale behind the Tomlinson report on services in the capital.
She highlights some of the problems which the inquiry unearthed and lists the main recommendations for change
The problems of London's hospital and community services have long been recognised.
The main problem, according to the report's authors, has been over-emphasis on the acute sector, including the large number of teaching hospitals, which has left the community services underfunded and underdeveloped.
The crunch, however, has come with the introduction of the internal market in the health service, with the separation of purchasers and providers and the withdrawal of money from London, as health-care purchasers look for cheaper, locally based services.
This, along with the introduction of capitation funding — where DHAs will be funded on the basis of a capitation fee for their residents — has forced the issue.
The view was taken that, without strategic intervention, the city's financially ‘sick’ hospitals, as they have been described, would have gone to the wall.
The main thrust of the inquiry team's recommendations is for services to be concentrated on fewer sites and the money released to fund improvements in the community.
Initially £140 million should be spent on improving GP practice premises and setting up four new community units, the team says.
Sir Bernard Tomlinson was asked by the government last October to advise on the organisation of and the inter-relationships between the NHS and medical education and research in London.
The report makes for fairly depressing reading, as it describes how the capital fares worse than the rest of the country in many areas of service.
It notes that while the rest of the country has developed its community services, the ‘overwhelming emphasis’ in inner London has been on hospital facilities.
The report's authors believe that the developments in community care could contribute to further reductions in acute hospital services.
They would do this by promoting a healthier population not requiring such frequent hospital admission, by providing health care in more appropriate settings and by freeing ‘blocked’ beds more rapidly.
Inner London hospitals face a significant reduction in demand for in-patient beds, and the report says the total requirement will shrink substantially over the next five years.
But the Tomlinson report is anxious to point out that piecemeal bed closures and efficiency savings will not meet the scale of the reduction in capacity envisaged.
It warns that there must be careful planning to ensure an orderly rundown.
‘If hospital capacity is closed faster than demand falls, waiting times in inner London hospitals will rise.
If it is not closed fast enough, some — perhaps many — hospitals will fall into a spiral of financial decline…
’ Tomlinson says decisions on the first hospitals to close should be made ‘urgently’.
The report says that the closures and mergers recommended, together with other changes planned, would result in a reduction in gross capacity of around 4 200 beds.
Currently, around 1 700 beds are closed, leaving 2 500 earmarked for possible closure.
The report also criticises the present unwarranted duplication of specialist services.
This it says, is partly owing to the ‘lack of consistent pan-London planning’.
But there are other contributory factors, for example, the close identity between each medical school and ‘its’ hospital which leads to having specialties in every hospital and the well-intentioned efforts of trustees of ‘teaching hospitals and special health authorities who marshal sometimes huge wealth in support of priorities which may not always accord with the health needs of the population.’
The report calls for ‘sensitive but firm’ reduction of manpower.
It mentions ‘inevitable reductions’ in the number of nurses and others including ancillary staff and managers.
‘For some,’ it says, ‘new opportunities will open up elsewhere’.
But it adds: ‘We would not wish to underestimate the difficulties that individuals may face during the period of transition….’
It is vital that decisions about changes to hospitals are taken ‘as quickly as possible’ as a time-lag will inevitably sap morale, the report concludes.
SOME OF THE PROBLEMS IDENTIFIED BY THE REPORT
Family health services expenditure per capita in London is less than in other inner city areas and the quality is poorer.
Community nursing services in the capital are more expensive.
Staff costs are higher and effective contact is more difficult.
Population turnover is high, large numbers are not registered with GPs, high proportions are from other cultures or homeless, refugees are common — in the North Thames regions an estimated 120 000 — and AIDS causes many deaths.
On average, inner London districts employ around one third fewer district nurses per capita of the resident population over the age of 75 than comparable districts outside London and the cost per contact is 60% higher than the national average.
Forty-six per cent of the premises in the four inner London FHSAs are below minimum standards — the average in England is 7%.
London has three times the national percentage of GPs over 65, twice the proportion of single-handed GPs and a higher incidence of large lists.
In some HAs only half the referrals to district nursing services comes from GPs.
Inner London has less than a third of the level of nursing home provision of England as a whole and this adds to the blocking of acute beds in hospitals.
The inquiry noted a relatively small number of community mental health services in London as a whole.
Inner London is dominated by teaching hospitals and medical schools and has traditionally taken in a significant number of patients from outside its area.
There is a concentration of specialised services and a higher proportion of admissions occur for elective treatments and through A&E than emergency GP referral.
Waiting times for elective treatment in inner London teaching hospitals is higher than the average, although the report noted an improvement in the past year.
Changes in patient flow and hospital organisation have reduced the number of beds in inner London by 5 000 over the past 10 years.
THE TOMLINSON REPORT'S MAIN RECOMMENDATIONS
ACUTE SECTOR
In the acute sector the report lists four pairs of hospitals as heading their vulnerability ranking — University College and the Middlesex; St Bartholomew's and the Royal London: St Thomas's and Guy's; and Charing Cross and the new Westminster and Chelsea.
The team recommends:
UCH and Middlesex — cost effective development of existing sites at UCH
St Bartholomew's and the Royal London Hospitals — should merge on the Royal London site
Homerton Hospital — should be a separate and independent management unit, later becoming a trust
A&E for the City of London area — services should be rationalised on one site
Charing Cross — should take on the relocated Royal Brompton and Royal Marsden hospitals
London Chest Hospital — should be merged into the Royal London
St Mary's Hospital — the planned trust should go ahead but with reduced beds
Queen Elizabeth Hospital for Children — should be integrated into the proposed Homerton Trust
Queen Charlotte Hospital — should give services elsewhere; sites to be sold
Moorfields Eye Hospital — consideration to be given to developing an ambulatory ophthalmic service for the North Thames area
Royal National Throat Nose and Ear Hospital — should merge with UCH
St Mark's Hospital — should move to Northwick Park; City Road site to be sold
Hospital for Tropical Diseases — to merge with UCH.
There is also a recommendation to make SHAs, the majority of which are single-specialty hospitals and prone to isolation, part of a major hospital complex.
COMMUNITY
The team recommends:
An increase in community nurses and other staff
Development of GP surgeries and health centres into ‘focal points’, alongside improvements in nursing and residential care and community hospitals
Management skills and systems development to ensure efficient use of resources in a more dispersed service and better targeting of health need
A shift from the predominantly hospital-based medical research into the community
A series of recommendations to change the deficiencies in GP services is recommended, including the setting up of ‘primary care development zones’.
London has a significantly higher use of A&E.
Suggestions to change this include improving the scope and accessibility of GP services and adapting hospital A&E services by including GPs and nurse practitioners among the A&E staff.
There should be a review of specialisms and the provision of psychiatric admission beds.
Substantial changes to medical education and research are outlined.
Under nurse training the report points out that the changes in the development of primary and community health services will have a major impact on training, which regions will need to take into account.
For those nurses relocating from the acute sector to community services, training will be needed to prepare them for new ways of working.
A call for collaboration between the four Thames regions and higher education institutions is made.
It recommends that resources for the developments in primary and community care to pump-prime and provide transitional support be secured urgently.
THE NURSE'S VOICE
Bernadette Friend talks to Pearl Brown, the nurse member of the team which drew up the Tomlinson report
Whatever the future effects of the Tomlinson report on nurses and nursing services, nurses are being affected now by the problems of the capital, says Pearl Brown, primary services manager of the Riverside Health Authority and a member of the inquiry team.
Hospitals in financial difficulty are shedding staff and some districts are opting for staff redundancy.
But while the report has been detailed on closures and mergers, it has been less so on the specifics about how the shift to the community will be achieved.
‘There is obviously going to be displacement of people as specialist sites are concentrated,’ says Ms Brown, adding that it would be necessary to ensure that the right amount of nursing support and training is available as the displacement of nurses takes place.
She suggests a ‘clearing house’ across London to be set up to ensure that, if nurses are no longer required in one hospital, there is a mechanism to collate the information and pinpoint areas where their skills are needed.
Ms Brown recognises the potential dilemma which the shift to community services would create for nurses already working in or waiting to go into the acute sector.
But she feels this could be overcome if managed well.
Much of the work going on now in hospitals would be carried out in the community, she points out.
‘I think there is great potential for nursing which has got lost in all the hype about hospitals.’
Broader forms of care will need to be developed, and she believes it is up to nurse leaders to ‘make it happen.’
‘Unless something is done about what is going on and a stop is put to the chaos, then the health-care prospects for London are very gloomy.’
She urges all staff to think about what people and the service need.
But many hospitals have ‘built-up’ pockets of specialisms and she does not think that concentrating them on fewer sites would mean the loss of centres of excellence.
Pearl Brown: good management could ease the changes
LETTER FROM BARTS
Simon Rundell, who works in one of the London hospitals threatened with closure, has a few home truths for the health secretary
Virginia Bottomley is a very nice woman: soft-spoken and yet forceful, articulate and obviously clever, and the last person I expected to talk to about my job.
But now I had come face to face with her four days after she stood before the House of Commons and declared that there were too many hospital beds in London, and that as a result, St Bartholomew's Hospital, along with numerous others great and small, would have to close, merge or become emasculated.
The reason for Sir Bernard Tomlinson's drastic recommendation is, apparently, that London is overstocked with health care.
Yet it is plainly obvious to anyone who works in central London, or has tried to get admission to hospital there, that this is untrue.
These hospitals cited as ripe for closure are not half-empty.
Go to any critical care unit in London and you will not find empty beds.
Why is it, for instance, that coronary care cover frequently has to be sought from outside London?
Where are these 5 000 empty beds they claim should be lost?
That is not to say that I disagree with Sir Bernard's suggestion that the primary health-care system needs to be radically overhauled.
I am frankly surprised that this home truth hasn't hit home before: vast areas of London don't have adequate GP cover.
A single GP working alone, for example, covers Soho, and this is why many clients choose to use the accident and emergency department of University College Hospital and Barts as their primary point of contact with the health-care professions.
Primary care is important for Londoners, both now and in the future.
But this won't remove or even significantly reduce the demand for tertiary referral.
Indeed, it may even increase it.
To try to build up primary care while running down Barts and other hospitals is like shooting your dog in order to get a cat.
Tomlinson has rounded on the central London teaching hospitals as though they were dole-scroungers, living off the hard work of the rest of the NHS, providing nothing in return and remaining eternally ungrateful.
Speaking from the sharp end, I get a very different perspective.
There is no short-fall in demand.
Barts holds contracts from more health authorities than any other: success in the internal market if ever I heard of it.
Not every clinical condition will be managed efficiently in the district general hospitals which are supposed to take over from us.
Not every hospital has the resources or the skilled nursing staff to see to the special needs of many of these patients.
A grossly unstable patient from a referring hospital turns out to be a typical (for us) unstable angina; a patient with life-threatening ventricular tachycardia can only come to Barts for the appropriate highly specialised medical or nursing therapy (or one of the few other centres, most of which are also on the Tomlinson hit-list).
We are often contacted for advice by other hospitals.
Why?
Because the nursing of the rare and bizarre has to be developed by centres of excellence.
The simple fact is that there needs to be an elite within the NHS, no matter how divisive that may sound if you're reading this in Dorset or Manchester or Gwent.
Certain important services must be provided in a central location.
And don't think this is merely London's problem.
After the demise of the central London Hospitals, what about the university hospitals?
What will the future be for Southampton, Leeds, Cardiff or Newcastle?
And if they are closed, where will the patient with bone tumours or tachydysrhythmia go?
It is essential that Londoners have the same rights of access to acute health care as their provincial counterparts.
It takes half an hour to get from Bournemouth to Southampton, but it can take up to an hour to get from Barts to the Westminster hospital.
So will closing these hospitals improve acute care?
I think not.
My personal reaction to Tomlinson is that its conclusions about Barts and the other hospitals scheduled for closure are fundamentally wrong.
London needs the current establishments of beds, and needs to be able to resource them fully.
I wanted to invite Virginia back to the unit to show her what these rationalisations will really mean at the sharp end.
I wanted to show her why hospitals like Barts are crucial as providers not only of specialist care of the rare and the bizarre, but also superlative care of the plain and usual, with a quality of nursing that surpasses the ‘barely adequate’ striven for by the NHS executive.
Unfortunately, facing Mrs Bottomley reduced me from passionate eloquence to an inarticulate oaf, and my opportunity was lost.
I feel sure that my grassroots viewpoint faded into insignificance, as the pundits, the consultants and the chief executives prepare to do battle.
I did, however, manage to express my views as a practitioner, as one who actually nurses in the system of which she is so poorly informed, and I suggest that if more of us did the same, then perhaps our collective expertise may have a greater influence.
MEGA-MOAN
A lot of people have been laying into the Tomlinson report on London's health services, and it was hardly surprising to find one of the most vociferous was NUPE's general secretary Rodney Bickerstaffe.
However, his blazing indignation appears to have given him a nasty dose of alliterative-itis in a NUPE press release condemning the report as ‘more market madness mirroring the mayhem in the mines’.
More a case of making a meal out of a mouthful, we'd say….
OUT OF SIGHT
Could this be the break that Virginia Bottomley is looking for in her battle to rein in public spending on health?
According to General Practitioner  ophthalmologists in the United Sates have devised a way of saving millions — by testing patients' eyesight over the telephone.
This apparently involves sending patients an eyesight test card and then running through the test itself over the telephone.
And according to the researchers, the results have proved ‘remarkably accurate’.
Of course, the possibilities that such a cost-saving break-through opens up are almost limitless.
How about hearing tests by post, for instance, or blood pressure by fax and heart bypasses by special messenger services?
An eye-opening prospect, one might say.
BACK TO THE FUTURE
Are officials getting a little worried about the outcome of the vote by COHSE, NUPE and NALGO staff on a new super union?
We only ask because the details of the voting process, as published in the COHSE Journal , reveal that voting begins on Monday, November 16 — and closes on Monday, November 7, nine days earlier!
At this rate, we confidently expect that the results of the ballot will be announced sometime last year.
SHARP OBSERVATION
There is an interesting article in this month's Professional Nurse on surgical intervention to deal with a skin condition called  hidradenitis suppurative.
The author?
Yes, it just had to be — a Mr Cutting.
BIG FAT PORKIES
If you're feeling overweight and under-exercised, help is at hand — in the shape of a whole range of new excuses for not doing anything about it.
The excuses have been collected by community dieticians from Bradford Hospitals NHS Trust who have been busy spreading the word about the importance of healthy eating.
Some of the reasons they encountered for not losing weight included ‘I haven't been to the toilet yet today’, ‘I've been arguing with my husband’, ‘I absorb fat through my skin’,(especially popular with people working in chip shops and serving school meals) and ‘it's the cough medicine I'm having for my sore throat’.
What the report doesn't say is whether any Bradford people actually took the dieticians' message to heart.
Maybe they reckon they've also managed to absorb that through their skin….
Nursing may have gone through massive changes in the past years, but the humour — and image of the nurse — appears to have remained remarkably constant (or stagnant?), if these postcards are anything to go by.
The cards, which cover the period from 1910 to 1945, belong to David Watkins from Bangor in Gwynedd who has been collecting samples of nursing humour for many years.
Has anyone else got other examples?
All contributions gratefully received
Why, we wondered, was a photo of RCN general secretary Christine Hancock juxtaposed with a short piece in the Evening Standard on BBC 2's Rough Guide to Careers ?
Closer scrutiny revealed, surprisingly, that the picture was not of Ms Hancock at all but of TV personality and ‘Yoof’ expert Janet Street-Porter.
Are they, as Private Eye might say, by any chance related?
BREAKING THE SOUND BARRIER
Jennifer Kelsall, winner of the 1992 NT/3M National Nursing Award for education, describes to Ruth Devlin her initiative to help deaf women in pregnancy and labour
At the beginning of 1990, Jennifer Kelsall helped a deaf woman give birth to her first child at Wythenshawe Maternity Hospital in Manchester.
A midwife with 25 years experience, she thought she had done a good job — then she discovered the truth.
‘I have to say I thought I'd done brilliantly.
She had an interpreter with her.
I used sign language, and I worked on the assumption that all deaf people can lipread.
So I mouthed the words nice and slowly.’
After the mother had gone home, Mrs Kelsall bumped into the community midwife, and asked how her client was.
She was horrified by the reply.
‘It turned out she'd been terrified during the delivery.
She didn't sign, and whatever words she might have been able to lipread were lost because the lighting in the delivery room was terrible.
‘And because I'd been speaking slowly, my lip patterns were distorted.
She had been to all the parentcraft classes, and had not learnt a thing.’
The lack of communication continued after the delivery.
The woman had taken her baby home without knowing how to feed or bathe it.
It was after this that Mrs Kelsall, a midwifery sister and joint team leader, embarked on a project that was to take up most of her free time for the next two years.
Realising how little they knew about the subject, she and two staff midwives from Wythenshawe began to research the needs of deaf women during pregnancy.
Through the BBC's See Hear programme, they contacted around 100 deaf mothers.
The letters they received in reply made uncomfortable reading.
‘They said they felt midwives treated them as if they were stupid,’ says Mrs Kelsall.
‘The midwives talked to their partner or interpreter instead of to them.
It was the ‘does she take sugar’ syndrome.
They didn't get the information they needed, so they knew nothing about things like alternative positions during labour.’
Mrs Kelsall believed the mothers' experiences were not usually the result of a lack of professional standards but of basic ignorance among midwives about how deaf people communicate.
‘As a midwife I thought I knew how to communicate with mothers, but my skills with deaf women were abysmal,’ she says
She and her colleagues began an intensive course in deaf awareness.
With the help of audiologists, interpreters and deaf people, they learnt about aural anatomy and physiology, the causes of deafness, lipreading, sign language, and about aids for deaf people.
Armed with this knowledge, they were able to look at how maternity care was offered in their own hospital, and adapt it.
They consulted deaf women and their interpreters, and re-evaluated their work, to make sure they were getting it right.
When the next deaf mother-to-be booked, she was met by a team of three midwives who felt better equipped to help her.
For one thing they arranged for continuity of care, before, during and after the birth.
Right at the beginning of hospital antenatal care, the researchers found there was a risk of a breakdown in communication.
Booking clinics were not geared to the needs of deaf mothers, who needed to be greeted and dealt with individually.
‘Imagine the receptionist looking down at her list of patients, and saying   ‘Mrs Brown please’.
If Mrs Brown is deaf, the chances are she won't notice her name being called.
So right away she is confused, uncertain and at a disadvantage,’ says Mrs Kelsall.
Jennifer Kelsall: Discovered a basic ignorance among midwives about how deaf people communicate.
Before her course she says ‘my skills with deaf women were abysmal’
They discovered that, like tourists in a foreign country, deaf people may smile and appear to understand because they fear looking stupid.
‘I have to make a point at every stage of care of saying ‘if you can't understand me, tell me.’
And no matter how long it takes, we will understand each other— all without making the mother feel stupid.’
The research team found that conventional parentcraft classes were often unsuitable.
Deaf mothers may need a separate tour of the hospital, and separate explanations about technical equipment, drugs, labour and birth.
Because of educational difficulties, many deaf people, though intelligent, have poor reading and writing skills.
Existing parentcraft books and leaflets, couched in unfamiliar language, are therefore often unsuitable.
Some deaf mothers need one-to-one teaching and more time to digest the information.
Information about the effects of painkilling drugs is particularly important for lipreading mothers, since drugs which make them drowsy are likely to make them less able to communicate.
The delivery itself has to be lit with communication in mind: lights which throw the midwife's face into shadow make lipreading impossible.
Sign language is difficult for the midwife to use, she does, after all, have her hands full at the delivery.
A partner or interpreter who understands the mother's sign language is essential.
After the birth, mothers usually need individual time and extra support to learn how to feed and care for their babies.
There is also the question of a special baby alarm when they get home.
Another important issue that emerged out of the project was the identification of the babies at risk of impaired hearing.
Even today some babies go undetected and midwives have an important role in identifying babies who should have early hearing tests.
It is not only deaf parents who could have affected children.
At birth babies who have been jaundiced, premature or have had certain antibiotic therapies — to list just a few instances — should also be screened for impaired hearing.
The research team acquired a mine of information, which they decided to put into a teaching pack for midwives and other health professionals, and it was then that the project began to take over Mrs Kelsall's life.
With the help of her midwifery manager, she raised funds from the hospital to print and collate the material.
She spent evenings assembling it in her own house and sending it out to midwives.
The See Hear programme publicised it on television.
Every time it did, Mrs Kelsall was flooded with requests.
She sold over 100 packs.
Eventually, she was given a small office at the hospital to use as a base.
The pack contains information on: aural anatomy and physiology; hearing loss; communication methods; deaf awareness; care before, during and after birth; parentcraft teaching; evaluating care; genetic counselling; identification and screening for hearing loss in the newborn; useful contacts, and a list of further reading.
The emphasis is on individual care.
‘Every single deaf woman is different, with different perceptions about what she wants while pregnant.
They need information’, says Mrs Kelsall.
As they began to sell, the packs became self-financing.
Mrs Kelsall set up a trust fund from the profits.
Some of the money provided equipment in the hospital for deaf mothers.
In particular it has paid for a text telephone — or ‘minicom’— for the delivery suite.
This device enables deaf parents to telephone the unit by typing a message, instead of speaking, and reading the reply on their own minicom screen, instead of listening.
It is portable and could also be used by a community midwife.
Further money has been used to buy hand mirrors for each delivery room.
Deaf mothers often said they did not understand descriptions of the advance of the baby during the second stage of labour and would have liked to see what was happening.
This option is now available to them — and of course also to hearing mothers using the unit.
The project has also led to a small midwifery team being established at Wythenshawe Hospital to care for deaf parents.
Then a workshop for deaf people in Scotland offered to print the information from the pack into book form.
It has recently been published.
The research team organised a study day, which received ENB approval.
Four more have been held since, and around 200 midwives have taken part.
The study day includes a talk by a deaf mother with four children.
Although she is no longer parcelling up teaching packs, Mrs Kelsall still finds her spare time eaten up by the project.
She has been invited to speak at conferences and study days all over the country.
Next May, she hopes to present a paper at the International Confederation of Midwives in Vancouver.
The research team has also lobbied firms about updating and adapting their video material for deaf parents.
After a great deal of persuasion, a baby food manufacturer agreed to get a video, which shows transition from breast to bottle-feeding, signed and sub-titled.
Mrs Kelsall recently received a letter from the British Deaf Association asking her to discuss ideas for updating a film for mothers on maternity care.
Around 700 deaf women give birth in the UK each year.
That means many midwives will come across a deaf mother only occasionally.
But the need for information on this small group is evident.
Mrs Kelsall has received over 400 letters asking for help since she began the project, and they are still arriving.
Ten tips for midwives when caring for deaf mothers
1.
The midwife must establish the deaf mother's own method of communication and understand its uses and limitations.
The main methods are: Writing pad, hearing aids, lip-reading, finger spelling, sign language, using an interpreter.
2.
Always allow enough time for explanations and for the woman to repeat what she has learnt.
3.
You should have your face well lit so that your mouth is not in shadow.
Do not stand with a light or window behind you.
While adjusting a spotlight to illuminate the perineal area take care not to throw your face into shadow, or lip-reading will become impossible.
4.
Always face the mother.
Do not cover the mouth.
Do not turn away or look down, while speaking.
Masks should not be worn.
5.
Don't speak too quickly but do not ‘overmouth’ words by speaking in an exaggeratedly slow manner.
6.
Speak in sentences rather than individual words.
Avoid jargon and technical terms.
Don't get impatient.
Smile, don't frown.
7.
Writing down certain words may be useful but remember that some deaf mothers may have limited written English and so may not fully understand.
8.
Pethidine and Entonox may interfere with concentration and therefore lipreading ability.
But it is for the mother to decide whether she has pain relief.
9.
Remember that teaching deaf mothers, both antenatally and postnatally, will take more time than normal.
10.
If the mother has acquired deafness she can be reassured that her baby will not inherit deafness from her.
If the cause is congenital or unknown, then it is possible her baby may inherit her disability, in which case further investigation may be desirable.
BEATING BULIMIA
A team in Bristol is helping women with bulimia overcome their binge-eating and purging.
Alysun Jones and Sam Stone describe the therapy
The facts about bulimia Regular bouts of binge-eating are the main features of bulimia.
These binges are accompanied by feelings of loss of control, self-induced vomiting, laxative abuse, vigorous exercise, or strict dieting to prevent weight gain.
Women with bulimia are generally over-concerned about their shape and weight.
The symptoms of bulimia can be alarming.
Those affected may be vomiting many times a day and may also be abusing laxatives.
Binge-eating and purging can have serious physical consequences which may, in extreme cases, result in death.
Binge-eating can cause menstrual disturbances, acute swelling of the stomach and also salivary gland enlargement.
Vomiting can lead to dental erosion and gastrointestinal reflux.
Vomiting and laxative abuse can trigger metabolic disturbances such as hypokalaemia.
Cardiac irregularities, kidney dysfunction, epileptic seizures, muscular spasms, peripheral paraesthesia, weakness, lethargy, oedema, and dehydration can all result.
Blood samples should be taken to measure the client's electrolyte and urea levels as a matter of routine.
These levels should be monitored regularly in cases of severe vomiting or extreme laxative abuse.
If the woman is abusing laxatives, a gradually reduction regime should be negotiated.
Women with bulimia who are abusing drugs or alcohol or both can benefit from being referred to specialist services, at least initially.
Women who are very depressed may need more intensive individual support before joining others with bulimia in a group.
Women affected by mild to moderately severe degrees of bulimia appear to reap the most benefit from attending group sessions.
Women with severe emotional problems may need counselling on a long-term basis.
Finally, women who are actively anorectic and weigh 85% or less of average expected body weight may not be suitable for referral to a group as they often experience physiological urges to binge as a result of emaciation.
EATING DISORDERS
With the development of community mental health teams, community psychiatric nurses (CPNs) are more likely to meet people with bulimia, most of whom are women.
But few CPNs are experienced in dealing with this eating disorder and may not know how to respond.
A CPN has been a member of the Bristol Eating Disorder Team for the past six years.
Initially he provided an assessment and counselling service for the families of people with eating disorders.
This role has developed to include giving counselling to individual sufferers, co-facilitating a support group, training other professionals and co-running a therapy group for women with bulimia.
The six clients attending our group at the Bristol Eating Disorder Clinic had been referred by their GPs.
They had all used vomiting as their main method of weight control.
The clinic is staffed by a multi-disciplinary team and offers services on an out-patient and in-patient basis to individuals and their families.
The six women completed The Eating Attitudes Test, the Bulimic Investigatory Test [Edinburgh]and the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Test.
Tests were administered before the group therapy started, at its end and at subsequent follow-ups.
All made a commitment to attend the group once a week for 13 weeks.
The group sessions, which ran for 90 minutes each week, opened with the clients discussing what they had eaten during the previous week.
At the end of the session they were set a homework task and were invited to discuss their feelings.
Each session was devoted to a relevant theme and the clients were given handouts summarising the main points.
The themes we selected reflected our views of bulimia, which we believe is a disabling problem with elements that are unique to each woman's experiences but which represent a way of dealing with life's stresses.
Session 1: Introduction
As homework we asked the women to keep a diary and initially to record everything they ate or drank over one week.
We asked them if they had vomited or abused laxatives and asked them to record their weight on a weekly basis.
In subsequent weeks, the women were asked merely to record the food and drink they consumed during binges and to note whether or not vomiting or laxative abuse had occurred.
They were also asked to note details of the situations and their feelings before and after the bingeing.
Keeping a written record or binge diary (see case studies) of what triggers binge-eating can help women disentangle the factors which maintain their eating problems, such as guilt, anger or sadness.
The initial record of all food and drink consumed for a week helped us to see if our clients were depriving themselves of food for long periods and if they were eating balanced meals.
Weighing on a weekly basis reduces  the likelihood that people will weigh themselves obsessionally every day and reassures the women with bulimia that weight does not necessarily go up when they eat three meals a day.
Sessions 2, 3 and 4: education about bulimia
We discussed the effects of bingeing, vomiting, laxative abuse and dieting, ways of breaking the binge-vomit cycle, weight and metabolic rate, and nutrition, calories and meals.
Often women with bulimia do not know that vomiting can cause physical and emotional problems such as depression, withdrawal, anxiety, guilt and shame.
Women with bulimia may also be ignorant of how their behaviour perpetuates their symptoms, creating a vicious cycle which traps them.
Bingeing triggers behaviours which attempt to ‘make good’ the binge, such as vomiting and/or laxative abuse, followed by periods of food deprivation.
These compensatory actions make the person excessively hungry.
This, in turn, makes binge eating more likely.
To break this cycle we asked the women to aim at eating three meals each day and encouraged them to take small steps to reach this goal.
We stressed that their existing methods of weight control were not particularly effective.
Vomiting does not completely eliminate all food from the stomach.
Laxatives are inefficient in preventing the absorption of calories, and any consequent weight reduction is the result of a loss of essential body fluids.
Women with bulimia are often sensitive to minor changes in their body weight.
We emphasised that people's body weight fluctuates during the day and during a menstrual cycle.
Bingeing on carbohydrates also causes water retention and therefore temporary weight gain.
Finally, we discussed nutritional requirements.
Women with bulimia, particularly those with a history of anorexia, have often lost touch with a normal eating pattern.
We stressed the importance of including carbohydrate, protein, fat, vitamins and minerals in every meal.
The homework for these occasions offered the group two ways of breaking out of the bulimia cycle:
To aim towards eating three regular balanced meals a day
To list 10 pleasurable activities immediately available and to engage in one of them when the urge to binge occurs, such as having a bath or telephoning a friend
CASE STUDY: SUSAN Susan, 35, was a teacher and married with two children.
She had suffered from anorexia nervosa since the age of 19.
After a year, excessive hunger led to a loss of control, resulting in binge-eating.
Her weight returned to normal but she began to vomit regularly to keep it stable.
After suffering bulimia for 15 years she sought help because her children were beginning to comment on her abnormal eating habits.
Her secret bingeing and vomiting made her feel depressed and ashamed.
Sharing her experiences and feelings in the group gave Susan enough confidence to tell the others her ‘secret’.
She felt relieved and began to express feelings she had hidden for years.
Gradually she learnt to eat more regularly and healthily, and was able to stop bingeing.
‘Binge’ diary Week 1 Decided to give up vomiting; binged three times 2–3 Noticed that when stressed by children she turned to food and binged 4–5 Binged only once each week 6–7 Returned home and observed how she wanted to please her parents 8–9 On holiday, eating three meals a day — discovered she did not put on weight.
Only one binge 10 Stopped weighing regularly.
Only one binge 11 Decided to allow herself to put on a little weight 12 Gave away ‘thin’ clothes and bought new ones.
No binges, just occasional overeating 13 Felt she still had difficulties to address but was free from her eating problems
Other behavioural strategies included eating slowly in a room away from the kitchen, preparing all food thoroughly before starting to eat, rather than eating standing up during cooking.
Group members were advised not to overstock their kitchen with food, to throw away leftovers, and to buy only small amounts of ‘binge’ foods.
Planning meals and writing shopping lists can be helpful too.
Session 5: stress management
We discussed ways of coping positively with stressful situations, such as using relaxation.
Women with bulimia may use binge eating as a way of coping with stress.
Sessions 6, 7 and 8: dealing with unhelpful thoughts
We looked at how people with bulimia can perpetuate their problems by thinking about their eating habits, shape and weight in particular ways.
Just as certain behavioural habits develop, such as vomiting after every meal, so women with bulimia can develop habitual thoughts and begin to think in a bulimic way.
We encouraged the women to notice and record these bulimic thoughts in a ‘thought-diary’.
We also explored alternative ways of looking at certain events.
They were asked to complete the diary for three to four weeks.
Sessions 9 and 10: relationships past and present
Women with bulimia may have begun to develop the condition as a method of coping with earlier traumatic events.
Links, for example, have been made between a past history of sexual abuse and bulimia.
Members of our group reported painful experiences such as early loss of a parent, parental alcoholism, and an overly close relationship with a mother.
We also looked at how past experiences affected current relationships.
Often women with bulimia repeat past patterns of behaviour in current relationships.
Sessions 11 and 12: expressing feelings
We looked at the central role feelings play in our lives, and at the difficulties women with bulimia often have in expressing them.
Suppression of feelings such as anger, disappointment, grief, anxiety, or even excitement, can lead them to binge.
Bingeing can be seen as a way of ‘stuffing away’ feelings and then getting rid of them by vomiting.
We encouraged group members to look at alternative ways of dealing with feelings, such as talking to a friend, crying, shouting and asserting themselves.
Session 13: body image
We explored what women associated with the word ‘fat’ or ‘thin’.
We discussed pressures from the media for women to be slender.
Most women with bulimia, particularly those with a history of anorexia, have a compelling desire to be thinner.
It is important to expose and challenge the roots of this drive, to help them to change.
We encourage women to accept their body shape.
We added one further session to summarise useful devices for coping with and overcoming bulimia.
We discussed ways of dealing with a relapse and made follow-up arrangements for three, six, nine and 12 months.
It is important to leave time for the group to discuss fears and hopes for the future.
We found that the course effected major changes in five of the six women.
(One woman failed to complete the sessions.)
For example, the average frequency of bingeing fell from four or five time a week to once a fortnight at the twelfth session.
The average incidence of vomiting fell from six times a week to once a week at the last session.
Initial results from the tests administered before the group started revealed group members to have very disordered eating patterns and a high severity of symptoms.
Final scores were much lower on both tests, and they often indicated that symptoms were no longer clinically significant.
The Hospital Anxiety and Depression scores also fell for all but one woman.
The women reported other significant changes in their lives — by the end of the sessions, none of them were intentionally depriving themselves of food and all were eating regular meals.
All said they were experiencing a greater sense of control over their eating.
At the end of the sessions we asked the women for feed back.
All said they particularly valued the ‘binge diaries’ and the educational component.
In addition, they said they appreciated the sense of acceptance, trust and understanding that emerged in the group.
These are qualities of vital importance to the woman with bulimia who feels disgusted, ashamed and unable to accept her behaviour.
Bulimia can become a chronic condition, so it is important that CPNs feel able to help those affected to find constructive alternatives.
CASE STUDY: JENNY Jenny, 20, was a student who had suffered from bulimia for three years.
On average, she vomited twice daily and was obsessed with dieting.
Her parents were academics who valued educational success.
They had wanted her to follow her brother's example by becoming a doctor, but Jenny wanted to pursue a career in the theatre.
However, being unwilling to contradict her parents' wishes she took three science A-levels rather than the arts subjects she preferred.
She became very unhappy but could not express these feelings.
She began to diet, thinking that if she were slimmer, she might feel better about herself.
But within weeks she started bingeing and a binge-purge cycle began.
In the group Jenny started to recognise how she often put the needs of others first.
She was able to change this pattern slowly, beginning to recognise, express and meet her own needs.
‘Binge’ diary Week 1 Binged and vomited four times 2–3 Keeping her diary regularly 4 Returned home and told her family about problems with eating 5 Stopped weighing herself so frequently; binged and vomited three times 6 Ate breakfast for first time 7 Allowed herself to ask for support from friends 8–9 Binged and vomited once each week 10 Expressed her feelings of sadness in the group for the first time 11–12 Ate three regular meals per day; binges much smaller 13 A week free from bingeing and vomiting 14 A week free from bingeing and vomiting
THIN EXCUSES
Rachel Smith describes the desperation and grim pleasures of not eating
EATING DISORDERS
I am 20 years old, 163cm tall, of medium build and weigh 41.3kg.
I am underweight and I look underweight, but still I can't eat normally — that is, eat enough to gain weight.
Why?
The reason I am writing this is to give greater understanding to those who want help and hope to those who need it.
I don't think any single factor led to my illness.
I had never liked my body.
Although outwardly I was a fun-loving, sporty and confident person, inside I felt everyone was prettier, more intelligent and more amusing than me.
I was extremely competitive and had a great desire to win.
I wanted to be the best at everything.
I also felt a need to please people, whatever the cost.
I desperately needed to be everyone's ‘perfect person’— a perfect daughter, sister, girlfriend and friend.
Unfortunately, it's impossible to please everyone, all of the time, at the same time, but I tried.
I hated arguments and dreaded anyone being cross with me or with anyone else.
I am also inclined to hang on to the past.
I don't like change.
When I was at school I hated it, but when I left I wished I were back there.
I suppose I'm having trouble growing up.
By not eating I was going back to the security of needing my family, not being relied upon but having someone to rely on instead.
I am ill biologically, not mad.
I fully understand what I am doing but I cannot stop.
It doesn't have to happen but it is a disease which isn't noticed until too late.
I wish I could have stopped it before it got out of hand.
Unfortunately I didn't realise I was becoming ill until I was ill.
I don't want to die; not any more.
I did at one stage: I could see no point in living and I believed death would be an easier option.
I now have the will to live, but is this enough?
I'm still losing weight and getting weaker.
I still may die, although I can't really believe it.
Looking at it logically, I will die if I continue to lose weight.
It's inevitable because you can't live without food.
Food is my enemy, food is my control.
Food is more frightening to me than death itself.
I'd rather die than eat.
I don't dislike food; all my mental energy is spent thinking about it, longing for it.
There doesn't seem to be a moment that goes by when I'm not thinking about food.
Some days I'll eat until I feel sick and even then carry on eating.
Then I feel ashamed, disgusted with myself.
I eat a minimum for the next seven days.
When I eat I'm scared and out of control.
I've lost what seems like the only control in my life.
I feel fat, gross — even my legs feel flabby, but how can that be?
I'm so uncomfortable — I can feel every bone.
It hurts to sit down, have bath, lie on the floor.
I've watched my muscles waste away — the skin just hangs off me, unable to shrink any more.
I'm cold, tired, weak and unhappy.
Surely if I know all this I should be able to put on just enough weight to make me feel comfortable, or at least stop losing any more?
There's a part of me that says ‘Its OK to eat’, but another part tugs me back and stops me eating.
Even though I have no energy when I don't want to eat, there's a sense of satisfaction.
Every moment is an effort, an ache, but I am in control and I feel good.
I know I'm too thin, I don't like what I look like and I've been told if I lose any more weight I'll have to give up work and be admitted to hospital.
The thought makes me scared, but I still feel relief when the scales show a couple of pounds less.
I have no energy to go out and my social life is nonexistent.
All I do is sleep, work, and count calories.
Exercise is also very important to me.
I'll walk to and from work, rather than take the car.
At the beginning of my illness I was on the exercise bike every day, desperate to lose weight.
Now I'm so thin I can't do sports or swim because I look awful in a swimsuit.
My clothes just hang off me.
I've got no bottom, and I know how awful and bandy I look, but still I feel good when I have to pierce another hole in my belt.
I feel selfish.
I see all the people I'm hurting — my family, my friends and many others.
I'm the only one who can stop this.
How can I put the people I love so much through so much pain?
If I had one wish in the world it would be to stop all this hurt and pain I'm causing.
Why can't I?
Since last Christmas I have been struggling towards getting better.
I'm fighting now.
I am getting psychiatric help, I have a supporting family and good friends and I'm no longer ashamed.
Through counselling I have come to terms with the fact that the world and the people in it aren't perfect, and nor am I.
I am continually fighting against myself.
At the beginning, although I felt that I wanted to get better, I was hanging on to the secure feeling that being ill brought.
People were worried about me.
I suppose it was almost like going back to childhood again.
I desperately needed looking after.
Recently though, I have become less depressed with the help of antidepressants and I've realised that I no longer want to be ill.
I'm fed up with being different from everyone else.
I want to be normal again.
I want to be able to sit with friends around a dinner table and not think about what I am doing.
Eating was natural to me and I want it to be normal and natural again.
I've found a will to fight.
It will be a bitter struggle against myself but I know I can do it.
I will get better.
When I eat I'm scared.
I've lost what seems like the only control in my life
A WIDER FRAME OF REFERENCE
Cherine Woolwich describes how she established and developed her role as an emergency nurse practitioner at St Mary's Hospital, London
NURSE PRACTITIONERS
The emergency nurse practitioner (ENP) is an exciting and innovative role for the accident and emergency (A&E) nurse seeking to extend the boundaries of practice within the clinical area, and also her own clinical expertise.
It is not a new role.
Many nurses in small community hospitals have been working as ENPs, unrecognised and unrewarded, for many years.
However, schemes are beginning to be implemented within large district hospitals as part of initiatives aimed at improving the quality of care in A&E departments.
The A&E department at St Mary's Hospital, London, is one such department.
ENPs work as independent practitioners.
They can treat minor complaints/injuries without reference to a doctor.
It is often patients with low priority problems that wait, sometimes for hours, to be seen in a busy A&E department.
These patients can be given the option of being seen by an ENP rather than a doctor if their complaint/injury falls within agreed parameters.
This can enable them to be ‘fast-tracked’ through the system reducing their waiting time and enabling the medical staff to be directed to the more seriously ill.
It is recognised that the ENP will refer to a doctor as necessary.
ENPs are able to adopt a holistic approach to their patients: they examine, request appropriate investigations, make a diagnosis, carry out the treatment and discharge patients.
Because ENPs deal with patients from start to finish they can be much more flexible in their approach.
Specific and general advice given to patients, in the context of the presenting complaint, is often more readily accepted by them.
At St Mary's, we decided to set up a 10-week pilot study before fully implementing the new role.
This would allow us to make any changes we felt were appropriate and would highlight any unforeseen problems.
Six weeks were spent in preparation for my new role.
There was an enormous amount of planning to do as well as writing the various protocols and policies which would enable me to function as an ENP.
We felt that it was important to have well-formulated documentation in order for the scheme to be recognised and the role legitimised at departmental, hospital and district levels.
I arranged a number of meetings with various staff: with the director of nursing services to discuss the status of the ENP and to look at her additional skills; with our business manager to discuss possible auditing tools for the scheme, availability of statistics, and so on; with the A&E consultant, to look at my long term training needs and the 
development of the role; and with the A&E registrar to agree a system whereby my clinical work could be audited.
Cherine Woolwich at work in A&E.
Far left: Examining an X-ray.
Left, top: reassuring a patient before treating her.
Left, below: discussing a patient's referral with a triage nurse
Supervised clinical practice with senior medical staff was organised.
I spent time attending their daily review clinics and I was able to attend the A&E senior house officer's education meeting and audit groups.
An information board allowed me to keep everyone up-to-date on my progress, stimulate interest and heighten awareness of my role as it developed.
This was important because many of the staff did not fully understand what the role entailed.
In addition, a hand-out was written for all the nursing, medical and reception staff and another for the patients, setting out the proposed procedure for referral to the ENP.
In order to overcome the difficulty of the ENP not being able to prescribe tetanus immunisation, a protocol was written and approved which set out the circumstances under which a named ENP could administer a dose prescribed by the consultant.
The local health authority accepted vicarious liability for this protocol.
There was a great deal of opposition to requesting X-rays when it was first proposed as part of the ENP's role.
I wrote a draft policy and sent it to the radiology department for discussion at their departmental meeting.
For the first two weeks of the pilot study I was unable to request any X-rays.
However, by the third week my proposal had been accepted.
A five-day training programme was agreed.
In addition, I was to attend one of the national radiation protection study days and receive certification.
The consultants and registrars undertook to see the X-rays and examine the patient, document appropriate treatment and countersign the request forms during the pilot study and until the training had been completed.
I was not allowed to request X-rays without a registrar or consultant being present in the A&E department.
Table 1.
Conditions treated by the ENP without reference to a doctor
Minor injuries below the elbow and knee.
These include grazes, lacerations, puncture wounds, superficial burns and scalds involving less than 2% of the body surface
Patients requiring tetanus immunisations only, or in addition to the above
Removal of tampons
Removal of easily visible foreign bodies from noses and ears
Removal of splinters requiring no anaesthetic or incision
Uncomplicated stings and insect bites
Trivial head injuries where there is no history of amnesia or symptoms
Patients requiring reassurance only
I worked in the department for a total of 37.5 hours per week, comprising a combination of early and late shifts, including alternate weekends.
No night duty was included in the study.
This total included the various meetings and other commitments outside my role as ENP, but within my role as a departmental sister.
The weekly average time spent practising as an ENP was 29.4 hours.
With the patient's consent, the ENP was allowed to treat those conditions listed in Table 1 without reference to a doctor.
It was agreed that all patients under 16 years of age, and injuries resulting from deliberate self-harm would be seen by a doctor.
When patients arrived in the department they were seen by a triage nurse, who assessed the nature of their complaint/injury and prioritised them accordingly, using the department's guidelines
The priorities used are RESUS, Major A, Major B, Minor A and Minor B. The ENP saw only Minor category patients.
On occasions I looked at the casualty cards myself and identified potential clients that for one reason or another were not referred to me.
All patients referred to the ENP were given the opportunity to be seen by a doctor.
During the pilot study I saw 160 patients; only four chose to see a doctor in preference to the ENP.
I examined the patient and wrote the relevant notes on the casualty card.
If it was a straightforward case I could see, treat and discharge the patient without reference to a doctor.
However, if the patient required an X-ray he or she had to be seen by one of the consultants or registrars.
The same applied if antibiotics were prescribed, or a referral to a specialty, usually orthopaedics, was required.
My work was audited throughout the pilot study by the A&E registrar, who examined all the casualty cards of patients seen by me and completed an audit form.
A separate audit of all X-ray requests made by me was carried out.
The 10-week period of clinical practice proved to be invaluable.
Before its commencement we did not know how the ENP would be received in the department or indeed whether the proposed  scheme would turn out to be a workable one.
I was able to identify four problem areas, namely training, various restrictions to my practice, other nurses being unfamiliar with my parameters of practice, and unrealistic expectations of both medical and nursing staff.
My period of training took place as I was practising in the clinical area.
We recognised that training for this role needed to be more structured and now a formal training programme to supplement and extend my training has been set up with the cooperation of senior medical staff.
As sessions were completed by me, a series of certificates of competence was signed for.
Pinpointing the restrictions
It is essential when implementing new, untried practice to proceed with caution.
However, having had the benefit of the pilot study, it was possible to identify specific areas that restrict my practice and so limit my effectiveness:
The whole issue of the ENP requesting X-rays proved to be the linchpin on which the development of the role of the ENP rested.
The greatest single restriction on my practice was not being able to request X-rays when senior medical staff were not in the department, This rendered me ineffective at times when I could be best used, namely evenings and weekends.
Negotiations took place to change this ruling and also to allow me to interpret my own X-rays without having to refer to senior medical staff.
As an ENP I could discuss my patients with the senior medical staff only; in practice this meant the registrars.
I felt that I would be able to work more efficiently if I could refer patients in my care to any of the A&E doctors.
This was a particular problem in the evenings and at weekends when the registrars were on call and not necessarily in the department.
However, it also included periods when, although on duty, they were committed elsewhere in the department.
This point was agreed.
The age range for patients who could be seen by the ENP was 16 year and over.
It was agreed to discuss lowering the age limit to five years with parental consent in cases where there was no obvious bony injury that required an X-ray.
During the pilot study, because the local GPs had not been officially informed of the scheme that we were running, it was agreed that patients arriving with a GP letter would be seen by a doctor regardless of whether the complaint or injury fell within my parameters of practice.
It was agreed that the GPs would be notified of the scheme and sent a copy of my parameters of practice, enabling me to see their patients.
In cases where a patient needed to be referred to a specialty, usually orthopaedics for digital nerve or tendon injuries, a registrar or consultant had made the referral on my behalf.
Negotiations took place with the orthopaedic department to enable me to refer my own patients.
While the nursing staff had been keenly following the implementation of the ENP, some of them did not seem to be familiar with my parameters of practice — I sometimes missed patients that I could have treated because they were not being filtered through to me.
A sign was put up in order to remind staff whenever I was on duty.
Incorporating flexibility
While it was unrealistic to expect one practitioner, with such limited practice, to make a significant difference to the workload of the department, it was possible to identify patients whose waiting time had been shortened because they were able to see an ENP.
If I did not have to involve one of the registrars or consultants my throughput increased.
As a consequence of this increase, a dilemma arose.
Should the ENP carry out the nursing care/treatment of all her patients, or should she delegate some of this work (such as dressings or plastering) to other nurses?
The ENP Policy stated as one of its aims: ‘To give priority to the needs of the patients rather than throughput of the department’.
As a profession, we strive to promote a holistic approach towards our patients.
However, in the clinical area this is not always easy to apply.
A degree of flexibility must be incorporated into the system.
If there are patients waiting to see the ENP, how long is it reasonable for them to wait while she is treating someone else?
Should patients wait to see the ENP if there is no one waiting to see the allocated doctor?
And if there are no Minor patients for the doctor should he or she start to see patients in other areas?
The needs of the patient, the department and the ENP thus need to be balanced.
It was agreed, therefore that it would be appropriate in certain circumstances for other nurses to carry out treatments prescribed by the ENP.
In the event of there being no patients for the doctor to see, they would not see the ENP's patients unless her waiting time was more than one hour.
The waiting time in other areas would be established, and, if appropriate, the doctor would be redirected.
During the period of the pilot study, I kept a weekly account of my workload and activities.
It gave an overview of my clinical practice, progress as the pilot study developed, and it enabled me to identify problems as they arose.
The study proved especially useful when compiling reports for senior managers to see.
There has been an enormous amount of interest in this new and exciting role.
I have received numerous inquiries concerning the scheme at St Mary's and requests for advice and guidance.
An ENP support group was formed comprising an informal network of practising ENPs.
A special interest group for ENPs is also being established by the A&E Nurses' Association.
The results of the 10-week clinically-based pilot study at St Mary's are promising for the future, providing the problems identified in the evaluation of the pilot study continue to be addressed and the issues raised are resolved.
The workload of the ENP will have to be increased in order to have any impact on the department — in particular on the ever-increasing waiting times.
This has been recognised, and my practice is being amended in order to facilitate this.
Training needs, now more fully identified, must be met and competencies obtained, in order to allow formal recognition of skills and knowledge gained by the ENP.
If the problems identified in our study are addressed, the ENP role has the potential to have a huge impact on the quality and delivery of care in the A&E department.
The pilot study helped identify specific areas that restricted my practice and therefore limited my effectiveness
WORKING TOGETHER
Extra staff training is offering mutual benefits for a health authority and nursing homes involved in a policy of contracted beds for long-stay elderly patients.
Steve Dilworth and Liz Smith explain
The use of continuing care beds for elderly people is being more closely scrutinised than ever as a result of the changing NHS culture.
In Medway, a new system of contracted beds in nursing homes is evolving.
It is viewed with some suspicion by staff anxious about the standards of care provided, but there is undoubtedly an advantage to clients, who are able to be cared for in more homely environments rather than long stay wards.
Accepting that contracted beds are a cost-effective, client-oriented solution, the Medway Health Authority committed itself to inspect nursing homes, monitoring standards and promoting good practice through a contractual process in addition to the statutory inspection and registration requirements.
The monitoring process is not an end in itself, and the resulting audit identified training needs for trained and untrained nursing home staff.
The inspector of nursing homes, together with staff development officers and the nurse general manager (elderly), met to discuss the training needs identified following the inspection of the nursing homes in their area.
As an outcome of that meeting, home owners and managers were invited to attend an exploratory meeting at the local hospital.
Attendance was excellent, and there was a positive commitment to some formalised training sessions, especially for care assistants.
Updating sessions were requested for training staff.
The training officers decided to implement a course for care assistants.
An initial draft programme was circulated for comments.
It was loosely based on Roper, Logan and Tierney's model of 12 activities of daily living.
The contents were debated, amended and finalised in a meeting of the home owners and managers to ensure that it met the needs of both  participants and employers.
The course planned to use some experimental learning and group work exercises, both of which were likely to be new concepts to the participants.
Several sessions were to be led by hospital nursing and other professional staff who had done little or no formal teaching before but who showed an interest in the project.
This approach was used because one of the main aims of the course was to promote an attitude change, both among participants in relation to clients and among hospital staff in relation to nursing home care In addition to, the course became a means of enabling development of teaching skills among hospital staff.
Eleven out of the 12 available places were filled by participants from six local nursing homes.
Some participants were funded and released by their home owners and managers, some were merely funded.
The cost was £75 per participant for the six-day course.
Ten participants completed the course successfully, one leaving for personal reasons.
A certificate of attendance was presented on the final day by the chief nursing officer who also stayed for the evaluation.
The inspector of nursing homes also attended many sessions throughout the course, and the involvement of these senior personnel was an indication of the health authority's support for this initiative.
The involvement of senior nurses from the health authority has enabled staff in nursing homes to articulate their training needs
Expectations were examined on the first day of the course and reviewed at the end.
A nominal group evaluation was also carried out.
Feedback was generally positive and the majority of expectations had been met.
The general relaxed and participative style of the course was enjoyed by the participants, as some had expected a ‘chalk and talk’ approach.
The feedback suggested that attitudes had been changed and that there had been an increase in knowledge and skills.
The home owners/managers also had a feedback meeting.
They had observed a ‘more thoughtful’ approach from participants and felt committed to nominating staff for a second course.
They have since suggested an ‘advanced’ course.
Expectations not met by the course centred round the needs of the dying client and managing the violent client.
Further discussion revealed that the speaker's brief on the ‘death and dying’ subject was not specific to the expressed needs of care assistants.
Although they enjoyed the session provided, it was at odds with their expectations.
A second problem centred on the sessions provided by non-nurse speakers.
Here the presentations were less nursing-oriented than expected.
Again, this could easily be resolved by using more nurse speakers.
It was decided to run a recall day at no extra cost to cover the areas identified.
The biggest difficulty related to confidentiality.
The experiential, sharing nature of the course was an essential and much-valued feature, but because nursing homes operate in a market economy, and there is an element of competition, such information-sharing can produce problems.
It became clear that the confidentiality rule needed constant, repeated reinforcement.
A session on confidentiality was included on the recall day to emphasise its importance.
It has been decided that the introductory day on future courses should include a substantial session on confidentiality.
Clear ground rules will be formulated, put on display and will be reiterated.
The involvement of senior nurses from the health authority has enabled the trained staff in nursing homes to identify and articulate their training needs, and guidance is being provided in many areas of practice — for example, care planning, continence management and communication skills.
It is hoped that this will continue in an atmosphere of sharing, as there is great potential for future development.
The health authority does not exist to service nursing homes, so there must be a charge for these services.
However, it is important for NHS staff to recognise and value the role of the nursing home in society and the difficulties that colleagues working in this area have to deal with.
The learning is not all one way.
The course aims to cover costs, but these are difficult to identify.
The income generated is paid into a trust fund enabling further NHS staff development and is available to any staff in participating directorates.
There is already a strong commitment to developing expert practitioners in Medway, as demonstrated by the appointment of staff development officers.
Using the generated income for training enables this activity to become an exchange mechanism.
The health authority is providing skilled training to enhance nursing home standards and in exchange uses the income to fund further development of staff.
This is a working example demonstrating that much remains possible in the NHS of the '90s.
In tandem with developing the care assistant course, the home owners'/managers' meeting originally started to discuss their own needs.
A programme was developed, and meetings have become a regular event.
Held bimonthly, they are hosted by each nursing home in turn, and a chosen topic is considered.
This has widened to incorporate guest speakers, and a request to the nurse education manager to present a session on PREP has resulted in nursing home staff being invited to scheduled seminars in the nurse education centre.
Although the formal agenda item is always very useful, perhaps even more beneficial is the process of sharing.
This could have been problematic among competitors, but was openly aired and dealt with by the group.
Inviting other home owners and managers to each home in turn indicates the extent to which this openness has developed.
THE INTENSIVE CARE EXPERIENCE
Patients in ICUs often need to be sedated and so are unaware of the nursing care they receive, but those with Guillain-Barré syndrome usually remain alert.
This allowed Peter Norrie to get one such patient's opinion of the care provided
CARE STUDY
Brian was an intelligent, articulate and self-motivated man who was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) at Leicester Royal Infirmary with Guillain-Barré syndrome.
Like most Guillain-Barré syndrome patients, he required maximal nursing, medical and physiotherapy care but did not need sedation.
This meant he could tell us about his experience and shed some light on the strengths and weaknesses of the nursing care he received during his 15-day stay in the unit.
Brian had reported general malaise for five days before he developed paraesthesiae in his right arm and weakness in his legs.
His condition deteriorated over the next week until he required ventilation.
He was admitted to the ICU shortly after receiving plasma-exchange treatment.
On admission he had only one eye and some facial movements and was effectively paralysed.
He was consistently tachycardic, hypersensitive and sweaty.
When turned or given other nursing care, his limited movements became agitated.
This was interpreted as evidence of discomfort and distress.
Accordingly, he received 20mg papaveretum per hour for sedation, and his hypertension was controlled with a labetalol infusion.
Plasma exchange began on Brian's second day in the unit and he received five treatments over the next two weeks.
He was started on a steroid trial which induced hyperglycaemia.
This was treated with sliding-scale insulin therapy.
He required bolus opioid to tolerate physiotherapy.
By day six, the opioid infusion had been discontinued and Brian was obviously becoming oriented and better able to tolerate his treatment.
As he became more able to communicate effectively non-verbally, we realised Brian was experiencing panic attacks combined with periods of hypertension.
The nursing staff treated these with bolus opioids and labetalol and a lot of verbal reassurance.
In addition, suctioning of his endotracheal tube cause bradycardias, which occasionally required intravenous atropine, although Brian seemed unaware of this.
The muscle power in Brian's limbs began to return by day four, and by day eight his ventilation was changed from controlled minute volume (CMV) to synchronised intermittent mandatory ventilation (SIMV) to begin the weaning process.
CMV is the simplest form of positive pressure ventilation, where a fixed number of breaths (frequency) of a specified size (tidal volume) are delivered to give a total volume of gas per minute (minute volume).
SIMV is a mode used in weaning patients off a ventilator.
The machine delivers a number of preset breaths as above but allows the patient to breath spontaneously between machine breaths.
Patients can begin to use their respiratory muscles again, which may be weak through disuse.
As the patient becomes stronger, the number of machine breaths is decreased and the patients have to breath more to maintain their minute volume.
Table 1.
Positive and negative aspects of nursing care
The ‘personal touch’ provided by individual nurses
Positive aspects
The reassurance given to him by staff
The encouragement to maximise his own function
Being given time to proceed at his own speed in self-care
Explanations of monitoring, ventilation and medical care given
Lack of intellectual stimulation
Negative aspects
Noise and disturbance in the unit
Sleep interruptions
Becoming emotionally attached to the ICU environment
Word transfer procedure
Brian began to complain of muscle pains and was put back on a low dose papaveretum infusion (2–4mg/hr).
By day nine, he was able to tolerate a continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) circuit, a self-ventilating system, although the patient may still be intubated.
A CPAP circuit delivers humidified oxygen and air to the patient under continuous pressure.
At the end of expiration, therefore, there is still a slight inflation in the lungs which helps to keep the small airways open.
Clinical details of Guillain-Barré syndrome
Guillain Barré syndrome was first defined in 1916 by Guillain, Barré and Strohl in a report about two soldiers who developed paralysis within two weeks of each other.
They described an ascending polyneuritis with a number of features.
First, it often occurs after a generally innocuous viral disease.
There may be other triggers, including infectious mononucleosis, hepatitis, HIV, surgery, lupus and lymphoma.
Typically, a largely symmetric weakness develops over one to several weeks, starting with the hips and legs.
It may progress to arms face and respiratory muscles.
Paraesthesiae are felt in the toes and fingertips which may ascend Eventually, deep-tendon reflexes may be lost.
There is a spontaneous gradual recovery over a period of weeks or months and the protein concentration of spinal fluid becomes elevated.
The condition can occur at any age.
Presentation varies greatly, from an almost exclusively sensory form to a predominantly motor form, and it has been described as ‘a variable constellation of signs of an acute peripheral neuropathy’.
Approximately 25% of patients develop dysphagia, aspiration problems and hypoxia, owing to oropharyngeal and respiratory weakness, and may require ventilation.
Other problems include a variety of autonomic disturbances, including hypotension (5–10%), sinus tachycardia (37%) and vagally mediated arrhythmias (35%).
Mortality is 3–4%, mainly owing to opportunistic infections and pulmonary emboli.
Deep pain in large muscles, especially the thighs and legs, is common.
The underlying pathology is a widely distributed inflammatory lesion in peripheral nerves, with adjacent demyelination.
These are almost certainly due to a disordered immunologic response.
Specific therapies are limited.
Plasma exchange (C. Glover, personal communication, 1991) and steroid therapy have been used, but their role in preventing the progress of the disease is doubtful and treatment is largely dependent on symptoms.
Table 2.
Strategies identified from role-play exercise to promote successful transfer of patients from ICU to ward.
Introduce family to ward staff before transfer
Allow patient to visit ward, with relatives, before transfer
Ask ward staff to explain ward management in advance
Encourage ICU staff to follow up patients in the ward
Brian repeatedly emphasised that he placed a high value on incidental conversations with the nursing staff.
To him, these represented a lifeline to the non-hospital world and provided some stimulation.
This is not reported in the available literature on intensive care and may be a unique finding.
However, the establishment of relationships between staff and patients is undoubtedly valuable, for example, to avoid feelings of helplessness.
A less complimentary analysis might be that value was placed on this because intellectual stimulation was at a premium on that unit.
For example, Suzuki and Kawamura advocate a number of formalised initiatives to ‘support a healthy mental state’, including excursions in a wheelchair, assessment of communication and encouraging visiting by family.
Analysis of Brian's nursing history does not show a structured approach of this nature; such support was provided as the need for it was noticed by individual staff members, which is theoretically unsatisfying, although it may have worked in practice.
Again, Brian placed a high value on the reassurance and explanation provided by nursing staff and the importance of these factors is well documented in a number of first-hand reports of long-stay patients.
Brian's list of positive aspects reflects the value for the patient of being able to maintain and maximise residual ability and is particularly important as a component of a rehabilitative programme.
This conclusion may be profitably shared with other members of the health-care team involved in rehabilitation.
Literature on Guillain-Barré syndrome places a high value on planning and implementing a programme to promote intellectual stimulation.
One patient found that the privacy of a separate room, which could be personalised by her own possessions, was important to her mental well-being.
This facility was not available to Brian and, in retrospect, might have been of benefit.
The Leicester Royal Infirmary intensive care unit operates an open visiting policy and all the personal reports of Guillain-Barré syndrome stress the importance of support from family and friends.
A separate room would also be useful in minimising noise and disturbance, especially at night.
Brian felt that sleep need not have been too much of a problem: he could go to sleep, but the staff would not let him.
Endotracheal suction and pressure area care in this unit largely follows a four hourly pattern.
During the night, it might have been useful to have adopted a more individualised approach.
Suction could have been provided overnight only when clinically indicated and an assessment tool used to give the patient a longer rest period between interventions.
Brian was also aware of other emergencies and admissions taking place and would have liked to have been told what was happening.
This, he felt, would have allowed him to tolerate the disturbances better.
Brian was given analgesia and occasional sedation at night.
It is gratifying he does not have a vivid memory of pain being a cause of trauma.
This aspect of his treatment therefore seems to have been managed with some success.
His transfer to the general ward was not a success, however.
Brian felt emotionally attached to the unit and staff and felt abandoned and alienated by being moved elsewhere.
He missed the high staff: patient ratio that he had enjoyed in the ICU.
This was shared by his family and led to their feeling insecure about his new environment.
They complained both to the medical and nursing staff in the ward.
There is a paucity of research on this topic, but, in a problem-solving role-play carried out by intensive care nursing students, four strategies were identified to minimise the obvious trauma that Brian and his family felt (Table 2).
An examination of Brian's nursing notes reveals a disparity between the preoccupations of the nursing staff and the perceived needs of the patient.
The nursing staff largely assess, plan and implement physical care: they give intellectual and emotional care on a personalised,ad hoc basis.
But Brian said time and again that it was the ‘personal touch’ he valued.
The nursing staff can take pride in Brian's care — his recollections of interactions with the nurses in the unit are overwhelmingly positive.
As health-care professionals, however, we should examine why such an important aspect of care should not be delivered within an appropriate theoretical structure.
Brian, incidentally, describes his recovery as 90% complete and he is now able to work full time, travel abroad and play cricket.
NT   
Brian emphasised the vale of incidental conversations with the nursing staff
THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 2
Compiled by Dr Anne Roberts Illustrated by Peter Gardiner
Nerve Conduction — The Action Potential
The neuron, like other cells, has an electrical potential difference across its membrane: 50–100mV, with the interior negative in relation to the exterior.
This happens because sodium ions (Na+) are pumped actively out of the cell, while potassium (K+) ions are pumped in until they are unevenly distributed between the two compartments.
Under resting conditions the cell membrane will not allow ions to diffuse passively across it, so the potential difference remains.
Nerve cells are excitable — that is, they respond to stimuli.
These produce a change in the cell membrane's permeability to ions, and therefore change its electrical state: the stimulus makes the cell permeable to sodium, which then rushes into it.
This called depolarisation.
If the stimulus is big enough, the electrical change will make the nerve cell fire and the impulse will be conducted along its length.
This is an ‘all or nothing’ occurrence: weak stimuli do not excite the cell, while any one that is above the threshold value is sufficient to make it fire.
After a very short time, potassium diffuses out of the cell and the previous electrical situation is restored — repolarisation.
For a short while after it fires, the nerve goes through a refractory period when it will not respond to a nervous stimulus.
How the nerve impulse is conducted
The movement of ions that depolarises part of the nerve cell membrane results in a potential difference between it and the part adjacent to it.
Because of this, a tiny electric current passes, and this wave of depolarisation runs along the cell, triggering a series of new action potentials.
This process is slow in unmyelinated fibres but quicker in myelinated ones, when the action potential is transmitted by jumps from node to node.
Conduction is also faster in wide diameter fibres, which have lower electrical resistance.
Crossing the Synapse
Nerve impulses pass from one neuron to another at a synapse, where two neurons are separated from each other by a space, the synaptic cleft.
An action potential in the presynaptic neuron releases neurotransmitter into the cleft.
The neurotransmitter then diffuses across to the postsynaptic neuron, and starts a new action potential in it.
In general, each neuron has only a single transmitter, such as acetylcholine, noradrenaline or dopamine.
Nerves excite muscles in a similar way at the neuromuscular junction.
OH BABY
A new column with a fresh angle on the familiar
Paul Mangan explains why he and his wife gave up on NHS efforts at parentcraft classes
During my wife's pregnancy, I was delighted to be invited to a dads-to-be session at our health centre.
I meant to leave work early on the day of the meeting but, as so often happens, I could not get away until late so, instead of the planned leisurely drive, I was home with barely enough time to squeeze my wife into the car before arriving hot and bothered at the meeting.
I was looking forward to the chance to meet ‘our’ health visitor and find out what would be expected of me in the months leading up to the birth.
I was also delighted that at last there had been an acknowledgement of the fact that I had a role in what was happening rather than being seen as a bystander in an event that would, all being well, change our lives beyond recognition.
There was a good turn-out of dads-to-be: professional types, city types, manual types and one or two dads who looked as if they were still, well…lads.
Each of us sat rather self-consciously chatting with our partners, who displayed varying degrees of rotundity.
The start was delayed by over half an hour because one of the health visitors had been busy through the day, and things went downhill from there.
‘Our’ health visitor was not going to be there after all because it was not her turn to do this session.
The speaker told us about the role of the health visitor and how it was a separate profession to nursing.
We were then treated to a video of somebody discussing childbirth, which at first could not be heard by those at the back.
When this was pointed out, the adjusted volume deafened those at the front.
The video was interesting, though.
It extolled the benefits of home births and especially the feeling of control that this method gives the mother.
It was switched off when the subject changed to pain control, which seemed to irritate most of the women present.
‘Unfortunately,’ the midwifery speaker told us, ‘we don't have facilities in our district for home births for first time mums.’
This struck me as being not only unfortunate, but also a bit like a quiz show host revealing to losing contestants the prizes they could have won.
‘What about the role of the father?’ somebody asked.
‘Simple,’ came the reply.
‘To support the mother and put up with her moods.’
Further discussion was truncated by the arrival of tea.
This tea-break proved a turning point in the evening.
Some made their excuses and left, muttering about being able to hire a video any time they wanted.
Others seemed genuinely to be pleased with the way things were going, while in a third group discussion centred on how much more usefully the time could be spent with the National Childbirth Trust.
So the next stage in our journey was perhaps predictable — we enrolled for a course with the NCT, which was made up of couples expecting their babies at roughly the same time.
As we arrived, Sue, our facilitator, welcomed each couple by name and made sure that we all got to know each other.
Sue insisted that we take her telephone number and told us that we should feel able to ring her at any time, day or night, with any problem, however trivial it seemed.
There appears to be a general assumption that women should somehow automatically know how to prepare for a baby, but this is simply not the case.
It can help when professionals recognise this.
The NCT sessions encouraged everyone to ask ‘daft’ questions — the sort that do not seem daft if you do not know the answers — like how do I make up a nappy, how many sterilising tablets do I use for the bottles and what should we buy before the baby is born?
The support from Sue and the other members of the group was invaluable.
So, too, were the practical demonstrations of getting comfortable, breathing exercises and familiarisation with the sorts of equipment that we might encounter during the labour itself.
The birth of a child is an important landmark in the lives of all concerned.
The batch approach to information-giving that was our experience of the NHS contrasted markedly with the sympathetic sharing of advice and counsel from the NCT.
It is of course true that the NHS is under tremendous pressures while places at NCT classes are largely taken up by the motivated.
However, if these observations can be made by somebody just passing through the service, surely something is wrong.
Perhaps it is time the autonomous practitioners themselves sought a solution to a widespread dissatisfaction with their service.
When the time came, I cannot say that we followed all of the advice we were given.
However, the confidence and sense of involvement that came out of the meetings ensured that all the men in the group were actually present at the birth of their child, and this might not otherwise have been the case.
The skills of the midwives were everything I could have wished for and the NCT made me feel as if I was a useful part of the whole process.
Later, courses and social events help new parents cope with what can be the most exciting yet the most frightening time in most couple's lives.
I am pleased to say that Thomas was born healthy and happy, and both he and his mother are well.NT 
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT MODULE P10 (ii)
NURSING TIMES open learning programme
P10: DELIVERY OF CARE
Part (ii): Delivery systems
THE FOLLOWING PAGES ARE DEVOTED TO THE NURSING TIMES OPEN LEARNING PROGRAMME.
You can work through the open learning material whether or not you are enrolled on the programme.
It has been designed to be of value and interest to all grades of nurses who may wish to work through for their own interest and professional development.
This programme is a two-year professional development course leading to enrolled nurse conversion to level one.
It is divided into three 10-week terms a year.
This is Week 8, Term 5, Year 2.
If you would like to enrol on the programme please see page viii for details.
Students enrolled on the programme should consult their student pack for additional information on this week's work.
WE HOPE YOU ENJOY WORKING THROUGH THIS WEEK'S OPEN LEARNING MATERIAL
Delivery systems
Last week, we considered who the real clients for nursing services might be, and how variations in who we see as our clients may determine the type of care we give.
This week we continue our inquiry by looking at ways in which the delivery of care may be organised.
WORK PLANNER 
This week you will look at how nursing care is currently delivered in your work area and try to identify who benefits most from this.
The Focus Activity asks you to choose an alternative way of delivering care; to describe how this could be implemented in your situation; and what the consequences might be for individual clients, costs and staffing.
You will probably have to consult colleagues to gain some of this information and you will also need access to a library to research the alternative delivery system you have chosen to examine.
You will remember that we have italicised client when we are talking about the main beneficiaries of various forms of care in order to differentiate this from ‘client’ used in the simple sense of a recipient of nursing care.
CLIENT-CENTRED CARE
Our debate on who our clients might actually be concluded last week at a very important point.
We considered the possibility that the client might be not one individual, or even an individual plus family and friends, but the organisation by which we are employed.
We also saw that meeting the needs of all these clients may create ethical problems for the nurse.
These different views of who the clients are also have far-reaching implications for how we organise the delivery of care.
By delivery of care we mean the way in which nursing care is planned and put into practice.
Clientcentred care is care that is delivered to meet the particular needs of the client , and that is why identifying the client really is is so important.
ACTIVITY 1 15–20 mins Identify a small group of clients, such as the first six people you saw in your last day's community care, the first six people attending your outpatients' clinic, or six individuals in a bay in your ward.
For each client, list the nursing interventions either by yourself or someone else, such as‘insulin injection’, ‘mouth care’, ‘socialisation’, ‘health promotion’, that each required in the fist hour of care, say between eight and nine, or nine and 10 in the morning.
You should end up with at least six separate lists, some with perhaps only one item on it, others with several items, listed in the order that each client received, or was assisted with, that care.
Are there any items common to several, or all, of the clients?
Did they receive similar care at the same time or in the same order?
Everybody will have a different list, but you can use your observations to begin to work out how delivery of care works in your area of work.
We have made lists for six clients in an imaginary Young Disabled Unit, for between eight and nine in the morning.
The care provided in such a unit might look something like the list that follows.
In our list, personal hygiene and eating are common activities, some clients receiving similar care at the same time.
For whose benefit do a number of clients receive care either at the same time or in the same order?
If you are a community nurse, you will obviously not give all your clients with diabetes their morning insulin at the same time, but you may well attend to those needing insulin before going on to visit people with other needs.
The fact that community nurses all over the country are tearing around between 7.30 and 9.30 in the morning giving one dose of insulin after another is almost always dictated by the needs of each client to receive insulin at that time of day.
The way the care is organised is therefore determined by the needs of the individual.
One of the items that is least likely to be individualised in hospital is the timing of meals.
The most commonly used argument for standardising delivery of meals is that it is a more economic use of resources.
All the meals are prepared together, arrive at the unit or ward together and are served together, thus using the time of chefs, porters and unit or ward staff in the most efficient way.
The true client when care is delivered in this way is the organisation, not the individual, because the organisation benefits most from it, rather than the individual.
ACTIVITY 2 10–15 mins Look again at your answers to Activity 1 and identify which aspects of care are geared to the needs of the individual and which are geared to the needs of the organisation.
You need to ask not only whether the actual care is specifically designed for that individual, but also whether it is given at a time that is chosen to suit the person, and possibly family and friends who may be involved.
You may have to consult colleagues about this.
The sort of standardisation described above can happen however the delivery of care is organised, but it is perhaps more likely to occur with some ways of delivering care, or delivery systems than with others.
DELIVERING THE GOODS
To try and work out why some ways of organising nursing care make it easier to give care which suits the needs of individual clients, we shall look at four commonly used delivery systems and try to identify who the real client(s) might be for each of them.
The systems are
Task allocation
Team nursing
Primary nursing
Multidisciplinary team care
TASK ALLOCATION
Task allocation is a method of organising work so that one person in the workforce is always responsible for the same task or tasks.
In task allocation the care is decided by the person in charge, the senior nurse or sister, and delegated to other members of the group.
Until the early 1970s, most nursing care in this country was organised in this way.
Nurses working in a ward or department would come on duty and consult a ‘Work book’ to find out what they were to do during their shift.
Atypical page might have looked like this: In task allocation, virtually all clients have the same thing ‘done to’ them at the same time.
You may remember Bill from M5(i) ‘What is quality?’ who liked this aspect of task allocation.
He felt embarrassed using a urinal when nobody else was doing so.
Clients may also find it reassuring to know what is going to happen, as a matter of routine, at a particular time.
ACTIVITY 3 5–10 mins Note down the points that strike you about this delivery system, the good as well as the bad.
Task allocation also means that nurses become very familiar with doing particular procedures, even though they may not give much thought to why they are doing something.
When task allocation was a common way of organising care, a nurse did not usually progress from one task to another until the sister judged that she was competent to do so.
Of course, it was perfectly possible for a nurse to undertake a particular task for all clients and not be competent, with possibly disastrous consequences.
The thing that worried many people about task allocation was that each client was descended upon for a succession of tasks by a succession of nurses.
The day was a continuous series of interruptions so that it was difficult for clients to have any real period of rest and quiet.
Equally, since each nurse ‘did’ only one or two things to each person, it was difficult to achieve any continuity of care.
For example, a client would ask for an aperient from the nurse who noted lack of bowel action and be told to ask the nurse who did the drugs.
If the person was asleep when the drugs were ‘done’ she would miss her opportunity and still be in difficulty.
Organising care in this way also meant that if a task was not allocated to anyone, for whatever reason, it never got done, whether it was necessary or not!
However, these problems of task allocation were all minor when compared with the driving force behind the system: getting the tasks completed as quickly and with as few staff as possible.
The following case study gives an extreme example of the ‘benefits’ of task allocation.
Bob recalls his first days as a charge nurse in the 1950s in a long-stay ward for elderly people.
Like most other nurses at that time, Bob was used to task allocation.
What he was not prepared for by his previous nursing experience was the lengths to which the staff in his ward had taken the system.
All meals at that time arrived in the ward in large containers and were served onto plates by the senior nurse on duty.
Bob asked whether people had any preferences or dislikes for individual items of food such as the tapioca pudding he was about to serve.
He was told that everyone liked everything.
When he had completed serving the meals Bob went round the ward to see who had eaten what and who had left any items uneaten.
Those who could feed themselves had at least had the choice of not eating the tapioca that they disliked and going hungry.
Those who could not feed themselves had only the option of closing their mouths against the intruding spoon.
Worst of all, one auxiliary, feeding a number of people, was going up and down the rows of bowls on bed-tables with one spoon which she filled from each person's bowl and put into each person's mouth before going onto someone else with the same spoon to repeat the process.
When this practice was questioned, the auxiliary protested that all the patients had their own bowls so she knew what they had eaten but that using one spoon was quicker, as she could feed more people at once.
It also saved on the washing up and therefore on domestic staff hours.
This was task allocation taken to its ultimate extreme.
Not only did long-stay clients or patients become institutionalised, so did the staff.
Thought and individuality were abandoned and the institution reigned supreme.
The arguments for and against task allocation are therefore quite mixed.
On the one hand, some clients may prefer a structured day with routine care, which everyone receives given at set times, very probably by a succession of nurses.
The complaint that there is never a moment's peace is countered by some nurses who say that such a system allows for a ‘snooze hour’ after lunch when no routine tasks were undertaken and the ward was as quiet as possible.
These arguments see the individual as clients , because even though they receive care by a task allocation system, it is a system which considers the benefits for them first.
The opposite side of the argument is that in task allocation people may not receive appropriate care at appropriate times and that the day is succession of minor interruptions, made for the convenience of the organisation and not for the benefit of individuals.
These arguments see the client as the organisation, because its needs are considered first.
ACTIVITY 4 10–15 mins Look at how you mapped your own work area in Activity 1.
Add the names, or, if you prefer anonymity, numbers, for the staff who gave each item of care to each person.
Is there any task allocation at all— for example , do only one or two nurses give the insulin?
If there is any staff allocation, for whose benefit is it?
Is it for the clients, as in our example of community nurses speeding round to give this essential drug, or for the staff, to get the work done?
TEAM NURSING
Team nursing is a system in which a group of nurses work together to plan, give and evaluate client-centred nursing care for a group of people.
The major difference between this and task allocation is in the relationship between the nurses and the ways in which the care is divided between the members of the nursing team.
In team nursing all members contribute to discussion and decision-making about care.
The role of the team leader is to co-ordinate the activities of the team, including the giving of care.
Kron describes the system in this way:
‘Team nursing is not merely a method of assigning individuals to a group: rather it is an implementation of the philosophy that holds that a group of people led by a knowledgeable nurse can effectively meet the nursing needs of a group of patients.
This method requires that each person on the team knows the patient and the patient's needs and problems.’
Consider whether the nursing group in which you work has any of the characteristics of a team-nursing approach to delivering care.
Does the group
Consult together and discuss aspects of the care of individuals?
Arrive at joint decisions on what individualised care is to be provided?
Arrive at joint decisions on how that care is to be delivered to individuals?
Have a leader who co-ordinates rather than directs the team?
ACTIVITY 5 10–15 mins
Team nursing was advocated by the nursing hierarchy to replace task allocation, as individualised care was adopted.
However, teams still cared for fairly large numbers of people — the staff in a ward of up to 30 people often being split into only two teams.
This meant that, even with daily case conferences, it was not possible for one nurse either to supervise or take responsibility for the individualised care of each client.
With increasing throughput of clients, team nursing could still result in a ‘getting through our side of the ward’ approach, rather than the ‘identifying and meeting all needs of each client’route required for effective individualised care.
The client could therefore still be seen as the organisation rather than the individual, with or without family and friends.
PRIMARY NURSING
Primary nursing, which is becoming more widely used, is a method of delivering care in which one nurse takes nursing responsibility for a small group of people throughout their period of care.
The primary nurse is responsible for assessing nursing needs, for identifying with each client the nursing goals, for planning care and implementing it.
The primary nurse holds 24 hours, seven days a week responsibility for the care of these clients.
Because the primary nurse cannot personally be on duty to give care throughout that time, arrangements must be made for care to continue during her absence.
Nursing colleagues who take on this important role are known as associate nurses.
They give care according to the plan specified by the primary nurse and will usually only change that plan in an emergency.
However, the role of the associate nurse is seen as being skilled and creative, indicating a level of professional job satisfaction far above that likely to be experienced by nurses delivering care by either task allocation or team nursing.
ACTIVITY 6 15–20 mins Does your work area use primary nursing as a delivery system? if so, make a note of any ways in which you think it could still be improved.
If your work area does not use primary nursing, do you think its introduction might improve the quality of care delivered to clients?
Make some notes in your diary of the benefits you think it might bring.
Who benefits from primary nursing?
Not the organisation in the usual sense because, whatever else it does, primary nursing does not reduce staffing levels and therefore costs.
Many, although as we saw earlier not necessarily all, clients get some benefit from tailor-made nursing care.
Bur might the real clients of primary nursing be the nurses themselves?
The personal rewards for primary nursing are high because of the closer relationship with a relatively small number of clients.
What are the possible limitations of this system?
As Kron points out, primary nursing certainly does not solve all nursing problems:
‘Its effectiveness in the delivery of health care depends upon each nurse and upon the nurse's competence and willingness to accept greater responsibility and accountability for decisions.’
MULTIDISCIPLINARY TEAM CARE
delivery of care by multidisciplinary teams mean that the health-care professionals who may otherwise give a variety of types of health care to a client organise themselves into, and work as, a co-ordinated team.
This means more than booking the physiotherapist to come and carry out postural drainage on a person with a chest infection, or ‘getting the psychotherapist in’ to try to help a distressed client.
Furnell et al.define a multidisciplinary clinical team as having professionals from different disciplines giving a significant portion of their time to the work of the group.
The work of the team is co-ordinated towards meeting agreed objectives with clear differentiation between, and respect for, those skills and roles which are specific to individual members as well as those which may be common or shared.
The team works in a specific community or hospital-based location and meets regularly.
Where different professionals have the same skills, role within the team may become interchangeable.
Blurring of professional roles occurs in other care delivery systems, but in a multidisciplinary team approach, overlapping or exchange of roles is planned and co-ordinated.
The needs of the client as a whole are at the forefront — not just their nursing needs.
Thus the individual, again with or without the extended group of family and friends, is truly the client , rather than the health-care organisation.
Does this mean enhanced job satisfaction for the professional nurse, even beyond that reported by nurses who deliver care in a primary nursing system?
That probably depends upon the individual nurse and the team of which she is a part.
ACTIVITY 7 15–20 mins Does your community area, department or ward use a multidisciplinary approach to the delivery of care?
If it does, how well does it work?
If it does not use this approach would you feel positive or negative about introducing such a system and for what reasons?
Make some notes in your diary giving reasons for your answers.
WHICH SYSTEM IS BEST?
This week we have considered four ways of organising the delivery of care and asked who might be the ‘real’clients being served by each.
We have considered the possibility that task allocation really serves the organisation, which is therefore the real client .
Team nursing moves nearer to seeing the individuals as the client but still may have some allegiance to the organisation.
Primary nursing claims to be totally client-centred, although in reality nurses working within this system invariably have to bear in mind the needs of the organisations as well.
However, it is possible that the clients who benefit mostly from primary care might be the nurses themselves.
Multidisciplinary teams again certainly don't serve any organisation which considers cost before all else, because they are very cost intensive in their use of a range of highly qualified, and therefore expensive, professionals.
They almost certainly meet the needs of individual clients, but, like primary nursing, they may also fulfil the needs of the professionals concerned so successfully that the professionals, rather than the recipients of care, are really the most important clients of the system.
Does that matter?
Next week we shall be looking at the impact these methods of delivering care have upon such varied areas of our professional life as advocacy, ethics, accountability and assertiveness.
But first, this week's Focus.
FOCUS 2–3 hours Describe the system of delivering care where you work.
Then choose one of the alternatives discussed this week (task allocation, team nursing, primary nursing or multidisciplinary team care) which you don't use but which you think might also be useable and would promote individualised care in the same work area.
Go to your library and carry out a literature search on that particular system.
When you have read the information, write a description of how you think the method you have chosen could be put into practice in your work place.
Try using the same number and range of staff that are presently involved in giving nursing care, however it is organised.
Then note if you think that in reality, more staff and therefore more cost would be involved with the alternative system.
Say how the alternative system you have described would promote individualised care in your work area.
Note also any other potential benefits for individuals and their family and friends.
WANT TO KNOW MORE?
Enrolled nurses
If you are working as an enrolled nurse and have at least one year's post-qualification experience, you may be eligible for entry into the programme.
You can obtain further information and an application form from the address given below.
Tutor/counsellors
If you are a nurse tutor committed to the concept of open learning you could become an open learning tutor/counsellor.
You can work full-time, part-time or for a few hours in the evenings.
If you are already working as a nurse tutor at a college, please approach your principal for further details on how to apply.
If your college is not yet involved in the programme you can write to us for an application form at the address given below and we will endeavour to link you into a college undertaking the programme.
Please write to the address below, marking your envelope with either ‘Student Application’ or ‘Tutor Application’:
NT AGENDA
A weekly selection of reviews, short research reports and diary items
PSYCHOLOGY FOR NURSES
Theory and practice
In the preface to this book Anne and Don Byrne state that instead of taking the usual text book approach to psychology they have ‘decided to identify those areas of psychology which are directly relevant to the practice of nursing.’
This is certainly what this book in part has achieved.
In its nine chapters and 234 pages it clearly bridges the gap between psychological theories and nursing practice.
Areas including communication, counselling, stress, perception and group processes are explored with reference to nursing practice.
Best of all, the chapters ‘Nursing as a helping relationship’ and ‘Burnout and its management in nursing’are superb, clearly demonstrating the importance of the interaction of nurses with patients as well as their own colleagues.
My only reservation is that I would like to see this approach extended into other important areas of psychology such as learning, intelligence, memory, personality and, especially, attitudes.
However, perhaps I am asking too much, because at £10.99 this is certainly a worthwhile text with a refreshing approach.
This publication would be especially useful for any student nurses (and also trained nurses) who are finding difficulty in relating psychology to their practice of nursing.
PLAY THERAPY
A non-directive approach for children and adolescents
To cover such an important and contentious area requires a very through book.
Fortunately this is such a publication.
Its comprehensiveness can make it difficult to read at times, but it is a text that is well worth persevering with.
It covers the historical context and conceptual basis of play, the role of symbolic play, the planning and stages of therapeutic progress, working with sexually abused children and the presentation of findings in a court of law.
The authors, who appear to be well qualified to write on this topic, state that the book is intended as an introduction to the concept of non-directive play therapy.
It is recognised that supervision and further training would be required for anyone who wishes to use the approach in the field.
The reference is comprehensive and thorough and the text is well indexed.
Play Therapy should be of great use to anyone involved in the care of children who might need counselling, and it would also be interesting reading for anyone working with children or interested in counselling them.
MANUAL OF FAMILY HEALTH
Everyday care in the home
The development of private health care and more charges being made for the use of the National Health Services will, no doubt, encourage people to seek some form of reference book to help them cope with ill health at home.
This manual takes a very comprehensive approach to the every day care of individuals from ‘womb to tomb’.
The use of medical terminology in the book is to be applauded, particularly as definitions are given, which it is to be hoped, will assist in breaking down some barriers between health professionals and the lay public.
The text includes a good balance of normal and abnormal development at various ages — quite a task to cover in one volume.
The price could be prohibitive for many families and it is a pity there are not more references made to Appendix 1, ‘How the body works’ as it is crucial that people understand their own anatomy and physiology in order to apply the positive principles of health care.
This is, however, a magnificent attempt to cover the subject in comprehensive detail, with the emphasis on the individual.
It deserves publicity in non-nursing spheres.
OBJECTIVES FOR CARE
Specifying standards for clinical nursing
The face of health care is complex and forever changing.
It is therefore necessary for nurses to base their practice on sound principles grounded in research.
In an attempt to keep abreast of current changes in care provision and in order to provide effective health care, many nurses are involved in identifying, setting and monitoring standards.
The notion of defining standards for practice is now a well recognised part of quality service provision.
Objectives for Care outlines practical applications for nurses to use in their everyday working lives.
It provides a point of reference for those starting on the standard-setting road by identifying objectives for care bases on Henderson's classification of the components of nursing.
This framework uses terminology already recognised by practising nurses, that of the nursing process and offers an alternative to the structure, process and outcome approach.
An interesting development advocated by the authors is that of moving towards a multidisciplinary approach, whereby other health-care professionals take responsibility for specific problems but all carers have access to the objectives involved.
This would be a useful book for learner nurses or those in the early stages of specifying their own standards of care.
IRON JOHN
Here it is — the paperback of the much-hyped book which has, we are told, sent a whole generation of American men off in search of the Wild Man within themselves, healing the psychic wounds of childhood on the way, until they reach the point of being able to look accusing radical feminists in the eye and say: ‘Hey, men have problems, too.’
Robert Bly, a poet (I presume he is; he certainly quotes enough of his own collected works in this volume), retells the story of ‘Iron John’, a fairytale collected by the brothers Grimm.
At certain points in the tale he stops and takes what is happening as the starting-point for a wander along lanes of quasi-anthropological speculation about the problems of the American male (and, by extension, of ‘civilised’ men everywhere).
It seems there are seven elements in the male psyche: each of us has a King, Warrior, Lover, Wild Man, Trickster, Mythologist and Grief Man within.
Unfortunately we have lost the delicate balance between these various elements: for instance, our Warrior has nothing worth fighting for and our Wild Man has been suppressed, and that's why, as a gender we're all so miserable.
There are some good points made here and there; Bly points out that fathers in US sitcoms are often portrayed as incompetent, in comparison with their wives, which says something about the way the American man sees himself.
But he doesn't mention the rise of slob sitcoms such as Roseanne or Married with Children , and its hard not to wonder about how he selects his evidence.
Blood, he tells us, was associated by our ancestors with iron, because of the red that hides within the ore.
I would have thought it more likely that the ferric taste of blood was the reason.
The author also quotes someone about museums being the repositories of ‘hard’ artefacts like weapons instead of‘soft’ones that mark the rise of culture, such as reed baskets.
Hang on a sec, Bob, which is likeliest to last?
If groups of American men want to gather in clearings in the forest, drumming, sharing their pain and getting in touch with the damaged child within, good luck to them.
I think I'll pass this time.
CEREBRAL PALSY
Cerebral palsy is a disorder of movement.
A child with cerebral palsy may have additional disabilities such as visual problems, language delay or coordination difficulties.
The extent of the disability unfolds as the child develops.
For parents, the discovery that their child has cerebral palsy can be devastating.
They may also have to devote energy searching for services to which the child has a right.
The author, who has a child with cerebral palsy, offers sound advice on all aspects of the condition, such as the causes and types of palsy, treatment available within and outside the NHS, day-to-day management, rights and benefits, education and employment opportunities.
There are also charts, for example on child development, and helpful tips on such matters as easing constipation, as well as useful organisations and books.
This informative book will remind professionals that their advice and therapy should complement the child's normal life and not replace it and will help parents gain a better understanding of cerebral palsy and make informed choices.
NURSING BEDS
This report describes a study design to establish whether nursing is — or can be — therapeutic, by evaluating the effect on patients admitted to an experimental clinical nursing unit where therapeutic nursing was practised.
The book follows the design of the successful RCN research series, the aims of which are to encourage an understanding of nursing research.
Information about the study is presented clearly and concisely, thus creating an ideal text for nurses new to evaluating research reports.
The back ground to and the philosophy underpinning the study are outlined.
Moreover, literature relating to nursing ideologies, primary and therapeutic nursing as well as nursing beds is briefly reviewed.
A profile of the design and organisation of the experimental clinical nursing unit, data on the study design and also the quantitative and qualitative results are presented clearly.
The 37-page appendix contains all the study survey forms, making this a valuable resource for anyone aiming to replicate this important work.
I commend the report of this research study to any nurse interested in promoting or developing nursing as a therapeutic endeavour.
SPIRITUAL CARE
With the arrival of The Patient's Charter and a clearer need to respond to the spiritual needs of patients, many nursing staff may wonder how best to do this.
This booklet goes some way to providing a resource.
The first two chapters offer a definition of spirituality and a way of identifying spiritual need.
The list includes the need for purpose, love, forgiveness, hope and strength, trust, personal belief and values and the freedom to carry out spiritual practices.
At various points the book invites the reader to undertake activities and then to discuss the issues with a group.
Chapter 3 provides information on a variety of religious faiths, and it was here I found the text least satisfactory.
At various points the text is misleading — for instance, ‘if a child is born stillborn, a baptism must be carried out…by a senior nurse or a Catholic nurse.’
This is misleading in that baptism is an initiation rite within Christianity as a whole and is not performed on dead people.
Other rituals may be performed in order to address the anxiety of the family regarding the naming and blessing of the child and commendations to God.
Moreover, the reference to Jewish patients who have died —‘the body not to be touched by hospital staff.
Body washed and shrouded only by Rabbi’— is misleading in that the Jewish Burial Society usually perform this task.
Staff can touch the body provided they wear disposable gloves, although they should not wash the body.
One other problem is that there is an assumption that everyone will practice their religion in the same way.
People may be tempted to look up information and act on it and then find the particular family do not confirm to expectations.
The author states: ‘It is beyond any doubt that helping patients to meet their spiritual needs is a fundamental part of holistic care.’
This booklet should provide a useful starting point to explore some of the issues involved.
SHORT REPORTS
ELDERLY PATIENT'S USE OF EYE-DROPS.
Many elderly people have visual problems, which are often treated with eyedrops.
Such medications may be hard to instil; one study of a mixed agegroup sample reported problems with compliance in 54%.
We decided to investigate this area with a purely elderly group of patients.
Sixty-two consecutive patients aged 75 or over and attending a general ophthalmology outpatients clinic were assessed.
Of these, 43 were using eyedrops.
They were asked what instruction they had received, whether they put drops in by themselves and if they had experienced any problems.
The participants were then asked to demonstrate their technique.
This was scored by awarding one point for each step as follows: unscrewing bottle lid, tilting head back, gently pulling lower eyelid down, occluding the punctum, aiming accurately, avoiding hand shaking, squeezing bottle, not touching the eye with the bottle and blinking gently and slowly.
A score under five was taken to mean the patient could not apply drops correctly.
The mean age of the 43 patients was 82.
Glaucoma was the most common reason for treatment (in 25), followed by cataract extraction (in 13).
Treatment had been given for periods ranging from two weeks to over 10 years.
Nearly two-thirds (27) said they had been told how to instil eyedrops.
In 23 cases a nurse had instructed them, in three a pharmacist and in one a doctor.
Less than a third (12) had physically been shown how to apply the drops.
Nurses had provided these demonstrations in all cases.
None of the patients' spouses or carer had been shown or told how to give the drops.
Twelve subjects put their drops in themselves.
Ten of those who relied on others lived alone and had regimens specifying up to six applications daily.
Thirty-six reported problems in application, including difficulty in raising the shoulder or squeezing the bottle adequately.
Arthritis, tremor and blinking were mentioned as causing difficulties in aim.
Patients who put in their own drops scored better on technique than those who did not (median score 5/9 versus 3/9), but this difference was not significant.
Having received instruction and/or demonstration on how to instil drops did not affect scores.
Only two patients had been prescribed aids or appliances to improve their technique.
The worst performance was on occlusion of the punctum, which none of the participants was able to perform.
Tilting the head back, aiming accurately and pulling down the lower lid were other areas of difficulty.
These result suggest that most elderly patients have some difficulty in making the best use of eye-drops.
Asking patients is not the best method of ascertaining problems; observation is required.
Better instruction and the consideration of aids which make eye-drop instillation easier should be implemented.
Most elderly people had problems putting in their eye-drops
IMPROVING PHYSICAL HEALTH AFTER MI
Rehabilitation after a heart attack is a concern of all health professionals.
We have developed a multidisciplinary approach to physical and psychosocial support at our unit in Sweden, and this research was conducted to examine its effects.
Following myocardial infarction, eligible patients were assigned randomly either to our six-month ‘caring rehabilitation programme’ or to normal medical follow-up.
The experimental programme involved group sessions once a week with a maximum of 16 patients in a group.
Each consisted of an hour's physical exercise followed by an hour's discussion.
The physical sessions included warming-up, periods pedalling on an exercise cycle, free-standing exercises, stretching and relaxation.
They were conducted by a physiotherapist.
The discussion sessions led by a physician and a cardiac nurse specialist, were informal, but progressed to a preselected theme for debate.
Topics covered lifestyle and risks after MI, and psychosocial consequences.
The aim of the programme was to help patients increase or restore their physical strength with the help of enhanced knowledge and coping skills.
Patients in both control and experimental groups were asked to complete subjective measures of pain and exertion during exercise and an objective submaximal exercise test five weeks and six-months post-MI.
A general questionnaire on health complaints and assessment of physical habits was administered six and 12 months after the heart attack.
Fifty-three patients participated in the rehabilitation programme and 63 acted as controls.
The mean age of both groups was around 56 years, and 87% were males.
They did not differ significantly in other demographic or health-related factors
Subjective assessments of pain and difficulty during exercise were significantly less for patients in the experimental group on both test dates than for the control group, although they improved for both groups.
Similarly, their performance on the exercise test was significantly better at five weeks and at six months.
Physical health complaints of breathlessness, fatigue and reduced physical fitness were significantly fewer at six and at 12 months for the patients who participated in the programme.
Modifications to lifestyle, such as performing calisthenics and returning to normal frequency of sex, were also more likely to have occurred.
Patients on the test programme were also less likely than controls to have had another infarction at 12 months.
These results seem promising, and suggest that a simple interdisciplinary programme involving little added staff time can have valuable results for patients.
The programme involved sessions of physical exercise (below), followed by a discussion (bottom)
GROUPS FOR PARENTS OF SLEEPLESS CHILDREN
Parents often have difficulties getting their children to sleep.
The stress this causes varies, depending on what the parents perceive as tolerable, but some find it creates considerable tension.
In Kingston and Esher Health Authority we have introduced ‘sleep groups’ to help parents tackle their children's night waking, and this report describes an evaluation of our work.
Over six months, 48 children aged 1–4 years were referred by health visitors, clinical psychologists and GPs to one of three groups.
In total, 27 mothers were interested in taking part in the group and came to at least one session.
The first group was run by two clinical psychologists; the second and third jointly by a clinical psychologist and a health visitor.
Each group met six times for five consecutive weekly sessions and then again two weeks later.
The mothers were asked to complete sleep diaries for their children for a week before the group began and throughout its duration.
This information was used to decide whether children had a severe waking problem initially.
The programme's objectives were to help parents define what they wished to change about their child's behaviour, to learn techniques for doing so, and to share their own feelings with others in a similar situation.
Sessions included information about sleep, its stages and how much was needed.
Parents discussed their children's sleep diaries and their aims for improvement in twos and threes as well as with the whole group.
At the first and final meetings each mother was asked to complete a rating scale of the impact of the sleeping problem on the family and on her relationship with the child.
In total, 25 mothers completed both sets of questionnaires, of whom 21 attended four or more of the sessions.
Nineteen of the 25 children were reported never to have established a regular sleep pattern, and 22 were classified as having severe sleep problems.
By the end of the group this number had fallen to seven.
Initially, the children were waking up almost every night of the week, and about three or four times a night.
They then took 30 minutes to an hour to settle again.
Nineteen were sleeping in their parents' beds.
By the final session, the average frequency of waking had fallen to once or twice a week and once or twice a night; settling time had decreased.
Although nine children were still sleeping in their parents' beds, the frequency had decreased greatly in all but one case.
The perceived impact of the sleep problem fell considerably during the duration of the group.
Most mothers felt they were coping better and were under far less strain; tension had reduced between them and their children and spouses.
Mothers generally found the group useful.
We were pleased with these results, and the groups will continue.
The frequency of waking fell to once or twice a week by the final session
EVENTS
Events free listings are intended primarily to help nurses and midwives organising low-budget lectures, workshops, seminars and study days.
Most of the events listed cost under £60.
Organisers of larger events will be directed to the paid-for section at the start of NT Classified.
Copy should arrive at NT four to six weeks before the desired date of publication.
RESOURCES
HOW TO KEEP WARM THIS WINTER
The Department of Health's annual Keep Warm, Keep Well campaign to advise elderly people has been launched for this winter.
A million copies of the booklet have been printed and a Freephone helpline offers information on benefits.
DEALING WITH VIOLENCE AND HARASSMENT
The causes of aggression are examined in a training resource pack from Sheffield Hallam University.
The author, Vida Pearson, who has worked in Northern Ireland, Philadelphia and London, has produced the pack for anyone who has to deal with the possibility of harassment or violence.
HEALTH AND SMOKING IN THE WORKPLACE
A new Health and Safety Executive booklet urges employers to give the needs of non-smokers higher priority.
Passive Smoking is available free from the HSE free leaflet line.
THE ETHICS OF TRANSPLANTATION
The British Kidney Patient Association has produced an education pack for 9–14-year-olds on kidney patients and the ethics of transplantation.
CARE FOR PATIENTS WITH NEUROLOGICAL CONDITIONS
The number of people with neurological conditions is grossly underestimated by the health service, according to the neurological charities who estimate there are 1.5 million people whose needs are left unmet.
The charities have produced a report on the standards of care they believe should be provided, copies of which are available from the Motor Neurone Disease Association.
TACKLING HEALTH TARGETS LOCALLY
A regional approach to tackling targets identified in the Health of the Nation White Paper has been produced by South East Thames RHA.
Partners in Health is directed at purchasing authorities, local community and voluntary organisations.
HELP WANTED
Do you need help with a project or report that will benefit your ward or unit?
Has a colleague just made an interesting career move?
NT would like to hear of appointments.
Short obituaries and retirements are also published occasionally.
Letters selected for the section will be published approximately six weeks after they are received.
Bereavement group
We have started a bereavement group in our area — two afternoons a month and one evening session — which we are going to evaluate in six months' time.
We would be grateful for any advice on how to achieve this and would also be interested in hearing from other community groups.
Grading appeal
I am a senior enrolled nurse who wants to hear from any enrolled or senior enrolled nurse who has been awarded a staff nurse grade F, or above, in 1988, or subsequently through the grading appeals system.
Details regarding the post would be a bonus.
Improving models
I work in a psychiatric hospital on a unit caring for functionally ill elderly people.
I am evaluating the initial assessment tool from which care plans are formulated, based on the Roper, Logan and Tierney models.
I believe the present system could be improved and would be grateful for any examples of assessment forms used by practitioners in similar areas.
Perineal audit
I am a midwife interested in developing a perineal audit system, enabling midwives to follow their suturing up to a year postnatally.
Does the unit in which you work have such an audit system?
Have you ever heard of such an audit system?
Share your experiences please.
Day surgery
We are in the early stages of developing a day-case surgery/five-day ward and would be very interested to hear from anyone who has been part of a similar project.
Information about documentation, nursing models used or problem areas found would be appreciated.
Maslow's hierarchy
We are nurses working on an assessment ward for older people with mental health problems.
We are developing a holistic model of nursing care directly based on Maslow's hierarchy of needs.
We would be interested in hearing from anyone who has experience or knowledge of similar projects.
Care plan assessment
I am a staff nurse on a continuing care ward for elderly people and I am looking into ways of designing a new care plan assessment for our residents.
I would be grateful for any advice or specimen copies from other continuing care wards.
JOURNAL OF WOUND CARE NURSING
LEG ULCER TREATMENT
Community clinics
Home care for an elderly patient
Emergency wound management
COMMUNITY CLINICS
Mary Eagle describes the leg ulcer clinics in her district which bring practitioners and patients together to share resources
Mentioning leg ulcers often conjures up a picture of old ladies with large, offensive, discharging ulcers and nurses condemned to daily visits to change unpleasant dressings.
But ulcers try very hard to heal — if they do not it is often because of nurses who unwittingly use the wrong treatment.
To understand an ulcer and be able to treat it, we must understand that it does not just appear; something causes it to develop.
Some underlying problem causes the skin to break down and fail to heal; the leg ulcer is the end stage of a chronic progressive condition.
Leg ulcers affect an estimated 400 000 people in the UK.
Ten in 1 000 of the adult population and 36 in 1 000 over 65 have ulcerated limbs, and 83% of all ulcers are nursed in the community.
Leg ulceration is the most common ailment nursed at home.
There are twice as many venous ulcers as any other type.
Up to 88% of district nursing time could be spent on leg ulcer care, as a quarter of clients with ulcerated limbs need visits lasting more than 15 minutes and half require dressings more than three times a week.
Current estimates of the cost of treating leg ulcers in the UK range between £150 million and £600 million yearly — similar to the cost of tobacco-related disease.
More than 60% of the cost is for community nursing services.
Projected figures estimate there will be 80 000–100 000 more dependent elderly people in the over-75 age group by the year 2000, which will increase the problem.
The type of care given must be monitored to ensure the best results.
In a study I undertook, five clients from each of five surgeries, a total of 25, were studied over a six-month period.
One client from each surgery had bilateral ulceration but clients with critical limb ischaemia and arterial ulceration were not included.
Their mean age was 72 years and all clients had had leg ulceration for more than six months (one client had continuous ulceration for 34 years).
During the six-month period, one surgery implemented a change of treatment, learnt at the Rank Teaching Centre in Battersea, London.
The active participatory method of treatment used to combine once-weekly dressing, compression bandaging and, most importantly, client participation, resulting in joint agreed contracts of care between client and nurse.
Orem's model of nursing was chosen to assess how clients could be assisted with universal self-care demands.
This  model emphasises the individual's contribution to his or her own health.
In a state of health, individuals will be self-caring, but during illness, injury or disease, additional self-care needs may be present and the nurse will need to help meet these demands.
Considerable savings were made in the surgery during the six months after introducing this treatment.
Also, all clients appeared positive about their progress and their leg ulcers rapidly reduced in size.
Comfort and independence were achieved with minimal interruption to daily living.
Active methods of treatment for venous ulcers do work, but the ‘Hawthorn’ effect must be remembered, in that part of any improvement is due to the change as much as the method, or ‘a change is a s good as a rest’.
A recent survey in West Surrey and North East Hampshire asked district nurses how many clients they had with ulcerated limbs; the number of times they visited each patient; and the types of treatment given for a specific month.
The nurses made approximately 41 visits a day to clients with leg ulcers.
The variety of treatments used was enormous, with 37 different types of treatment being recorded.
The number of visits clients received ranged from daily to once a month.
Leg ulcers continue to be a nursing problem, and wound care is basically a nursing task.
Most hospital techniques are not suitable and do not work for clients at home.
All clients need individualised care: we need to question the practicality of clients undertaking bed rest and elevating limbs.
The choice of where clients with ulcerated limbs should be treated is extremely important.
The options are as follows:
Self-care
Many clients continue to look after their own leg ulcers at home without any assistance from nursing or medical intervention.
The simple act of ‘leg watching’ in the supermarket supplies evidence of this practice.
Admit to hospital
Ulcers are not usually seen in one particular specialist department in most hospitals.
The specialty varies according to the patient's underlying condition.
Often the client is seen by the most junior doctors, who rely on the sister's expertise to dress the wound.
Although the consultant or GP may prescribe the treatment, community nurses make most treatment decisions — yet training for nurses in this area has been haphazard.
While in hospital, because of the long-term nature of the disorder, patients' morale deteriorates and normality is lost.
They lack independence, may develop stiffness or even feel a failure because their ulcers do not heal.
Community-based clinics, such as Aldershot Health Centre, can provide complete care for leg ulcers.
Full assessment and nursing diagnoses are made using ultrasonography (above) and clients needing compression hosiery are measured accurately and given education (left)
Outpatient treatment
This produces the stress of tiring ambulance journeys, the long wait in the clinic and not seeing the same staff at each visit.
Such treatment is, however, useful in order to assess, treat and dress ulcers which require more specialised forms of diagnosis, treatment and review.
Home visit
Clearly, some clients will need community nurse visits at home.
There is unfortunately no miracle cure for leg ulcers around the corner; community staff must be prepared to handle them in the most efficient and effective manner possible.
Most literature focuses on treatment and wound management, but personal observation and experience has indicated the importance of a much broader approach.
Intense chronic pain, odour and discharge, unsightly sores and ugly bandaging, immobility and inability to bathe can be very distressing and lead to altered body images and low self-esteem.
Nursing care should embrace the physical, psychological, social and educational needs of the patient, rather than focusing purely on the break in the skin surface.
District and practice nurse have an important role to play in providing a positive approach, by assessing clients' perception, attitude, expected outcome and perceived needs.
Loneliness and isolation may lead to ulcers dominating patients' lifestyle.
If they are preoccupied with the wound, they may develop ulcer dressing rituals and interfere with the prescribed treatment.
People with high isolation scores tend to have ulcers which never heal, or recur soon after healing.
It is often assumed that clients interfere with their ulcers between treatments to ensure the community nurse will revisit and meet their need for social contact.
However, periods of solitude are essential to all ages and may be therapeutic to the elderly, providing the opportunity to reflect on and analyse their lives.
Nurses should help patients realise being alone is not always synonymous with being lonely.
Community-based clinics or ‘mini-clinics’
These clinics provide several benefits to clients who can leave the house.
Being smaller and more local they give the client a sense of belonging, providing the chance of an ‘outing’ without the long delays of attending hospital clinics and with fewer problems of travel.
Social needs are met with familiar faces attending each week and consultations with the same nurses and doctors.
Friendships are also made.
At a time of many losses and readjustments, personal contact, love, extra support and attention are vital.
Clients compare progress and self-esteem improves as they realise they are not alone with their problem.
Positive thinking is encouraged as they ‘compare legs’.
Waiting time is reduce for patients and the drop-in system allows flexibility and encourages independence, maximising normality.
Full assessment and nursing diagnoses are made using special tools and recording equipment, such as ultrasonography.
Planned appropriate treatment is implemented for clients with active ulceration followed by evaluation of care.
Clients needing compression hosiery are measured accurately and given education.
Thus complete care is possible within a clinic system.
The clinic also provides the opportunity for screening checks of blood pressure, blood electrolytes and glucose, with early GP referral if appropriate.
Group health promotions could include work on weight reduction, diet, exercise and mobility.
Joint contracts of care can be made between the clients, district and practice nurses and GPs.
Members of the extended primary health-care team such as dietitians are also available if necessary.
The benefits to nurses of a clinic system are many.
They can share knowledge as they put research-based theory into practice.
Shared care with GPs, practice and district nurses produces a standardised and high-quality package of care.
Clinics are also cost-effective, reducing the number of visits needed to patients, travel time and petrol costs.
One important consideration is that techniques can be developed to stimulate the healing process and prevent the spread of pathogens which may inhibit wound healing.
Clinics can also be used as centres of resource knowledge.
The Rank Teaching Centre, a voluntarily run leg ulcer clinic in Battersea, London, has taught over 26 000 nurses and doctors.
When setting up a community leg ulcer clinic, nurses need to be knowledgeable about many aspects of care (Fig 1).
An understanding of the basic mechanisms of wound healing is fundamental to the planning of care for each individual wound.
Our district has five clinics operational, with more planned in the future.
We give structured assessments, order appropriate investigations, reach an accurate diagnosis and then make the relevant treatment or referral.
Nurse training and education in this area has been implemented.
The clinics are areas of resource and knowledge, with nurses taking the lead, putting research-based theory into practice.
There is still a long-term nature to many ulcers, and a high rate of recurrence, in spite of improvements in dressings, compression hosiery, nurse education, dissemination of knowledge and new products; there continues to be a need for nursing research into the social and psychological implications of clients with leg ulceration.
It appears that little is known about how venous ulcers might be prevented, and this is clearly another urgent area for research.
After all, leg ulcers are overwhelmingly a nursing problem.
The psychology of change
Basic mechanisms of wound healing
Criteria for ideal wound dressing
Characteristics of conventional dressings
Effects of nutrition on wound healing
Effects of infection on wound healing
Resistant pathogens
Effective methods of compression bandaging
Management of underlying cause of ulcer
Management of skin surrounding ulcer
Management of ulcer
Careful nursing diagnosis techniques
Effective assessment and recording techniques
Availability of suitable dressings and bandages within the community
Fig 1.
Knowledge needed to start a clinic
HOME HELP.
Alison Berry describes how she cared for a patient with a difficult leg wound in the community
Joan Allen was 74 years old when her son asked her general practitioner to visit her at home.
Five days previously, a clothes drier had fallen on her leg and a large infected wound had developed.
She had thought it would heal quickly by itself, but her son insisted that the GP look at it.
After his initial assessment the GP requested that a district nurse should visit, assess the wound and recommend an appropriate treatment.
This was how I met Mrs Allen.
She lived in a first-floor council flat with her husband, Alex, who was admitted to hospital as an emergency with a gangrenous left foot three weeks after my visits began.
She had been married 19 years; they had no children together, but each had a son from a previous marriage.
The flat was small, cluttered and dirty.
She had had no serious illnesses in the past and had never been in hospital.
The GP visited again 10 days after his first call and asked that I continue to review the wound regularly and alter the dressings as necessary.
He prescribed the appropriate cleaning agents and dressings as required.
Table 1 shows my assessment of Mrs Allen's problems which formed the basis of her care plan.
The assessment was based on Neuman's model, which examines the stresses that impinge on an individual's equilibrium.
In drawing up a care plan, Mrs Allen and I agreed that the main problem was the infected gash on her leg and the surrounding area of cellulitis.
Table 1.
Initial assessment [extracts]
Question
What do you consider to be your main problem?
How do present circumstances differ from your usual pattern?
Have you ever experienced a similar problem?
What do you anticipate as a consequence of your present situation?
What are you doing and what can you do to help yourself?
What do you expect care-givers, family.
friends and others to do for you?
Mrs Allen's comments
‘Getting the gash on my leg better’
Not being able to get about and walk outside’
‘I'm on my feet a lot of the day — washing and cooking for a man keeps me busy’
‘I've been on thyroid tablets since 1939, but they don't affect me’
Women have to keep themselves well to look after their men’
‘As soon as my leg is better I'll get back to things as before’
‘I'm keeping it clean.
I thought it would have got better by itself — it was my son who made me call the doctor’
‘Nothing much — Alex collects the messages anyway.
I suppose with the nurse coming my leg will get better quicker’
District nurse's observations
Large (6cm × 6cm) triangle infected pretibial wound
Dry, black necrotic tissue (2.5cm × 0.5cm) at base of wound, with surrounding cellulitis of leg
Usually keeps herself busy doing household chores.
Husband does very little
No previous coping behaviour to draw on.
Not had to be inactive before.
Is not used to and does not like being dependent on others.
Cellulitis should subside within 10–14 days (antibiotics).
Sloughiness from wound should be removed in 3–4 weeks.
Healing can then begin.
More mobile in about a month
Will need advice about elevating limb, rest, high-protein diet.
Ensure antibiotics are being taken as prescribed
Dislikes being dependent on others.
Will find increased rest difficult to adjust to.
May not be aware that her leg will not heal overnight 
We drew up short term goals but Mrs Allen was not particularly interested in these — her main concern was the long-term aim of having a healed leg wound.
We discussed primary intervention (aimed at prevention of further problems) and agreed on a different method of drying clothes to prevent a similar accident happening again.
Three actions were undertaken for secondary intervention (dealing with the problem and aiming to restore health).
First, I traced the wound using a clean, clear polythene bag and filed it in Mrs Allen's notes to allow regular reassessment of healing.
The wound had to be desloughed before granulation and healing could begin and it was decided to use Hioxyl cream (1.5% hydrogen peroxide).
Using a cream gives time for the hydrogen peroxide to be in contact with the bacteria in order to kill them or inhibit their division.
Protection of the surrounding skin is unnecessary, so there was no risk of her already fragile skin being damaged.
The wound was cleaned daily with sodium chloride 0.9%, the hydrogen peroxide cream applied and then covered with a non-adherent dressing and secured with a bandage.
Second, Mrs Allen was encouraged to rest her leg as much as possible and to elevate it when sitting to encourage venous return and prevent the development of dependent oedema.
Finally, it was important to ensure that Mrs Allen knew when and how to take the antibiotic prescribed by her GP.
She was   told of the importance of completing the course, even though her cellulitis appeared to be improving.
A balanced diet with protein and vitamin C aids protein synthesis and promotes healing
Tertiary intervention, aimed at maintaining health once it is restored, was also discussed.
I stressed the importance of a balanced diet with protein and vitamin C, which aids protein synthesis and promotes wound healing.
Ageing means that skin is less elastic, it has less collagen and circulation is poorer so that speed of wound closure is reduced.
Mrs Allen was taught which foods contained protein and vitamins and encouraged to have some form of protein with each meal, as well as fruit and vegetables, at least once daily.
When Mr Allen was admitted to hospital I reassessed the situation and together Mrs Allen and I set some revised goals for her care.
It was important that she should feel confident to discuss and question the progress of her husband's condition in the less threatening environment of her own home.
One primary intervention therefore was for me to liaise regularly with the ward so that Mrs Allen was fully informed about the situation.
I also needed to be knowledgeable about the procedures, likely outcomes and prognosis so that I could give full and accurate explanations to Mrs Allen.
I phoned the ward every day at first, and then weekly, to discuss Mr Allen's progress.
As part of the care plan.
I stated that time should be specifically assigned during each visit to allow an opportunity for Mrs Allen to voice her feelings and fears.
Mrs Allen was encouraged to speak to the nurse in charge or doctor at least weekly so that she had a realistic idea of Mr Allen's progress.
A short-term goal that I felt was important to include was that Mrs Allen should be able to adapt her lifestyle while her husband was in hospital.
As a long-term goal, she should be prepared for his discharge or possible death.
As a primary intervention, I would aim to direct conversations so that preparation for these changes could be made and some consideration given to the future, whatever that would entail.
Another of my concerns was that Mrs Allen would not bother to cook and eat meals now that she no longer had to prepare anything for her husband.
We agreed on a short-term goal of maintenance of nutritional intake and Mrs Allen said she would make sure she ate one ‘proper’ meal each day.
As a tertiary intervention, I offered to organise a home help or meals on wheels service if Mrs Allen wished.
A final problem was the potential conflict with her stepson, who blamed her for allowing Mr Allen's problem to become so serious.
A short-term goal aimed at improving her relationship with him was set and she was encouraged to talk to him regularly and to discuss his father's condition.
The dry necrotic areas of Mrs Allen's wound became moist and sloughy within five days of cleaning with hydrogen peroxide cream.
Fifteen days after the accident, the black necrotic skin at the base of the wound was soft enough to allow removal using a pair of sterile scissors.
At 21 days, the outside of the wound was clean and granulation was beginning to take place.
There continued to be a small sloughy area about 1cm in diameter in the centre of the wound.
By 30 days, the whole wound was completely clean.
The dressing regime was reassessed and a hydrocolloid (Granuflex) applied.
Hydrcolloid dressings provide an ideal environment for wound healing.
They keep the wound clean   and moist and may be removed without traumatising newly formed granulation tissue and capillary buds.
They are also cost-effective and labour-saving as they can be changed weekly.
Assessment was carried out two days after the application of the dressing to ensure no adverse reaction had occurred, and then continued weekly.
The surrounding cellulitis responded slowly to initial treatment with amoxycillin.
On completion of the five-day course the GP prescribed cofluampicil capsules four times daily (containing 250mg each of flucloxacillin and ampicillin).
Within two days, Mrs Allen's face had become red, warm and swollen.
She had no problems breathing or swallowing but was distressed by her facial puffiness, particularly round her eyes.
The GP was consulted, recommended that she stop taking this medication and started her on ciprofloxacin 500mg twice daily.
It took seven days for the swelling to subside completely and a note of the allergy was made in her nursing and medical notes.
Mrs Allen initially had little understanding of the importance of diet in wound healing.
After several discussions she said she realised the importance of protein and vitamin C to promote healing and in which foods they were contained.
She was weepy when her husband was first admitted to hospital, concerned as to how she would find him and worried as to what would happen if he came home.
Within a few days she seemed very accepting of the situation, almost enjoying not having her husband around the house.
She was philosophical about her stepson blaming her for allowing his father's foot to become so black, saying that Alex had to look after himself.
She was not responsible for him and he was daft to allow it to become so bad.
In the event he had to have a below-the-knee amputation.
She said she had no idea his leg was so badly diseased.
Mrs Allen rarely spoke to any of the hospital staff; any information she got was via her stepson.
She said she knew Alex might die, but thought that he was too resilient for that to happen.
She had little idea as to the extent of his amputation and of his various trips back and forth from theatre.
She knew he would be in hospital a long time and wondered how they would manage if he ever came home.
But she said she would deal with that problem when it arose.
She consistently refused any offers of help with cooking and cleaning or transport to the hospital, maintaining that she was quite capable of managing for herself.
I stopped visiting Mrs Allen eight weeks after her accident, when she was able to visit the treatment room nurse at her GP surgery.
In this care study I have endeavoured to show some aspects of the unique role of the nurse described by Salvage.
She highlights the importance of a research-based, problem-solving approach, a holistic assessment and the need for change in the nurse-patient relationship towards a greater participation and equality.
AN A&E APPROACH
Managing skin and soft tissue injuries in the emergency department requires sound knowledge and a systematic plan, as Don Wijetunge explains
In most areas in the United Kingdom, the hospital accident and emergency (A&E) department, in addition to its main role of managing severe injuries and illness, has become a centre for the initial management of many skin and soft tissue injuries.
A&E staff spend a considerable amount of time in this type of work.
Traditionally doctors have played a small role in the overall management of these types of injuries after the initial stages.
But nurses have tried to keep wound care high on the agenda in the rapidly changing world of high-tech medicine, especially with regard to chronic wounds.
Today we are aware that the nurse or the doctor who sees the patient, assesses the wound, and treats it carries a great responsibility for the ultimate outcome.
The public expects high-quality care for wounds from health-care professionals.
Yet the state is applying maximum pressure on us, the providers of health care, to get value for money.
Our challenge in the A&E department is to work within very tight cash constraints and to provide the best wound care without limiting access.
This is becoming more complex and the only way to meet these challenges is to base management on well-understood basic principles.
As well as playing a vital role in wound care, the A&E department is also a place for education and research in wound care and a place for promotion of preventative measures.
Most of the wounds we see in the A&E department are in otherwise fit young individuals and will heal with or without intervention.
But a few patients have a deficit in the process of healing which could lead to catastrophic effects.
Some primitive species have the ability to regenerate.
We have the ability to heal, probably an inferior process to regeneration but a vital feature in preservation of life.
At tissue level, the end point of good healing is scar tissue, which does not match up to the original tissue lost in injury.
Scar tissue produced even by good healing may lead to major functional problems such as contractures.
In managing the acute wound one needs to pay meticulous attention to detail.
This requires a clear understanding of the cellular and biochemical process of wound healing and the mechanisms of individual types of injury.
We also need to appreciate the microbiology of wound care.
In A&E, the ability to limit the tissue injury to the initial wounding depends on the initial management of the wound as well as the reaction between any contaminants and the wound.
Contaminants combined with inappropriate wound care can convert a simple wound to a major catastrophe.
The objective in A&E wound care is to restore the function of the wounded tissue to as near normal as possible, so that the patient can resume activities with the least interference with quality of life.
To do this, management protocols must be based on available knowledge on wound healing.
Caring for wounds in A&E is no different from managing any other condition in the department.
Managing a patient with a skin and soft tissue injury can be divided into four stages: managing the patient; managing the wound; rehabilitation; and prevention.
Managing the patient
Any injured patient in A&E is managed using a well-established standard of assessment.
This consists of primary assessment and simultaneous resuscitation, where all life-threatening conditions are identified and treated in the ABC sequence: Airway, Breathing, Circulation.
A secondary assessment follows which consists of a detailed head-to-toe examination of the patient.
External bleeding is controlled by direct pressure over the bleeding site.
However, it is important to turn the folded skinflaps to normal position as direct pressure can irreversibly damage them.
Only when the patient is stable do we start the detailed management of the wound.
The whole philosophy in emergency medicine is think of the ABCs — not to overlook a potentially life-threatening injury and get distracted by a more dramatic but less serious injury.
Managing the wound
Management of the wound consists of taking a detailed history, performing a thorough examination of the patient and wound and, finally, deciding on the wound management plan.
History
Obtaining a good history is the first step in the management.
In this the aim is to find answers to the following questions:
When did it happen?
How did it happen?(mechanism)
Where did it happen?
What is the patient's occupation?
Does he or she have a significant past medical history which will influence good wound healing?
While it is important to know when and where the injury occurred, as a wound which presents late may have major septic problems, the mechanism of the injury can also warn us whether to anticipate problems with healing.
Wounding mechanisms can be divided into two broad groups: shearing and impact injuries.
The former lead to a ‘tidy’ wound, the latter to an ‘untidy’one, and management strategies differ.
In a shearing injury there are two parallel forces acting to give tissue failure, for example a knife slipping and cutting the side of the index finger.
Here the slipping knife provides one force and the finger provides the other force in the opposite direction.
The result is a lacerated wound with little surrounding tissue destruction and the energy released at the site of the injury is very low.
This ‘tidy’ wound is not very likely to have complications in the healing period.
In an impact injury, a bigger blunt force is applied to a larger area of the skin, leading to tissue failure, for instance if an older person slips on an uneven paving stone and falls forward hitting the forehead on the hard pavement.
This leads to a lacerated wound with wider tissue destruction around the laceration.
These untidy wounds are about 50 times more likely to get infected than tidy ones.
Knowledge of the patient's occupation and lifestyle as well as the past medical history are also vital to plan the management of the wound.
Examination
Examination of the wound is done with respect for aseptic procedure and follows the traditional approach of ‘look’, ‘feel’, ‘move’ and, if indicated, X-ray.
The site of the wound is significant as skin micro-organisms, and thus the potential for infection, vary according to location.
It is important to look for evidence of skin loss, state of circulation, sensation, loss of tendon or muscle activity and impairment of motor function before the area is anaesthetised for detailed wound examination, cleaning and repair.
Use of a magnifying glass may be helpful in examining and repairing wounds.
Final evaluation of the wound is done once that part of the body or the whole patient is anaesthetised.
In order to diagnose injuries to specific tissues, one has to adopt tissue-oriented and systematic examination.
It is necessary to test for the integrity and the function of the constituent components of each tissue group.
Fig 1.
A definition of wound management
1.1 Wound management is the pursuit of the permanent, functional and aesthetic healing of the patient's wound through the promotion of physiological healing and the prevention of elimination of factors — whether local, systemic or external — that disturb healing
1.2 The means of healing must be conducted by scientifically based procedures and materials.
These should be carried out and applied by a properly trained multidisciplinary team.
1.3 Good wound management focuses not only on the closing of the wound by procedures and dressings but also upon the mental and physical comfort of the patient throughout the process of healing.
In addition, the prevention of disfiguring scars, the generation of functional new tissue and prevention of regression are an integral part of wound management
1.4 It is recognised that there is a group of patients with tissue defects that cannot be healed.
The management of these patients should be directed towards the control of pain, treatment of correctable complications and improved quality of life.
Management plan
This consists of anaesthetising the wound and setting up the method of repair or dressing of the wound.
Anaesthetising the wound can be done in one of three ways: infiltration, regional block or topical application.
Each one of these has its own advantages and disadvantages.
Following this the surrounding skin is cleaned using warm sodium chloride 0.9%.
The wound is then debrided if it contains devitalised tissue.
Even though this is an essential part of wound care, identifying exact limits of debridement is not easy.
The usual wound preparation is copious irrigation of the anaesthetised wound with warm sodium chloride solution.
There is no place for surgical scrub solutions or other antiseptic solutions, as they damage the cells of the wound as well as those in the blood and other natural cells and secretions helping the normal process of repair.
For management purposes, wounds can be grouped according to their potential for contamination.
Clean wounds include those surgical incisions which do not involve the alimentary system, genito-urinary system or upper respiratory  tract.
Clean contaminated wounds include those surgical incisions involving the alimentary system, genito-urinary system or upper respiratory tract.
Contaminated wounds are accidental or traumatic wounds which present within six to eight hours after injury.
The large majority of wounds seen in the A&E department belong to this category.
Dirty contaminated wounds are heavily contaminated at the time of the injury or present for treatment late.
Wounds can also be described according to the degree of tissue loss.
Those where there is no tissue loss are considered for primary closure (joining the edges together), while wounds with tissue loss may need grafts, flaps or to have healing by granulation allowed.
The conditions which will influence these decisions include the site, time lapse before treatment, contamination and state of the circulation.
In some wounds delayed primary closure is advisable.
The most appropriate suture and the needle for each wound is selected.
Handling of the wounded tissue has to be very gentle and non-traumatic and the knot has to be placed tension-free.
An alternative method of wound closure uses tapes but the general experiences of tapes in the A&E department has been disappointing.
It may be that once a decision is made to tape the wound, little attempt is made to perform a thorough wound toilet.
Our observation is that tapes can be used only in very superficial wounds and very small skin lacerations.
It is difficult to keep the edges of a full-thickness skin laceration by using tapes.
Once this stage is completed, one needs to decide if a dressing is needed and if so, what type to use.
The first stage of healing is a local inflammatory phase.
An excessive or prolonged inflammatory phase could lead to a poor outcome after healing.
The micro-environment probably has the potential for balancing the timing of wound healing if left undisturbed.
This phase is followed by repair, which consists of angiogenesis, fibrinolysis, and the interaction of various growth factors on their target cells.
What we do should assist this process but not interfere with it.
Top left: failed wound: a clean contaminated abdominal incision.
The suture marks show the closure was not tension free.
Top right: typical contaminated dirty wound.
Above: large pretibial laceration (impact injury).
Left: improperly managed pretibial laceration.
Below: poor management of a dirty contaminated wound caused by a dog attack has, ten months later, led to extensive fibrosis
It is obvious that wound dressings have a major influence on the micro-environment of the wound.
If a wound is   occluded in a way that retains a moist environment between the wound and the dressing the process of healing is faster and effective.
A good wound dressing should have the following properties:
Humid wound/dressing interface
Ability of the dressing to remove or absorb the excess exudate and other substances toxic to the cells
Ability to exchange gases while giving adequate thermal insulation
Ability to prevent introduction of bacteria and resist bacterial multiplication by helping the natural defence agents abundant in the wound
Causes minimum or no discomfort to the patient while wearing the dressing as well as when the dressing is removed
Ability to reduce the  frequency of dressing changes 
Postoperative care of the wound should support the process of healing and may include the use of antibiotics.
Antibiotics administered pre-operatively have a better chance of preventing infection.
Most wounds in A&E do not need antibiotics, however, and they should never be used as a substitute for meticulous wound toilet and repair.
Wound care is not complete in A&E without taking steps for tetanus prevention.
The decision to give tetanus immunisation depends on the patient's immunity as well as the wound's susceptibility to tetanus.
One has to match the two and use active and passive immunisation when necessary.
Rehabilitation
Even though most wound patients need little or no rehabilitation, some may need the help of the physiotherapists, occupational therapists and a formal rehabilitation programme.
It is important they are identified very early so the whole team can get involved in their treatment.
Prevention
Prevention must always be considered in wound management.
Unfortunately, the system is such that we often pay only lip service to this very important area.
Most wounds are preventable, but we need education for ourselves, our patients, the public and politicians who have the power to bring legal charges.
A&E can be used as a centre for good public health education in addition to its numerous other roles.
Managing skin and soft tissue wounds in A&E is a great challenge.
If the basic principles of wound care are not followed with respect for the natural healing process, even though most patients are young and fit, we could occasionally see a disastrous outcome from a wound.
This is almost always caused by bad wound management.
This year the International Committee on Wound Management developed a consensus statement on the subject of wound healing in the form of answers to several questions.
The answers, listed in Fig 1, adequately summarise what should be achieved in managing patients with skin and soft tissue wounds.
The approach described in this article should produce such care.