

AUTHOR'S INTRODUCTION
‘If you have the time,’ said my publisher, could you write an introduction?’
So I just sat down and found time — in the middle of it all.
The breakfast dishes weren't even washed, though I haven't so many now as two daughters are away.
One's in Edinburgh (a nursery nurse — definitely not my side of the family!), and the other's in London, training to be an actress ‘carrying on where ma Mammy left off….’
(She knows I hate being called Mammy.)
The window I am sitting beside overlooks the back garden, where there is a perpetually erected bonfire, old cuttings, window sashes and a few wardrobe doors.
Yes, that pile does signify that I have moved again —back to Glasgow.
I was missing the warmth of the people, although my two years in the ‘east’ gave me quite a lot of material which you will discover in the following pages.
My first book,When Sixpence Was A Fortune , has reached many corners of the world — a lady told me her sister read some of the poems to an audience of exiled Scots in New Zealand and half the folk there ‘wiz greetin'’!
I hope that Pink Rock And Postcards gives as much pleasure.
I would like to thank Miss Freda Scott, Voluntary Services Organiser, for all the work she has done to promote my books, and I look forward to resuming concerts at Ruchill Hospital and elsewhere.
My thanks also go to Colin Harvey and the staff at Heatherbank Press.
Also to you — the readers — for buying my first book, and for the many letters I received, mainly  nostalgic.
This edition of poems is a bit different, but then people don't remain the same either; experiences colour one's outlook, and being two years older, I must have more to write about!
MAGGIE'S MINK
You've heard aboot ‘Oor Margaret’?
Well — this will make you think,
She's outdone all the others,
And got a Silver Mink!
Beautifully matched and fitted,
Half-belted at the back,
Whoever did the cutting
Made a lovely job of that.
She didn't say the price,
Except it cost a bomb…
And you couldn't buy the buttons
In ‘Going For a Song’….
‘Mind noo where ye hing that
Don't pit it on yer bed —
As a matter o' fact, jist leave it here
Across ma knees instead.’
We went out for dinner,
No Indian or Chink,
It had to be the best
For Maggie and her mink!
It lay around her shoulder
Like some familiar pet,
While I struggled to keep cool
In a nylon polo-neck.
As we finished off our meal,
The heat had me demented,
But the mink never budged —
I think it was cemented!
I had a wee try-on,
Just for a laugh,
But I'm that wee bit bigger —
An' couldny get it aff!
Talk about a panic,
I could hear her at the door,
Feart tae gie a tug
In case the damn thing tore.
I came to the conclusion,
Just as the shops were shuttin'
I'd need a bigger size —
An' that would mean an extra button!
There's not much I can add about ‘Maggie’ as I'm sure you all feel well-acquainted with her by now,(see ‘Oor Margaret’in my previous book).
Most people are amazed at our continuing friendship, but no malice is intended: even her nephew, Crawford, good-humouredly looked up at her recently purchased Venetian chandelier and asked, ‘Aunt Margaret, is that plastic?’
THE EMPTY SITE
Snuggled together for winter warmth
Protected from sea and frost,
Waiting until their owners return
To give them a lick and a wash.
There's nought so bleak on a winter's night
As the silence surrounding a caravan site.
No more ‘Hi Jimmy, are ye gon fur a drink?
The wife's in the launderette steeped in the sink,
The weans are in ma neebors' van,
Come oan, we've time fur anither wan…’
Big Mary staunin' herself oan the flair
Her straw skirt oot fur its annual air.
Carl is banging away at the drums,
Big John as usual gnashing his gums —
‘I'm from Glasgow, to me it belongs…’
There's no other singer, no other songs.
Big Mary's still dancin', and jist fur a laugh
Wiggles her hips till her skirt fa's aff.
But now there's no sound, blinds tightly drawn,
Another wet summer has come and gone.
Turned off mains, locked up loos,
While grass recovers from dogs and shoes.
Days will lengthen according to plan
Till life returns to the caravan.
SOAP OPERA
Soap can be like perfume, nostalgia in its scent,
Cakes of it like milestones
To remind me where I went…
Falling off a stool to reach it when aged three,
Dashing Mother's hope for Miss Pears '33!
My Granny's soap was different,
In a saucer by the sink,
Strongly smelling stuff
That made you cough and blink.
I still can see it now — beside her old gas geyser
Being told to wash my legs —‘and don't stop
Where your knees are….’
School soap was hard —
A big block sliced.
You chased it round the sink
With water cold as ice.
The janny stood and watched you
From his elevated station,
The roller towel embroidered:
‘Glasgow corporation ‘.
Then there's the one just made for babies,
Clenched fists and silken skin,
Wriggling in the bath
As you gently lay them in.
These smells all seem to linger, unfolding page by page,
Memories of years gone by, until the present age.
I've stuck to my old favourite —
But wish they'd change the colour,
The school-girl complexion is getting even duller!
And I'd love to change the bathroom
To a different colour scheme,
As I've been stuck for years now
With the same old Olive Green!
SIDE EFFECTS
You try to get up for a cup of tea
After you've had the flu,
Crawl downstairs to the kitchen —
And passing, glance in at the loo.
You've been in bed twenty-four hours,
Feeling limp as a sheet,
To look at the mess that faces you now,
It would seem to be more like a week!
Light-headed and dizzy, weak at the knees,
You have to sit down for a minute —
Only to find on one damp behind
A dish-cloth that once was a semmit….
Don't feel like tea — just a small bit of toast,
Your appetite's gone…so has the roast.
Your pots are all dirty, the kettle has fused,
And a mouse has been keeping the cat well amused.
The washing's all piled up and dirty,
Stacked in a big crumpled heap —
There's no better place that the dog likes
When he's settling down for a sleep…
Thinking of falling right back into bed,
The place is a mess, and the budgie needs fed,
Time's getting on and you glance at the clock,
Deciding this time, they're in for a shock —
Pop back into bed and say you were dreaming
The washing was done…and so was the cleaning!
SPRING CLEANING
Dreary winter passed us by —
Wet wellies on the floor,
Pulley full of drying clothes,
An endless-seeming chore…
Were nothing to the upset
When Spring came in the door.
Gazing round the ceiling
We could hear that dreaded phrase
‘Spring cleaning starts tomorrow,
So it's porridge and auld claes….’
The clothes basket held treasures
Which adorned our mantelpiece,
The mirror on the wall above
Supported clouds of fleece.
Blue vases with the waving fronds
Of imitation grass,
A miniature of Robert Burns
With ploughshare made of brass.
The largest rugs were lifted
And carted down the back,
Two cane carpet beaters
With their resounding whack!
Not until the dust had cleared
Would the beating stop,
Or some adjacent neighbour called
‘It's efter eight o'clock!’
Every drawer turned inside out,
Fresh with paper lined,
Curtains stripped.from windows
Dusting paper blinds.
Mattress hauled from off the bed,
While she dusted all the springs,
But ‘Leave thon picture oan the wa'
There's a big crack where it hings….’
This went on for five whole days —
Very near a week,
Home-made soup and stovies
Were all we had to eat
When everything was back in place,
She beamed with pride and boasted:
‘Aw weel, ah feel much better noo!’
Then collapsed in bed exhausted.
TEA BAGS
I like my friends to just appear,
No need to phone me first —
Just drop in for a cup of tea,
I'm always dying of thirst.
Forever in the kitchen,
Or paintbrush in my hand,
Pull out a chair, but watch the cat
(She has some kitten planned).
And take no notice of the dog,
She always jumps about,
Hang on now, it's raining,
I've got some washing out.
It's so nice to see you,
To have you popping in,
Hearing all your bits of news
About your kith and kin.
Everyone's so busy now,
Haven't got the time,
Unless a date is made before
On their assembly line.
I'm really pleased to see you,
Glad you were passing by,
I don't have to make a fuss
Or even have to try.
I have some fresh baked scones —
Rasp or blackcurrant jam?
Had it been an invite,
It would have had to be York Ham.
THE FORGOTTEN TRACK
This once was a track, a few years back,
Ridges of grass where sleepers lay —
Roller coasters where rabbits could play.
Overgrown now with brambles and weeds,
A track forgotten that nobody needs.
Listen closely and recall that dream,
Hear the whistle and puff of steam.
Into the carriage and close the door,
Head for Fife and that golden shore.
Cases and coats upon the rack,
Father relaxed with a paperback,
Frightened to dirty our whitened shoes,
Dying to investigate corridor loos…
Calling at floral railway stations,
Tended by porters with loving patience,
Lobelia blues, Geranium reds,
White-painted barrels in shell-bedecked beds.
Weathered milestones take us back
Along the edge of the coastal track.
An old white gate with no middle spar,
Rusty bikes and the door of a car.
The bustle, the porters, the chocolate machines
Have all disappeared like a cloud of steam.
It's into the car and close the boot,
Petrol fumes instead of soot.
Gone from our ken the iron horse,
Those were the good old days…of course.
FORTY WINKS
Feet up on the fender, paper on the floor,
I'm gonna hae ma forty winks
So dinna bang the door!
Dishes steepin' in the sink,
Watter no' richt heated yet,
So I'll jist hae ma forty winks,
While it's gettin' het
The dogs hae baith been fed, an' lyin' at my feet,
I got the paper read, noo I'll hae a sleep.
I've had a busy day — washed doon a' the stair,
Polished a' the brasses, an' thon wee lobby flair.
Listened to yon neebor, the wan that's fu' o' groans,
She's aye got a pain and her voice even groans.
If I'm ever kept too long
An' canna thole her girnin',
I get someone to call me in —
‘Come on the mince is burning’…
Yes, I've had a busy day, my hours are all that full,
Makin' soup an' stovies, bairns comin' in from school.
Now I'm getting drowsy, the fire is burning low
So if you see me fall asleep — just before you go,
Close the door behind you,
Leave the dishes in the sink.
I'll see to all that later…
When I've had ma forty winks.
THE OLD WORLD GARDEN
There is an old world garden
By the house that's next to mine,
Clematis climbs the wall and smiles
At nodding Columbine.
A moss and ivy carpet
Appears between the stones,
While  wispy fronds of fairy fern
Stand in clumps alone.
A narrow weaving crazy path
Leads to a wooden gate,
While cats slink along the wall
From dusk until I wake.
Roses large and yellow
Surround the window-sills,
While underneath asleep now
Are last year's daffodils.
Honeysuckle clambers
Up the wash-house door,
And branches of willow
Are protruding from the floor.
London Pride and poppies
Are dancing in the sun,
I really love this garden —
It's having so much fun!
THE HOUSE
It stood there, shaded from the sun,
Paintwork badly needing done,
Cracked sink, lead pipes exposed —
Re-wiring, plumbing too I supposed.
Dark varnished doors and skirting board,
I pictured them white, with paint restored.
Wallpaper peeling in the hall,
I'd had enough — I'd seen it all.
Cupboards dark and gloomy too,
Ancient cistern in the loo,
Floorboards warped and stairs unsteady,
My mind was now made up already!
But…
Lying forgotten on a chair
Was someone's much-loved teddy bear,
Moth-eaten, button-eyed and one chewed ear —
Instantly this house had atmosphere.
That fireplace there with worm-eaten beam
Had many a Christmas morning seen.
Children in these rooms had played,
A kitten somewhere must have strayed.
I could sense with new delight
A lovely old house shining bright,
I could see the floors not rotted,
Plans took shape…that's if we bought it.
Should we…
Or perhaps not — bother,
Dare to put in such an offer?
I nearly died when three weeks later,
Lawyers' letters, lawyers' papers,
Informing us that of the lot —
We were the folks that house had bought!
PINK ROCK AND POSTCARDS
I'm sick of pink rock and postcards,
Each time I hear that old till —
Instead of making me happy,
It's slowly making me ill!
(Tinkling away all summer —
Those keys are never still.)
Chocolates have sold by the dozen,
Boxes of sweets by the gross,
But I wish I had just stayed a worker,
Instead of being a boss.
(They can relax when the shop shuts,
Forget about profit and loss.)
Invoices, orders and statements,
Each in a separate pile,
I bury mine deep in a corner —
The windowsill serves as a file.
We're stocked up with pink rock and postcards,
Comic and clean local views,
Stacked alongside Sunday papers,
Next to the fruit penny chews.
Just imagine the Reverend's excitement,
As his toes began to unfurl,
When he went to read his Observer
And found the News of the World….
We've sold all the stock we had of pink rock,
With lettering that stood out like Braille,
They were just blobs of ink — but we made them  think 
Each stick said ‘A present from Crail’.
Next season's rock will be dearer,
Sticks won't last quite as long,
But still coloured pink, flavoured with mint,
And hopefully — not stamped Hong Kong ….
THE FISHERMAN
The ceaseless intermingle
Of sea and surf and shingle,
The fisherman could not explain
This strange compulsion once again 
That all his other boats must burn
And to the sea he must return,
Dictating the hour that he must rise
And anxiously scan the cloudy skies.
Oilskins and boots are near at hand,
Decks hosed free of dirt and sand,
Creels rebaited on the quay,
And then he's heading out to sea.
In sleety, stinging, biting cold,
He struggles freezing ropes to hold,
Lonely hours at anchor rides,
Returning laden with the tides,
Lobster and Partan now abound
With clawing, scraping, scratching sound.
This is the life his father knew,
And others long before him too.
He tried so many times before
His hand at work along the shore,
But the call is strong, the sea is deep,
This part of him will never sleep.
He must return, it's not a game
Once the salt gets in the veins.
SEA PHANTOMS
'TIS a wild wolves' moon that stares at me
From behind the foamy clouds,
While sailors dance on phantom ships
Wrapped in misty shrouds.
All around the whistling wind
Blows like a reeded flute,
The rising swell heaves to a silent tune,
Even the sailors are mute.
A moon-beam glides down a leafless tree,
Held in its skeleton hand,
Softly reflected by the sea
It bathes the deserted sand.
No cry of a gull, just the restless foam
As we turn our backs and head for home,
While mariners dance on phantom ships
To the tinkling yachts on deserted slips.
I daren't look round for fear I should see
The hand of a mermaid beckoning me
To join in the bobbing of fishing creels
And the haunting music of distant seals.
I quicken my steps and pray that soon
I won't hear the waves…
Or see that wild wolves' moon.
HOMESICK
Didn't like the city, been there all my life,
Longed for a spot in the country,
Far from constant strife —
And women wearing headscarves
With perpetual message bags,
Talk of ‘Ma man's no' workin',
Who's gonny buy the fags?’
Winos at the bus stop,
Stray dogs and hordes of cats,
Plastic bags on pavements
Torn by tenement rats.
Green and yellow buses
Pakis at the wheel,
‘Hurry along there plees’,
And the way they make you feel….
My God if they ruled the country,
Front seats would be for the Black,
And everyone going to Bingo
Would be shoved away at the back!
But it's so quiet here in the country,
The patter's not the same,
I miss the folk who laugh and joke
Just ‘tae please the wean’.
It's not the same in the country,
I'm trying ever so hard,
But just like seeking an orchid,
It's there in your own backyard.
One day I'll return to the city,
And rectify this bloomer —
Yes, I really miss dear old Glasgow
With its wonderful sense of humour.
AULD PARTICK
Shattered window panes
Staring at the past,
Wondering what these metal arms
Are doing at the sill.
Slates fall like confetti,
Dust rises from inside,
She gazes at familiar walls
She lived in as a bride.
Wallpaper flutters, loose and damp,
(I mind he picked it, thon wee scamp),
Moved his bed to hide the tear,
Ripped the lino getting there.
Now it hangs for all to see —
Not everyone's choice, but it suited me.
That gap where my fireplace used to be,
Friends sat round with cups of tea,
(That chimney aye wis bad fur soot —
Wan gust o' wind an' the fire wis oot).
Old voices echo down the hall,
As neighbours' names I now recall.
Another sound breaks up my dreams,
While crackling flames eat up the beams
Much louder than a pulley squeaking,
Dirtier than a chimney reeking —
A bulldozer now with menacing roar
Rips apart my treasure store.
A few more days — and nothing will remain,
A puddle maybe, if there's been some rain.
No traces of the past in the mud and dust and brick,
But nothing lasts forever…
Even Auld Partick.
Inspired, yes, by a bus run, but the booler is definitely my own husband who is devoted to sport and allows nothing to come in the way of his bowls, both indoor and outdoor bowling.
The ‘aye dein'’ character was the tone of voice from behind me on a bus run which was supposed to be a ‘Mystery Tour’but he gave a detailed commentary on the whole journey.
‘Efter we get alang here a wee bit, ye come tae a loch, then roon' the bend is a castle, then we cairry oan up the road a bit till we cam tae anither loch…’
His wife didn't help much as she kept trying to shut him up by offering him sweets every five minutes.
THE RING
I placed it on my finger
For all the world to see,
Not the ring I'd treasured
At my wedding ceremony,
But a band of gold which measured
A Mother's love for me.
The ring I'd grasped as a baby
On a hand that had shielded my head
And rocked me with soothing comfort
Then laid me gently in bed.
Through school this hand assisted me,
Taught me to read and spell,
At times clasped tightly in prayer,
Wrung bitterly when life seemed Hell.
It scrubbed every inch of the kitchen,
Carried in buckets of coal,
Was looked at and nervously fingered
When her man was on the dole.
Loved and adored as a granny,
Knitted jumpers for every child,
Even midst outbursts of temper
She quietly sat and smiled.
Signed papers of departure
To dwell across the sea,
And now returned to my finger
I can touch and I can see
The wedding ring worn by my Mother,
One look and such memories unfold.
I'll wear it with love for ever,
This precious band of gold.
DRIVING FORCE
It's no' wan bit funny
When you think o' the money,
And the worry that makes you all tense…
I usually freeze
When he hands me the keys,
And lose all my reason and sense.
My instructor's a kind man —
He calls for me at nine,
When the weans are in school
And the hale road is mine.
I started lessons greener tan most
(No car of my own of which I could boast),
Awthing wis new — I had to be telt
Which way to fasten my safety belt!
‘Now mind how you steer,
Both hands on the wheel…’
(Never mind if the sheepskin covers aren't real),
‘Slow down at corners, don't overtake,
Get your foot off the pedal — I'm trying to brake!
Use your wipers,’ he said, ‘it's beginning to rain,’
I started fiddlin' all over again.
I signalled left, I signalled right,
I couldny get they wipers tae wipe!
He leaned over coldly and flicked on a switch,
(I knew he was thinking — silly old bitch…)
The car got all steamed up and misty,
He wanted to stop for a smoke,
I was just parched and thirsty —
Desperate for a coke.
‘You know, of course, about gears, dear?
Most cars are fitted with four,
Give me your hand a minute…’
I panicked and reached for the door.
I'd been told a lot of stories
And warned by more than one,
How there are lots of instructors
Who try making lessons fun…
I may be getting on now,
Face all laughter-lined,
But even I know the Highway Code
Isn't taught in the seat behind….
I would like to stress that the characters in this poem bear no resemblance to any real persons living or dead!
This was my first poem ever written and it was for a daffodil tea in our church.
While endeavouring to find a title for my first book, Colin Harvey, the publisher, suggested ‘Poems for Daffodil Teas’.
I thought Poems for D.T.'s would be more appropriate, or would attract more attention on a book-shop counter.
Getting back to the actual poem, I had to write about a subject that the ladies of the congregation could identify with, and as Tupperware is a household name, I got the inspiration to write ‘The Hostess’ It all started from there, and, like the product, has gone from strength to strength.