

THE GROUNDING OF VALUATION
1.1 ‘Be aware’ as first principle
Since in the last decades of the twentieth century all valuations are in question, let us start by imagining a manner of life in which I do without them altogether.
Let us suppose that, when invited to judge actions or persons, I appeal only to what is, never to what ought to be.
Facts appear solid, values fluid; there are firm reasons for accepting, if only provisionally, scientific laws of nature, none for submitting to canons of taste or to the moral law.
Should I criticize another or myself, it will be for failure to take account of facts, for insufficient awareness of the conditions and consequences of a choice.
If I respect your opinion in the arts, it will be because you are especially intelligent, more than usually perceptive of colour contrasts and harmonies, rhythms and vowel sequences, the shades of meaning of a word, the motives of a character, the ring of authentic or false feeling; we shall not argue over tastes.
As for morals, I shall have on this policy to refuse to condemn even Hitler's genocide, although I might permit myself to sneer at it as stupid, because the theories about the Aryan race and the Jewish conspiracy which inspired it were fantasies.
However little I care for the way you live, I shall concede that as long as you get your facts right, sense flavours and textures with accuracy and discrimination, think out the implications of your choices, are not deceived about your desires and ambitions, you may do as you please.
As long as I stay confined to this moral nihilism, the single unquestioned imperative will be to act intelligently, and in particular to be aware of objective conditions, of those obstinate facts about external difficulties and my own limitations which thwart my efforts unless I recognize and adapt myself to them.
In general I shall recognize what is, not what ought to be; but certainly I ought to be aware of what I am trying to do, why I want it, how to do it, whether it can be done.
In addition to all the rationally established facts I formulate in the indicative mood, there is the imperative to respect them, expressed in injunctions of varying generality imposing varying degrees of obligation, ‘You ought to know that’, ‘You should have had more sense’, ‘You had better check that’, ‘You were wrong to overlook that’, and sometimes directly in the imperative mood, ‘Face facts’‘Know thyself’, ‘Think what you're doing’.
As the most suitable to sum them up provisionally let us pick ‘Face facts’, a roughly formulated injunction which carries with it its own punishments for disobedience, without any need to appeal to God, philosophers or the police.
If I were to question its authority, and find a nurse to look after me, I would no longer be doing anything on my own responsibility, and problems of valuation would in any case no longer concern me.
Since temptations to inattentiveness, prejudice, wishful thinking, are as strong as moral temptations, there are  times when ‘Face facts’ imposes itself as the most rigorous, the most unwelcome of imperatives.
However, it is unlike a prudential or moral imperative in that it tells me only how to prepare for a choice, not how to choose.
‘Face facts’ does not tell me what to do about the facts to be faced.
A book of ethics does not have to spell it out, any more than a book about mathematics or zoology has to include the reminder ‘Read me attentively, intelligently’.
If I could be nothing but a witness and tolerant judge of others, this ethical nihilism would be a fully rational mode of life.
But I am myself an agent; there remains the question of how I make my own decisions.
The assembling of facts merely sets the stage for asking the question ‘What shall I do?’.
To choose, I have to judge that here and now, for me, one alternative is the better, and to make my choices consistently I have to add to ‘Face facts’ other principles to which I ascribe an imperative force, and ensure that they are logically compatible.
But although codes of more or less articulated principles are a practical necessity for everybody, they seem to hang in a void without anything to support them.
Certainly, once committed to a personal code, I can make value as well as factual judgments about your conduct; but if your first principle is ‘Do as you would be done by’ and mine is ‘Care only for yourself’, it seems that there is no objective test by which one of us can convince the other that he is right, as there is for an issue of fact.
My temptation is to try to make my other imperatives as unimpugnable as ‘Face facts’ by rooting them in fact.
But how can the advice ‘Do this’ or the decision ‘I will do this’derive its authority from a purely factual claim, whether theological (‘The creator of the universe commands this’), sociological (‘It's the law’, ‘It's the custom’) or psychological (‘I desire it’)?
To suppose that it can is an assumption long ago undermined by Hume, that one can infer from ‘is’ to ‘ought’from purely descriptive premisses to a prescriptive conclusion.
To some extent I can evade the issue by letting spontaneous inclination take its course, without allowing thought to intervene, so that my action is not chosen but caused; but I am not an instinctive being like an animal, I have to choose, and on the position we are considering all imperatives are ungrounded, except such as may be derivable from ‘Face facts’.
I may be tempted to offer the spontaneous inclination itself as reason for my choice, and say I shall do it because I want to do it; but in examining myself objectively I see that a fact about my wants and likes would be directly relevant only to a causal explanation of my actions, and could be used in deciding what to do only as I use any other objective facts.
This, admittedly, is a hard saying, and may well stir a first inkling that there must be something fundamentally wrong with the approach which has brought us to this point.
There is surely something very odd about insisting that I need more than the fact that I love cats and hate dogs to decide which to have about the house.
However, once granted that one cannot infer what to do from fact alone, there seems to be no flaw in the argument.
It appears then that in the last resort, with all the facts before me, and all my ungrounded principles logically ordered, I still have no grounds upon which to choose.
It is not that I have no reason to submit to the moral law and can do as I please; I am left with no reason even to do as I please.
I can be rational about everything except the point which most immediately concerns me, how to conduct my life.
This is the conclusion which many, approaching by this or similar routes, have come to see as inevitable, after the successive failures to prove that principles of conduct can be grounded in the existence of God, or in Kant's Categorical Imperative validated a priori like ‘two and two make four’, or in the biological facts of evolution or the psychological facts of human needs.
It leaves a gap at the very centre of the knowledge which the rational procedures of the sciences are continually expanding, with nothing to fill it except deduction from principles themselves ungrounded, or habit, or religious or political emotion, or the Existentialist's anguished leap in the dark, or doing as one pleases, or as convention or fashion pleases.
To live by ungrounded values, which even if organized as rationally as a science have only an inward coherence without external support, has come to be widely accepted as the quintessentially modern condition.
Nothing forbids me to dramatize the crisis by saying that the individual has found a new sense of his dignity in the knowledge that he is wholly free to choose, with the sole responsibility for his choice.
But would I be doing more than playing with words which sound agreeable to me, ‘dignity’, ‘freedom’, ‘responsibility’, to describe what could still just as well be called nihilism?
All that I can honestly say is that after collecting the facts I do decide one way or another, without having any reasons which will satisfy you if you do not share the same standards.
But is this conclusion as inevitable as it has come to seem?
It so happens that another growing tendency in contemporary thinking has been undermining the whole approach which leads to it.
It no longer seems as obvious as it used to that I can detach myself from my interactions with other things, observe them objectively, and arrive at facts about them wholly independent of my own reactions and decisions.
In the sciences of course the possibility of pure objectivity has been a convenient and fruitful assumption, which has only recently run up against its limitations.
At the sub-atomic level however physics does now have to take into account the effects of the observer on the particles he observes.
Why should the assumption of a perfect detachment be retained in ethics, where it amounts to the transparent fiction that I can, so to speak, stand outside myself, withdraw to a point of observing Ego witnessing unmoved even my own emotions?
When I obey or defy ‘Face facts’, my welcoming or resisting of the facts is itself a psychological process in causal interaction with spontaneous inclination; on the one hand emotional bias distorts judgement, on the other desire or aversion veers with additional information.
Certainly I cannot deduce which goals to pursue from the facts to be faced; but will it not be a causally necessary condition of obeying ‘Face facts’ that I let myself be moved, at least incipiently, in the direction in which the facing of the facts would cause me to move?
Suppose for example that I am a smoker who has just heard about the dangers of lung cancer.
Some of my friends have been frightened into no longer wanting to smoke, others have faced the facts but are reconciled to being fonder of smoking than they are afraid of cancer, but I myself yield to the temptation to smoke although convinced that I ought to abstain.
Does that ‘ought’ depend on some other imperative than ‘Face facts’?
No doubt if I cannot break out of the convention of thinking as though I were a detached Ego contemplating unmoved both the possible consequences and my fear of them, it will seem that I can have no reason to stop smoking unless I  recognize some further imperative such as‘Take care of your health’.
But if I am not misled by this convention, it will in my own case be sufficient grounds for choice that it is the impulse to abstain which prevails when I am fully aware of the danger.
The sight of a photograph of a cancerous lung causes me to shrink with disgust from the very thought of smoking; a few hours later the physical craving revives, obliterates the memory, and causes me to smoke again.
Pulled between the conflicting impulses, I ought to resist the craving which dulls the awareness which moves me to abstain, because for me that is a causally necessary condition of obeying ‘Face the fact that you might get cancer’.
Let us imagine, as the first dawning of objective thought, a child wanting another helping at dinner, remembering what it is like to be sick, and telling himself what he has often been told by his mother, ‘Don't, or you'll be ill’.
Up to this moment he has always behaved as spontaneously as an animal, surrendering to appetite and vomiting; now for the first time he makes a considered choice.
(We describe as ‘spontaneous’ all activity which is not the result of a considered choice.)
What will be the logical form of his thought?
A common answer would be to fit it into some form of the practical syllogism:
Shall I eat it or not?
Another helping will make you sick.
You don't want to be sick.
Therefore don't eat it.
But here we run up against the difficulty that this formulation appears to derive a prescriptive conclusion from two factual premisses.
One might avoid the objection, following R. M. Hare, by interpreting ‘You don't want to be sick’ as itself prescriptive, a logical imperative equivalent to ‘Don't get sick’disguised by the grammatically indicative form.
This would involve claiming that whenever one rejects practical advice by repudiating the presumed end, in the words ‘But I don't want that!’, one is declaring ‘I don't recognize any imperative to do that’.
Yet the end would be repudiated even more strongly by a ‘But I don't feel the slightest inclination to do that!’, which is unmistakably expressive of a spontaneous revulsion.
On closer inspection one sees that this interpretation of ‘want’ misplaces the centre of imperative force in the child's situation.
He does not require an imperative to make him avoid the sickness from the thought of which he already shrinks in nausea; what he has to force himself to do is hold on to the fact that sickness is the likely outcome of yielding to temptation.
Under the pressure of this unwelcome fact, he is being spontaneously pulled between the revulsion when he remembers and the greed when he forgets.
In taking this first step to rational choice, the single imperative which imposes itself is none other than ‘Face facts’, which has exerted its authority from his first recognition of the obstinate resistance of external circumstance to his desires.
The form of his thought will be something like this:
Overlooking the fact I find myself moved to eat, facing the fact I find myself moved to refrain.
In which direction shall I let myself be moved?
Face facts.
Therefore let yourself be moved to refrain.
From this illustration is may be seen why, for choosing a course of action, ‘Face facts’ may be the only imperative required.
The child's greed is obstructing awareness of consequences the facing of which would cause him to refrain; therefore to let the impulse to refrain prevail over the impulse to eat is a causally necessary condition of obeying the imperative.
If he succumbs to temptation after all and suffers the consequences, it would be to the point to say ‘You should have known better’ or ‘You ought to have had more sense’, reproaches which derive their authority from ‘Face facts’; but it would be irrelevant (and exasperating) to say ‘You shouldn't have made yourself ill like that’, on the authority of the ‘You don't want to be sick’of the practical syllogism interpreted as ‘Don't get sick’.
From the imperative to refrain on this occasion the child may advance, as he observes the situation recur in his own or others' experience, to his first general principle:
Overlooking the fact that too much will make one sick one may be moved to eat, facing the fact one is moved to refrain.
In which direction should one let oneself be moved?
Face facts.
Therefore one should let oneself be moved to refrain.
We might formulate his newly discovered principle as ‘One ought not to eat too much’, but very probably it would be first encountered by him as ‘Sensible people don't eat too much’.
While the first formula (the practical syllogism) served choices of means, the new formula whether in particular or in general form serves choices of ends.
The motions in causal interaction with the facing of facts are incipient motions towards goals, spontaneous desires or aversions, and to prefer one inclination in the light of‘Face facts’ is to choose its goal as an end.
At first the prevailing inclination will issue immediately in action, but with increasing rationality the child will learn to suspend action in order to take further goals into account.
Later still he may train himself to eradicate the desire or aversion itself, releasing himself from one causally necessary condition of facing facts, so that the formula is no longer directly applicable; but that will be in the service of other ends, and unless he can discover some new way of validating them these too will be spontaneous goals selected from the rest by thinking within the frame of the same formula.
He will also learn to clarify his ends; originally he saw no further than immediate goals, the satisfaction of hunger and relief from nausea; later he conceptualizes the nourishing of the body by food and the danger to health of over-eating, and it is towards or away from these that he finds himself spontaneously pulled.
Of the new formula, we may observe
(1)
When particular, it applies ‘Face facts’ to a choice without introducing any other universal imperative.
When general it ordains a standard, which however  has not more but less authority than the particular choice, since it depends on a generalization about everyone's reactions in a recurring situation, which is as vulnerable to exceptions as any other generalization.
The generality of the standard will in most cases be local; few standards are as firmly rooted in the universal constants of human nature as the child's ‘One ought not to eat too much’.
(2)
It applies no more nor less to the most personal and transitory goals than to the most general and long-term.
(3)
It does not require any principle for weighing spontaneous inclinations, for example a hedonist principle by which vomiting is to be avoided as unpleasant.
One is simply moved in one direction or the other in greater or lesser awareness.
If we are to use the metaphor of weighing, in choices of means the agent is the weigher, but in choices of ends he is the arm of the balance itself.
(4)
There is no need for any criterion for the relevance of facts which is not implicit in the formula itself.
The ‘fact’ of the first premiss covers all and no more than the facts awareness of which would modify spontaneous reactions to the issue in question; ‘Face facts’will be applicable to the issue only within the scope of this information.
The test of relevance will be whether awareness of a fact does act causally on spontaneous inclination.
That the dish is tasty and that another helping will upset the stomach are relevant facts because they do modify inclination; that it is a rainy or a sunny day and that the wallpaper is yellow or white are irrelevant because they do not move the child in either direction.
(If it so happens that yellow wallpaper does take away your appetite, then for you it is relevant.)
(5)
Different though it is from the practical syllogism, it resembles it in that its conclusions are always revisable in the light of further information, which imposes itself as relevant whenever it does turn out to alter spontaneous reaction.
It is time to look more closely at the imperative for which we have so far been getting along on a rough formulation, ‘Face facts’.
Since we are using it for choices of ends, we cannot treat the awareness it prescribes simply as a universal means to our ends whatever they may be, which is what the admonition suggests in ordinary discourse (with the implication ‘If you don't you'll suffer for it’).
What we require is a formulation of that universal imperative to take into account in choices which imposes its authority whenever something is recognized to exist, whenever it confronts us as not illusory but real.
Let us reduce it to two words, ‘Be aware’, and define ‘aware of X’ as prepared to take X into account in choices.
(We shall similarly use ‘intelligent’ of the general disposition to take things into account.)
We put it in the grammatically imperative mood in order to show up starkly its difference from factual statements, but also to leave room to interpret it according to circumstances as the strong ‘One ought to be aware of this’, or as ‘It is a good thing to be aware of this’, or in diminishing degrees, as the prospect of something coming within one's range of choice becomes remote, ‘Other things being equal, it is better to be aware of it than not’.
Allowing this latitude, we may claim ‘Be aware’ as an imperative both universal and valid a priori , since it would be inconsistent to say of anything that it exists yet is irrelevant to any possible choice.
Although one can speak also of being aware of the value of something, it will be essential to confine our usage to awareness of the existing, of persons, things, events.
The theoretical rigour of the formulation will not however exclude the practical possibility that, as a matter of psychological fact, awareness of something may interfere causally with awareness of something else, so that a local unawareness may be a necessary condition of obeying ‘Be aware’.
We may now refine the grounding formula as it applies to particular choices:
In awareness of everything relevant to the issue (= everything which would spontaneously move me one way or the other), I find myself moved towards X, overlooking something relevant I find myself moved towards Y. In which direction shall I let myself be moved ?
Be aware.
Therefore let yourself be moved towards X (= choose X as end).
We shall not linger over what we mean by choice, which even when narrowed to considered choice is a concept with blurred edges.
To accept responsibility for a choice, I may judge it sufficient that I was closely attentive to the object before responding in one direction or the other.
In this vague sense animals likewise choose, and are aware and intelligent by our definitions.
It is convenient to limit considered choice to humans, assuming a definition of ‘consider’ which requires the operation of verbal or other symbols, and to use it as the criterion for distinguishing the deliberate from the spontaneous.
But unless I talked out the issue with others, or wrote it up in my diary, it may be far from clear even to myself whether or not I did verbally formulate the alternatives.
Identifying as unquestionably spontaneous whatever cannot even on the most indulgent interpretation be ascribed to considered choice, what will be the place of spontaneity in our model of the rational man?
Let us say that in the first place man is a creature responding intelligently or stupidly to his surroundings, much as an animal does.
The activity which his reason can criticize and partially direct was not initially chosen by him, it is spontaneous; the physical processes of birth, breathing, digestion, orgasm, death; the emotions; the desires and aversions which are independent of his principles and may conflict with them, irrespective of whether he thinks of them as innate or as socially conditioned; dream, reverie and fantasy; ecstasies of love, mystical illumination, intellectual discovery, artistic creation and contemplation.
Rationalists and moralists have always been at least a little uneasy about admitting that so much that they most value comes out of the vast area of human behaviour which shares the spontaneity of physical events.
Physical events are caused, human action is willed; causes determine effects, the will is free.
To the extent that activities are spontaneous it appears that they belong to the realm of the caused (which in the case of biological process is obvious enough), and that he is a free agent only to the extent that he learns to direct them.
For many people there is something terrifying in the thought that in a universe in which man is so insignificant in comparison with the unreasoning forces of nature, most of his own organism belongs to or wants to defect to nature.
Unlike an animal, man can halt his incipient reactions, reason about his situation, and respond more intelligently in the light of increased understanding.
But since he can think only of a few things at a time, the routine function of his noble  gift of reason must be to correct spontaneous reactions and keep them running in an intelligent direction.
He breathes, digests, lifts an arm, takes the next step, without thinking how to do it, and if bad health forces him to analyse and choose in such peripheral matters he is sorry to be distracted from his central concerns.
He knows too that there are activities in which he is most intelligent when he is most spontaneous, in which to think may even be dangerous; the ski jumper or the tightrope walker cannot afford to hesitate and reflect.
While still learning, to swim or drive a car or speak a foreign language, he does have to think out what to do next, but it is when he comes to trust his own reflexes that he will have mastered the skill.
Not that when apprenticeship is past he will do these things thoughtlessly, but in this context ‘thoughtless’ means not ‘unreasoning’but ‘heedless’.
A driver is sensitive to minute shifts in the pressures on his hand and in the rhythm of the engine, with an intensity of concentration which when tiring he sustains by an effort of will; but most of the time he does not ponder alternatives, apply principles, or make decisions, his hands are as though moving of themselves.
Among the various intelligent activities of the rational man is the analytic thinking which criticizes the rest, which exposes clumsiness in driving, a weak line in a verse, ineptitude in an intuitive estimate of character.
For ‘Be aware’ this analytic faculty will be the final court of appeal; nevertheless, there are all sorts of ways of being aware.
Once we come to terms with the very limited although crucial place of analytic thinking among the varieties of intelligent behaviour, we draw from ‘Be aware’ the corollary ‘Reason as much as and no more than will assist awareness’.
For agents in complex and quickly changing circumstances, that ‘no more than’ will be as important as the ‘as much as’, until the time comes to judge in retrospect, when they can analyse and revalue without reserve.
‘Be aware’ will recommend that spontaneity be intelligent irrespective of any purpose it may serve.
If a car suddenly swerves round the corner while I am standing in the middle of the road, the right thing for me to do is to jump for the pavement as spontaneously as a cat.
Without time to think, the only alternative would be to stand paralysed by shock, unaware of what is happening to me, or be aware of the danger but too confused to know how to escape in the instant available.
‘Be aware’ will prefer the intelligent to the stupid reaction, irrespective of any value set on self-preservation.
Even if it happens that I have made a firm decision to commit suicide, and have been wondering for weeks how to cheat the insurance company, the failure to jump would accord with my intention only by chance.
It would be highly intelligent to take in the situation instantaneously and choose to stand waiting for death; but that would be not a reaction but a deliberate act.
After the jump, no doubt I might simply regret not having died, but only if it no longer matters to me how I die, only if I am past caring about the value of my acts.
Granted that ‘Be aware’ suffices for some choices of ends, it does not necessarily follow that it suffices for all.
Let us try a rearguard action to confine its scope to peripheral cases.
I concede that it will do for judging in retrospect the spontaneity beyond the margins of my rationality, as when jumping like an instinctive animal for the side of the road, and for such primitive choices as the child's refusal of another helping; but I continue to insist that at the centre of me I differ from  the child in having escaped being restricted to choice between spontaneous goals.
But when and how did I make this escape?
The most rigorous deduction of new ends cannot release me, as long as it was from spontaneous goals that the ends from which my system grew were themselves originally chosen.
A stream of spontaneous desire and aversion continues to pour into the centre of me, and I never cease to choose new ends from among its goals.
Indeed, as far as -my self-interest is concerned, on what principle could I choose as an end sufficient in itself something which I do not spontaneously want?
For morals we wait until the next chapter but there will be the same dependence on spontaneity whenever I choose on behalf of someone else what I think he himself would want in his own interests.
Rational people do in general pursue, and at their more moral help each other to pursue, what they want or supposedly would want in fuller awareness of themselves and their conditions, and in unmasking self-deception they recognize the genuine want by its spontaneity; the liberal and rationalist tradition even tends to reject as irrational any prescription of religion or custom which requires us to act otherwise.
Here it may be advisable to point out that we are not advising the rational man to be any more spontaneous than he already is, merely inviting him to continue reasoning about means, ends and principles as before, with his mind at rest about that little puzzle about passing from ‘is’ to ‘ought’.
We wish also to persuade him that once he takes fully into account that his ultimate goals are spontaneous (are , not ought to be; what they ought to be is intelligent as well as spontaneous), he will require no first principle other than‘Be aware’ for choosing between them.
The spontaneity even of the most transient whim or velleity never ceases to pull towards or away from awareness.
The same applies at every level of involuntary or semi-voluntary behaviour, in falling asleep or waking, health or sickness, interest or boredom, welcoming a scent or recoiling from a bad smell, snapping up a useful fact or closing the mind against an awkward one, or in any kind of creative or contemplative ecstasy.
Simply to like or dislike, be attracted or repelled, feel pleasure or pain, involves a quickening or a shrinking from awareness, a point which we shall be looking at more closely in the chapter Awareness and pleasure .
Expansion and contraction of awareness may be interdependent, so that‘Be aware’ would not, for example , pronounce waking good but sleeping bad; when exhaustion is blurring awareness one can go so far as to say ‘You ought to go to sleep’, although only for the sake of waking with refreshed awareness tomorrow.
One can conceive the theoretical possibility of an all-embracing ethic in which every moment of every life is in principle evaluable by its degree of awareness, by how intelligently one is acting or reacting.
In such an ethic, my rational ends at any one time would be the goals, whether of long-term ambition or of momentary caprice, to which I spontaneously tend in the fullest awareness then available, and all my deliberate acts would be means to these ends.
We may arrive in sight of the same conclusion, near enough to see the possibility of rooting all valuation in a single principle of awareness, by an approach from the opposite direction.
My deliberate actions are means to ends, and are defended in debate by proving them adequate to the ends.
However, to go on justifying ends by further ends will involve me in an infinite regress unless I arrive at a  terminus in something that I do for its own sake.
Although moral philosophers tend to treat aesthetics as a poor relation of their own discipline, it is in aesthetics that we arrive at the central problem of evaluating the activities which we pursue without thought of serving a purpose, in particular the one traditionally regarded as not merely good in itself but in some mysterious way improving to the agent, the contemplation of beauty.
But an object contemplated for its beauty alone spontaneously attracts the spectator and rouses him to expand and intensify his awareness of it; and however much or little trust he may put in the formulation of aesthetic standards, he evaluates it by his reaction at the unsustainable height of concentration when he is responding to all his information at once.
By this approach too we find the starting-point of at any rate one kind of valuation in choice of the spontaneous reaction in obedience to ‘Be aware’.
It is now time to call attention to an incongruity in the conception of the rational man from which this chapter started.
Why did I introduce myself as a sceptic about values but not about facts?
A consistent sceptic would doubt even his senses until reason approves them.
It was indeed from this position that the philosophical tradition of modern Europe began.
Descartes refused to be sure even of the reality of the external universe until he had proved a priori to his own satisfaction that he was not dreaming it.
However, most of us now admit that reason unassisted by observation can never break out of the closed circle of logic and mathematics.
We are content to acknowledge ourselves beings which sense their surroundings like the animals, but with the power of reason to criticize and to guide the senses.
Kant, approaching morals with the same demand for certainty, was radically sceptical about not the reality but the value of spontaneous inclination, and convinced himself that he could start from a Categorical Imperative wholly detached from it.
His demonstration nowadays satisfies us no more than that of Descartes.
We find ourselves compelled in practice to start from inclination as from perception, questioning inclinations like perceptions only when they conflict, without reason having authorized the initial step.
But does not this suggest that we have only to learn the same lesson over again?
Without perception and inclination, reason has nothing to engage with; when it does have them to engage with, it can criticize and guide.
In assuming that it may be rational to be a sceptic about value alone, we had stopped at an uncomfortable halfway house between philosophy and common sense, between the pure thinker who doubts everything and the plain man who questions neither what he sees nor what he likes or dislikes.
To some temperaments it may seem that in crediting myself only with a capacity to choose between reactions which themselves are not chosen but caused, I would be representing myself as something less than human.
But what could be worthier of my human intelligence than to discriminate between and interrelate the parts of a painting or musical composition with the concentration of a mathematician solving a problem, yet respond to them with the immediacy of a dog pricking up its ears?
Suppose that I am sitting by a bowl of fruit; my hand hovers over a pear, then a peach catches my eye; their distinctive favours revive in memory and pull against each other, then my hand moves over and picks out the peach.
Let us assume nothing but a casual connexion between the imagined tastes and the motion of the hand.
I responded like a monkey to what I saw and smelled, but in full  awareness of the two flavours, in obedience to ‘Be aware’.
Could I in fact have chosen in a manner more worthy of my dignity as a rational agent?
It will be said perhaps that I should have combined some principle of conduct with propositions about the flavours.
But I do not even have a vocabulary to describe the distinctive tang of a pear or a peach.
The best I could do would be to say ‘I like peaches better’, but quite apart from the logical objection to deriving ‘Choose the peach’ from this psychological statement, reliance on a generalization about my preference could get me into a habit which would dim my awareness of the tastes, until I fail to notice that I no longer like peaches as much as I did, or that at this moment I hanker after a pear, so that the abortive try at rationalization would make my choice less intelligent.
Or suppose that I am eating escargots for the first time and cannot bring myself to forget the disgustingly slimy look and feel of snails in the garden.
You reproach me for being stupidly repelled by a taste of which I have never dared to become fully aware.
As a gourmet you certainly think of yourself as a product of high civilization, as far above the animal as a scholar or scientist is.
Perhaps I am myself no gourmet, and think of food as a matter in which the rational man can excuse himself from making a fully-considered choice.
However, if I do think of myself as making a considered choice, can I deny the justice of your reproach?
If I reply that in choosing between flavours it does not matter whether or not I confound a present taste with remembered sight and touch, whether I respond to reality or to illusion, I am renouncing rational discourse altogether.
The question now arises: can that rational animal Man ever become more than an animal which criticizes its own spontaneous tendencies in the light of its awareness of itself and of external conditions?
Perhaps I think it beneath my dignity to let myself be carried on the spontaneous flood, employing my divine gift of reason only to navigate on the course of greatest awareness.
I wish to be wholly responsible for my acts, to be master of my fate; I shall make my own choice of ends, distance myself from my own reactions and learn to manipulate them like external events.
There is something paradoxical about this aspiration to lift myself out of nature by the use of reason, since I cannot without setting arbitrary limits to reason forbid the sciences of physiology, psychology and sociology to reincorporate me into nature, as a phenomenon in principle explainable and predictable like everything else.
However, the escape from spontaneity has long been a philosophical ideal, at its most intransigent in Sartre's Being and nothingness , which treats even emotion as a matter of choice, to the point of denying the distinction between genuine and willed feeling.
The ideal would indeed be attainable if a self-contained system of imperatives could be re-established on foundations other than‘Be aware’.
Philosophers have of course done their best to do so, by deducing a priori a Categorical Imperative, or by deriving imperatives from theological, psychological or sociological premisses at the cost of blurring the line between ‘is’ and ‘ought’.
It is now widely recognized that all such attempts have failed, yet it continues to be assumed that the rational agent has somehow pulled himself up by his bootstraps out of reach of his own spontaneity.
This is to mistake the will for the deed.
If the scope of reason is confined to refining and systematising imperatives and deducing them from each other, how can it ever change their relation to the spontaneous?
I may try to shrink myself to an infinitesimal point of thinking Ego to which all spontaneous process is external, but the spontaneous is always springing up at the centre of me, thrusting me forward or dragging me back, and it is only at the periphery that I can take full control of it.
Nor is it sensible to wish that it were otherwise, since raptures, aesthetic, erotic, intellectual, mystical, in which the spontaneous floods the whole of consciousness, can lift us to heights of awareness beyond our ordinary capacities.
They can also delude us of course, and the obscured line between revelation and illusion is a distinction to cling to as best one can, to be clarified by reason in retrospect or not at all .
The subjective conviction of heightened awareness is so treacherous that to exempt it from the critical tests of reason is to put oneself at the mercy of chance.
But if I insist on forcing the spontaneous towards an end which I already deem rational, I remain imprisoned within a circle of old concepts, reason goes on doing the same kind of sums, there can be no novelty except the discovery of unnoticed implications of the familiar.
In poetry such a transport is evoked by a pattern of words (selected by the poet perhaps with the most intense thought and effort), which stabilizes it and allows me to evaluate it at leisure.
The reader of a poem may find himself ‘responding’(a word as fully at home in some dialects of literary criticism as in Behaviourist psychology) with an extraordinary expansion and enhancement of awareness.
To a degree unknown in any other use of language he finds himself not only attending to what is said but simultaneously hearing the words as textures of vowels and consonants, noting rhythm, rhyme, assonance; meanings refuse to be tied down, disclose nuances and associations of which he has never been conscious; sights and sounds which he has never heeded become sensuously precise and vivid in imagination; emotion assumes a peculiar lucidity, undisguised by what he habitually feels or has been taught that he ought to feel; truths about life and death, which he follows social convention in systematically evading, stand out as simple and unchallengeable.
Or the poem might be one which has the opposite effect, lulling him in established habits of perception and feeling, or fascinating with some novel and appealing fashion in self-deception.
A literary critic devotes much of his space to analysing such effects.
We may raise, although this is not yet the place to answer, the question: does he need any aesthetic standards which cannot be treated as implications of ‘Be aware’?
Among the wildest of the ecstatics who float themselves on the spontaneous, comparable only with the poet, lover or mystic, is the man of reason possessed by a new insight.
When a routine problem arises he perhaps assembles the information and pursues his inferences to the conclusion almost as tidily as he would on paper.
But on other occasions, to use a phrase of Nietzsche, ‘a thought comes when ‘it’ wants, not when I want’, explodes and opens out too fast in in too complex ramifications to be disciplined, takes bold analogical leaps in defiance of logical rigour; the problem on which it centres is obscure, defining itself in the process of being solved, and as he struggles to formulate it the thought is running in another direction, yet he yields to the flow out of a vague intimation that it will circle back; for the final effort to force the argument into a coherent and publicly testable form — the only assurance even for himself that he is illumined and not deluded — he waits until the time comes to complete it on paper.
Even for  philosophers, one suspects, it is less the philosophy than these episodes that give meaning to their own lives.
It is curious that thinkers should explore the logic of rational conduct without coming to terms with this phenomenon at the very centre of their own experience.
It has after all become a commonplace that the creative imagination of the philosopher, mathematician or scientist is not much different from that of a prophet or poet; what distinguishes him is how he treats his findings in retrospect.
A great formula has been known to appear to a scientist ready-made in a dream as though he were a Siberian shaman, but unlike the shaman he accepts it not on the authority of the dream but because afterwards it satisfies his most stringent tests.
But if even in the sciences rationality is no more than the capacity to criticize the spontaneous, where can we expect it to be anything else?
As for the slogan that man is master of his fate, no doubt it has its uses in combating a fatalism which could contract still further the limits within which he can influence the spontaneous by reason and will.
In insisting on these limits, we are not concerned with the philosophical problem of whether there is free will at all, but with the evidence of common experience that although you can choose to think about a problem, be considerate to your wife, distribute pamphlets for a cause or pray for forgiveness for a crime, you cannot by mere exertion of will hit on a new thought, love your wife, have faith in the cause, or repent the crime.
Someone may ardently desire to create, love, believe, repent, but if the hope is fulfilled it will be because of a spontaneous process of maturation or crisis of conversion, which reason and will can coax but not force.
He can only work to prepare the ground and let the change happen of itself or not at all.
(Not that we are denying the importance of making such efforts for uncertain gains.)
There is nothing essentially new in thus narrowing the scope of will; most of mankind throughout most of its history seems to have taken it for granted that they were moved by forces from beyond them and mysterious to them, which might lift them above or drag them below the capacities of which they might presume to be in command (in Christian theology, the unpredictable visitations of divine grace assisting a will otherwise impotent to resist the Devil), and in the present century, ever since Freud demonstrated that the same conception of man could be translated from a religious into a psychological language, we have found ourselves thinking our way back to it.
The man of reason is becoming reconciled to admitting that the function of his reason is critical, that it is not itself the initiator of what it judges to be best in him.
He can make this concession without allowing any limits to the scope of reason as a critical tool.
Is this perhaps the only conception of rationality which is viable in the late twentieth century?
A rationalism which imprisons in systems of means and ends, in which the ends are both disconnected from spontaneity and without rational foundations, resting on nothing, summons up irrationalism as its nemesis.
1.2 Awareness and Morals
Is it possible to build a coherent ethic on the principle of awareness alone?
We have still to try it out on relations between persons.
But having started from a basically simple idea, let us see how far it can take us.
Its interest, as will already be clear, is that it offers a prospect of closing the gap between fact and value, bypassing the issue of whether or how one can draw prescriptive conclusions from descriptive premisses alone: it affirms the apparently naive claim that to know how to act I have only to be sufficiently aware of myself and my surroundings.
To come to terms with it demands an abrupt shift in one's conceptualization of the rational man, which runs against resistance from one's vanity, from a certain ideal of human dignity perhaps, but above all from habit.
In the abstract it may not be too difficult to acknowledge that the thinking, desiring and feeling which seem more intimately myself than my bodily motions are spontaneous, and also voluntarily controllable, in much the same proportions as the physical process of breathing, and that there has never been a moment of choice when I was not already being spontaneously pulled by them in the directions between which I chose.
However, in abstract thinking it has always been our habit to assume the role of Ego perfectly isolated from spontaneity; and even when in theory we have learned to distinguish the play-acting from real life, we are still liable to slip back into thinking as though the agent applying ‘Be aware’ were indeed an Ego unaffected by inclination veering with awareness.
As long as the habit clings, to derive evaluations directly from ‘Be aware’ will feel like making an indefensible leap to value from fact.
However, let us assume that the habit is broken.
So far we have been presupposing a single agent responding to a present situation and trying to guide his spontaneity by reason.
Submitting to ‘Be aware’, he attends closely to his situation and to his own reactions, and instead of trying to infer from principles how he ought to respond, discovers how when most aware he does respond, and perhaps surprises himself by an impulse contrary to social convention or to his own self-image.
Then ‘Be aware’ entitles him to choose its goal as end and find means to it; and if the situation is a recurring one, he can generalize the choice by formulating a rule, like the child advancing from ‘Don't eat it’to ‘One ought not to eat too much’.
On this basis he may by all means erect a system of imperatives logically interrelated with statements of objective fact, and elaborate it to any degree of complexity he pleases, but to confirm or correct it he has always to return to subjectivity, to his own spontaneity in the concrete situation.
His choices of ends require no appeal to principles, not even any verbalization, only the discerning of conflict between inclinations and self-alerting to the situation, after which, whether instantaneously or after protracted exploration, one inclination spontaneously prevails.
It will be a choice of ends, for example, even if forgotten a moment later, when he chokes back an erupting laugh at a slip by an important man, the choice being between a momentary and a long-term goal, the latter of which the other man could jeopardize.
But although he sacrifices the transitory for the long-term, the latter are not differently or more solidly grounded; indeed they are in danger of becoming rigid and brittle if they are not continually being enriched, modified and eroded  by local and temporary reactions.
Above all, however deeply he commits himself to a long-term end, it must never be allowed to outweigh ‘Be aware’.
There will always be the possibility that his spontaneous preferences will change with wider information or finer perceptiveness, and to retreat from awareness in order to cling to a highly-valued end will be one of the great offences against ‘Be aware’.
What happens when I extend this approach from myself, as I am here and now, to other persons, places and times?
Clearly I cannot get along entirely on factual information, any more than I infer from the mere facts how to act here and now.
If all valuation starts from choice between responses, it will extend beyond the here and now only if I am spontaneously reacting to situations outside the here and now.
I have to simulate perception of situations not present to my senses (that is, imagine them) in order to discover how I would respond, and incipiently simulate other persons (that is , empathize them) in order to discover how they respond; I have to explore how things look and feel from different viewpoints.
Suppose that I have a sudden impulse to settle when I retire in the village where I was born; but reality breaks in, I recognize that I had better remember it not as a nostalgic vision but as I indeed saw it before experiencing the city, admit to myself that it will have changed beyond recognition, try to anticipate living in it not as I am now but as an old man who no longer easily makes new friends, try to see myself through the villagers' eyes as already a stranger who may no longer deserve a welcome.
To decide, I require not only facts but awareness of how it is likely to feel passing my declining years in that village, and for that I must try to achieve independence of my personal and present viewpoint, reduce it to equality with other viewpoints.
My whole understanding of the human world requires that in thought and imagination I am constantly shifting between and responding from different viewpoints, here or there, remembered or anticipated, individual or collective, my own or someone else's, hypothetical, fictional, or simply indefinite; it is only in action that I have to settle in a present viewpoint, whether personal (‘I’) or social (‘We’).
The different viewpoints, although not of course equally informative, are equal in the sense that whether ‘Be aware’ obliges me to take one of them into account depends on its relevance to choices, not on its nearness to ‘here’, ‘now, or ‘I’.
Now a crucially important consequence of basing an ethic on ‘Be aware’ will be to extend to value the neutrality as to spatial, temporal and personal viewpoints which is claimed for fact.
I make myself aware of a three-dimensional object by synthesizing what I perceive from here with what I imagine from there, of a continuing event by synthesizing what I perceive now with what I remember from past and anticipate from future viewpoints; and in either case ‘Be aware’ obliges me to let myself be moved from the different viewpoints, as a causally necessary condition of becoming aware from them.
In choosing between the goals towards which I spontaneously tend, I may find myself being excited more strongly by what I perceive here and now than by what I imagine from other viewpoints, so that for example a present amusement obliterates consciousness of a future danger.
Then ‘Be aware’ prescribes awareness from the future viewpoint, and letting myself be moved to avert the danger.
Now awareness of other persons similarly depends on synthesizing perception of their bodies with imagining and feeling from their viewpoints, and awareness of myself on synthesizing imagination of my body from  other viewpoints with perceiving and feeling from my own; otherwise I would become, to vary Ryle's dictum that the mind has been commonly conceived as ‘a ghost in a machine’, a ghost in the company of machines, no longer aware that I resemble other people in the respects in which they resemble each other.
‘Be aware’ therefore prescribes the same neutrality for personal as for spatial and temporal viewpoints; it refuses a privileged status to ‘I’as to‘here’and ‘now’.
But if ‘Be aware’ requires me to be aware both of you and of myself both from your viewpoint and from mine, it requires me also to let myself be moved towards both your goals and mine, as a necessary condition of becoming aware from either viewpoint.
We may therefore propose as a specialization of our grounding formula:
In awareness from all spatial, temporal and personal viewpoints which are relevant to the issue (= viewpoints from which I do find myself spontaneously moved in one direction or the other) I find myself moved towards X, overlooking a relevant viewpoint I find myself moved towards Y. Be aware.
Therefore let yourself be moved towards X (a goal which may be here or there, now or then, yours or mine).
Here the prospect of building an ethic on spontaneity and awareness brings about an unexpected shift of the burden of proof.
M oral philosophers are accustomed to start from the individual pursuing his own ends; at once the question arises ‘Why should I prefer anyone else's to my own?’, and until it can be answered the advantage lies with the egoist.
The moralists — as it seems to many of us who have worried over this question — either shirk the answer or botch it.
But if we start from the conception of the rational man who disciplines his spontaneity by an awareness independent of viewpoint, then it is for the egoist to explain why he claims priority for responses from his own viewpoint.
An egoist who tries to ground his ethic in ‘Be aware’ would have to break down the analogy between personal and other viewpoints; and to do so he could not appeal to the most obvious difference, that while ‘here’and ‘there’are exchanged by the agent's movements, and ‘now’is continuously changing into ‘then’, he remains to himself unalterably ‘I’.
That ‘Be aware’ requires one to perceive or imagine from all relevant viewpoints is wholly independent of whether the viewpoint to which one is confined in perceiving is freely mobile, carried forward by time, or permanently fixed.
The first question which an egoist might raise is why it should be assumed that I cannot be aware from another's viewpoint without being moved towards his goals.
The other perceives, I merely imagine; he suffers, I merely simulate his distress by letting myself be moved by what I imagine.
He himself is moved to relieve his distress, but why should my imaginative simulation move me to do the same?
This objection, it will be noticed, assumes a difference between the emotion and the simulation corresponding to that between perception and imagination.
But to simulate a feeling is to feel similarly, just as to simulate a process of thought is to think similarly.
When trying to guess where someone went when I missed  him at the airport I do not imagine his thoughts, I try to imagine his situation as someone like him would see it, and think; if he tells me he has just learned he has cancer I may hear in imagination the doctor's grave voice, but I do not imagine the fear, I feel the chill of it; if I see him cut his finger I do not imagine the pain as something objective before my ‘mind's eye’, either I look on as though the knife were cutting through cheese or I incipiently wince.
Provided that an object is conceived to be real, reactions to it are the same in kind whether one happens to be perceiving or imagining it; and if in the latter case one reacts less strongly, that is because one is also less aware of it.
If I explore in imagination a coining danger, I cannot simulate my future fear without already being afraid, and moved to avert the danger.
Here the analogy of personal to temporal viewpoints plainly holds.
That being moved by imagining from a sufferer's viewpoint does draw me towards his goals is sufficiently shown by my impulse to shrink from imagining as painful in itself, and liable to draw me into action against my own interests.
If there is such a thing as a simulation in the same relation to suffering as imagination to perception, it is in response not to a real but to a fictitious situation; it is the emotion of the actor revelling in the part of a tragic hero.
The egoist might raise a further objection: granted that I do indeed suffer from a sufferer's viewpoint, I generally feel very much less from other viewpoints than from my own; then will not the inclinations I choose in obedience to ‘Be aware’ tend to be self-centred, even if they do not quite fulfil the requirements of a pure philosophical egoism?
But how strongly one feels has nothing to do with the argument.
Even in making oneself more aware in preparation for a choice, it will be enough that one can identify which would be the relatively stronger inclination in the fullest attainable awareness; there will be no need to experience it in its full intensity or to prolong it after the choice.
In the case of temporal viewpoints this point will be easily conceded.
My fear of a remote danger may be almost driven from mind by current emotions; but to decide to take precautions I need no more than the faint tremor as I glimpse what the consequences of neglect would be like, I do not have to maintain the stimulus to action by living in constant terror until the danger has passed.
Similarly, it may take no more than a momentary pang of empathetic distress to convince me that if I could become as aware from the sufferer's viewpoint as from my own I would be spontaneously moved to help him even to my own cost.
That will be sufficient to oblige me to choose the inclination which I felt increasing pari passu with intensifying awareness, after which choice there will be no need to go on agonizing over his plight, which might even impair my efficiency as a helper.
I can recognize the choice as right (as I would the choice to prepare for coming danger) however strongly I am inclined to shut off the brief glimpse in order not to be distracted from present and selfish goals.
Superficially it may seem reasonable to prefer a firmly-held end to a faint altruistic stirring which is easily dismissed.
But in the course of developing our case we have found no grounds upon which I could have validly chosen my present ends except that they are the ones to which I spontaneously tended when most aware; on what grounds then could I persist in preferring these ends to a further advance in awareness which would undermine them?
The egoist might now appeal to the difference between awareness and attentive  attentiveness.
Granted that ‘X exists’ or ‘X is real’implies ‘Be aware of X’(= ‘Be disposed to take X into account in choices’), it certainly does not imply ‘Remain attentive to X’.
But it is only while attentive to someone's suffering that one is spontaneously moved to help him.
The egoist might concede that, since in choosing means to his own ends he has to try to predict others' behaviour, he does find it a practical necessity at times to imagine from their viewpoints at the cost of transiently feeling himself moved in altruistic directions.
However, after attention lapses he can retain his insights into another person, and use them in choices of means, without abandoning his long-term egoistic ends for the altruistic goals to which he briefly felt himself drawn; he can therefore claim to have obeyed ‘Be aware’ without ceasing to be an egoist.
But the point is not whether or not attention is sustained, but that it is when most attentive that one is taking most information into account.
Although awareness outlasts attention, it is by attending that one arrives at, maintains and renews it.
Even if it is only for one moment that a spasm in your face draws my attention to the intensity of your pain, a glimpse from which I flinch back into insensibility, it is during that moment that a choice between my conflicting pulls to help and to ignore will be made in fullest awareness.
What is called the ‘moral sense’ is on this account being able to recognize that if, even against my present will, I let myself become aware of how someone in trouble feels, I would be moved to help, and that I ought not to close myself to this awareness.
It depends on the act of viewpoint-shifting, which we must now consider more closely, remaining always on the lookout for loopholes through which the egoist might slip.
To ‘put myself in your place’, to ‘see your point of view’ and ‘understand how you feel’, is not a moral but a cognitive act, but of what sort?
Is it inference by analogy?
If so, it would seem to be no more than a logically disreputable form of reasoning to which I have to resort until the scientific study of behaviour puts more rigorous methods at my disposal.
Certainly simulation by shifting to other viewpoints is a kind of analogizing the active kind which makes myself like instead of recognizing as alike.
But analogizing is an operation deeper down in human and animal behaviour than any kind of inference.
Pavlov's dog analogizes to previous occasions when it learns to expect its dinner as before when the bell rings as before, the ape simulates when it ‘apes’.
Man too has a mechanism of mimicry which goes back to the baby in the cradle answering its mother's smile, older than any utilization for learning how others feel or how to pick up skills or even for play, and which can get out of control in neurotic echolalia and echopraxia.
The language in which he makes inferences itself built its vocabulary by similar naming of the similar and was learned by mimicking other speakers.
The imagination without which he would be imprisoned in ‘I’ and ‘Now’is a simulation of perceiving which analogizes to what he has already perceived.
Analogizing, including simulation, is already involved even in the organizing of sensations as perception.
I see a man up on the hill, but when as the minutes pass he does not move it occurs to me that what I am looking at must be a stone.
It is not that I inferred from the resemblance in shape that it was a man, until I began to doubt I was not thinking about it at all.
Being a man myself, the similarity by which I recognize as a man must be not only to others previously classified as men but to myself; I assume, and when close enough to read  expression and gesture simulate, thought and emotion like mine, turning his observed behaviour inside out.
It is not that I am inferring information about him by analogy; without the incipient mimicry I would not be perceiving him as a man, would be seeing him as an automaton only outwardly resembling myself.
It appears from Jean Piaget's child psychology that perception has been inseparable from simulation right from the start, and that instead of learning to project my inwardness on to other persons I had to unlearn the habit of projecting it on to the rising sun or a bouncing ball.
Even after leaving behind this ‘animism’, it is still by their relative resistance or permeability to insight through simulation that in relating things to each other we relate them also to ourselves as inanimate, vegetable, animal, human.
Moral philosophers often ignore empathy as though it were an irrelevance outside their province, a matter for psychology perhaps rather than philosophy.
But analogizing, as we shall be arguing more fully in a later chapter, is an operation too fundamental to thinking to be escaped in philosophy or anywhere else, at any rate outside logic and mathematics.
It is part of the spontaneous process which reason guides; inference is indispensable to criticize and correct its spontaneous assimilations and differentiations, but can never abolish them and start again from logically impregnable foundations.
Wittgenstein and Ryle have taught us that no kind of philosophical argument is exempt from the danger of vitiation by concealed analogies.
Why should I assume that in combining imperatives with propositions about other persons I can afford to ignore, while taking for granted the analogizing on which the mere use of a common name depends, the operations of assimilating to and differentiating from myself without which the propositions would not even have their full meaning?
Such a sentence as ‘He feels sad’ would be unintelligible without assimilation to my own feelings; and although ‘He is sad’is interpretable as a dispositional statement about behaviour, in the manner worked out in Ryle's Concept of mind , someone who did not know that it entails ‘He feels sad’could not be said fully to understand it.
The impossibility of becoming aware of another's inwardness without a readiness to let myself feel as he does is plain when someone tries to communicate what is inside his head.
When an emotionally articulate speaker wants to convey to me, not the fact that he is sad, but in what way and to what degree, his language becomes rhythmic and metaphorical, pulls me to his viewpoint to visualize his situation becomes a poetry which infects me with his melancholy and a rhetoric stirring me to help him, and afterwards perhaps I find myself regretting having committed myself to an action in his interests rather than my own.
He does not describe his emotions, he calls them up; if anything is described, it is the situation which excites them.
Imaginative writers know as an important item in their craft, that the way to convey emotion with most lucidity and particularity is to choose the apt words, not for the emotion itself, but for the image or scene which activates it.
Nor does their command of verbal symbolism, the only medium in which one can even pretend to be describing inward states objectively, give them any advantage over painters and musicians.
The media through which the sharers of a culture refine their insight into what goes on in each other 's heads are the arts in general, through which the most aware evoke in their audience the look and feel of things  from their own viewpoints (in the case of the drama and novel, of multiple interacting viewpoints), in fixed forms available to be explored at our leisure.
As long as I remain detached from you, I see your actions as aids or obstacles to mine, as means to my ends.
But in so far as I achieve awareness from your viewpoint I feel the pull towards your goals, and even when I resist, I do so very much as I push away inclinations of my own which are dangerous to my long-term ambitions; a choice between your goals and mine belongs among my choices of ends.
To the extent that inclinations from my own viewpoint harmonize or conflict with yours, the interaction moves me in new directions for or against you and your goals, to sympathy or antipathy, love or hate, pity or cruelty, gratitude or revenge.
These passions are disinterested, in the sense that they excite me to help or harm you as in yourself attractive or repulsive to me, irrespective of further advantage to myself; they treat you not as means but as end, if only as a negative end.
Thus to love or hate you, it may not be enough that your actions in your own interests make all the difference between success and failure for my highest hopes; but it may be enough, even if nothing you do has any bearing on my projects, that in being drawn to or shrinking from your viewpoint I feel myself in touch with a personality of which the total pattern attracts or repels my own.
Indeed, it is the disinterested character of the reactions which is the criterion for being aware from other people's viewpoints.
In general, whether someone is shifting viewpoints or not, the test of whether he is aware of the look and feel of something, not merely of the facts about it, is whether he takes it into account in choices of ends as well as of means.
(Ends sufficient in themselves, it will be remembered, include for us anything chosen however briefly for its own sake, even if it is only lazing in a deckchair in the sun.)
You demonstrate to me your awareness of the fact that water is boiling hot by pouring it over tea-leaves, your sensuous awareness of the heat of the bathwater by preferring to linger long after you are clean but get out when it turns cold.
Are the people in the room aware of the redness of the roses in the bowl, or merely of the fact that they are red?
The wife, who prefers red roses to white, and has just put them in place of the white roses by her chair, is aware of the redness.
The husband who bought them to placate her may not be aware of more than the fact that they are red (the wife too, come to think of it, if she was only signalling forgiveness).
Similarly, if I treat someone's urgent need of money solely as an opportunity to buy cheap from him, you may well doubt whether I am aware of more than the fact that he is in trouble, and try to rouse me from my callousness: ‘How would you feel if I did that to you?’
But if I sympathize and help, or gloat and take opportunities to add to his difficulties, in neither case with any prospect of advantage to myself, you can be sure that I am indeed aware of how he feels.
The disinterested passions compel me to see from other viewpoints, but also blind me to the equality of viewpoints.
The range of my sensuous and emotional awareness reveals monstrous gaps when compared with my awareness of fact, and extreme disproportions, as in the distortions of pride, anger and jealousy.
The envious man is obsessively drawn to see through his rival's eyes, the cruel man is as sensitive to a sufferer's feelings as the compassionate; and both are disinterested, in that it does not matter to them whether any injury they do is of  benefit to themselves.
In choices of means, I may pay severely for failing to recognize the equality of personal as of spatial and temporal viewpoints, if for example I lose awareness of the fact that a competitor's need and determination is as great as mine; but in choosing between our ends, nothing compels me to feel the pull of his inclination equally with mine, other than a recognition that it is illogical to shut my eyes in one case to what I am forced to acknowledge in the other.
To the extent that I let myself be moved spontaneously in and out of perceptual and emotional awareness, it is likely to be my own ends, and those of persons whom I love or hate, which determine most of my choices of ends.
But in spite of the fact that I am more attentive to my own affairs than to yours, the disproportion of awareness is not necessarily in my own favour.
In any intimacy between a stronger and a weaker personality the weaker is inclined to yield even when he has the means to prevail, from a compulsion to see through the eyes of the stronger.
It is no mystery that a child can feel compelled  to judge himself from his father's viewpoint, although it may seem so if one uses Freudian language and starts puzzling about what it could mean for an instinctive egoist to ‘introject’ the image of his father.
In the complex interactions between myself and the countless others with whom I am remotely or directly engaged, my self-awareness and the self-regarding inclinations which it generates may occupy only a small part of my field of awareness, and not for any moral reason; I feel myself spontaneously pulled towards admiration as well as pride, submission as well as power, masochism as well as sadism, judging myself from other viewpoints as well is judging others from mine.
In the swing between extremes, it can seem almost a matter of chance whether a man bursts out in self-reproach or in righteous indignation, in suicide or in murder.
Above all, for emotional as well as for factual awareness, others have the weight of numbers on their side.
For most people the dread of being surrounded by contemptuous or accusing eyes (a dread independent either of the awe of moral authority or fear of practical consequences) is a weightier factor than all but their most basic needs.
‘Be aware’ in morals is a warning, not only against sheer insensibility — to be aware and responsive in some degree from other viewpoints is in any case a practical necessity of living in society — but against the distortions and disproportions of awareness, including those demanded by one's society.
However many facts I know about another person I can treat him as pure means, but I cannot be perceptually and emotionally aware from his viewpoint without letting his inclinations interact with mine and affect my ends.
The question arises whether there is any such thing as a specifically human goal which is fully detachable from influences from other viewpoints.
There are pre-human ones of course, food, shelter, orgasm.
But is there any major passion excited by interactions between persons which is not a blend of reactions from multiple viewpoints?
A man may pursue power simply as a means to employ others for his own purposes, but someone with the true passion for power will betray, by exceeding any rational design to control those useful or dangerous to his ends, that he does penetrate deep enough inside his subjects for the exhilaration of sensing their wills tense against his own and yield.
It would be self-contradictory to say that Stalin treated all men as tools — for exercising power over men.
Even pride, the most self-centred  of passions implies that one does see oneself from other viewpoints and care whether one is admired or despised, even to the point perhaps of valuing respect by others above self-preservation.
It would seem likely that more people get themselves killed out of pride than sacrifice themselves for any moral end.
But unless it is possible to escape being moved from other viewpoints, our selfishness cannot perfect itself to its theoretical absolute except in such circumstances as a tooth-and-claw fight for survival.
Instead of asking ‘How do we ever unlearn our native egoism?’ we must ask ‘How near to a true philosophical egoism do we ever succeed in getting?’
Our ordinary selfishness in practice is relative, a matter of tending to put reactions from our own viewpoints first.
We may define ‘egoism’ as the principle of acting only for the goals to which one inclines from one's own viewpoint, and suggest two directions from which it might be approached.
One is by reducing awareness from other viewpoints to a means to the ends from one's own.
This is at its most practical in empathizing sufficiently to collect useful facts about a person but closing oneself to sympathy; it is at its purest in vanity, basking in awareness from other viewpoints as long as it is of oneself.
The other course is to withdraw altogether from the awareness, towards a liberation from emotional entanglements in an amoral indifference for which others are no more than means.
Both defy ‘Be aware’ by adapting awareness to present ends, instead of adapting ends to increasing awareness.
The most extravagant possibilities of an egoism which both enhances and distorts awareness spring from the appetite for power.
To start from myself, I cannot choose between reactions without having some control over them; to choose not to be burned I must at least have the power to withdraw my finger from the flame.
This power is my personal sovereignty, on the one hand freedom from domination by others, on the other self-control when threatened by the rebellion of disruptive desires.
As I enter into interactions with others, I become aware from their viewpoints and respond in favour of their sovereignties as of my own.
But I also discover both reactions of my own which are in their power, and reactions of theirs which are in mine, so that the drive towards sovereignty urges me, either to dominate, or to let myself be drawn to the viewpoint of the stronger and submit.
The assurance of power is in having compelled against spontaneous inclination.
In my own case it is by self-denial, by acting against my own inclination, that self-control is confirmed and strengthened.
Therefore the drive to sovereignty can generate the supremely irrational impulse to act against the inclination in fullest awareness, against in sadism the other person's, in masochism one's own.
‘You shall not , because you want to.
I do this, because it hurts you’.
The challenge, as in Sade, is in the abyss of unreason it opens up; it could as well be, and easily becomes, ‘I do this because it hurts me ’.
Here there is none of the numbing of awareness characteristic of plain selfishness.
The enjoyment of power over another is fed by imagination from the viewpoint of his resisting and suffering self.
There is an inflation of pride, through intensified awareness of one's own power by seeing oneself through the subject's eyes.
There is also a simple desire to enhance one's own well-being by widening the contrast with another's distress; and this too attracts towards his viewpoint, since it is only in awareness from other personal  or temporal viewpoints that one's well-being is experienced as relative arousing envy of another's happiness or nostalgia for one's own in the past.
Whereas pity has to overcome a reluctance to be drawn into subjective awareness of another's suffering, cruelty welcomes it.
But the awareness although sharpened is also twisted by the appetite it serves.
To the extent that awareness from multiple viewpoints is equalized, it is of the pleasures as much as the pains, and moves one to help the other rather than oneself when his need is greater.
But cruelty in intensifying awareness contracts and withdraws it from the pleasures, even from pains not inflicted by the sadist himself.
The pains themselves, since he is aware of them only in order to be assured of his sovereignty, remain on the boundaries of an awareness always centred on his own reactions to them.
In the case of an only moderately cruel man, the intensification of the pain beyond a certain point will suddenly switch him to the equalization of viewpoints, and his pleasure will lapse.
But the cruellest experiences the victim's pain however great as less than his own enhancement of power however small, so that the suffering of a victim who is being crippled for life may be deliberately empathized by the torturer, but as less than his own titillation, which he may have forgotten by the time he goes home to lunch.
Sadism is not an inherently egoistic drive, rather it is the assertive phase of a drive which may also be submissive even in the same person.
The lover of power is attracted to the viewpoint of the strongest, the one who can, even if he graciously refrains, force others to act against their wills; he may himself achieve power, or fantasize it, or in consciousness of impotence prefer to look down on himself through the eyes of real or imaginary conquerors.
Since in practice power concentrates, greater the fewer the contenders, the last of these solutions has strong attractions as a more generally attainable second-best.
The powerful are forced to strain towards an absolute always beyond reach without which they are insecure; but for the security of an absolute subjection, abjection, it seems that one has only to let go.
Nothing illustrates better the fluidity of viewpoints by which we can swing towards and away from egoism, and how little it has to do with morality.
Even Hitler, whose life and ideology glorified an  untrammelled lust for power, surprises by his docility under discipline as a corporal in the first World War, and the little reported about his sexual tastes suggests that they were masochistic.
As for the drive towards egoism by withdrawing from emotional awareness, in competitive conditions it appears reasonable to detach oneself from the joys as well as the troubles of others, on the calculation that love or trust is likely to be betrayed, and any generous action may be utilized against oneself.
How far can I proceed in this direction?)
A consistent egoism quite unsullied by altruism is a philosophical abstraction.
Suppose that I try to act consistently as an egoist, indifferent to any effect on others which is not a means to an effect on myself.
Another person is happy or unhappy: I can use his good mood perhaps to charm a concession out of him, or take advantage of a time when he is distracted by trouble to steal a march on him; but I shall not be pleased or displeased by emotions which do not touch my interests.
I shall be incapable of kindness.
pity or cruelty.
I shall not be gratified for a benefit, although I may return it in the hope of future benefits; similarly I shall not avenge injuries except as a deterrent to future injuries.
I may seek to  control him, if he is potentially useful to me; but I shall be betraying my principles if I begin to enjoy the sensation of another resisting and yielding, if I develop a taste for power for its own sake.
A good reputation will be merely a means to winning what I want from others; I shall care nothing for the respect or contempt of people who cannot help or ham me, and find no pleasure in the prospect of millions seeing my face on television or reading my books after I am dead.
I shall associate with others when they are useful to me, but without feeling either friendliness in their presence or loneliness in their absence.
I shall treat my own family in the same way, disregarding the fiction that my children are in some mystical way an extension of myself.
Nothing in sex will concern me except the pure physical pleasure; I shall be incapable of love, of Don Juan's pride of conquest, even of caring whether the woman is pleased or bored with my company.
I shall reject all arts and entertainments which depend on participation in the feelings of other people, whether these people are real or imaginary, whether I am watching a game or watching a theatre.
All my pleasures will be solitary, even when I happen to be in company; I shall not be exhilarated simply because the people around me are enjoying themselves, nor depressed because they are in low spirits.
Clearly all this is not going to be much fun, but my aim is egoism and not hedonism.
Successful hedonists are, for short periods, very sensitive to the feelings of those with whom they talk, drink or make love, postpone the question ‘Am I getting as much as I am giving?’, and do not revert to egoism until the party is over.
I his journey towards egoism is not a progressive liberation of the desires from moral restraints, but a step-by-step renunciation of everything we desire except food, raw sex and a few bodily comforts.
Its destination is a state near to apathy, emptied of most of the strongest and most dangerous human appetites, and therefore relatively harmless.
Admittedly most of us become egoists in a struggle for mere physical survival,— starving men fighting for food, drowning men climbing into an over-weighted boat; but it does not follow that we can become egoists from principle in conditions where basic human needs are satisfied.
The egoist, like the puritan, must inhibit his immediate response in obedience to a principle: ‘It is happening to him and not to me, I have no reason to care.’
A person who approaches anywhere near this ideal affects us, not as the natural man freed of civilized restraints, but as cold and inhuman, rational to the point of emotional impoverishment.
The man who does not use his reason to weed out his emotions is not an egoist; he is selfish and generous, kind and cruel, grateful and revengeful.
It is time to take account of that difference between perceiving from ‘Now’ and ‘I’and imagining from other viewpoints which we have so far put aside as irrelevant.4 Although one can respond with some awareness to remote or hypothetical situations, and evaluate them sub specie aeternitatis , everyone's actual choices of ends are of course confined to his own present and future and to his effective scope of action.
But there is something more to be said about the focusing of attention on the present and oneself.
Suppose we have a hedonist who says ‘Live for the present, why bother about the future?’ and ‘Live for yourself, why bother about other people?’, two maxims which once again assimilate temporal and personal viewpoint-shifting.
It might not be just to press philosophical objections, since it is obvious that a rhetorical question does not commit him to ignore even the most imminent of coming events.
This hedonist tends to live for the moment, because if one is constantly distracted from present experience by designs for the future nothing will ever be fully enjoyed.
Similarly he tends primarily to heed his own sensations, because pleasures from other viewpoints are pale and  shallow compared with those from his own.
Now we have already made the point that the weakness of a premonitory or sympathetic reaction compared with experience which is present and mine is no objection to acting on the former rather than the latter.
Nevertheless, one does not have to be a hedonist to agree that a person is somehow impoverished by living too much for the future or for other people, and ‘Be aware’ can show us why.
Imagination from other viewpoints depends on my having already perceived something analogous from the then present and my own, and is undernourished if I was distracted at the time by consideration of the future or of others.
This ultimate dependence becomes obvious to me whenever I make a mistake about others by supposing them to be like myself.
The intelligence and sensitivity by which some people draw rich implications from quite narrow experience would have nothing to work on if they had not plunged deep into that experience.
A society of extreme altruists, each devoting most of his attention to the welfare of others, would not be the ideal community it might seem; since each would be poor in self-awareness, he would be still less aware of the actual needs of those he was trying to benefit.
The same would apply to a Utopian society projected by thinkers too remote from the people of their time to pay much attention to their behaviour in real circumstances.
To know how to live for oneself and for the present when a choice involving sacrifice for others or the future does not arise will be indispensable to learning to make such choices in sufficient awareness.
This line of argument supports, as beneficial to all, a certain kind of individualism, which is not of course the same as egoism.
True egoism, as we have described it, is conceivable only under conditions of conflict in which only the pre-human ends remain.
Individuals in interacting either harmonize or conflict, and there is no reason to suppose that any enlargement of awareness would either reconcile all conflict or expose all harmony as illusory.
The development of co-operation or conflict has its own momentum, and there are limits to the extent that rational effort can influence it.
When the swing is from co-operation to conflict, the modification of one's ends by reaction from another's viewpoint will tend towards hate, revenge or cruelty rather than love, gratitude or pity; by an effort to see from his viewpoint one can resist the tendency, but at the extreme point of escalation one's ends narrow to the survival of self or kin, and the other and his destruction are reduced to means to it.
One no longer has to hold on to any specifically human end, because the circumstances allow only a single and pre-human end, survival.
Admittedly a society cannot without self-extinction dissolve into units smaller than minimal families, so that an  untrammelled egoism is possible only under limited conditions.
But given these conditions, egoism is not only possible, it may be permitted by ‘Be aware’.
It is not that in desperate circumstances we discover ourselves to be natural egoists and throw off moral restraints, it is rather that morality no longer applies.
Two shipwrecked men in a boat have only enough food for one, so that one of them must die if the other is to live.
One of them would not mind sacrificing himself if he thought that the other is of more use to humanity, but sees no evidence of it.
He would be willing to draw lots as to who jumps over the side, except that he is sure that the other, if he lost, would go back on his word.
He would rather fight in the open than wait to murder the other  when he falls asleep, but is so much the weaker that to fight without an advantage would amount to suicide.
In such a pure case of one man's gain being the other's loss, what forbids him, even in the fullest awareness from both viewpoints, to act on the inclination from his own?
‘Be aware’ has become irrelevant, morality has lapsed.
However, even if we cannot blame him for murdering the other in his sleep, we might respect him more if he did put himself at a disadvantage by clinging to one of his last disintegrating scraps of morality.
Without any ends at all for which to survive life would be, in the strict sense of the words, not worth living, and on this boat a few decencies preserved without regard for consequences would be the last ends left which he values for themselves.
The reduction of the other to means and of his own ends to survival, itself no more than a means without ends left to serve, would be tolerable, if at all, only because the variety of human ends will open up again for him if he ever gets to shore.
As a variation on the same theme, let us amuse ourselves with a science-fiction possibility.
Suppose that in the future it becomes possible to predict others' behaviour more efficiently by observation and computation than by the always hazardous venture of trying to fathom the mysteries of the human heart.
(This assumes the behaviourist position that what is experienced subjectively as thought and emotion is identical with the behaviour, incipient as neural process as well as overt as bodily movement, which objectively is perceived by the senses.)
Let us say that, although not trapped in a fight for survival, we are all still caught up in the ordinary competitiveness of business, social gamesmanship, and marriage.
It is becoming less useful to enter into each other 's feelings, more and more convenient to consult one's pocket computer.
In competition it is to my advantage to feel for others as little as possible, an advantage which outweighs my dread of a growing isolation.
Gradually I get out of the unscientific habit of trying to read other people's faces, and come to see the bodies from which personality has faded as the automata which for scientific explanation they already are.
In the middle of a still most active social life I am being drawn into an absolute solitude in which I cannot even entertain myself with the motions of the teleonomic mechanisms on stage or screen, and making love is equivalent to copulating with a perfectly lifelike mechanical doll.
Everything and everyone is drained of value except as means to my own dwindling and at last exclusively pre-human ends, and I myself am equally a means in the eyes of everyone else, as I am forced to recognize whenever an automaton interacting with me reaches for its own pocket computer.
If finally I become wholly submerged in this solipsism there could be no other rational ethic for me than egoism.
But it would not be the egoism imposed temporally by external necessity on the two men in the boat.
We should all be vaguely conscious of a disaster brought about by ourselves, a universal mutual degradation, and would be making feeble intermittent efforts to restore contact and rehumanize each other.
Egoism, then, is no more than a terminus towards which interacting individuals are pushed by competition.
But with the glorification of competition by capitalism it has come to seem natural to think of ourselves as fundamentally egoistic.
Several fortuitously converging considerations have encouraged this faith in the primacy of egoism.
(1)
When desires disrupt co-operation their spontaneity is evident, when they support it nothing proves that they were not instilled in the first place by moral training.
(2)
To the man of reason, that as a physically and mentally distinct person he should look after his own interests seems self-evident like a geometrical axiom, that he should care for others seems to require proof like a theorem.
(3)
The tradition of scientific explanation is atomistic; if the study of social behaviour, human or animal, is to become a science, the simplest approach is to start from individual organisms as the atoms.
The first point does not establish that people are spontaneously more inclined to conflict than to co-operation, merely that the latter tendency does not prevail absolutely.
As for the second, we have undermined its apparent logic by approaching from the opposite direction; what is self-evident is that a person should prefer his reaction in fullest awareness, what would require proof is a claim that the awareness should be from all spatial and temporal but only one personal viewpoint.
The reversal has a further consequence.
As long as we start from the conception of a rational agent, it appears easy to decide whether an inclination is egoistic; it will be so if its goal by the agent's own standards is beneficial to himself.
But if one starts from the spontaneous inclination itself, the question arises whether it makes sense to call it egoistic before it has been chosen in terms of the agent's own standards for the beneficial.
Even granted that everyone, for example, finds pleasure beneficial, to judge an inclination egoistic because achievement of its goal gives the agent pleasure would be vacuous, because whatever his goals he will be pleased if he succeeds, sorry if he fails.
With the breakdown of faith in the fundamental rationality of man we no longer ask, for example, whether the drives of Freud's Id and Super-ego are to be classed as egoistic, or see a puzzling self-contradiction in masochism.
Nietzsche already made the point, and as a philosopher who was willing to call himself an egoist his witness is especially interesting:
As every drive lacks intelligence, the viewpoint of ‘utility’ cannot exist for it.
Every drive, in as much as it is active, sacrifices force and other drives: finally it is checked; otherwise it would destroy everything through its excessiveness.
Therefore: the ‘unegoistic’, self-sacrificing, imprudent, is nothing special — it is common to all the drives — they do not consider the advantage of the whole ego (because they do not consider at all!), they act contrary to our advantage, against the ego: and often for the ego — innocent in both cases!
There is however one kind of inclination which may legitimately be classed as inherently egoistic or altruistic, the biological drive either to self-preservation or to preservation of offspring or others.
Here we do not have to ask by what standards the agent estimates benefit, since no one can be benefited if he does not survive.
At this biological level the evidence is unequivocal; there are drives both to preserve self and to sacrifice self for others, and the latter cannot be derived from the former.
It seems indeed that in Darwinian terms egoism cannot be primary, in spite of the fact that genetic traits will survive only if they favour their carriers.
Natural selection is of traits favourable to the survival, not of individuals, but of successive generations.
Egoistic traits may be expected to survive if they benefit also the descendants which inherit them, to be weeded out if they benefit the individual at the expense of its offspring (for example, cannibalizing its brood, or long outlasting its reproductive powers); altruistic traits will tend to survive if they benefit kin which are also transmitting them (in particular , the mother's protection of her young), to die out if they give the advantage to strangers which are not.
Darwinism destroys the presumption that a separate organism functions primarily to preserve itself (as do simpler homeostatic systems which do not reproduce); it shows me that even at the biological level my spontaneity only secondarily and partially serves myself, and invites the reflection that behaving consistently to my own advantage became conceivable only with the clarification of my viewpoint in contrast with others, which in turn implies that I have been assuming other viewpoints from the beginning of self-consciousness.
But although Darwinian natural selection seems plainly to deny primacy either to egoism or to altruism, it is interesting to notice that nearly everyone has preconceptions which hinder him from coming fully to terms with the evidence.
On the one hand one rather likes to find examples of animals helping each other, out of a confused feeling that it will somehow strengthen human motives for altruism to know that the lower creation can be altruistic too.
On the other hand it would be so much simpler for explanatory purposes if animals did behave like the rational egoists of classical economics.
Here both the second and the third of our considerations encouraging faith in the importance of egoism come into play.
Since Mother Nature does not teach morality, how would brute beasts ever learn to be unselfish?
Moreover, as interpreters of animal behaviour we have our own convenience to consider; to dissolve species (and human societies too, as in classical economics) into uniformly egoistic atoms offers much the best prospect of finding simple laws to apply to them.
A remarkable illustration of the explanatory convenience of egoism is the concept of the ‘selfish gene’, through which the rational egoism which is so difficult to find in the hopelessly illogical world of men is finally tracked down in our ultimate genetic constituents.
The mechanism of natural selection can indeed be beautifully expounded in a metaphorical language which treats organisms as designed by their constituent genes in accordance with the mathematics of games theory to serve the egoistic projects of each of them.
Yet it is plain that the selfishness of a gene can have nothing whatever in common with human egoism.
A gene, for purposes of the theory, is a segment of genetic material divided off as best suits the investigator, who needs a unit small enough to be treated as identical through successive generations; it has no self with which to be selfish.
Even if it had, the selfhood would be in the replicas of the gene scattered over different bodies; that the gene, analogous though it is to species rather than to individual, has to be taken as the unit, is precisely because it is more useful for explanation to speak of the selfish gene than of the altruistic replica.
In any case, if one insists on anthropomorphizing the gene, it behaves not selfishly but in utter disregard of its own interests, either doing the same thing over and over again or, by mutation, doing something else quite arbitrarily, and passively allowing itself to be favoured or eliminated by natural selection.
It does indeed seem touchingly human in its irrationality, as unegoistic as according to Nietzsche  we should all be if we surrendered completely to our drives.
The geneticist's language is no more nor less metaphorical when he calls the gene selfish than when he depicts it as though itself working out the solutions in games theory by which he is explaining its survival.
To respond always with full awareness would be to become equally aware from all relevant viewpoints and react with sympathies and antipathies as impartial as those with which one reads a play of Shakespeare or novel of Tolstoy.
Then one would no more require moral standards than that ‘Vengeance is mine, I will repay’ which Tolstoy put under the title of Anna Karenina .
In practice however awareness is unequal, variable, uncertain, with impassable limits even in the case of self-knowledge, so that we can never take the full measure of our reactions from all viewpoints; like the child wondering whether to risk another helping at dinner, we require an ‘ought’ whenever we are losing sight of the reaction at an unsustainable height of awareness.
We still remain then, for moral as for prudential questions, at the position that imperatives can serve only for judging between spontaneous reactions.
Certainly duty can pull against one's strongest inclination; but could one recognize the force of a moral imperative without feeling some inclination however slight towards the course which it commands?
It appears reasonable to claim that a man without the capacity to put himself in another's place could not understand a moral appeal (even if he should happen to be a law-abiding man who accepts commands and prohibitions on external authority), just as someone incapable of shifting temporal viewpoints could not understand an appeal to his future interests.
On the present analysis, moving to the viewpoints of other persons is not in itself a moral act, any more than is temporal viewpoint-shifting, so that a reduced capacity for either is not a moral but a cognitive defect.
It may be noticed that insensibility both to moral appeals and to appeals to one's future interests, imprisonment within both ‘I’ and ‘Now’, are often combined in the same person, and that the combination is widely accepted as the strongest criterion for classing him as ‘psychopathic’and exempting him from moral judgment.
The psychopath, even so, falls far short of the ideal of philosophical egoism.
His sympathetic feelings are shallow and transient rather than absent altogether, and if he had no insight at all into how things look to others he would never learn how to manipulate them.
A criminal psychopath would not want to kick someone's face in for the fun of it unless he had at least an inkling of what it feels like to the victim.
Someone for whom it really is of no concern whether others enjoy or suffer is schizophrenic; he is no egoist, but one whose imaginary viewpoints are disconnected from the real people around him.
The argument of this chapter bears a superficial resemblance to familiar attempts to base morality on the claim that human beings are naturally unselfish and behave egotistically only out of ignorance.
But our approach has by-passed all questions about the goodness or wickedness of human nature.
My spontaneous recoil from awareness of others' troubles (or of future danger to myself) is no less or more natural than my impulse to sympathy or cruelty (or to avoid or irrationally court danger) when I do become aware; it is as pointless to ask whether human nature is selfish or unselfish as whether it is improvident or far-sighted.
1.3 Awareness and pleasure
Throughout our argument we have never questioned that there is a logical gap between ‘is’ and ‘ought’, indicative and imperative, fact and value.
Even without insisting on the strict claim that inference from fact to value is logically inadmissible, a claim which since Hume has been a commonplace, and after G. E. Moore's analysis of the Naturalistic Fallacy was for some time an orthodoxy, it has been convenient to stay out of range of standard criticisms by showing that we can get along well enough without resorting to this kind of inference.
We do not intend to abandon this policy.
However, we have already noted in passing a complication in the case of psychological facts.
What would commonly be taken as a characteristic example of the Naturalistic Fallacy is ethical hedonism, the doctrine that we ought to do what gives most pleasure.
There is something decidedly odd about objecting to it that the mere psychological fact that one alternative is more pleasant than another cannot by itself be a reason for choosing it.
The gourmet, presented with a difficult choice between two dishes, ponders which will please him more as in other circumstances he might weigh conflicting moral demands, decides which one tempts his palate, chooses to order it without even being conscious of making a second decision, let alone one which requires a logically different kind of support, and afterwards perhaps is disappointed by the dish and regrets having chosen wrongly.
It seems to be a matter of ordinary experience that in such circumstances we do accept the psychological fact as sufficient reason for making a choice and for retrospectively judging it right or wrong.
Suppose that I am hoping to discuss some urgent problem with a friend, and ask,
‘Will you be in tomorrow afternoon?’
‘No.
I am going to Regent's Park.’
‘Do you have to?
Why?’
‘I want to go to the zoo.’
‘Why, at a time like this?’
‘I want to take another look at the gibbons.
My friend is not simply explaining why, for good or bad reasons, he did decide to go to the Park (as he might after the event, in which case it would be no objection to his explanation that when he got there the zoo turned out to be closed); he is defending his decision to go to the Park rather than meet me at his house, and I can still try to change his mind.
I may object on a point of fact (‘There are no gibbons there now’) or by appealing to some other end or principle (‘You ought not to put that problem off any longer’).
In any case, his chain of reasons remains unsupported unless he can answer one more question:
‘Why do you want to look at the gibbons?’
‘For the fun of it.
I just like gibbons.'
Whatever reply I find for that one, obviously it is not going to be
‘I'm afraid you're making an illegitimate leap from fact to value.
Irrelevant psychological information about yourself only confuses the issue.'
His answer was not merely acceptable, it was final, in the sense that he need give no further justification of his decision, and if I still wish to object the burden of proof has shifted to me.
I may continue to look for factors which will outweigh his prospects of enjoyment at the zoo.
Or I might suspect too much vehemence in his insistence that he loves gibbons, and suggest that he is deceiving himself, that visiting the animals has become a habit without much joy in it.
But if I do admit his claim to enjoy them, and still persist in the inquisition (‘Why do you like gibbons?’), the logical nature of the question will have changed.
I shall merely be requesting information about a taste which puzzles me, not demanding a further reason without which the whole string of answers will prove to be baseless.
We may look at this example from another angle.
The chain of argument, up to the penultimate stage, is of the kind which supports a hypothetical imperative: ‘If you want to look at gibbons…go to Regent's Park’.
It justifies the decision to go to the park as a means to see the gibbons.
However, the formula is not usable in a practical situation unless the end is either supported by a principle or further end, or else is anticipated as enjoyable in itself.
The mere fact that I have set myself the end X, with Y as a necessary means to it, and without conflict with other prudential or moral considerations, does not guarantee me from being mistaken in doing Y (Anyone who supposed that it did would indeed be guilty of the Naturalistic Fallacy without appeal.)
If for example I am pursuing X in the expectation of enjoying it, but when I get it am disappointed, or seem to enjoy it yet afterwards come to recognize that only habit or a false idea of myself or  susceptibility to persuasion made me suppose I was enjoying myself, then I was mistaken in doing Y. Every choice of means, however well argued, proves groundless with the discrediting of the end, yet that I did not have the fun I expected is itself no more than a fact.
We are thus led back to the same problem as before; although the fact of taking X as end does not justify the decision to do Y, the enjoyment of X which does complete the justification is itself merely a psychological fact.
Indeed a hedonist would be unnecessarily cautious if he were content to defend his grounds of choice as no better nor worse than those of other ethical schools.
It may be a theoretical difficulty to him that logically imperatives are derivable from other imperatives but not from psychological or other factual statements uncombined with imperatives.
Yet in practice justification by an imperative does not benefit from this logical advantage, is very much open to doubt (indeed invites it, without a first principle such as Kant's Categorical Imperative to save from appealing from imperative to imperative in an infinite regress), while the appeal to pleasure does not seem vulnerable to ethical scepticism at all.
To say, as I pull my hand back from the flame, 'l have no reason to shun pain', is no more than playing with a verbal formula of doubt; it does not open any abyss under my feet like ‘I have no reason to obey moral imperatives’.
The most radical possible objection to the argument from pleasure is not scepticism but the counterclaim that pleasure is evil, which condemns as wrong any choice in favour of the enjoyable.
We may imagine an ascetic who consistently chooses the sour instead of the sweet apple, in order to mortify the flesh.
But should he ever lose faith in the principles behind his asceticism, and fail to put other principles in their place, he  will not find himself living in a void without grounds for preferring one apple to another.
He has always recognized the sweetness of an apple as a reason for choosing it, although a sinful one; with the lapse of the standard which condemns it, it asserts itself as the only relevant consideration.
The hedonist has a privileged place in ethics; his is the case which stands if every other falls.
As our first example of deciding on hedonistic grounds we took a choice between two dishes.
It is similar to an instance discussed earlier, of choice between a peach and a pear, in which the spontaneous preference for the peach in full awareness of the flavours was approved on the authority of ‘Be aware’.
Now it must be confessed that no one in that situation would be likely to justify his choice by saying ‘In recalling the tastes I found myself spontaneously moved to take the peach’.
It may be noticed too that our analysis rather simplified the relation between awareness and spontaneity, taking account of the awareness only up to the rousing of the impulse.
It did not make it clear that the impulse to take the peach is a continuing reaction in awareness of its anticipated taste, so that I have chosen rightly only if I continue spontaneously to welcome the awareness right up to the savouring of the juice on my tongue, in other words if I do relish it, enjoy it.
If then it would seem artificial to analyse and describe the whole process when asked the reason for my choice, is that not because I already have the vocabulary of pleasure to name it?
‘I enjoy X’ entails ‘In becoming aware of X I am drawn towards it, I approach it with sharpening awareness of it’.
The natural justification of my choice between the fruit would be something like ‘The peach looked delicious’, which conveys the full information that I expected to be responding in accord with‘Be aware’ until the last trace of the flavour faded from my mouth.
To return to the enjoyment of looking at gibbons, it will be agreed that it is not an activity separate from looking at them, not an end to which looking is the means (as looking is the end to which visiting the zoo is the means).
Nor is it simply looking at them with no further end in mind, which might be the listless action of someone who can think of nothing else to do.
An obvious difference is that one who is enjoying the sight of the gibbons will be intensely aware of their small black faces and long black fingers showing up against white fur, of their swift agile leaps and the poise of their immensely long arms at the moments when they balance perfectly still.
He would of course be equally or more aware of a nagging toothache, but there is the further difference that while he would shrink from awareness of the pain, in this case he wants to sustain and enhance the awareness just as he wanted to come to Regent's Park in the first place, and can be judged to want it by the same kind of tests, for example his reluctance to be dragged away from the cage.
The quickening of awareness in pleasure and the shrinking from it in pain are spontaneous, as I discover whenever I suffer, or deliberately resist a temptation, or try to enjoy some cultivated entertainment which bores me.
The connection between enjoyment and a spontaneous welcoming of awareness is logically necessary, for it would be contradictory to say ‘I intensely enjoyed the sensation, but I had to make an effort to be much aware of it.’
It can be recognized even in such an extreme case as enjoyment of sinking into sleep.
As long as I was forced to stay awake I shrank from any stimulus to sensation; now I relax and welcome the fading sensations until they are extinct, and for a few minutes will  notice impressions of which I am normally unaware, such as the twilight images on the edge of consciousness.
Enjoying, we spontaneously welcome awareness; bored and listless, we cannot without effort summon it up; disliking, we withdraw from it; suffering, we recoil from it but cannot escape it.
The differences, it is important to notice, are in the spontaneous tendency, not in the actual degree of awareness achieved or suffered.
Local pleasures and pains may be very much alike in both intensifying awareness and contracting it to themselves; but the difference remains that pain forces itself on awareness against our spontaneous resistance.
The experience of tragic art confirms that the relation of pleasure and awareness is two-way; if a welcoming of the sharpest awareness of things from which we most deeply recoil, without any reservations of the sort of ‘This hurts but it is good for me’, can make even the fate of Lear or Oedipus enjoyable, it would seem that there can be no involuntary quickening of awareness without joy.
Of course this imaginative feat is possible only because we watch the tragedy secure in the knowledge that we shall be ourselves again when the curtain goes down.
Detachment of a situation from its anticipated consequences allows many such mysterious transformations of anguish into joy in memory, imagination or the arts.
Danger, as an experience which especially enlivens awareness and is unpleasant only in relation to consequences, is especially rich in possibilities of becoming enjoyable.
The imagination of danger keeps us immersed in a story; the adventurous court it in actual life; the unadventurous relate with gusto how they were carried off to hospital with an undiagnosed and probably fatal illness, as a vivid patch in an otherwise uneventful life.
We may notice too that since pleasures tend to fade unless varied at every recurrence it is difficult to distinguish in practice between the man who lives for pleasure and the man who lives for new experiences.
The former perhaps will repeat a pleasure until exhausted, the latter lose interest as soon as he is fully aware of its nuances, as though suspicious of the tendency of pleasures, like pains, to contract awareness to themselves.
For him apparently, although no moralist, the answer ‘I enjoy it’ does not quite settle the matter.
Pleasure interests him only as long as its quickening of local awareness contributes to his overall awareness.
Approaching from another angle, there is at least one answer which has the same claim to finality as ‘I enjoy it’(finality in the sense that no further reason may be demanded, although other reasons may outweigh it).
Most such answers imply enjoyment, even ‘I am interested in it’(which at least suggests the prospect of happy hours of observing, reading, thinking); but ‘I am curious about it’ is neutral as far as enjoyment is concerned.
‘I want to find out about it.’
‘Why?’
‘No reason.
I'm just curious’.
The search has the same prospect of satisfaction or frustration as any other purposive activity.
At the other extreme, ‘I dislike it’ turns out to be highly questionable when it implies diminished awareness:
‘I don't like to think about it’.
This answer would be fully acceptable only if the speaker is fully aware of his situation and can do nothing at present to ease it.
Otherwise, he has provided both a reason which is in our sense final and a counter-consideration which outweighs it.
It can now be seen that the argument from pleasure draws its imperative conclusions, not directly from psychological fact, but from psychological fact combined with the imperative ‘Be aware’.
Examining myself, I find spontaneous inclinations and aversions, which I express by ‘I want/don't want’.
From the mere fact of wanting more or less or not at all or the contrary I can derive no imperative for choosing between my wants.
But as soon as I say ‘I enjoy/like/desire’, even ‘I want’ spoken with a certain stress, something new enters; I convey the further information that with awakening awareness I am stirred to approach, and as I approach awareness quickens.
However local and limited the awareness to which the words testify, I have identified a spontaneous reaction to which, since it is provisionally approved by ‘Be aware’, it is rational to seek means as an end good in itself; if you disagree, the burden of proof has shifted to you, to make me aware of something overlooked which will redirect my response.
Conversely, to say ‘It hurts’ conveys the information, not merely that I spontaneously flinch from the sensation, but that I am sharply aware of it.
In the light of‘Be aware’, the spontaneous recoil from the object in becoming aware of it will be the right reaction; but the suffering as a spontaneous shrinking from awareness itself, will be bad, just as pleasure, as a spontaneous welcoming of awareness, will be good.
‘I enjoy it’ and ‘It hurts’testify of course only to awareness of the immediate stimuli, and will always be outweighed if enlargement of awareness changes the response.
This analysis lifts us above such complications of hedonism as having to measure degrees of pleasure or distinguish the higher from the lower.
Estimating awareness no doubt raises its own problems, but at least it can be conducted in terms of the things of which one is made aware.
It may be difficult to explain why a few minutes spent reading fourteen lines of Shakespeare should be a higher pleasure than reading an equivalent length of a James Bond story, but the analyses of literary criticism elucidate how in the former case one is living those few minutes in intensified awareness with an extraordinarily extended span, from the texture of the words sounding in one's inner ear to the remotest implications for the living of one's whole life.
Here a difference emerges between becoming perceptually and emotionally aware and becoming aware of a fact.
In deliberate action, ‘Be aware’ obliges me to take account of any fact relevant to achievement of the end, which may require an exertion of will to resist emotional bias and acknowledge the facts whether I like them or not.
Any obscuring of the world as the known facts show it objectively to be betrays a weakness in me.
In the case of the spontaneous goals from which the ends are chosen, the same neutrality would be theoretically conceivable; it is possible to imagine a being immune from pleasure and pain, who is moved towards or away without either welcoming or shrinking from awareness.
However, that is not how we are constituted.
Even in obeying ‘Be aware’, the objects which with arousal of awareness draw me towards them also enhance awareness of themselves, the objects which repel also numb awareness of themselves.
‘Be aware’ does of course recommend a sensibility open rather than closed to new impressions, but even the most greedy for new experience cannot embrace joy and suffering with  equal fervour, there is always a bias in favour of the enjoyable.
In my universe of smells.
the nuances will be much more finely discriminated in the scent of flowers than in the stench of carrion.
That there must be such an imbalance follows from our consistently maintained position that the rational man can never rise above his spontaneous inclinations, merely learn to choose rationally between them.
Our spontaneity is such that even in obeying ‘Be aware’ attention is drawn from the dark side of the world towards the light.
If our constitution does not altogether submerge us in wishful thinking, that is because pain and misfortune force themselves on attention from outside.
It is perhaps a physical impossibility to be as aware of a bitter as of a sweet taste, but a toothache relentlessly pulls wincing sensibility to itself.
An impartially distributed awareness would presumably require an optimum ratio, with enough trouble to stimulate without overwhelming, and enough joy to prevent morale succumbing under too much pressure.
Blake in The marriage of heaven and hell sums it up: ‘Joys impregnate.
Sorrows bring forth.’
The thinker who most boldly exploits this psychological tension is Nietzsche, who in the exuberance of his thought always strains to seize the most sombre truths without losing the momentum of his ‘gay science’.
But even the most abstract thinker does not wholly escape the need to impregnate thought with joy.
The logical structure admittedly is independent of the desires of the thinker, but the drive behind it is an enthusiasm, or an obsession to rid himself of an intolerable burden; at the point when we notice there is no more joy or stress in his thinking, that it has become a routine, we begin to be afraid that his creative phase his passed.
Suffering happens, is not chosen, is a ‘misfortune’; shall we say that, since by nature attention quickens only as a function of the organism striving towards its goals, the optimum of internal and external stimulation to awareness can be only a matter of chance?
To choose suffering for the sake of the stimulating effects of running away from it is indeed a paradox.
Suffering can make its full contribution to my awareness only if I do not pursue it in advance, even though its value may be appreciated in retrospect.
I cannot will the disappointment of my highest hope, in the expectation that the catastrophe will make a new man of me, because it is no catastrophe unless I am fully committed to the hope.
Still less can I will the death of someone I love on the calculation that the bereavement will be a rewarding experience.
Nevertheless, it does seem that there is an impulse of curiosity which can correct the chance relations of internal and external stimuli by choice of a painful experience simply as a means to equalize one's awareness of the light and the dark.
It is in a sense a perversion, by which instead of attending to situations in order to respond to them intelligently, one treats awareness itself as an end.
Since the awareness from which we recoil is constantly being forced on us by pain or misfortune, no doubt many or most people can take every opportunity they have to avoid the unpleasant without being in any danger of becoming more aware of the bright side than the dark.
However, among the lucky or sheltered it is common enough for someone to have the uneasy feeling that he is living too comfortably, might find himself unprepared to cope if his present security were to collapse, lacks adequate understanding of miseries outside his experience.
Such a person might, with the full sanction of ‘Be aware’, deliberately choose the unpleasant alternative, to live for a while in a jungle or a slum.
But after the initial choice, which is exceptional in treating awareness itself as an end to which hardship is the means, he will not be taking suffering as an end; to force himself to accept it passively would insensitize and brutalize him instead of enhancing awareness.
Once in his jungle or slum he will learn by trying like anyone else to make the best of his circumstances.
To cultivate awareness of fact one goes to the sciences, of sensation and emotion to the arts; and we expect the latter, in sharpest contrast with the former, also to give pleasure.
Not that this stops the tragic artist from coaxing us into awareness of the normally intolerable, taking advantage of ways in which things terrible in experience become agreeable in imagination.
But one can hear the naked cry of agony in Greek tragedy only because its conventions are elaborately designed to distance the events from our own affairs, to show only noble personages speaking eloquent and musical language.
A realistic genre has less obtrusive conventions, but still has always to recognize that it can never evoke as real unless the audience welcomes rather than shrinks from the awareness.
We can be well aware in the abstract of the horror, misery and emptiness of much of life, but is there any such thing as an intense imaginative vision of life, however pessimistic, which is not in some sense pleasing?
We shall not go into the variety of psychological mechanisms which convert terrible actuality into pleasing imagination, but there is one of them, sado-masochism, which demands attention because it explains why tellers of harsh truths so often offend not only our sentimentality but our moral sensibility.
The difficulty of becoming vividly aware of the worst without having a positive taste for it may be illustrated by listing underminers of eighteenth century faith in human  perfectibility who have earned our thanks by laying the ground for a view of life reconcilable with the trenches, bombs and concentration camps of our own era — Sade, Maistre, Baudelaire, Dostoevsky, Nietzsche, Freud.
Except for Freud, whose impersonal style does not reveal him, all of them flaunt a pronounced sado-masochistic sensibility.
In their own ways, do they not all see the world through rose-coloured spectacles?
The morally estimable act of exposing to us the worst in ourselves nearly always has something morally equivocal about it.
The name which stands chronologically first in the list is eloquent in itself; and Nietzsche is explicit about the underlying cruelty (in which he includes cruelty to oneself), not only of tragic art and religious self-denial, but of the pure appetite for truth, for its own sake and at any cost.
Consider finally how even the man of knowledge, when he compels his spirit to knowledge which is counter to the inclination of his spirit and frequently also to the desires of his heart — by saying No, that is, when he would like to affirm, love, worship — disposes as an artist in and transfigurer of cruelty; in all taking things seriously and thoroughly indeed there is already a violation, a desire to hurt the fundamental will of the spirit, which ceaselessly strives for appearance and the superficial — in all desire to know there is already a drop of cruelty.
But sadism, as we have noticed, in intensifying awareness also distorts it.
Even if Nietzsche is right that cruelty is at the root of tragic art, the serious artist knows that he must transcend it.
It is, after all, only another kind of sentimentality, drowning the painful scene in the self-indulgent feelings of the onlooker.
The point may be illustrated by the different treatments of violent death in art and entertainment.
Sadism suspends awareness that death comes to all of us, by exploiting the death of another to intensify one's own consciousness of life and power.
A traditional device for drawing us beyond the possibility of sweetening by sadism, right to the viewpoint of the dying man, is the death speech, at its starkest when Agamemnon cries offstage that he has been struck his mortal blow.
As it happens, the film which in 1930 began the Hollywood gangster cycle,Little Caesar , ended memorably with Edward G. Robinson dying in the gutter with the words ‘Mother of God, is this the end of Rico?’
But it is notable that this convention, universal in tragedy, never established itself in the crime film.
There violent death is spectacle; one has the sense of killing but not of dying.
The spectator has come for blood, but did not buy his ticket to be reminded of his own mortality.
It is time to consider or reconsider certain fundamental questions about awareness.
We defined it as being prepared to take into account in choices, and have throughout treated it as the fluctuating disposition to take the look and feel of things into account in choices of ends and the facts about them in choices of means.
In presenting the imperative as both universal and absolute (and without yet even discussing why there are so many situations where common sense or common decency oblige us to violate it!), we are not far from the claim traditionally put in metaphysical terms, that Good is identical with Being.
It will be objected perhaps that it is too late in the day to try to re-establish our crumbling values on ‘Be aware’, since the True is already sinking into the gulf which has swallowed the Beautiful and the Good.
When even measurements of space and time have proved to be relative, and the sub-atomic world to be as insubstantial as the realm of Platonic ideas, is it perhaps time to recognize that each of us lives in his own reality?
If so, ‘Be aware’ is no securer than any other proposed foundation of morals; better settle for the Assassins' ‘Nothing is true, everything is permitted’.
However, one may well draw the opposite lesson from modern science and art.
for physics there is only one true measurement from any one position, and it can be more accurate than ever before; writing and painting communicate look and feel from a viewpoint with more sophistication than ever before; with a Cubist vision which constructs reality from the different facets exposed from different angles one is better orientated than ever before.
The more complex technology becomes the more depends on getting the facts exactly right.
If there is indeed the same relativism in physics and in morals, should not one individual's choice in his particular situation be as unimpugnably right or wrong as his measurements of distance and duration?
In any case, there is no point in letting the great abstractions Truth and Reality divert us into epistemology and metaphysics, since such questions have no relevance to the application of ‘Be aware’ in the conduct of life.
If I happen to be pondering them when about to cross the street, and the green light has changed to yellow, ‘Be aware’ resumes all its authority; never mind that at another level of discourse physics dismisses colour as subjective, unreal.
When thinking how to act, I am in the world of common sense where something either is or is not, and where it is a matter of course that I can be in touch with it through highly subjective impressions.
If the thought comes into  my head that a careless remark has just hurt a friend or made an enemy, ‘Be expression in his apparently untroubled face set off this vague disquiet.
Why have we chosen to say ‘aware’ when philosophers generally say ‘know’?
Philosophy has an incorrigible bias towards thinking of knowledge in terms of the verbally formulable, the proposition, the logical grounding of which has nothing to do with such psychological questions as whether the knower is being acted on causally by things which the proposition is about.
Consequently, the enterprise of building an ethic on the imperative ‘Know’ could hardly be understood except as an attempt to deduce principles of conduct from the propositions known, vulnerable to standard criticisms of the Naturalistic Fallacy to which we have offered no answer.
To give this impression would ensure shipwreck on a reef which we shall in any case be lucky to avoid, the indifference of the reader who takes it for granted that we are trying to deduce imperatives from the facts of which one ought to be aware, and assumes in advance that there has to be a flaw somewhere, hardly worth the trouble of locating, as in a new proposal for a perpetual-motion machine.
The substitution of the word ‘aware’ may not be enough to dislodge so strong a preconception, but it should help.
Awareness, although aided by propositional knowledge, is primarily of the concrete situation, to which one cannot attend without being causally affected, so that to have become aware of it at all one must already be responding to it in ways which vary with the range and degree of awareness.
Knowing, on the other hand, is not a matter of degree, either one knows or does not.
Whether my knowledge that I shall some day die, that a nuclear war is likely sooner or later, that alcohol will kill me, that another person is suffering, does move me in one direction or another, depends on the extent of my disposition to take these things into account in choices, on awareness which may spontaneously vary from one moment to the next and be sustainable only by an effort of will.
I may well know how I would react if I could remain consistently aware of what I know in the abstract, yet yield to the opposite reaction, so that‘I see, and approve, the better: I follow the worse’(Ovid's Video meliora proboque, deteriora sequor ).
A further objection to ‘know’ is that knowing a proposition to be true is independent of viewpoint, so that there would be no possibility of an imperative ‘Know’proving like ‘Be aware’to be relevant to morals.
The moral consequences we have drawn from awareness of how someone else feels could not be derived from the mere knowledge that he is suffering and needs my help.
Of what does one have to be aware?
Since one cannot be aware of everything, ‘Be aware’ will of course be unusable without tests of relevance.
When someone is said to act or react with ‘full’ or ‘sufficient’awareness — qualifications which recur in our argument without further explanation, with no doubt irritating frequency — it is implied that he is aware of everything relevant to his choice of means or ends.
It will perhaps be said that, although there may be no inherent difficulty in establishing criteria of relevance to choices of means, the vagueness of ‘Be aware’ for choices of ends reduces it to meaninglessness as our proposed ‘first principle’.
But this is almost the reverse of the case.
Deciding what facts are relevant to a choice of means may be very complicated, and that the difficulties from admitting his obligation to take account of them testifies to the irresistible  authority of ‘Be aware’ in practical decisions.
But to judge something relevant to the choice of a spontaneously emerging goal as end, it is enough — as we have insisted from the first — that awareness of it does in fact act causally on the spontaneous inclination.
For a person insensitive to visual impressions the pattern on the wallpaper he is buying may seem not to deserve close scrutiny; but if the room he has papered begins after a while to depress him, it has turned out that the pattern was relevant to the choice after all.
Whenever in relation to a loved person, idealized place or personal indulgence I find myself pushing out of mind some disagreeable thought, its relevance (as distinct from its importance) is not in doubt; it is enough that it does spontaneously move me against what I have decided for.
We must insist too that the authority of ‘Be aware’ is independent of practical advantages and disadvantages.
Admittedly such corollaries as ‘Face facts’, which we introduced at the very start of the discussion in the first chapter, do support their authority by the urgency of factual awareness in choices of means.
Without doubt it is the obstinate resistance of facts blocking the way to goals which has taught mankind such awareness as it has.
However, choices of means, taken by themselves, encourage only an awareness mixed in advantageous proportions with illusion and insensibility.
The utility of believing that, however many setbacks my cause may suffer, God or the historical process is ultimately on my side, an effectiveness demonstrated throughout history by so many religious and political movements, is only one example of the practical value of delusion.
Or again, for the ruling class or race against which such a movement rebels, as long as its authority is secure there are very strong practical advantages in thinking of its subjects as incapable of governing themselves, happy and carefree in their poverty, innately inferior in intelligence, out of work only if lazy, loyal and grateful for all one has done for them unless misled by irresponsible agitators; it is only when they start to be dangerously restive that it becomes practically useful to understand their motives and capacities better.
Our application of the principle of awareness to morals implies that the pursuit of any selfish end exerts strong pressures to.
close oneself to awareness from other viewpoints; indeed, if full awareness were, required for the intelligent choosing of means, our thesis would invite the rejoinder:-‘If ‘Be good'’ follows from ‘‘Be aware from all viewpoints'’, why does not the urgent need to be aware of the people with whom we deal compel us all to be moral?’
However, if X is there, it is there whether I take account of it or not.
If a thing is objectively so for one choice of means it is so for another; it is a contradiction to estimate the capabilities of a subject class or race in one way when they are tractable and in another when they are not.
If it is so for choices of means it is so for choices of ends; and it is one of the greatest temptations to irrationality that nothing compels us to acknowledge in the realm of ends what we cannot afford to deny in the realm of means.
There is no obstacle at all except a respect for logical consistency to weighing facts justly when a mistake can cost money but refusing to extend the same standards to the historicity of Bible narrative, or to shutting one's eyes to the use of Einstein's relativity in work on the atom bomb while publicly denouncing the theory as Jewish science or  bourgeois idealism.
But in recognizing the authority of ‘Be aware’ as absolute we run up against that imbalance of the organism in the direction of what pleases it, by which it  spontaneously expands awareness in one direction by contracting it in others.
The involuntary expansions and contractions have the consequence that to hold on to the most aware response it may be a practical necessity to numb oneself to a local awareness which distracts from it.
The compromise involves some danger of overlooking factors relevant to a choice, so that in principle one would be better off without this weakness of the flesh.
The obvious example is the surgeon with his ruthless but healing knife.
He is best imagined as an old-fashioned sawbones before the invention of anaesthetics, carving away placidly while an assistant holds down the screaming patient.
When someone protests at his callousness he says ‘Would you rather my hand shook?’.
In the last resort his conduct is in accord with‘Be aware’, because he would be acting the same if he were capable of full awareness both of the goal of saving life and of the temporary anguish he is inflicting, but being merely human he would lose sight of the goal if he let his mind dwell on the pain.
But suppose he is told about the new discovery chloroform, and says ‘I've no time for such newfangled nonsense’.
Then one could say ‘You've forgotten what it must feel like’; this time he ought to be aware of the pain.
The question might be raised whether a surgeon's callousness is after all even a local violation of ‘Be aware’.
We have defined awareness as the disposition to take into account in choices, and we have always insisted that although a capacity to recall a feeling is necessary to continuing awareness of it, a constant maintenance of the feeling is not.
A surgeon who immediately welcomed news of chloroform could reasonably claim always to have been aware of the pain although he had disciplined himself not to heed it.
In one's own case it is perhaps always theoretically possible to withhold attention without losing awareness.
But that ‘Be aware’ does allow the judgment that a person can be better off locally unaware is plain enough in dealings with other people.
If someone is critically ill, what well-disposed person will choose the moment to tell him that his business has crashed and his wife has gone off with another man?
There is some danger that founding an ethic in ‘Be aware’ may encourage ruinous excesses of truth-telling like the events in Ibsen's Wild duck .
However, a consequence of so extending the scope of the imperative is that it becomes relevant only to the logic of value judgments, and has no direct bearing on how far a creature adapted to heed only what pleases it can push towards awareness against the grain of organic functioning.
Our choice of ‘aware’, as a philosophically uncorrupted word which can help us to approach philosophical problems from a different angle, does have something to do with its recent currency in the valuations of ordinary discourse, as when someone is said to apply abstract principles without being aware of other people as persons, or to have lost by too exclusive concentration on the uses of things awareness of the colours of dawn and the scent of the flowers.
But having turned awareness into the universal test of value we cannot, as perhaps would most habitual users of the word, take the side of perceptual and emotional awareness against the abstractions of philosophy and science.
Our concern is rather to break away from the stale confrontation of reason and spontaneity which has persisted since the Romantic Movement, to invite the man of reason to admit that he never has had any ends which did not spring from his own spontaneity, and the intuitive and impulsive that no insight  that flashes from theirs can be acknowledged as objective truth until it survives the ruthless justice of reason.
Factual awareness is a theoretically simple matter of weighing the evidence without regard for what flatters our hopes, and the requirements of ‘Be aware’ are straightforward and stringent.
But as for perceptual and emotional awareness, lacking which we would have no motive to bother about facts, without pleasure or hope it simply fades.
Then how far forward can one press in submission to ‘Be aware’?
Let us leave the last word to Nietzsche, whose cruel intelligence is quickened only by the taste of bitter truths.
Something might be true although at the same time harmful and dangerous in the highest degree; indeed it could pertain to the fundamental nature of existence that a complete knowledge of it might destroy one — so that the strength of a spirit could be measured by how much ‘truth’ it could take, more clearly, to what degree it needed it attenuated, veiled, sweetened, blunted and falsified.
But there can be no doubt that for the discovery of certain parts of truth the wicked and unhappy are in a more favourable position and are more likely to succeed; not to mention the wicked who are happy — a species about whom the moralists are silent…
1.4 Decision and principles
It is tempting to think of all decision after the analogy of the choice of means, which is the most easily analysed type.
In it we know ourselves to be rational agents detached from spontaneity, judging on objective grounds what will serve our ends.
A man is getting ready to travel.
He considers taking an early flight because it is the quickest, doubts whether it will give him time to prepare and settles for the quickest later flight; he wants to be bothered with as few suitcases as possible, starts packing the biggest he has, finds the lock broken and chooses another.
Any spontaneous pull to which he yields (for example, a proneness due to laziness to exaggerate the difficulty of getting things done in time for the earlier flight) will merely bias his judgement; in the pure choice of means you either choose rationally or surrender to the spontaneous.
This kind of decision fits the model of a ‘weighing’ of considerations; we may think of the man as piling items pro and con on opposite sides of a balance and making his judgement after one side goes down.
However behind these choices of means there was a choice of ends.
Let us suppose a less hurried traveller who is flying to Bali with the intention of staying who wants the life he expects in Bali not for some business or educational purpose but for its own sake, as his vision of the Good Life.
Let us make him a highly intelligent but intuitive and responsive young man not much interested in abstract principles, the very antithesis of a philosopher.
Certainly he expects to be happy there, but even if we were to claim that his ultimate end is pleasure we should be using ‘end’ in another sense than when we say that his flight was the end to which booking the ticket was the means, since to enjoy living in a place is not an activity separate from and subsequent in time to living there.
But why did he choose to live in Bali rather than England?
On the analogy of a choice of means we might  suppose that he would choose in terms of principles which are behind his ends as the ends are behind his means, and as before would resist as bias all spontaneous inclinations in either direction.
But very obviously our traveller's decision would not be at all like that.
He has seen the Peliatan dancers on tour, hung his walls with posters of that photogenic island, bought records of gamelan music.
He begins to find himself day-dreaming about Bali.
Reveries of palms and frangipani flowers, terraced ricefields, cockfights and shadow plays, interrupt his work by day, at night he dreams of brown graceful women naked to the waist.
He takes to reading about Bali, and is impressed by the evidence that its culture is unique in the degree to which art is part of ordinary life and folk art is fine art.
Insensibly wish becomes want, arousing and tugging against a reluctance to leave his home country which was inactive as long as he was merely fantasizing.
He begins to ask himself realistic questions.
To what extent is a romantic yearning for a lost Eden making him idealize the island, and on the other hand how much of his caution is inertia and fear of the new?
Does he want to live where he would always be seen as a stranger?
Would gamelan music come to bore him if there were not much else to listen to?
He considers money, climate, health, Indonesian politics, whether nowadays the women still bare their breasts, whether he could learn the languages of the island.
He takes a holiday in Bali, the spell intensifies, the practical issues clarify.
Now it becomes urgent to decide, but frivolous or weighty considerations keep pulling him in one direction or the other.
Finally, when he has taken in all the information he can assimilate, after a dramatic ‘I will go’ or after waking one morning knowing that the problem has solved itself in his sleep, he applies for his visa, resigns his job, packs his bags.
Throughout the whole sequence, from the first musings to the final decision, he has been reacting spontaneously to what step by step he has been learning.
He has done an enormous amount of hard and soft thinking, but most of it about the stimuli to which he is responding, and the rest about whether he is being honest with himself as to how he is responding.
We have deliberately presented him as never at any point appealing to a principle of conduct.
Shall we say then that he has drifted spontaneously through the crisis without ever making a rational decision as to whether to go or not?
Suppose that when asked his reason he replies vaguely ‘I'm going to seed in England, I'm sure life will be more interesting there’.
When life gets more interesting one is more responsive, more aware of one's surroundings and what one is doing; his answer, inarticulate as it may be, has behind it the authority of ‘Be aware’.
Obviously there are other aspects of intelligent behaviour, some of which Bali may discourage; perhaps a time will come when he tells himself ‘I've run away from a big world to a little one, I was wrong’.
But let us assume that when we question him he proves not to have overlooked such dangers.
We see that he has not simply yielded to the stronger of two pulls, as would be the case if, for example, he never overcame a fear of being uprooted which he judges cowardly, and ever after said to himself ‘I ought to have gone’.
He has resisted both pulls until he has assembled all the information he thinks relevant, the test of relevance being whether it does in fact strengthen one pull in relation to the other.
His final decision is in favour of whichever proves stronger, but the stronger for perhaps no more than the brief spell of fullest awareness in  which he decides, afterwards to be panic-stricken at having committed himself to a choice which none the less he still knows in his heart was right.
What would a rational decision to live in Bali be like, if this is not one?
It will be suggested perhaps that, instead of simply feeling himself pulled between a thirst for new experience and a dread of losing his pension, a rational man would ponder conflicting principles, ‘It is good to welcome new experience’ and ‘One ought not to risk one's pension’, and judge between them by deducing from more general principles combined with verbally formulated facts about Bali and himself.
But, even assuming its feasibility, this would be a grossly stupid way of going about the business, reducing the whole delicate operation to a clumsy manipulation of crudely simplified formulae.
In the first place, we are no longer in the realm of choice of means, where all relevant information can be presented in verbal descriptions (supplemented on occasion with mathematical symbols and diagrams).
To decide whether to live in Bali you have to imagine the conditions with as much sensuous and emotional vividness as possible, and will learn more from photographs, music records, documentary films of dance, impressionistic writing, the talk of enthusiastic or disillusioned people who have been there already, than from strictly factual propositions.
It might be that the traveller after a prolonged deadlock sees a picture of Bali on a magazine cover as he is walking past a newspaper stand, thinks ‘I must go there’, the decision is made, and from then on he never wavers.
Is he being irrationally swayed by a fleeting emotion?
Apparently not, for he has been thinking hard for months and his decision is now solid.
His visual impressions have been fading without his knowing it, and with their reactivation stale information has suddenly sorted itself out into a new and firm pattern.
In any case, what kind of general principles would be of help in judging between ‘It is good to welcome new experience’ and ‘One ought not to risk one's pension’?
The rational man may contemplate them and give more weight to the former, and more still perhaps to ‘Art should be a part of ordinary life’, but these are not the sort of principles which he will profess to have interrelated in a deductive system.
Whatever he may think he is doing he can only be discovering, like our romantic traveller, but perhaps much less aware of what he is doing, that in the last resort his desires outweigh his fears.
To revert to the metaphor of weighing, in choices of means the traveller would be the weigher, but in this choice of an end he is the arm of the balance, and when the information is assimilated the impulse to go prevails over the reluctance to take the risk as the arm goes up or down when the balance is fully loaded.
If the glimpse of one more picture could turn the scales and leave them steady, that is a proof that the traveller is a very sensitive instrument indeed.
It must be admitted that in deliberately excluding considerations of principle we are crediting the traveller with a rather narrow kind of intelligence, acute though it may be.
Even for those of us who admit that he has made a rational choice on this occasion, it remains surprising that he has benefited so little from experience, that he has never made, or let God or society make for him, any previous decisions on general issues which could be of help to him.
Thus his conduct very well illustrates the maxim ‘Look before you leap’; and if his final decision was made when the trend of circumstances was making it harder to leave  home, he might well have recalled ‘He who hesitates is lost’.
However the general decisions formulated as maxims are themselves about how to act in a recurring situation and have no independent authority; they do not pre-decide particular issues, each of which will have its peculiar features.
The rational way to employ such conflicting prudential principles would not be to deduce from more general principles which of them applies to the present case.
It would be to let one maxim remind him of the treacherous limits of his information and the other of unconsidered consequences of delay, and try to fill both gaps in his awareness before letting himself be moved in one direction or the other.
The maxims would serve only to guide him towards fuller awareness of the present situation.
If we proceed from prudential to moral imperatives, will the conditions of the choice be fundamentally changed?
The traveller, we now discover, is a young man whose ailing parents want him to stay within reach.
Society imposes an obligation to look after his parents, as a debt owed to them for his upbringing, and owed to society for passing on to his children the obligation to do the same for him.
Such an obligation seems to be a factor different in kind from any considered so far.
As an external pressure, if only one to which it might be politic to submit, it certainly is different.
But what would transform it from an externally enforced to a moral obligation?
On the present argument, the recognition that in widening awareness, exploring from his own former viewpoint as child and future as old man, and generalizing to the viewpoints of all, his spontaneous dislike of the obligation as a hindrance to himself turns to approval of it as beneficial to all.
But then ‘One ought to look after one's parents’ derives, like ‘Look before you leap’, from a general decision following the same procedures as his particular decisions, and it too can claim no stronger authority.
In a particular situation it will bind him only to heed, in addition to its other features, everything taken into account in the general situation.
As a moral imperative, far from being incommensurable with his previous considerations, it merely adds others similar in kind; he now has to see things from his parents' viewpoint as well as his own, consider their health and resources, ask himself how much they have done to arouse his gratitude or his rancour, whether his staying would really do them any good, whether he can get on with them without quarrelling, and add all this to the information which he must assimilate before he lets the needle of his internal compass finally settle in the direction of Bali or of home.
There remains a further complication.
To act on or defy a socially established rule has effects on all who benefit or suffer by its observance.
To disobey one's father in traditional China would violate the filial piety integral to the whole system of mores and be seen as a threat by all; on the other hand when the young of such a society begin to question the code and assert themselves against the old, they see a disobedience as a blow struck for all of them.
Assuming a social code rather nearer to the Confucian than to our own, the man who wants to go to Bali might choose to obey his parents although convinced that to stay in England is both to his own disadvantage and of no real advantage to them.
However, if it is a moral decision rather than mechanical conformism or a prudent surrender to social pressures, the case remains fundamentally as before, but with an added layer; he now takes account, not only of the effects on his parents but of the damage  to the community as a whole of any successful disobedience.
Here it may be as well to shift from filial piety to what for our society is the more straightforward issue of theft.
A rich and aged relative, who has little use left for his wealth, refuses to give him the money he needs to go to Bali (he has at last made up his mind), but there is an opportunity to steal it from him.
He would be doing little or no harm to the old man.
But from the viewpoint of any property-owner, an unpunished theft is a danger, increasing the chances of being robbed himself.
The most deeply spontaneous, the gut reaction, from every viewpoint except the destitute, or of a criminal ready to pay for the advantage of robbing by the risk of himself being robbed, or of the kind of anarchist who acclaims private theft as a blow to the oppressive institution of private property, is of being threatened.
Seeing from the viewpoints of the many, the traveller therefore recognizes the force of the general imperative ‘Thou shalt not steal’.
How is he to measure it against ‘Look before you leap’, ‘Care for your parents’, and such other imperatives as he has been picking up on the way?
In the same manner as with the rest of them, by taking into account the increased danger to property-owners, minute but replicated for each of them, in awareness of which from their viewpoints he reacts against theft.
This might not stop him reacting still more strongly in favour of theft, from the viewpoints of all who as an anarchist he believes to suffer from the institution of private property; but otherwise he has to put the danger on the same side of the scales as the slight loss to the old relative, against the great gain to himself.
Treated as an instance of the Utilitarian calculus, the whole increasingly complicated operation would no doubt be quite unreal.
But all that we are requiring of him is that, widening his viewpoint from himself to the community, he has taken account of the communal effects of theft, before, as himself not the weigher but the balance, he allows himself finally to settle against or in favour of taking the money.
In that final settlement he can be influenced by, without necessarily even remembering, every relevant experience throughout the whole of his life.
We conclude then that choice even by the most responsible moral agent, however closely it resembles a pure Kantian decision for principle against inclination, is rational only if its fundamental procedure is that exposed to view by our unintellectual, intuitive romantic deciding whether to flee to Bali.
Obviously there are issues for which the pondering of moral principles will from the start play a much bigger part than the one which confronts the traveller.
But there is no issue for which simply to deduce from socially prescribed principles combined with factual propositions would be anything but a mechanical conformity; I know why I should do the prescribed thing only if, at least at my moments of fullest awareness from other viewpoints, I feel moved to do so.
This analysis shows up a further difference between choices of means and of ends; the former start from facts publicly testable by objective criteria, the latter from the look and feel of things tested privately and subjectively, by assuming in experience or imagination the relevant viewpoint in the fullest awareness available, and discovering how one does respond.
Choices of ends, as of means, are debatable in terms of public tests (of whether things are in fact as the agent imagines them, whether his reactions as observed in his behaviour are as he feels them to be), but can take account of public observations only to the extent that they are  subjectively confirmed.
To speak of private testability runs the risk of being misunderstood, of seeming to claim that there are truths — the most important truths — which are accessible only to an infallible private intuition.
But that is not at all what we have in mind.
Let us remind ourselves of the grounding formula for choices of ends:
In awareness of everything relevant I find myself moved towards X, overlooking something relevant I find myself moved towards Y. Be aware.
Therefore let yourself be moved towards X.
That I find myself or let myself be moved implies consciousness of being moved.
However strong the objective evidence that I do want X or Y, I can take these wants into account only if they pass my private test, if subjectively I do feel them.
The point then is not that the subjective impression is infallible but that without it no choice of ends can arise, very much as no choice of means can arise without highly fallible generalizations about causal connexions.
If others point out to me that I always shirk opportunities to get something which I earnestly insist that I desire more than anything else in the world, I shall be persuaded to relinquish it as an end only if on reflection I am forced to admit to myself that I do not feel about it as strongly as I supposed.
Let us imagine that the traveller has at his disposal a computer, far ahead of present possibilities, into which — we assume the behaviourist position -is continually fed all, and much more than, his own information about himself and his situation.
After provisionally deciding to go to Bali he consults this oracle: ‘How would I react if I had all your information?’, and gets the answer ‘You would stay at home’.
Does ‘Be aware’ now require him to act on the advice of the computer?
Not immediately, for to do what he would be moved to do if more aware, without trying to become more aware, would be a direct defiance of the imperative.
He would obey it by consulting the computer for the information he has missed.
Then, as with fuller information he feels himself being moved in the opposite direction, he can say to himself ‘Ah, now I see why I ought not to go’.
In the case of means, I can take many of the facts on trust from experts, even leave the choice itself to experts; but in the case of ends, however humbly I listen to advice, the decision remains my own.
It might be that a friend says to the young man who is thinking of living in Bali ‘You don't really believe that nonsense, you're playing at being Gauguin'.
Without being offered a particle of evidence to support the accusation the young man sees in an instant that it is true, and abandons the whole project.
But he has not taken the word of a wiser man on trust, his private test has confirmed it for him.
Certain individuals stand out as more perceptive, sensitive, far-seeing than the rest of us, and we recognize their value judgements as maturer than our own; but they differ from experts in that we can learn from them only how to evaluate more maturely ourselves.
I cannot choose something as an end simply because a wiser man tells me I would want it if I understood myself better, because I cannot choose ends at all by inferring from facts about my inclinations; the choice of an end is nothing else but the  spontaneous settling of inclination in one direction or other, and the honest or self-deceiving interpretation of its goal.
Any goal of mine which I have allowed to be chosen for me by others, even if I think of it as an end in itself, can only be serving as a means to something else which my private test does confirm as wanted for its own sake.
If I run after the goals which I see everyone around me running after, I reduce them to no more than means to the well-being of feeling at one with the many.
If I think I am going mad, and let a psychiatrist make my decisions for me, the goals I borrow become means to keep out of trouble and recover my health.
By now a consequence has emerged which has been implicit from the first in the whole enterprise of grounding valuation in awareness, that Good has now the same claims to objectivity as Truth.
In whatever sense it is to be recognized as an objective fact that I am now responding in awareness of more factors than before, my reaction will likewise be objectively better than before.
In the early stages of our argument, before the possibility of an egoistic interpretation was excluded, this implication had only a limited interest.
Even granting the absurdity of Hitler's racialist theories, it would be possible to credit him with realistic goals (to exploit a political scapegoat, to depopulate Eastern Europe for resettlement) for which he could massacre Jews and Slavs in as full awareness as theirs when they flee or fight.
The massacres would not be right from his viewpoint and wrong from theirs, he would be objectively right to kill and they to resist being killed; the parallel would be to two contenders for a job both being right to apply in the eyes of all, not to each thinking himself right to apply and the other wrong.
But with the recognition that ‘Be aware’ prescribes responding from all relevant viewpoints, the judgement changes to condemnation of the massacres as objectively wrong on the grounds that to be moved against Hitler and on behalf of his victims would be the reaction of anyone, including Hitler himself, who responded impartially from the viewpoints of both.
Whether one names this position absolutism or relativism may be left to the reader's discretion, but it is neither the absolutism which ascribes unconditional authority to universal standards ('It is wrong to take human life even in self-defence') nor the relativism which is neutral between judgements of a particular act (‘You think Hitler was right to massacre them, I think he was wrong.
Let us agree to differ’).
It implies that objectivity is to be sought, not by trying to root judgements in absolute standards, but on the contrary by treating all standards as provisional in order to get behind them to the reality of the concrete situation and the authentic response of the individual.
The very considerations which make many so anxious to establish that value judgements are objective, a sense of the urgent social need of common rules, disquiet at the anarchic consequences of everyone doing as he likes, have had the effect of raising irrelevant doubts about that objectivity.
As long as attention is diverted to supposedly universal standards and the differences of opinion and taste which undermine them, it seems that all value slides into the subjectivity from which factual judgements are exempt.
But if we begin from situations in which the community does not find it necessary to impose standards, we find, in the very simplest cases, full confidence and agreement in evaluating, untroubled by worries over differences of taste.
If hesitating between a peach and a pear you languidly inspect sniff and fondle the fruit before deciding for the pear, and eat it  slowly with a look of bliss, no one who has left behind the absolutism of childhood (‘Anyone can see that a peach is nicer than a pear’) will doubt that you made the best possible choice between the flavours; the rightness of the choice, and the objective fact that in the fullest awareness of the two flavours you were spontaneously moved to take the pear, are two sides of the same coin.
The case of the traveller to Bali is vastly more complicated, his deciding reaction having been influenced by an indefinite series of accessions to his awareness from the viewpoints of parents and community as well as from his own.
But acknowledgement of increasing complication and uncertainty is not a retreat from objectivity; doubt or acceptance of a supposed historical fact or law of nature likewise depends on accumulation of evidence which can never be complete.
There is even a special affinity between evaluation of a choice of ends and one kind of factual judgement, prediction of that choice.
An observer would follow the same procedure in judging the traveller's choice right or wrong and in predicting that choice, except that in the former case the question is how the traveller would react in fullest awareness, in the latter how he will react in his actual awareness.
The possibilities both of prediction and of evaluation will of course be limited by the observer's own range of awareness.
He has himself, let us say, spent a couple of disillusioning years in Bali, so that he fully understands the considerations which tempt the young man, but has the advantage of fuller information.
He is thus qualified to predict that the other like himself will go and will be disappointed, and is proved a true prophet by the event.
He sees too that the other should from the first have known better, as he himself should (he has come to understand that in retrospect), and therefore judges that they both made not only an unlucky but a bad choice.
The young man's disillusionment when it comes confirms, not only the observer's prediction, but the superiority of his evaluation over the young man's, although not necessarily its correctness.
As with a question of fact, the more informed judgement could be the mistaken one.
There might be a third person wiser than either who is living happily and fruitfully in Bali, and remembers that both of them came with unrealistic expectations.
However, in being always revisable in the light of new information the judgement still remains on a par with acceptance of a historical fact or a law of nature, which likewise never escape the possibility of being discredited by new evidence.
There will be only one right decision in the unique circumstances of each unique one of the three travellers, as there can be only one right prediction of it.
We may push the parallel between evaluation and prediction a little farther.
When the complexities of circumstance defeat analysis, and we grope for the best prediction or choice attainable, we do not doubt that there is a better founded prediction or better informed choice which no one perhaps will be lucky enough to hit on.
There can be unestimated value in the same sense that there can be unknown truths and unmeasured dimensions.
We shall ignore the epistemological issues, and certainly are not proposing to Platonize values as eternal entities on another plane of reality.
However, in the world of Orwell's 1984 there may be people who although sure that the events abolished by official historiography did happen, are not so sure that the experiences treasured in memory keep the value which official propaganda degrades; they might be happier for the assurance that, in the sense that it remains true that an event happened even if universally forgotten an experience remains good even if in universally shrinking awareness there will never again be anyone capable of appreciating it.
In ordinary affairs, for which we aspire only to the best choice on the available information, the only assurance we need is that each veering of spontaneous reaction with expanding awareness is objectively a change for the better.
Everywhere individuals, communities and cultures respond differently to similar situations; their reactions are always criticizable in terms of awareness, including awareness from each other 's viewpoints;, at the ideal limit of awareness each would still respond differently, yet rightly even by the judgement of the rest.
It has been commonly assumed that in controversy even if we could finally agree on what is objectively so, the moral debate has not yet started; you can still find good what I find bad, and unless we discover common principles from which to argue, the debate can never begin at all.
But the present argument has led to the opposite conclusion; when we reach agreement, by public tests, on what is objectively so — which includes how we do respond when we see the situation as it is — the debate is over.
(If my private test convinces me that I do not want what you think I want, I assume error in your reading of me the public tests, which I must expose or leave you unanswered.)
Where we may feel at a disadvantage compared with moral absolutists with fixed standards is not in the claim to objectivity but in the sense of certainty.
The awareness on which valuation depends is that on which we act in ordinary life, seldom treatable by the strict methods of proof of the sciences.
Our understanding of each other is adequate enough for the small change of moral discourse, leaving us in no doubt of how most people feel about being murdered, robbed, raped or cheated, but the more sensitive the valuation the less confidently it can be made.
We cannot hope to recover that certainty about good and evil upon which in the ethical religions salvation itself depends.
But outside a religious context, why should I ask for a certainty with which I dispense in every other field of life?
What matters is that I need never question that there is a course which is objectively the best for me, and that when most aware I am nearest to it.
What if the critic of a choice lives in another society with a different moral code?
Those who simplify moral judgement to the application of standards would assume that he has either to impose his own code or to accommodate himself to the other.
We affirm on the contrary that he has to see every code including his own as criticizable in terms of‘Be aware’.
If you grew up in a society which is strange to me, I have first of all to acknowledge that its customary approvals and condemnations are as spontaneous in you as are your more personal reactions.
I have to acknowledge too that since you ought to be aware from your fellow's viewpoints and incline towards their benefit as well as your own, and ought also to be aware that individuals cannot benefit themselves or each other by community without agreeing on common rules, the rules you follow in acting towards your fellows should be those of your community and not of mine.
If I myself joined your community, I should be obliged to adapt myself to your code, even if my spontaneous approvals and disapprovals did not change.
Up to this point, ‘Be aware’ instructs me to judge individuals by their own code, not my own.
However, it no more obliges me to apply without question your standards to you than mine  to myself.
A standard is acceptable on the authority of ‘Be aware’ to the extent that, when most aware of the recurring situation to which it applies from the viewpoints of those affected by it, one is spontaneously moved to act as it prescribes — which is what makes the standard feel right.
But would you and your fellows spontaneously so react if you could break through traditional assumptions to a fuller awareness of the recurring situation?
Would you so react to the particular situation which confronts us now, if you were not applying the standard mechanically?
If the prescribed action affects others outside your community, would you so react if aware from their viewpoints?
This last question is crucial; if the condition is satisfied, different codes may prescribe different behaviour within the societies they organize yet still be reconciled, never contradicting each other 's judgements of the same person or action.
The ethics of the universal religions take a different course in pursuit of objectivity, seeking to break out from the limitations of local custom by submitting to standards acceptable from the viewpoints of all mankind.
But on the present approach the search for universal standards is irrelevant to the objectivity of right and wrong; it is in the nature of standards, which must alter with changing conditions and vary in stringency and applicability to particular cases, to be both a help and a hindrance to discovering the objective worth of a particular act.
A socially accepted code, whatever its pretensions to universality, will in practice be moulded not only by ‘Be aware’ but by the ubiquitous ‘We are better than you’and the equally mindless ‘You are stronger than we are’which can cow us into doubting our superiority.
No amount of reflection on first principles will stop a Christian from assuming that the morality demanded of women, which in Islam he judges to be imposed by the physically stronger sex in its own interests, is in his own religion true to the equality of the sexes before God; not until women become conscious of and vocal about their own interests does he appreciate that the difference from Islam has from the very first been only one of degree.
Although the sociologists and anthropologists are too polite to mention it, social codes in general including in these changing times whichever one was brought up in oneself by the preceding generation, can be seen from a sufficient distance to have been in large part shaped by gross delusions about the cosmos and about man, and by a brutal ignorance of everyone outside one's own people, sex and class.
We are not denying that in the case of an alien culture one has less right to criticize than in one's own, out of lack of experience of what it can be like to live in it.
However, if a people sacrifices all strangers to the sun, because it will burn out unless nourished by human blood, it would be unduly humble to think that they have as much right to their opinion as we have.
If they learned a sounder astronomy and a clearer insight into how things look through the eyes of strangers, they would act differently, and better, because in greater awareness.
What can be said for them is that if the High Priest is acting in the fullest awareness at present attainable by his people, it is right for him to perform the sacrifice, just as it would be right for a Western onlooker to try to dissuade him; he is not like a Nazi who has voluntarily shut himself off from the knowledge of biology and history and the personal sensitivity attained by the culture of the Weimar Republic.
Here a question may be raised as to just what we mean when we think of ourselves as plunged by the twentieth century into a chaos of relativism.
In relativism, so it is said, every valuation is debased to ‘a matter of taste’, on which anyone's opinion is as good as anyone else's.
Yet even in cuisine, from which the metaphor of ‘taste’ comes, people who take food seriously do not think of their preferences as relativistic in this sense.
They do give weight to the judgements of the most aware, those who have educated themselves to discriminate between flavours most accurately.
Not that I have to make the same choices as someone I acknowledge to be more discriminating, since my differently constituted palate may react differently, but my own choice will be better informed if I heed nuances which I would have missed if he had not pointed them out.
We also generalize about the taste of the discriminating and set up standards, useful as guides as long as one does not credit them with greater authority than a considered choice which violates them, but not without the suspect motives and tyrannical pretensions of standards in morals; if you show signs of food-and-wine snobbery, I had better when listening to your recommendations take care to distinguish what I sense on my tongue from an affected taste.
There is an objectivity behind the subjectivity of our preferences which entitles you to recommend to me a dish which you do not choose yourself and which I have hitherto been repelled by, but may come to like if I can forget my prejudices and for the first time attend closely to the flavour.
This is just the objectivity which is to be claimed in general for the good; what is good for me now is not necessarily good for you or for me at other times, nor even what I now spontaneously prefer, it is what anyone would spontaneously prefer for me if sufficiently aware from my present viewpoint.
If this is relativity it is like Einstein's, by which it is not that you can make any measurement come out as you please, but that from any spatio-temporal viewpoint you can estimate what will be the right measurement from any other.
In the fluidity of contemporary values we do indeed sink into a relativism for which your opinion is worth as much or little as mine whenever we lose faith in awareness itself, and surrender to irrationalism.
But to the extent that rationality continues to prevail, we have long since been submitting all codes to ‘Be aware’, without noticing that this imperative is creative of values as well as destructive.
We may be nostalgic for the security of those old standards which have been dissolved by changing conditions and needs, and by the opening up of viewpoints which have only lately become articulate, of women, working-class, blacks, Third World, homosexuals.
It may seem that if we succeed in adapting our values to such disturbances instead of losing them altogether, it is because we still retain some vestige of a Christian and liberal moral tradition a memory of ‘Do unto others…’ at the roots of social habit, which saves us from the collapse into competing egoisms into which deepening conflicts are perpetually driving us.
This supposition is mistaken, according to the argument of this book; the imperative to become equally aware from different spatial, temporal and personal viewpoints is independent of moral traditions and habits, and we need not doubt that under any conditions spontaneity will continue to channel itself in selfish or unselfish directions with inequality or equality of awareness.
In so far as the fear of relativism is of it becoming even for the most aware a matter of taste whether one is selfish or unselfish, compassionate or cruel, the fear is misplaced.
However, the consensus  about the value of particular reactions which we have declared theoretically conceivable is not practically attainable in times of perpetual and world-wide interaction, conflict and change.
The danger is of a breakdown, in the disorientation of excess of information, the compass needle going wild as multiple pulls drag it hither and thither, and then a self-defensive shutting off of information and lapse into irrationalism.
1.5 Analogizing
Traditionally it has been assumed that thinking, whether about value or about fact, has to be fully detached from the spontaneous, which engages with it only as emotion biasing judgement.
We have argued that for questions of value reason cannot achieve this independence.
That the same is true of questions of fact is a conclusion that lately has become increasingly difficult to resist.
There, however, the spontaneous currents which reason navigates are not inclinations but those analogizing processes already discussed briefly in an earlier chapter, with particular reference to simulation.
The sciences were at one time supposed to generalize from observations by a logical operation called induction, claimed to free them from dependence on the merely analogical thinking which prevailed in the mediaeval proto-sciences, and which regrettably remain for the time being indispensable in dealing with everyday problems.
But this involved a misunderstanding of analogizing.
It is not that on the borders of logic there is a loose form called argument from analogy, but that all thinking starts from a spontaneous discrimination of the like and the unlike, and tendency to group the similar in categories and expect similar consequences from similar conditions.
The problem, as with inclination in the case of questions of value, is whether reason ever quite lifts itself out of reach of spontaneous analogizations, or whether its function remains limited to organizing, criticizing and choosing between them.
The difficulty in establishing a clear break from analogization arises at all stages, in defining terms and in observation as well as in induction itself.
The similarities between things called by the same name are indefinite and fluctuating; one tries to pin terms down by definition, so that they can be used for strict inference, but Wittgenstein showed that in the vocabulary of natural languages the similarities are ‘family resemblances’, by which A may be like B in one respect and B like C in another, but A like C in neither, so that it is useless to look for common characteristics by which to define the word which names them all.
It seems too that analogizing is so deeply involved not only in thinking but in perception that there is no hope of escaping from it by isolating pure observations from which induction can start.
Thus it has been shown experimentally that, because we all expect playing cards to fall into familiar sets, a briefly exposed black four of hearts will be perceived as a red four of hearts or black of spades.
This effect can vitiate scientific observation, as when seventeenth century experimenters, familiar with the concepts of post-Galilean mechanics but not of electrostatic attraction and repulsion, regularly reported observing chaff falling as though by gravitation, or mechanically rebounding from the electrified bodies which attracted them.
Above all, there is the doubt as to whether induction itself is more than a logical fiction to justify the generalizations which regularly spring from spontaneous analogization.
In everyday affairs we formulate a generalization when we find ourselves beginning to expect consequences as before to follow when conditions are as before.
It is not clear that one has to postulate anything more than a reaction like Pavlov's dog learning to anticipate its dinner whenever it hears the bell.
This is not to deny that it is an intelligent reaction, and that the sense of when to trust the analogy between present and former situations is in some individuals very intelligent indeed, but there is nothing in that to distinguish it from the other insights and hunches by which we instantaneously synthesize similarities and differences too fine and complex to be analysed before a change in the situation obliterates them.
There has been a long resistance to accepting that, in spite of the logical stringency with which laws in science are formulated, interrelated and tested, their origin has never ceased to be the same.
To establish laws of nature without analogizing would be possible only if there is indeed a logical operation for inferring from the particular to the universal, which induction is supposed to be.
But it has never been shown that induction is logically more respectable than a formalized argument from analogy, indeed that induction from some particulars leading to deduction of others is anything else but a roundabout argument from analogy.
The admission that laws of nature cannot be established by induction became possible only with Karl Popper's demonstration that they are sufficiently assured by a continued failure to refute them, the rationality of a claim depending not on its origin but on its success in surviving criticism.
Strictly universal statements (such as‘All men are mortal’) are in principle unverifiable and are tested by trying to falsify them, while strictly existential statements (such as ‘Unicorns exist’) are in principle unfalsifiable and tested by trying to verify them.
This solution induces vertigo if one thinks in terms of a self-contained realm of observation and inference; does it mean that the most you can say of Einstein's physics is that it has not yet been refuted, which can be said equally of ‘Unicorns exist’?
But it no longer seems so queer if one thinks of rationality as starting not in inference from observations but in the testing of spontaneous expectations, just as in our theory of valuation it starts from choice between spontaneous inclinations.
My expectations from analogy with the past, like a dog's, are sometimes realized, sometimes disappointed; if the mechanism were not often effective it would not as it evolved have been spared by natural selection; but I, as a rational being, want to be able to judge when it is reliable.
To sort out which expectations are sound or unsound, a procedure to falsify the unsound (as with universal statements) will be just as effective as one to verify the sound (as with the existential).
It is from the chaos of spontaneous analogizing that creativity breaks into the ordered by closed realm of analytic thinking.
Nothing prepares for the glimpse of a new analogy.
When a thinker unravels previously unnoticed implications of a familiar idea, one seems stupid to have missed them oneself; but anyone who discerns a similarity which runs athwart the current categories, a poet by metaphor  or a scientist by a new model or paradigm, can strike us with astonishment and awe, as a genius whose spontaneous flash illuminates what no logical operation within the frame of accepted concepts could have disclosed.
Donald Schon has shown how the displacement of a concept by analogizing not only initiates new thoughts but also, by changing the concept itself, forces one to rethink the old.
He discards the assumption to which most of us still cling (if only because the ground seems to melt under our feet if we think otherwise) that we can clearly distinguish the literal and metaphorical uses of a word, fix the literal by definition, and leave the metaphorical to the poets.
Schon argues that  it is time to recognize that scientific as well as poetic language is riddled with metaphor, that there is no clear line between literal and metaphorical, and that a perfect system of mutually definable terms is not even conceivable outside logic and mathematics.
One of his most striking illustrations, highly relevant to our own use of the term ‘viewpoint’, is the constellation of visual metaphors embedded in cognitive vocabulary.
I am presumably using words literally when the metaphor is a matter only of etymology (‘insight’), and feel still more confident of it when the etymology belongs to the Latin ancestor of the word (‘intuition’, from intueor ‘gaze at’).
I am also rather confident of speaking literally when I say ‘It was enlightening’ or ‘I discovered that…’, since ‘enlighten’and ‘discover’are not commonly used directly of lighting up or unscreening; but what of ‘It was illuminating’or ‘I uncovered the fact that…’?
When I speak of ‘seeing’ or ‘showing’a truth which becomes ‘apparent’, of ‘lucid’, ‘clear’or ‘obscure’ideas, of ‘points of view’or ‘aspects of a situation’, of ‘shedding light’on a matter or ‘being in the dark’about it, my language becomes more and more plainly metaphorical.
Nor is it quite obvious on second thoughts that even in the most literal usages the visual metaphor is wholly dead; however accurately ‘insight’ may be defined in a dictionary, could I handle the word with any confidence without being guided by its grammatical and semantic affinities with ‘sight’?
No doubt many users of the word ‘introspection’ are unaware of its Latin etymology (from introspicio ‘look within'), yet they are surely influenced by its affinities with ‘inspect’, ‘spectator’, ‘spectacle’; otherwise, why do they claim to introspect entities as not physical but mental because not extended in space, treating introspection as analogous with sight, which reveals spatial extension, rather than with hearing, smell or taste, which just as much as consciousness of love or anger, hope or fear, exhibit temporal change without spatial extension?
Even if one does think of self-consciousness as perceiving one's own activities rather than heeding them (as one also heeds the perceived), there is no obvious reason why one should not be perceiving as thought and emotion what to the eye would be neural process, just as when, with the same experience of temporal change without spatial extension, one hears as sound what one would see as vibrations.
The analogizing of knowing to seeing may pervade the concrete experience of coming to know, in the mystic's vision flooded with light; or it may be explicit in parable, as in Plato's of mankind misled by illusory appearance as prisoners in a cave who see only the shadows on the wall.
Or it may set the direction of a programme of research, as when the Gestalt psychologists extended their primarily visual concept of ‘insight’ into a gestalt (literally ‘shape’) from perception to  thinking.
A very striking example of a philosopher dominated by the visual metaphor is Descartes, of all the one who made the most radical attempt to break away from the preconceptions of common experience and establish knowledge on purely rational foundations.
He must have supposed himself to be using a language absolutely purged of metaphor when he wrote at the grand climax of the Discourse on method 
…
And having noticed that there is nothing whatever in this ‘I think, therefore I am’ which assures me that I say the truth, other than that I see very clearly [je vois très clairement ]that to think it is necessary to be, I judged that I could take it as a general rule that the things which we conceive very clearly and very distinctly [que nous concevons fort clairement et fort distinctement ]are all true…
The words are easily accepted as an appropriate dress to clothe a perfectly abstract thought, yet throughout Descartes' philosophy, as Schon says, ‘it suggests itself that intuition is displaced seeing; the ‘clarity and distinctness'’ of ideas is a displaced clarity of objects; and the light of reason is a displaced theory of the eye, the eye of the mind, containing covertly the ancient doctrine that the eye projects.
its own light'.
Nevertheless one can hardly hope to discuss knowledge in a language any less metaphorical than Descartes' (I have myself a few paragraphs back analogized not only to seeing but to ‘glimpsing’ and being ‘illuminated’by a ‘flash’, not only to clarity but to drawing a ‘clear line’).
It appears impossible to detach oneself from the visual analogy sufficiently to criticize it, without finding another to put in its place or balance against it.
Among other metaphors there is a rich cluster based not on sight but on touch, some likewise submerged in Latin etymologies (‘conceive’, ‘apprehend’, ‘comprehend’, from concipio ‘seize together’,apprehendo ‘grasp’,comprehendo ‘grasp together’), others overt (‘be in touch’, ‘grasp’ something, ‘catch on’to it, ‘get the point’, ‘feel’that it is ‘palpably’true).
The two sets of metaphors have persisted side by side, not only in the West since the ancient Greeks, but in other civilizations as well(Chinese ming ‘bright’ is the ordinary word for the enlightenment of the sage, which is often compared to a mirror reflecting things exactly as they are, while te ‘get’is used of insight; ‘I've got it!’says the disciple to his master as he catches on to the Tao).
Metaphors of grasping call attention to the active process of thinking rather than to static and distinct thoughts, and make it easier to understand that we interpret and organize rather than passively reflect.
The contrast between the tactile and the visual metaphors makes it plain how the latter encourage assumptions very characteristic of Cartesianism, that the clear and distinct ideas reflect things unaltered in the mind like brightly lit objects in front of our eyes.
As for‘aware’, its associations are with the cognate ‘ware’, ‘beware’, ‘wary’, ‘warn’; the analogy is with putting oneself on guard against a peril, a vigilance imposed by pressing need or by duty.
It predisposes us to think of coming to know, not simply as active in itself, but as inseparable from reacting to the object and acting in reply.
A seminal influence in this style of thinking has been Gilbert Ryle's exposure of the category mistake, which implies that the most logically organized case may crumble because it turns out to depend on unnoticed analogies.
To pick  once again examples relevant to awareness, philosophers have often argued on the assumption that since an observer cannot be mistaken about what he sees or hears (although he may mistakenly suppose that he has seen or heard it), or a thinker about what he knows, there must be infallible operations by which to arrive at this certainty.
Ryle points out that in being impressed by the certainty of the seen and the known, one is assuming that seeing and knowing are analogous with looking and thinking, so that it becomes a problem how they escape the fallibility of these operations; he invites us to shift ‘see’ and ‘know’to the category of achievement verbs such as‘find’and ‘cure’, which are related to ‘seek ‘and ‘treat’as ‘see’and ‘know’to ‘look’and ‘think’, but do not tempt us to suppose that there are infallible methods of discovering lost articles or restoring to health.
This approach has radical implications:
(1)
Theories about perception and knowledge which it has seemed possible to prove or disprove a priori turn out to depend on concealed analogies; with the exposure of the analogy their foundations collapse.
(2)
Neither the old nor the new analogy is logically derived; the former is rooted in habit, the latter emerges by a flash of insight.
(3)
Once the new analogy is recognized, it can be compared with the old and shown to be more adequate, in that it dissipates previously insoluble problems.
The choice of the new analogy is not arbitrary, but neither is it justified by a rigorous proof; by the conceptual readjustment problem-solving becomes easier.
(4)
One escapes the old analogy only by submitting to another; the role of logic, even when it is suspected that there is something wrong at the foundations of the argument, is confined to applying and criticizing concepts thrown up by the spontaneous process of analogizing.
In the sciences it is a commonplace, not at first sight disturbing, that physics began by simulating Euclid's demonstrations in geometry, and that the inverse square law of gravitation became the model for another in electro-magnetism, that ‘waves’ of sound or light are suggested by waves on water, and the genetic ‘code’by language.
But Thomas Kuhn has argued that even the concepts and laws become intelligible in practice only as components of a disciplinary matrix which he calls the ‘paradigm’, in which the scientist learns to apply them through concrete instances of problem-solving which serve as models in approaching new puzzles.
Observation and reason, far from establishing results on independent foundations, are guided by the paradigm, simulate the observation and reasoning in the exemplars.
Not of course that the reasoning is invalid, or that the paradigm itself cannot be questioned when it is sensed that something is going wrong; indeed it is its destiny to lead eventually to intolerable anomalies and be replaced by another.
But Kuhn insists that scientists never abandon a paradigm until they have found another, even at the cost of that supposed blasphemy against the spirit of science, the saving of hypotheses by ad hoc modifications when they conflict with observation.
Nor, when a more viable alternative does appear, are they necessarily much bothered if it reopens issues peripheral to the main line of advance which seemed to be already settled.
The new paradigm must pass critical tests to survive, but it is born as spontaneously as the metaphors of a poet:
Paradigms are not corrigible by normal science at all.
Indeed, as we have already seen, normal science ultimately leads only to the recognition of anomalies and to crises.
And these are terminated, not by deliberation and interpretation, but by a relatively sudden and unstructured event like the gestalt switch.
Scientists then often speak of ‘the scales falling from the eyes’ or of the ‘lightning flash’that ‘inundates’a previously obscure puzzle, enabling its components to be seen in a new way that for the first time permits its solution.
On other occasions the relevant illumination comes in sleep.
That all thinking is grounded in analogization shows up especially clearly when we try to come to grips with the thought of another civilization.
The concepts which it assumes as self-evident, until persistent failure to solve a problem calls attention to them, appear to an outsider as strange metaphorical structures to be examined and re-examined as he learns to find his way around the conceptual scheme.
To take an example from my own professional field, sinology, the first Christian missionaries in China were confronted with the Neo-Confucian cosmology, for which the universe is composed of something called ch'i and ordered by something called li.
Ch'i is a universal fluid out of which bodies condense and into which they dissolve.
At its densest, as in a stone, it is inert, but the more tenuous it is the more freely it moves, for example as the air we breathe; even the void is ch'i at the ultimate degree of  rarefication .
Inside the denser ch'i of the living body flow more  rarefied currents which circulate and activate it, moving freely as breath, less freely as blood.
The concrete meaning of the word in ordinary language is in fact ‘breath’, and the alternations of breathing out and in are the paradigms for the ch'i in its active phase moving, expanding, rarefying as the ‘Yang’, and in its passive phase reverting to stillness, contracting, solidifying, as the ‘Yin’.
This duality accounts for the generation and alternation of opposites throughout nature, light and dark, moving and still, male and female.
Since ch'i occupies the place in Chinese cosmology corresponding to matter in ours, Westerners took a long time to grasp how very different it is from what we understand by matter.
Early in the present century S. Le Gall was still translating ch'i by matière .
A passage by the Neo-Confucian Chang Tsai (1020–1077), translatable as
The assembly and dispersal of the ch'i in the T'ai-hsü (‘Supreme Void’) is like ice congealing and melting in water
is rendered by Le Gall
‘La condensation et les dispersions des atômes [my italics]dans la T'ai-hiu peuvent se comparer à la fonte de la glace dans l'eau’.
Although Chang Tsai's comparison with water shows clearly that the ch'i is a continuum and not an aggregate of atoms, the analogy with matter is so deep in Le Gall's preconceptions that he assumes the component atoms to be implicit in the word ch'i of the Chinese text.
A reader asking the important question ‘Is there atomism in Chinese philosophy?’ would find the wrong answer embedded in an actual quotation from a Chinese philosopher.
As for li , it is pattern, structure, order; the concrete uses of the word are for veins in jade and the grain of wood.
The li as a whole is the cosmic pattern which lays down the lines along which nature and man move, which harmonizes opposites with complementary functions, Yin and Yang, ruler and subject, father and son, and alternates day and night, birth and death, the rise and fall of dynasties, in regular cycles, diverging downwards to the minutest detail of texture and converging upwards to the unity in which everything is interrelated.
The li is not obeyed or defied like a law, one goes either with or against the grain of it, as in chopping wood.
Le Gall translated it by forme , thus by the choice of two words remoulding the whole Neo-Confucian cosmology after the analogy of Aristotelian form and matter.
J. Percy Bruce chose for his equivalent ‘law’, and so incorporated into the Neo-Confucian terminology itself the wrong answer to the question ‘Are there laws of nature in China?’, a misunderstanding which Joseph Needham in elucidating the concepts of Chinese science had to analyse at length.
But to think of Le Gall and Bruce as making mistakes which we now avoid would miss the whole point.
There are no exact equivalents for li and ch'i among our concepts, and there is no way of approaching them except by breaking out from or awakening to one analogy after another.
Approaching this cosmology, it is natural for an outsider to suppose that the Chinese can think only concretely, after the analogies of breathing or the veins in jade (a supposition encouraged by misunderstandings of Chinese script as a kind of picture-writing), while he thinks abstractly; that the Chinese are wrong and he is right (for is not the universe in fact composed of matter obeying the laws of nature?); that the Chinese are trapped within an unchanging conceptual scheme while he is free to go wherever reason bids.
However, to take the first point first, the Chinese concepts appear concrete to us only because the inquiring outsider, unlike the insider who habitually thinks with them, needs to fix his attention on their metaphorical roots.
He is much less conscious of the metaphors behind his own ‘matter’ and ‘law’, which however he must rediscover if he wants to explore the differences to the bottom.
He himself thinks of matter after the analogy, if not actually of the timber which is the concrete meaning of Greek hulè and Latin materia , at any rate of the ‘materials’ utilized in making an artefact; and the usage of ‘matter’has behind it a larger model, of a universe created by God for a purpose, from which the transparently metaphorical ‘laws of nature’also derive.
Indeed we no longer employ the word with full assurance, or are confident of what we mean by philosophical ‘materialism’, now that we are forbidden to think of atoms as little balls out of which a universe could be constructed; twentieth century physics has less substantial entities which would slip through one's fingers.
As for the metaphor of ‘law’, its persisting power is evident whenever someone, pondering the determinist thesis that even his own actions are ‘bound by’, are ‘subject to’, ‘obey’ the laws of nature, finds himself thinking as though he ought to be conscious of his own resisting will, as he is when submitting to human laws.
Secondly, there can be no sense in insisting that the universe is composed of matter and not of ch'i .
The former concept had a crucial historical advantage at the birth of mechanics; Western thinkers approaching things as materials which  stay put until the craftsman or builder reaches for them, would not have started trying to measure how the inert is moved by external forces if they had been thinking in terms of inherently active ch'i .
The advantage however is accidental, and brings with it difficulties of its own; assuming that matter, unlike ch'i , is inert until moved, it took some time to arrive at the thought of inertia as either rest or uniform motion in a straight line.
The concept of ch'i was not without local advantages.
predisposing the Chinese to think of blood as circulating and of the earth as having condensed out of a more fluid state (hence the fossil sea shells found up in mountains).
Nowadays, with the boundary between mass and energy abolished, the advantage might be said to have passed to ch'i ; yet it would be absurd to suggest that the Chinese have been proved right, since the advantages and disadvantages depend on which problems happen to be current.
There can be no right or wrong, true or false, for the primary stock of concepts from which thinking starts; they reflect classifications of the similar and the different guided by past needs, and the inherited categories prove themselves useful or misleading in the course of putting them to service.
The concepts of each civilization, like the soil of its homeland, have been cultivated by a long tradition of directed effort, but in the last resort are not invented but given.
Thirdly, there is no difference in kind which entitles us to think of the concepts of civilizations other than our own as static and imprisoning.
(There are differences in degree, for the unprecedented acceleration of Western civilization since the fifteenth century does indeed make all others seem static by comparison.)
The Chinese cosmology based on li and ch'i goes back only to the Neo-Confucian movement of the Sung dynasty (AD 960–1279), a conceptual revolution which can itself be understood in Kuhnian terms as a response to the breakdown of an older paradigm.
The concepts themselves have an earlier history on the margin of the philosophical tradition, and were changed in being drawn to the centre.
In the older Chinese cosmology Heaven ordains by its decree everything which man must accept as unalterable by his actions, the nature he is born with, the moral rules he should obey, the changes of fortune and the day of his death.
Confucians ever since Mencius (fl. 320 BC) were very much concerned with the problem that if, as seems evident, there is evil in the nature which man receives from Heaven, to do evil in accordance with one's nature would seem to have the authority of Heaven.
During the intervening 1,500 years, even in the periods of least philosophical activity, we find Confucians debating whether human nature is good, or bad, or mixed, or neutral, or good in some and bad in others.
Ch'eng Yi (1033–1107) and Chu Hsi (1130–1200) solved the problem to the satisfaction of later Confucians by changing the paradigm.
Heaven, its decree, and other related concepts, were reinterpreted as different aspects of li .
Man's basic nature was identified with the li which, to the extent that his ch'i is permeable by it, patterns his behaviour in the moral order which belongs within cosmic order.
His basic nature, then, is morally good.
The ch'i however varies in density from person to person, and the line that I should follow may be hard to discern through the turbid obscuring ch'i of which I am composed.
The individual's congenitally imperfect constitution is commonly described as his nature, but is not to be confused with his basic nature.
The effect of disciplining and training myself morally  is to refine my ch'i to a perfect transparency; then the li show through.
and it becomes effortless to live in accord with my nature.
In the arts it has become over the last century not the exception but almost the rule for the innovator at the crucial time of forming his style to find something in another culture from which he can learn, an influence not superficial, as in eighteenth century chinoiserie, but radical (the Impressionists and the Japanese woodcut, Debussy and the Javanese gamelan, Frank Lloyd Wright and Japanese architecture, the Imagists and Japanese and Chinese poetry, the Cubists and African sculpture, Henry Moore and the Mexican Chac Mool, Brecht and Chinese theatre, Artaud and Balinese dance).
When Fritjof Capra claims the same kind of affinities between twentieth century physics and Indian and Chinese philosophy (although not the same direct influence), one is at first inclined to demur.
There can be no significant relation between a hypothesis in our physics and a superficially similar idea in a tradition which never developed the procedures of mathematization and controlled experiment.
But that would be to miss the point.
Capra's parallels are between not hypotheses but concepts, for example the ch'i and the quantum field.
Whatever one thinks of his comparisons, there is no difficulty in conceding in principle that physicists breaking with Newtonian concepts would be struggling to unlearn distinctions and assimilations which other cultures will never have made in the first place, so that the fundamentally different conceptualizations even of a pre-literate culture might illuminate him.
In the changing conceptual frame inside which a science progresses, it would be as out of place to look for progress as in the styles of an art.