

SHOE GUIDE 92
200+ models reviewed
£1.75 CANADA $3.95
NUMBER ONE FOR ROAD RUNNING AND ATHLETICS
WIN! £16,000 of Nike Gore-Tex rainsuits
EXCLUSIVE
Rosa Mota London, Barcelona and beyond p40
After 26.2 — vital recovery advice
MAY 1992 Running ISSUE 133
FROM THE EDITOR
We all admire the athlete who doesn't know the meaning of losing, don't we?
You know, the champion who is consistently ahead of the opposition of the day.
If this dominance continues over a period of years though, how often does the feeling creep up on you that you'd like to see this champion really tested, even beaten?
I must admit I was starting to get this admittedly ungenerous feeling a bit towards Rose Mota before last year's World Championships.
In Tokyo, however, recovering from major surgery, she dropped out after 16 miles.
The women's distance duel of the year — Mota against Boston winner Wanda Panfil — was a non-starter.
Now, with the news that Rosa is running London this weekend, there is just that slight question mark hanging over her in Olympic year to make things interesting.
Has she recovered fully?
We sent RUNNING's Deputy Editor Jayne Belcher to Rosa's home town of Oporto in Portugal last month to find out.
Her conclusion, which mark Shearman's photos support fully, is that she's relaxed and ready to run against all comers.
Our exclusive interview begins on page 40 and I'm sure you once you've read it, you'll be looking forward to Olympics as much as I am.
With this issue on sale just before the ADT London Marathon, we've packed in pages of practical information about after the race.
Why?
Because if you're running you won't have the time or energy to soak up more than the two pages of essential last-minute information starting on page 44.
But once you've finished, take our three steps to total recovery.
Firstly, read Practical Running this month which is jam-packed with advice that starts as soon as you cross the line.
Secondly, read Bruce Tulloh's words of wisdom (page 46) to plan the rest of your season — after a suitable rest, of course!
Thirdly, if you haven't already, take out a subscription to our sister publication, Peak Performance.
Launched 18 months ago, PP is unique: a newsletter that scans the world's sports science press and brings it to you in 12 pages of essential information each month.
We've a taster of what's in the latest issue in our Practical Running section and look out for our generous subscription offers in this issue.
I'm sure you'll agree that once you've read a copy, you'll wonder how you ever managed to do without it!
News EDITED by JAYNE BELCHER
London — the battle begins
One of the strongest domestic fields for many years — including three previous winner of the race — is set to line up for the London Marathon on April 12.
Allister Hutton, Mike Gratton and Veronique Marot are returning to the course which brought them victory in the eighties and they'll be joined by Berlin Marathon winner Steve Brace, who is using the London as part of his preparation for Barcelona.
Also in the line-up is Belgrave Harrier Paul Evans, who came ninth in last year's Carpi Marathon in 2:12:53, Dave Buzza, who clocked 2:17:37 in last year's London and Sam Carey, who recently came third in the English National Cross-Country Championships.
Another familiar face on the starting grid is Valli Harriers' Kevin Forster, who has twice finished runner-up at London in 1984 and 1988, but has not tackled the event for a couple of years.
They'll face a touch continental line-up, including last year's winner Yakov Tolstikov from the Commonwealth of Independent States, Poland's Jan Huruk and Mark Plaatjes, the South African-born runner who lives in America.
Boguslaw Maminski, the 1983 World steeplechase silver medalist, has chosen London to make his marathon debut.
The 36-year old is based in Italy.
Veronique Marot, who won London in 1989, heads a touch British team, which includes Andrea Wallace, who came seventh in Carpi in 2:31:36, and Angie Hulley, the 1990 Commonwealth Games bronze medalist and winner of this year's UK Cross-Country trials.
They are facing formidable opposition in the shape of last year's winner, Rosa Mota, who sees London as a warm-up for the Olympics, where she'll be defending her title and looking to put the disappointment of the World Championships in Tokyo last year behind her.
(Read our exclusive interview with Rosa Mota on page 40).
Germany's Katrin Dorre, who took bronze in Tokyo, will be looking to follow up her useful 2:27:34 run in the Osaka Women's Marathon earlier this year and the 1990 Commonwealth silver medalist Tani Ruckle from Australia, who was side-lined last season through injury, is a last-minute addition to the line-up.
She clocked 2:33:15 in Auckland to take the silver.
Brace, can he repeat the success he enjoyed in Berlin?
Marot — a previous winner at London
The Rhondda Heritage Park, an area dedicated to the once famous mining communities of the region, is the venue for a new half-marathon on May 17.
The Heritage Run ‘92, which has already signed up top marathoner Steve Brace, will start and finish in the Park.
It promises to be a fast, scenic and accurate course.
Further details are available from 
Fit to scream?
Sick and tired of election fever and politics?
Does the sight of Major, Kinnock or Ashdown make you instantly reach for your remote control?
It could be worse — you could live in the US where a would-be president must prove to be an Olympiad to make it to the White House.
In recent years the American public has demanded that a president is fit and healthy.
The phrase ‘fit to rule’, is taken literally in the US.
That's why 67-year old George Bush has been seen humiliating himself on a tennis court and going on daily runs.
Democratic contender Paul Tsongas added fitness to his campaign and took to the swimming pool to improve his image.
Of course the pool was lined with press photographers watching his every stroke.
His dip couldn't save his fight to be elected and he's now stepped down.
So, perhaps we're lucky just being able to watch our political leaders slug it our over speeches and television debates.
Think of the prospect of John Major lining up at the London Marathon, or Neil Kinnnock limbering up before taking to the squash courts.
Worse still, imagine Margaret Thatcher preparing for a dip.
Paddy Ashdown, on the other hand, is said to be one of the fittest MPs at Westminster but according to his camp, ‘he likes to keep his fitness regime out of the headlines’.
As the memories of our election battle start to fade, spare a thought for those across the sea; the Americans have got another six months of sporting endeavours to go before the presidential battle is over.
Can sport stand the strain?
The TV sprint for coverage
Good news is in the air for all you armchair viewers with satellite dishes as the battle of the TV channels begins in Olympic year.
Sports channel Sky Sports is looking to increase its coverage of athletics because of Barcelona and the spotlight falling on track and field.
For the first time ever the AAA Indoor Championships in Birmingham moved from ITV to Sky Television.
A company spokesman said they were also looking to cover four other domestic meetings and were negotiating to televise several overseas Grand Prix events.
Sky's coverage of the US Olympic trials began in February with th4 screening of the women's marathon and the company will be showing the men's marathon on April 11.
The highlight of the coverage will be the live screening from New Orleans of the US Track and Field Championships in June.
The Sky Sports representative said: ‘We have not shown a lot of athletics and we will be looking to see how viewers respond.
It will be interesting to see what they think.
In this Olympic year we are making a major commitment to athletics.’
A spokesman from ITV said: ‘Our contract gives us exclusive rights to screen 10 domestic, six outdoor and  three indoor events along with the Clubs Championships on Channel Four.
Unfortunately this coverage means that we have to let some top events go elsewhere.’
The BBC is planning to show an action-packed year of athletics, culminating in live coverage every day of the Olympics in Barcelona.
Over the two weeks of events, there will be more than 200 hours coverage with up to 10 hours a day on occasions.
BBC chiefs will, as usual, be sharing the coverage between BBC1 and BBC2.
‘We will be trying to cover as much of the Games as we can and athletics is one of the most popular,’ said an official.
The BBC kicked off its athletics year with the European Indoor Championships in Genoa.
The company says it will be ‘dipping in and out of the Grand Prix circuit,’ irrespective of whether the events are shown on satellite.
It plans to cover the final and around 10 other major GP meetings, including those in Oslo, Nice and Brussels.
The London Marathon (see story on page 6), the Boston Marathon, Great North Run and Newcastle Road Race are also on its priority list.
The official added: ‘There's another 12 months to run on the ITV's domestic deal and then it's up for grabs.
We cannot do anything about domestic events now, but certainly we would be keen to shown them.
We will just have to watch and see what happens.’
Smiles ‘n’ miles
Television cameras will also be on site to cover two more unusual road races this summer; the Blackpool Golden Mile and the Milton Keynes Straight Mile.
Both races will be included in ITV's 24-hour Telethon extravaganza, which aims to raise money for a number of charities.
Granada TV will be recording the Blackpool event on June 21; it's the first staging of the race and the route takes runners along the picturesque seafront.
More than 700 runners took part in the Milton Keynes Straight Mile last year.
The race gets underway on July 9 and Anglia TV will be there to capture the action.
Entry for both races is limited and late applications will only be able to take part in fun runs held after the main events.
Contact the organiser  Any runners who are able to raise more than £25 for charity will have to pay the £5.50 entry fee.
There will be races for both men and women, as well as for a variety of different age categories.
So don't forget the event, souvenir photographs of all runners will be taken on both days and specially designed T-shirts will be on sale.
Mum Eleanor back on the ultra trail
Two weeks after the premature birth of her fourth child, Eleanor Adams-Robinson, Britain's finest female, ultra-runner, is back on the road and expects to be competing at the European 100K Championships in Holland in September.
After those championships she has her sights set on a more demanding six-day track event in Australia; she set a world best for 538 miles at the equivalent event in 1990.
Her last major race was the World 100K Road Championships in Florence some 12 months ago.
She retained her own individual title at the event.
Soon after that success she became pregnant.
Her initial plan was to run right up to the birth, but on her doctor's advice she stopped four months into the pregnancy.
It was the first major break she's had during her career.
Unlike other higher profile running mothers, returning to training after the birth of a healthy son has been gentle for the 44-year old.
‘At the moment I'm only doing up to eight or nine miles a day.
I've tried to be sensible about getting back into it, which is strange for an athlete, and it's forcing me to temper my enthusiasm and take the training easy.’
‘I have to face the fact that I'm now the wrong side of 40.
You can't take a substantial break and expect to get back to your best form as easily as when you were, say, 20.’
‘With having such a long time off, I've lost a lot of speed but the endurance is still there, which of course is the key for anyone on the ultra scene.
I won't be in record-breaking form for the European Championships, but I expect to be competitive.
I'm not just going along to make up the numbers,’ says Adams-Robinson.
The Olympic marathon course has been given a thorough testing by 7000 runners taking part in the 14th Barcelona Marathon in March.
Work has finished to flatten out an uphill section towards the end of the course; officials were worried that the incline, along with the heat, could hamper many of the marathoners.
The course begins in the town of Mataro and was mostly flat until the last three kilometres.
Work was carried our on a car park, enabling a gentler gradient for the athletes.
The women's Olympic marathon takes place on July 31, while the men's race is on August 9; both events are being staged at 6.30pm.
The diet Coke Great London Run, a 10,000m race for women, will, for the first time, allow men to compete, this year, on October 18.
It was the biggest women-only race in the world with 46000 competitors.
A separate men's 10k race will take place after the women's.
The other diet Coke events are being staged in Tyneside on September 20 (and will include the official World Half-marathon Championships), Glasgow on August 23, Birmingham on September 27 and Portsmouth on October 122.
Police shot dead a man near the finish of the Los Angeles Marathon.
It's believed the man assaulted two officers and tried to snatch a gun from one of the officer's holsters.
Meanwhile, Ireland's John Treacy was winning the race in 2:12:28.
After a one-year hiatus the Honeywell Bracknell Half-marathon is back with a new route and a new date, June 7.
Last year's event had to be cancelled due to problems with the course, forcing organisers to switch to a new two-lap route mainly off the road.
Entry details are available from .
The tour kicks off at the Arches Theatre, Glasgow on May 10.
Anyone wanting to know the full list of dates,.
It'll run and run!
If ever a stage production was set to enjoy a long run, it must be the work being put on by the Glasgow-based ensemble company, The Golden Age Theatre.
Alan Sillitoe's The Loneliness of the Long Distance Runner has been adapted for the stage and is going on tour throughout Scotland in May and June during the Mayfest and Perth festivals.
The plays tells the story of Colin, an incorrigible young offender, who finds himself able to express his hatred of injustice, hypocrisy and exploitation through his cross-country running.
The book was made famous when Tom Courtenay played the role of Colin in Brian Forbes' film version.
Neil Packham is pictured as Colin in the stage version.
(See below for telephone details)
Farewell to Les Jones
Tributes have continued to pour in for British Team Manager Les Jones, who died after the European Indoor Championships in Genoa.
The popular 48 year-old customs officer from Belfast, was found dead in his hotel room.
It's believed he dies of a heart attack or stroke.
He was awarded the MBE in the 1991 New Year's Honour list and was Vice-Chairman of the British Athletics Federation and Chairman of the Northern Irish Federation.
BAF spokesman Tony Ward described him as ‘the best team manager Britain has had because he felt himself to be one of the athletes’, while Liz McColgan said he ‘wasn't just a friend through athletics, he was a personal friend as well’.
Linford Christie and Steve Cram were among the athletes who flew to Ireland to attend his funeral.
Jones served as Deputy Team Manager for four years and took over from Mike Turner in 1989.
He leaves a widow, Lesley, and daughter Kerri and son Simon.
Charities EDITED BY JAYNE BELCHER
Helping body and soul
Anyone keen to run should write for an application from (enclosing a stamp) to .
Or, if you are unable to take part, all donations would be welcomed.
Many of you may be feeling the inset of charity fatigue as the London Marathon 1992 becomes nothing more than a passing memory.
A huge £50 million has been raised for charity since the race started in 1981 and runners can pat themselves on the back for all the financial help they have given to worthy causes.
The trouble is that charity work never ends and the same can be said for the constant need for money to pay for research work, buy new hospital machinery or vehicles for disabled youngsters.
So, charity workers, up and down the country are asking you to put your feet up after London, take a rest and then come back eager to set new personal bests on the road/track and to raise more cash for the needy.
One of the most harrowing sights on our television screens was the pictures of the abandoned orphans in Romania.
In 1990 Anita Roddick from The Body Shop visited the country and was shocked into action by the desperate situation.
A group of volunteer workers from The Body Shop travelled to the remote village of Halaucest, in the northeast, and set about restoring orphanages.
By March 1991 three orphanages had been renovated and work is continuing to help those youngsters.
Now, The Body Shop wants to start another project to update a hospital for the terminally ill in Sculeni, near the Russian border, and has launched a fresh appeal to this end.
Staff say there is no heating or hot water and urgent help is needed.
That plea for assistance has been answered by two keen runners, Hilda Mills and Roseanne Partridge, from The Body Shop in Lewisham.
They are putting on a 10K race on Sunday May 10 called run for Romania.
The event is being held at Blackheath and starts at 11am.
A two-and-a-half fun run will take place at 10.30am.
The 10K costs £3.50 for club members and £6 for unattached runners.
Hilda and her husband Roger, a former 20K international race walker who took bronze in the 1974 European Championships, started East London Runners in 1982.
Roseanne and her husband Alan joined the club as novices and now run full and half-marathons.
Hilda says: ‘We think it's so important to raise money for this cause.
We considered what we could do to help and decided to link it with our interest in running.’
The race is limited to 500 runners and the Allied Irish Bank is giving £500 towards the prizes.
Are you struggling to find a particular product or feel you have a need which isn't being catered for?
If so, we'll try to solve your problem.
Address your enquiries to us at:
Products EDITED BY STEVEN SEATON
NEW ENERGY
For years the British confectionary industry has talked a lot of bunkum about its products.
Your average chocolate bar, far from being the energy snack advertisers would have you believe, is loaded with fat.
For the average distance runner fat is about as much use as a pocket watch.
Distance runners need carbohydrate.
This produces glycogen, the fuel muscles burn during exercise.
eating chocolate bars won't do any harm, but won't really help either.
Of course, some companies have noticed these deficiencies and introduced high carbohydrate bars which offer a far healthier balance of carbohydrate to fat.
But these tend to be expensive and don't taste too good.
As finishers at this year's ADT London Marathon will discover when they delve into their goodie bags.
Needlers has come up with a good compromise with the introduction of its New Energy Bar.
The caramel and crisped wheat milk chocolate bar, looks, costs and tastes like a regular bar, but carbohydrate constitutes about 60 per cent, with fat down to around 30 per cent .
Of course, it's still not a perfect solution, but at only 30p a bar, it's a tasty and inexpensive snack which should provide a positive supplement to any runner's training diet.
The New Energy Bar is being launched at the ADT London Marathon exhibition, but further details and local stockists are available from .
Brooks continues its commitment to the sport of triathlon by sponsoring the British Triathlon team for 1992.
It's the first time the team has had an official kit sponsor.
The deal will include racing strips, tracksuits and other related products.
ATHLETE'S DIARY
Training logs are one of those things you simply do or don't take to.
Plenty of runners keep them religiously, and can boast uninterrupted records covering years, even decades.
Others can't reliably recall what they did last week, let alone last year.
The Athlete's Diary is one of a growing number of products available to assist the former group and encourage the latter to mend their lackadaisical ways.
It's a software product designed to run on either PC or Macintosh computers, and offers not just the facility to record, but also to analyse your training performances over several sports simultaneously.
Whether or not computerised logging will appeal to you depends largely on your attitude towards computers.
If you're comfortable with them, you'll find TAD simple to use, and the mercifully short manual guides you painlessly through the use of what is a pretty simple piece of software.
Too simple, perhaps, to justify the price tag of £39.95, but if that doesn't deter you, TAD offers a well-structured and systematic look at your training, from a number of perspectives.
It can, for instance, produce a graph of your training programme in one or more sports, plotting your speed, duration or mileage trends.
Totals and averages are available at the press of a key, and the programme allows you to log your training against a wide variety of parameters, and with a choice of units.
One neat feature is the ability to select and analyse specific runs, allowing you to plot your performances on a given course.
More information available .
USA SPORT
In the March issue of RUNNING Magazine, Mr G. Bamtik, a budding triathlete from Kent, complained about sports manufacturers who seem blind to the needs of bifocal wearers.
Well, not all are so discriminatory.
USA Sport, a company aptly located in Oakley, Hampshire, markets a range of sports glasses for any prescription condition.
In fact, anyone using ordinary glasses can wear the company's Supervisor range which, in essence, are glasses with a sports shade tacked on in front.
At first sight the Supervisor looks much like any other pair of sunglasses fronted by a mirrored, shatter-resistant polycarbonate shade.
But all is not quite as it appears.
Behind the sun shade, neatly secured onto the top of the frame, are a pair of ordinary plastic prescription lenses.
Once in place there is very little movement and although two lenses are heavier than once, after a few runs you hardly notice the difference.
Prescription lenses are readily available from your local optician.
Once you have a pair you can link up with any of the nine interchangeable lenses in the Supervisor range.
As ever, such technology comes at a heft price…£39.95…but that's favourably comparable with other sports shades on the market.
If you wear bifocals, or if contact lenses are simply not an option, the Supervisor certainly offers an alternative in the trendy world of modern sports shades.
For more details contact 
If you're a Reebok Pump convert, you may be interested to hear where the company is heading with new technology.
Reebok recently unveiled its future plans, in the guise of Inst-Pump and Pump Custom Cushioning.
Both developments allow the wearer to adjust an inflatable bladder (which varies according to the style of the shoe) with a hand-held carbon dioxide container, to create a more precise fit.
If that isn't enough, one of the shoes will even feature tiny electronic pressure gauges with digital read-outs.
You may well ask if such precision is really necessary!
Shoes featuring this technology will make their debut in 1993, but somehow it's hard to envisage the serious runner rushing out to buy them.
Those of you with narrow feet will be pleased to hear that New Balance has extended it popular M997 training show to a 2A fitting.
The British-made show is now available in four fittings.
Forum READERS' LETTERS
WRITE IN AN WIN…a pair of Saucony shoes with the Saucony star letter.
Each month we have a pair of Saucony Shadow 5000 shoes to give away to the best letter on a running issue.
This high mileage trainer is one of the top shoes in the Saucony range and is available in both men's and women's models.
Fit for nothing
Since taking up running and cycling two years ago, I have suffered the ravages of chest infections, colds, blisters, aches, pains, general wibbly-wobbliness, strained ligaments (which kept me on crutches for a fortnight) and I've never felt better!
My training programme is reduced to hopping up and downstairs and out-sprinting other be-sticked people in the high street.
My long-suffering boss said the other day, ‘pity you've been poorly ever since you've been fit!’
I don't suppose she'll even understand.
Unequal opportunities
I recently completed in a 10K race.
The race itself was very well organised but I was absolutely amazed at the way in which the winning women were treated in comparison to the winning men during the prize giving ceremony later on.
The first three fastest men, the first 040, 050 and 060 men as well as the first three male teams were each presented with their prizes before any women were even mentioned.
The fastest man received a bottle of champagne compared to the fastest woman who got a bottle of wine for her efforts.
And the person awarding the prizes had to admit that he didn't know what her time had been, even though she had run a superb race and had beaten the course record by a full four minutes.
Why can't men and women receive equal treatment after a race?
It doesn't seem fair that women put in just as much effort, dedication and time as men, and are still treated in a second-class fashion.
MYSTERY ATHLETE NUMBER 1
Age 29 Male Australian marathon winner, Record holder for Britain's most popular half-marathon.
Disappointed in the 1991 World Championships.
High hopes for the Barcelona marathon.
Paying up
I am general secretary of a small road running club and I know I am not alone in thinking that the increase in regional affiliation fees for 1992 is excessive.
Our club pays £40 for road running only.
If we wished to compete on track or in cross-country races, the cost would double.
We have only 40 members, though, which makes competing quite a costly activity.
It seems, therefore, that small clubs are being penalised for their size.
Does the SEAA wish to see us disappear altogether?
Also, I received a note in March ‘91, sent with the proposed SEAA constitution, which stated: ‘All clubs who affiliate to the SEAA will automatically affiliate to the county in which their headquarters is located.’
A few months later, I received a letter from Surrey County AA which stated: ‘…affiliations to BAF do not include a county affiliation,’ and was consequently asking for a fee.
Could someone please help clarify this confusion?
Out of the Running?
I am an avid reader of your magazine and eagerly look forward to each month's issue.
I have read it now from cover to cover — every word of it for the past seven years — since I first got hooked on running.
I find it thoroughly fascinating, but I am sorry to say that as much as I enjoy your magazine there never seems to be much advice or any articles for that matter, for women like me.
I am a club member, 50 in June and obsessed with running and keeping fit.
I always go hammer and tongs at my running and then wonder why I end up with chest pains sore throats, dead legs, etc.
So can I put in a plea?
Can we please have a column for us 50-year-olds?
Incidentally, I have been following Bruce Tulloh's programme for the London Marathon.
Why do I find it so hard to stick to?
Are we all that superfit?
All I want to do is finish the London under 4:20, perhaps with some help from your magazine.
Ed We are considering our Vets coverage.
So keep your eyes peeled !
Age old row
Further to the letter from T. Jenkins in the February issue, I would like to point out that the AAA has had minimum ages for road races for at least 30 years.
In the last few years, the AAA has made strenuous efforts to see that the age for distance rules are observed, not only for official races but also for fun runs, which are not subject to their control.
In addition, the police to their control.
In addition, the police are requiring promoters to observe the appropriate minimum age and failure to do so often results in permission being refused.
T Jenkins can now enter 10K races, as the minimum age for that distance is 15, but the number of road races open to runners in their early teens is very few.
Towering lack of success
I was most interested in Mark Blythe's article on racing up towers and high buildings around the world.
I'm sure several readers will wonder why we do have many similar races in Britain.
It is not for the want of trying.
Over the last three years, I have attempted to persuade both the Nat West Bank, with its building in the city of London, and the London Docklands Development Corporation, which supervised the building of Canary Wharf, the tallest office block in western Europe, to permit races to be staged — but without much success.
The owners believe that the buildings are for business and should never be used for recreational purposes, ignoring the enormous publicity that would be generated.
Perhaps other readers will have better luck.
WIN £16,000 WORTH OF RAINSUITS
Designed to whet your appetite
Sit down.
Take the phone off the hook.
Clear your mind of all distraction.
This is one page you have to read, and read carefully.
Failure to do so could cost you the chance of winning one of the best prizes RUNNING Magazine has ever offered.
In the past we've always made it easy for you.
This month we're asking for a little more.
But then we have a little more to give.
Actually we have A LOT more to give — £16,000 worth of Nike Gore-Tex suits to be precise.
It's a once-only chance.
The value of prizes has never been bigger, and with 100 suits to give away your chance of winning has never been greater.
But it isn't going to be a cake-walk.
We want you to earn it.
First we're going to send you on a treasure hunt, collecting information from the magazine.
Once you have the information you'll have to do a little deductive reasoning to piece an eight-letter anagram into a well known winning phrase.
It sounds complicated, but don't be discouraged — it isn't.
It just requires a little time and activity from the old grey matter.
If you can manage that, and, come out with the right answer, then there's a pretty good chance you'll have a smirk on your face the next time the heavens open.
Waiting for each of the 100 winners, is a Nike International suit, constructed from light-wight, fully breathable waterproof Gore-Tex.
Each of the jackets boasts a detachable hood, full-length zip, side pockets and Velcro sleeve fasteners.
To complete the suit there's a matching pair of Gore-Tex trousers which, like the jacket, have strategically located Scotchlite reflective patches to warn traffic of your presence at night.
It all comes in a black, white and ‘hot coral’(definitely looks pink to me!) colourway and retails at the tidy sum of £160.
How to win the treasure suit
Throughout the magazine are three short biographies of mystery Nike International athletes.
Your first task is to find them and identify the personalities.
If you read the magazine regularly and have a rudimentary knowledge of the sport, it shouldn't be a problem.
All the athletes are well-known international stars, none of them are British.
Now her comes the difficult part.
Spell out the name of each athlete.
from the first, an Australian marathon runner, take out the first two letters of his forename. from the second, an American sprinter, we want another two letters, this time the first two from his surname.
And from the last, another Australian distance runner, we want letters three and four from her married surname.
That gives you six letters.
Add these to two that we are giving you for free — T and U — and rearrange them into a familiar three-word phrase.
How to enter
Fill in the coupon below with your answer, name, address and size.
The return it to 
Rules
1.
Entries will not be considered from employees of Stonehart Leisure Magazines, Nike, or any company connected with the printing of distribution of the magazine.
2.
The closing date for the competition is May 11.
3.
There are no alternative prizes.
4.
The editor's decision is final and no correspondence will be entered into.
Vets, EDITED by steven seaton
Money Matters
This year, London has finally acquiesced.
For the first time, top Veterans at the marathon will receive financial reward for their labour.
Vet prize money is a long overdue development, likely to add a new measure of excitement to the sharp end of the field.
Overseas runners drown by the lure of the pound will inevitably confuse the equation of who eventually comes out on top.
The all powerful, but ageing New Zealander John Campbell, never one to turn down a pay day, will be favoured to improve on his 2:17:22 winning time from last year, that is if he shows up.
But if you're looking for a domestic challenger to knock King John off his throne, John Wheway may be your man.
But don't expect the unassuming islander to back you up on that view.
‘I just don't know how I'll run in London until after I've run Bath.
The overseas contingent is going to be the big unknown, but a lot depends on me and how I run.’
‘I'm certainly not in 2:12 shape at the moment but I'll be disappointed if I can't improve on my 2:23 from last year.
Even that would have made me third Vet, but is from good overseas runners come in, you could see a few run under 2:20; then I don't know where I'll be.
I could run five minutes faster than last year and still end up fifth, or lower.’
To be fair to a Wheway, last year's 2:23 at London is not a good indicator of current form.
But then neither is the 2:12:20 he produced in 1990.
A niggling hip injury, which has troubled him on and off over the past year and hampered his preparation, was closer to the root of his troubles than any age-related downswing.
The injury w£flared up again at the end of the year, but at least gave him a brief respite to demonstrate that being 40 was not a barrier likely to hold him back.
Living up to a burden of expectation is never easy.
But after joining the Veteran ranks in August, Wheway has not disappointed his public.
Nevertheless, he's maintained a fairly ambivalent attitude to the whole Veteran scene.
‘It's a positive thing, but then I wouldn't go to a Vets race that wasn't in some way useful to me.
I couldn't imagine, for example, going to the World Veteran Championships in Finland on my own.
If it fitted in with a family holiday, then I might go.
If it fits in with my running plans I'll do it, but not just to win a Vet Championship.
I'll run in the Bath Half-marathon instead of going to the Vets Cross-Country Championships in Wales.’
John Wheway, on course for a London payday
That said, the Vet scene has charged his zest for running which otherwise might have been swallowed up in the 40-something concentration on family, career and mortgage.
‘I would probably still be running anyway, but the Veteran scene has kept me motivated when I might have been just drifting around with my running.
It's definitely given me something to aim for.’
So far his aim has been good.
Two seemingly impressive performances in the Great North Run (1:05:14) and the Stroud Half (1:05:29) at the end of last year were both overshadowed by a record breaking run at Chelmsley on October 4.
His time of 48:52 remains a British Veteran best for 10 miles.
But even that could have been faster.
‘I really think I was holding back.
I went into the race after some good runs but with the injury earlier in the year, my training load was not up to its maximum.’
Once again, it's flagging below a level which would give him confidence for London, yet his form over shorter distances has been good, highlighted recently by a new course record of 38:20 at the Thorney 12K in Peterborough.
Converting that into a winning performance at London is another matter, hence his insistence on downplaying his chances of finishing in the money.
On form be should be well under 2:20, but how far under is still in the balance.
MYSTERY ATHLETE NUMBER 2 Age 24 American sprinter, 200m specialist.
Unbeaten in his last 38 races Golden certainty for the olympics.
He also had the fastest 400m time last year
At the races
Former IAAF Managing Director, Jon Wigley, led Invicta East to its first victory at the Southern Vets Cross-Country Championships.
In the women's race, Joyce Smith was ruing her luck.
The field, including eventual winner Sue Ogilvie, filed past as Smith tried to retrieve a shoe from the mud…
In ideal conditions M50 George Bettis sneaked inside two hours (1:52:35), the leading Vet on the day in 10th position…
After recovering from a virus infection, Veronique Marot (35:57) knocked almost four minutes off the course record in winning the Huddersfield Road Runners 10K…
Terry Guy (32:00) held off the challenge of clubmate Ray O'Fourman (32:44) to win the Vets race at the Warwick University 10K…
Elswick, led by second place M45 Harry Matthews, won the team event at the North Eastern Vets Cross-Country Championships.
Alan Catley won the individual event…
Paula Fudge (56:18) won a tight battle with W45 Anne Roden to win the women's section of the Woking 10.
Mike Hurd (51:55) was the first male Vet, yet finished eighth overall.
Grenville Tuck speeding to fourth in the 10-mile rankings
News shorts
Cardiff's Dic Evans established a new world track record for an M45 over 30 miles (3:00:56) and 50K (3:08:14).
The Welsh headmaster took almost seven minutes off the previous records in the rain and drizzle at the Les Croupiers track 40M race at Barry on March 1.
Evans adds the record to a distinguished career which also includes international vests for the four running disciplines of track, road, country and fell.
Entries for the World Veterans International Running Championships to be held in Birmingham on August 26 and 30, have already exceeded 500.
Dave Walsh, one of the event organisers, is confident that the final number will fall closer to 3000.
‘Apart from the top Americans, who won't come because there's no prize money, we're expecting practically all the top names,’ said Walsh.
Among the men already entered are  The women's event will see such names at  For an official entry form contact 
Don Thompson, the 59-year-old former Olympic walk champion, added his name to the exclusive ranks of the ‘100 club’.
He completed his 100th marathon in a respectable 3:48 at the Romney Marsh Marathon.
Continuing problems with a foot injury look likely to hold back Mike McLeod's Veteran career which started so po positively earlier this year.
Judging by his recent form though — he smashed the course record at the Lamplight 5M road working and doesn't seem to be hampering him unduly.
STATISTICS CORNER
A new M65 World and British best by ‘rocket’ Ron Lucas at the Michelin 10 was last year's memorable performance.
But he was not alone, John Wheway (see left for more details) also set a new British best, as did Arthur Keily and they both head their respective age groups in last year's Veteran's 10-mile road rankings.
FROM THE DESK OF SYLVESTER STEIN
Many happy returns for Davidson
When a Vet first takes up running — or resumes after a long lay-off — he or she can count on one thing: several years of improvement.
Why should this be?
It's due to a number of things: regular training, a growing understanding of how to peak, how to race and a gain in motivation.
My own history is a case in point.
In 1972 I undertook my first race since leaving school 35 years earlier and managed 13.3 seconds for the 100m, ending last in the O50 final and lame in both hamstrings.
I had trained for the first time only four days before!
By the time 1972 was out I had found a Vets club in join, the VAC as it was called, and I began to pick up something about the scene — where to find the minor races, who to go to for training advice, the way to use blocks and how to seek out physios for repair purposes — and I took up steady training.
As a result, it was almost 20 years before I managed as slow a time as 13.3 again.
Month by month, year by year, I improved, doing a lifetime best of 12.0 seconds on a hot day at White Plains, New York in 1975.
I stayed that way, and although age took over again, I still remained faster than my 1972 debut.
That's a sprinter's example, but it's the same for any athletic performance, as I've just been reminded by watching the astonishing improvement of Ray Davidson in these past few years.
Ray, a Veterans Athletic Club road and cross-country runner, has been slowly picking up speed during his first six or seven years back in the sport and he's now a top-ranked man.
He's gone about it quietly, just plugging away and learning from watching others.
He's not only had to pick up technique in racing, he's had to learn how to train — that's been the secret, he says.
He was in fact an excellent schoolboy quarter-miler (thus proving another old adage of mine, that if you were very good in your youth you'll be a very good Vet, no matter that 30 years may have passed since you last pulled on running shoes).
But he didn't always get the right encouragement at club level, and instead took up football.
‘I regret it in a way,’ he says thoughtfully.
One can tell from his present ability that he's right to be sorry, he might have gone on to be a famous international.
To get to the end of my story first, let me point to his last winter's feat of equally Laurie O'Hara's O55 Wimbledon cross-country record.
It took Ray years to discover the mix of speedwork and mile  repetitions he needed for improving his race times.
What he would have really profited from at the beginning, he believes, was a coach and it was only some time after he joined the Vets movement that he found the next best thing, encouragement and advice from a distinguished Vet member of Cambridge Harriers, David Coward.
During the past three years he had knocked as much as 40 seconds off his five-mile mark.
When it comes to racing he has a lifestyle problem.
He works at weekends as a hospital porter, and finds it necessary to take a week off to compete in a national or international event.
That has limited his appearances in top championships, which a world-beater needs in the final sharpening up process.
Nevertheless, I would predict that we will see Ray's name in the records books before long, though, perhaps not until he turns the grand old age of 60 in another three or four years and can make a new charge up the age-group ladder.
There are many other cases I could quote.
Alan Bowdler of Rochdale, a fellow-sprinter, Ed Matthews of the US and Geoff Harrold, a well-known distance runner from Bromley.
Geoff took up Vet running at a serious level two or three years ago and has forged through the ranks until arriving at the top of the O50s this season.
World gold is what he'll be going for next.
So take the plunge now, those of you on the sidelines; think about a serious attack on the situation, in the knowledge that there are still improvements to make.
RECOVERY SPECIAL
Practical Running
EDITED by HAYNE BELCHER
WHAT'S INSIDE
This month, Practical Running is entirely devoted to recovery from the London Marathon.
We're proud of every one of you who battled around the course, even if you didn't make it.
This ‘Race Recovery Special’ doesn't have to apply just to London; if you're planning another marathon elsewhere, you should find it invaluable.
So, when you next pack your kit bag, don't forget this copy of RUNNING Magazine.
Owen Anderson kicks off by telling you the physical changes that occur when you run 26.2 miles.
He also offers the latest advice on how soon you should start training again.
Now you've crossed Westminster bridge and achieved your goal, we outline the best possible way to recover.
There's more medical advice — do you know what RICE stands for?
And there's guidance on what you should eat and drink the moment you cross that line.
There's more this month from the élite, including Seb Coe and Rosa Mota, who explain how they go about race recovery.
PLUS — AN ALTERNATIVE THERAPY SPECIAL We look at alternative medicines and how they can help you get back on your feet after a marathon.
We don't recommend or condemn any of the therapies mentioned.
We simply feel that your body might like to experience something different and these are some of the options on offer.
If you do try out any of them let us know how you got on.
We can always pass the message on to other runners.
Just write to 
Do you know why you should seek a massage?
And what can reflexology do to your tired feet?
What are the benefits of hypnotherapy and is aromatherapy a way of totally relaxing after your gruelling experience?
We also look at acupuncture, Shiatsu-do, naturopathy, homeopathy and many more!
WHAT HAVE I DONE
There's one thing you have to say about the London Marathon — it's fair.
After all, almost everyone who completes the race gets a free, three-day keepsake.
All right, it's true that the marathon souvenir happens to be soreness and stiffness, but what else did you expect?
Running 26.2 miles is further than the average person achieves in a lifetime and you've done it in around four hours or less writes .
Although your lower-limb lamentations are a testimonial to your marathon effort, the pain provides only a small hint of what has actually happened inside your body during the race.
During a typical marathon, your fatty tissue is whittled down by almost six ounces, your liver and leg muscles cough up about 11 ounces of carbohydrate, and — if you don't drink properly during the race — your body can lose about 100 ounces of water.
Thousands of red blood cells are crushed by the impact of your feet with the pavement, and scores of white cells cascade out of your spleen into the bloodstream to see what's going on.
A marathon alters your normal hormonal profile, tires your heart, dumps abnormal amounts of protein into your blood, irritates your digestive tract, and often sneaks a few red blood cells into your urine.
After the race, your leg muscle cells are nearly depleted of carbohydrates, their membranes are frazzled, and about one out of 10 muscle cells is swollen and inflamed.
Your mitochondria — the tiny structures inside muscle cells which supply the energy to get you moving — are often in tatters, and small blood vessels leading into your muscles look like construction sites.
Apart from that, you're fine!
Well done!
Now read this section to see how best to recover
While these changes may sound pretty drastic; don't worry.
Fortunately, all of these alterations are only temporary and your strength of character in completing the London Marathon will eventually have a positive impact on your fitness.
Most of the problems will clear up in a couple of days, and your muscles will be back to normal within three to four weeks.
You can hasten this recovery process by relaxing, resting and eating well in the days following your run.
(For nutrition details turn to Appetizing Thoughts on page 28).
WHEN RICE IS NICE
If you don't get to the finishing line through injury or you cross it in pain, seek help quickly.
It could be that the acronym RICE might come in handy.
It stands for Rest, Ice, Compression and Elevation.
Below are the vital steps you must take.
Rest Stop running and rest the injured area.
The aim is to minimise tissue damage and further movement could do just the opposite!
Ideally get out of your wet kit and seek shelter/warmth away from the elements.
Ice A pack of ice applied to the site of the injury is cooling and will cause the blood to constrict.
This in turn will limit bleeding and, therefore, the extent of the injury.
Use the ice for five to seven minutes an hour.
Make sure you don't put the ice directly on the skin as you could burn the area — wrap it in a tea towel or an old shirt first.
Compression Bandaging the problem area will restrict tissue swelling and further bleeding.
Elevation Lie or sit with your legs raised higher than your waist.
This allows the blood which has gathered in your feet and legs to move on.
It will reduce the swelling and the pain.
DO IT AGAIN
A quick and efficient recovery immediately after the race will mean that by the time you're on your way home, you are planning the next marathon.
If you mess up the hour or so afterwards, you no doubt will never want to line up to cover the distance again.
So, follow these guidelines.
As you cross the line, make your way to the lorries containing your kit bag.
Get your tracksuit on as soon as possible; the quicker you do this, the less stiffness you will feel post-race.
En route grab a drink from one of the dozens of eager volunteers.
You may not be thirsty, but your body needs to rehydrate as soon as possible.
If your urine in dark, you are probably still dehydrated.
Keep drinking until it pales in colour.
It's not always possible in London but a short walk might well get you away from the crown and give you a chance to loosen up your legs, contemplate the last few hours and consider how your body is feeling in general.
Take your shoes off and see what condition your feet are in.
Hopefully, you've brought along some first aid remedies in your kit bag to deal with blisters, cuts or rubbed areas.
If you haven't, or don't feel able to take care of the mess at the end of your legs, head for the first aid tents.
Remember your feet have probably expanded and you might have to unlace your trainers far more than usual.
If you cannot get your shoes back on, bring along a pair of flip-flops or sandals that you can slip into and which won't aggravate your feet.
If your leg suddenly suffers from a bout of cramp, don't panic.
Stretch the area for a while, then relax it and continue this until the pain goes away.
Massage can help cramp and can prevent it spreading to other areas.
The élite are lucky and get attention quite promptly, but it's not so easy for the masses.
Perhaps a family member can help?
Besides massage, a good soak in a bath can help to relieve the post-race fatigue in your legs.
A gentle walk — which can act almost as a warm-down — will help to clear the debris from your legs and will aid recovery.
Enjoy the adoration of family and friends and sensibly and slowly plan your next races (see Bruce Tulloh's advice on page 46) or, if London ‘92  was a bit of a disaster, don't feel sorry for yourself.
Shake off that depression, assess where you went wrong and try to put it right next year.
You won't be the only one!
TO TRAIN OR NOT TO TRAIN
So, what's the best way to recover from the London?
Some coaches and physiologists recommend no running at all during the week following the race, in order to give your tired leg muscles a chance to recover.
Others believe that light jogging is superior because it stimulates blood flow to the legs, reduces muscle tightness and preserves fitness, says 
To evaluate those opposing recommendations, scientists at Ball State University in the United States studies a large number of marathon runners.
Some of the guinea pigs stopped running for a week after a competitive marathon, while a second group jogged lightly for about 30 minutes every day the week after the race.
All of the runners experienced muscle soreness and weakness for several days, but the resting group recovered much more quickly.
Leg-muscle endurance capacity (measured on a Cybex TM machine) returned to normal within three days in the resting runners but was still below par after seven days for those who jogged in the recovery week.
The resting runners also had greater muscle strength than their active counterparts.
The Ball State researchers concluded that a one-week rest from running boosts the ability of leg muscles to recover quickly after a marathon.
APPETIZING THOUGHTS
Even if you're feeling sick or perhaps you just aren't thirsty or hungry after London, it's still wise to put a little back into that body of yours.
After all, it's served you well for the past few hours and may now be looking forward to you treating it.
RUNNING's nutritionist, gives you some advice on the subject.
Fluid replacement
Weigh yourself before and after racing to get an idea of how much fluid you've lost.
It can take up to 48 hours to rehydrate properly.
Make extra efforts to drink more for at least two days after the race.
You can drink water or fruit juice, which is rich in minerals and vitamins.
If you cannot stomach orange juice (it might be too acidic) try apple juice or tomato juice.
Commercial fluid replacers (iso- and hypotonics) are of most benefit during exercise and they are not very rich in nutrients.
High carbohydrate drinks will help refuel your muscles and will come in handy in the hour or so after the race if you are not able to eat anything.
Mineral replacement
This usually takes care of itself.
The minerals in a normal diet will be adequate to replace any losses.
It's very unlikely that your body will be short of salt, but if it is, it will tell you so and you'll crave salty foods.
Remember that the less processed a food, the higher its mineral and vitamin content.
So, try wholemeal rather than white bread and fruit juice as opposed to squash.
Carbohydrate replenishment
Your body is most amenable to replenishing muscle glycogen in those first few hours after exercising.
Therefore, attempt eating foods with a good carbohydrate level if you can.
If you cannot, then stick to a carbohydrate drink.
East lots of fruit, oranges, melons and bananas.
For that all-important post-race feast (or perhaps it will be just a meagre affair) be aware of where the carbohydrates are coming from and maybe increase the volume.
Have thick crust pizza, extra potatoes, thick sliced bread or rolls with your meal.
WHERE DID I GO WRONG?
my shoes let me down and rubbed me/gave me blisters
We hope you didn't run in new shoes.
If you did, you won't do it again in a hurry.
Had you broken them in properly or carefully plastered any sore areas beforehand?
If you didn't wear socks, you should have done.
Nest time use surgical spirit weeks in advance to toughen your feet.
I felt stiff from the start
The aim is to stay warm and to limber up properly.
Carry an old T-shirt to keep you warm and go through those vital stretches we have you last month.
I was frustrated by a slow start — the mass of runners held me back
That's just one of those things at London.
Next time, stay calm and pick up the pace when you can.
Getting frustrated can only hinder you further.
I got cramp
Did you take too little or too much liquid on board?
Did you eat too soon before the start?
Talk it over with your doctor.
I hit ‘The Wall’
Analyse what you did and consider why you ran into trouble.
Had you trained properly for the complete distance?
Did you go off too fast?
Again your doctor might have some advice or ask fellow runners.
I felt so depressed at the end despite a good run.
It was an anti-climax
Even though you should rest a while after London, do plan other races and have other goals.
Turn to our Race Series details on page 78 for other events to try.
Soon you'll be applying for London again.
Steve Brace —
‘I don't do anything for a while, not even put on a pair of trainers.
The recovery is mental as well as physical.
I'm usually very sore for two days after a race.
I make sure I drink well to counteract the dehydration, do light stretching and have a hew hot baths’
Hugh Jones —
Advocates massages, lots of gentle walking and stretching exercises.
Paul Davies-Hale —
‘You train for so long and so hard that you need a break afterwards.
I have a week or 10 days off and then gradually get back into it.
Your legs are wrecked for three or four days’
The McColgans —
‘Liz automatically had a rest after New York as it was the last race of the season’
Dave Long —
‘Last year in London I managed to get a massage within 10 minutes of finishing.
My wife Tracey went to evening classes to learn about it and that proved very helpful.
I would do no hard training for a month afterwards and not race for about six weeks’
Sally Ellis —
‘I like to have a massage and eat as much as I can.
I take 10 days to two weeks off.’
Veronique Marot —
‘I replenish my lost fluids as soon as possible.
Afterwards I have a rest for a few days or go swimming’
Seb Coe —
‘Immediately after the marathon it was local election time and I was on the move constantly.
I walked 10 to 12 miles a day doorstepping with local candidates.
I actually jogged the day after London.
I had no ill effects.
It was quite remarkable.
On the day, I went home with a couple of mates and watched football on television.
My wife was competing in a one-day event and I drove around the M25 to pick her up’
Rose Mota —
‘How can an athlete train and prepare so well and be so good and take so long to recover?
I don't understand why some athletes take so long to recover.
I have always been very conservative and relaxed in my running.
If the marathon is in the morning, sometimes I run later on.’
For more details about the Olympic champion turn to our feature on page 40.
Practical Running Recovery Special
Geoff Wightman —‘Later in the day, you may feel the lure of the pub as a suitable place to celebrate your marathon triumph.
As you march stiffly to the bar, still clutching your medal and foil blanket, do ensure that you've already drunk at least four to six pints of non-alcoholic fluids and consumed the equivalent of a square meal.
‘The world is made up of two kinds of people — those who puncture their blisters and those that don't.
I am on the radical wing of the ‘leave-them-alone’ camp and spurn the US Army research which proved that 80 percent of carefully burst blisters reattach to the skin over time.
‘When you resume training, consider the benefits of non-weight bearing cross-training, like swimming or cycling.
My favourite is deep water running — you know, the exercise which gets odd looks from lifeguards.
‘A quick recovery serves two purposes.
Most importantly, when you meet work colleagues and friends, your springy step must be able to bluff them into believing that you could have managed two laps of the course.
A John Wayne gait would give the game away’
ALTERNATIVE THERAPIES
THE FLOATION TANK
Hands up how many of you have ever heard of a flotation tank?
Only a few?
All right then, how many of your would like to try a session in a flotation tank?
Don't be nervous, it's a method of totally relaxing your mind and body — not something you'd find on the Stock Exchange.
In brief, it's a light-proof, sound-insulated shell, enclosing around 10 inches of a saline solution, which is kept at skin temperature.
The makers claim the combination of the warm water, quiet and darkness unite to give you a sense of floating in space.
That's probably just what your aching body could do with after 26.2 miles — weightlessness!
The tank provides what is known as a ‘restricted environment’ and researchers have been looking at the benefits of Restricted Environment Stimulation therapy (known as REST) for almost 30 years.
Salt water is chosen as it supports your body, prevents the skin from crinkling and has a beneficial effect on the skin, joints and muscles.
The difference between a flotation tank and other relaxation techniques is that other methods require effort on the part of the patient.
You have to try to relax, which some people find very difficult or even impossible.
Floating, they say, is passive and universally achieved.
Three floats are enough to give you long-lasting relaxation and that should cost you around £45 for an introductory course.
You can complete the in about two weeks and sessions last about an hour.
However, if you just want to have one float, put around £20 aside.
How can it help?
According to consultant Samantha Vandertoorn from The South London Natural Health Centre, the knowledge that you're about to forget all your troubles in flotation could be just the incentive your body needs to get you to Westminster Bridge.
She says:
The anti-gravitational effect will prove irresistible.
You'll not only get the weight off your feet, but you'll find you are also able to relax your body totally.
It works on a mental level as well as a physical one and you can off-load all the stress and tension you've carried around the course.
‘You can release all the mental strain that you've built up when psyching your self up for a marathon,’ she says.
If London didn't go as you'd hoped — perhaps you never made it to the end — a float will help you put things into perspective and will leave you feeling more positive.
It takes a lot to run a marathon and now you have the satisfaction of knowing that a session in a Flotation Tank requires no effort on your behalf.
All you have to do is climb in.
The tank is 7ft long and 4ft wide; so even the tallest of you should fit nicely!
Who do I contact?
Take the plunge and write to .
The Centre has a number of tanks and can give you plenty of advice.
REFLEXOLOGY
If you're ticklish on the feet, perhaps you'd better give reflexology a miss, but if you love a little footsie, read on.
Seriously, reflexology is a form of ancient Chinese medicine in which reflex areas in the feet are massaged.
It is believed that every part of the feet corresponds to a part of the body.
The left foot represents the left side of the body and the right…well I'll leave you to work that one out!
An imaginary line half way down the foot is compatible to the body's waist line; so the organs in the upper part of the body have reflex areas in the upper foot and the lower organs are linked to the lower foot.
Maps have been drawn to illustrate just what organ is linked to which part of the sole but the soles are not the only areas used: there are said to be reflexes on the tops of the feet and a short way up the backs of the legs.
The feet are massaged and the side and end of the thumb are used to press quite deeply into a particular reflex area.
If the zone is out of balance, a tenderness or pain will be felt as pressure is applied.
The degree of discomfort you feel will dictate the extent of the problem.
Don't worry about the treatment being too painful — it certainly isn't.
The whole foot is worked on — with the tender areas given special attention — and such problems as migraine, back pain, menstrual trouble, kidney disorders and circulatory  conditions can be eased.
There are also reflex areas in the hand which you can work on yourself — ask about them if you go for treatment.
The costs seem very reasonable; anywhere between £15 and £20 should cover a trip.
Remember every section of your sole if sacred in reflexology
How can it help?
We contacted the Director of the Bayly School of Reflexology, Nicola Hall.
Your feet are probably the parts of your anatomy that will suffer most after a marathon — so we were particularly keen to hear what she had to say.
Above all, it's a relaxing therapy and she sees it as a major way of helping a runner ‘warm down’.
Your tired, aching feet will feel ‘very pleasant’ after treatment and they will start to relax.
If one spot on your foot was very sore or there's a blister by your heel, those areas would be avoided.
Basic soreness should be eased and as the treatment deals with the entire body and not just the feet, the entire you should start to feel better.
Yet again this is a treatment that should leave you calm, with peace of mind and a sense of wellbeing.
Who do I contact?
IRIDOLOGY
It's a method of diagnosing illness by examining the iris of the eye.
Problems can be caught in their early stages before you've felt any trouble.
The British Society of Iridologists is at 
LYMPHATIC DRAINAGE
No, it's not something that's done in the sewers!
The therapy aims to stimulate the nervous system by body massage and manipulation.
It helps to get the lymph fluid — a vital part of the body's waste disposal system — flowing.
COLONIC IRRIGATION
No, don't be put off; do read on.
Disease can often be caused by problems in the colon.
By literally washing it out, the detoxification process can start.
Diet advice is usually given too.
ACUPUNCTURE
Before you contemplate a visit, put all those jokes about feeling like a pin cushion well and truly behind you.
The Chinese (yes, you might have known!) originated acupuncture several thousand years ago.
It's a system which sets out to restore and maintain good health by inserting needles into specific points on the surface of your skin.
The use of the needles is said to stimulate your body into rebalancing itself.
Without wishing to go too deeply into the theories of acupuncture, practitioners see the therapy as a way of redirecting the vital energy of the body — known as the Qi — which flows around the meridian system, the energy network linked up to all those vital areas of your body, such as the internal organs.
With me?
It has gained a reputation for controlling pain and in China is extensively used as an alternative to anaesthesia in surgery.
Among the many conditions it treats are sciatica, high blood pressure, depression, asthma and bronchitis.
The practitioner will need to have an overall picture before diagnosis; he/she may ask about your past illnesses, family tendencies or general energy levels.
The patient's colour, face and body features as well as pulse and tongue will also come in for scrutiny.
The needles are usually made of stainless steel (the first needles were of stone, then bone and bamboo!) and are so fine that you shouldn't feel pain.
They can be left in place for up to 15 to 20 minutes.
Sometimes moxibustion is used alongside acupuncture: a ball of dried herb is placed around the shaft of the needle.
It is lit and smoulders, heating the needle slightly and intensifying its effect.
The first session costs around £35 for one-and-a-half hours and then you'll pay £25 for subsequent treatments.
How can it help?
Principal of the Acupuncture and Osteopathic Centre, Ron Bishop, says:
The treatment has an effect on the circulation and will get to work on removing lactic acid.
The cardio-vascular systems and main organs would be checked for stress and treated.
Again the therapy helps body and mind, leaving you more relaxed and calm.
Who should I contact?
SHIATSU-DO
If you quite like the sound of acupuncture but you're a wimp when it comes to needles, think instead about Shiatsu-Do.
It uses pressure and stretching techniques to relax and revitalise your body.
The word Shiatsu means ‘finger pressure’ in Japanese, but the therapy has its beginnings in China.
If you're interested in a session, a practitioner will apply pressure to various parts of your body, which correspond with the points and energy lines (known as meridians) used in acupuncture.
The consultant may use thumbs, fingers, elbows and perhaps even knees and feet to apply the pressure.
It is said that this stimulates circulation and the flow of the lymphatic fluid, eases the nervous system, helps to release toxins and tensions from the muscles and stimulates the hormonal system.
The mental effect should be one of calmness and well-being; you should feel more in touch with your body and mind.
The therapy works on the system that energy is present throughout the body: there are places where it gathers or is near the surface of the skin.
If you are ill, the energy is disturbed and pain, selling or redness will be found in these areas.
Rubbing or pressing can relieve the situation.
A session lasts about an hour and could cost anything from £15 to £30 depending on where you are in the country.
How can it help?
The therapy affects your physical, emotional, psychological and spiritual levels.
Principal of the British School of Shiatsu-Do, Ray Ridolfi, says that all you runners will need the major systems in your bodies — such as the nervous, musculatory, respiratory and excretory — restored to normal after a marathon by a practitioner.
‘In this way it enables the body to recover from nervous and muscular fatigue more rapidly,’ he says.
The treatment can decrease the time it takes the body to remove the lactic acid build-up in your muscles.
That's achieved by stimulating the Tsubo points on your meridian energy channels.
Once the lactic acid is dealt with, those aches and pains should not be as bad.
If you're feeling depressed after the event — you've wasted so long and it's now an anti-climax, or it proved a disaster — the practitioner would concentrate on your lungs and large intestinal area.
If you feel anxious — perhaps you developed a mystery pain or have been unable to eat or relax — the meridian lines connecting the stomach and spleen will be examined by the practitioner.
There is said to be an area on the knee called The Three-Mile Point; it  sounds wonderful for runners because, practitioners say, if you touch it in the right way, you'll have enough energy to run another three miles.
Doesn't that sound great?
It's a revitalising point outside of the calf and below the knee.
Ask a practitioner more about it — sounds like something anyone who pulls on a pair of trainers should know about!
Who do I contact?
AT A PRICE
Please note that prices quoted throughout this alternative therapies section are only approximate.
You may well find some practitioners more or less expensive.
Only tiny amounts of essential oils are used but they have a big effect
NOW YOU'VE RECOVERED
When you feel able to contemplate running again, turn to our Events listings on page 69.
You're spoilt for choice.
AROMATHERAPY
Our sense of smell may not be as advanced as most animals' but aromas have huge effect on our mental and physical states.
The whiff of a field of flowers can be uplifting and invigorating; catching the smell of a cigarette or cigar can make you feel stuffy and uncomfortable.
Armonatherapy uses naturally grown aromatic substances to treat patients.
It's believed that the life force, energy and soul of a plant is to be found within its essential oils.
These are obtained from leaves, flowers, bark, seeds and roots; usually the liquid is extracted by distillation.
They are found in tiny quantities; it takes 5000lbs of Damask rose petals to make 1lb of Rose Otto essential oil.
They are used in a number of ways; you can add them to your bath, massage them in to the skin and there are vapourisers to combat the effects of colds.
Oil burners are wonderful ways of filling a room with a relaxing aroma.
Treatment consist of a massage — said to be the most effective way of stimulating the blood flow and lymphatic fluid — but as the oils are concentrated, a base oil is added.
The first treatment lasts between one-and-a-half and two hours and costs £25 to £30; the follow-up sessions will be around an hour-an-a-half and slightly less expensive.
How can it help?
David Tagg from the International Federation of Aromatherapists says there are a number of oils which could help weary marathoners.
A thorough assessment would be required first to see how you're faring, mind and body.
You should feel uplifted by the close of play.
Muscular aches and pains can be eased by eucalyptus, camomile, lavender or marjoram.
There are also oils to tackle cramp, burns, cuts and wounds as well as anxiety and stress.
David Tagg (and his chartered physiotherapist wife Linda) also give advice on back care.
They advise you to ensure you have a good back support when you come and rest after 26.2 miles.
If you slouch, you could be doing yourself harm.
Who do I contact?
NATUROPATHY OSTEOPATHY
Naturopathy is one of the oldest forms of medicine and is based on four principles: the individuality of the patient, that you should treat the cause of the condition and not just the symptoms, that the body retains the ability to heal itself and that you must treat the whole person and not just an affected area.
How much care do we take of our bodies and lifestyle?
Often the only time we take notice is when something is wrong.
The practitioner will set out to make you more responsible for your health and that means considering rest, exercise, nutrition and hygiene.
Using natural therapies, the emphasis is on increasing your vitality and tackling any problems.
Practitioners give diet advice — the belief is how can healthy tissues be built from deficient foods — consider  fasting, psychology and hydrotherapy, which, if you read on, you'll see can be very important to runners.
Many naturopaths combine the principles of osteopathy in their work; indeed The British College of Naturopathy and Osteopathy teaches a combination of the two.
Osteopathy uses massage and gentle manipulation to soften and realign the body.
It restores the blood and lymph circulation and nerve functioning.
A session should cost you anywhere between £20 and £25.
How can it help?
President of the General Council and Register of Naturopaths, Jon Leigh, practices both these principles and gave a thought-provoking list of suggestions to help marathoners.
He stresses the importance of the warm-down after the event and then urged runners, if possible, to have a warm shower — not a really hot one.
The power of the water on your skin should prove beneficial, stimulating your circulation.
He says to shower for at least 10 minutes and not to opt for a bath.
If you can, he says, take a rest after the shower and relax in a quiet room or area.
Have a light meal!
If you find that after a day or so you have aches and pains that won't go away, shower again, using hot water for three minutes and cold for one on the affected area.
If after two days, it's still the same — go to see a practitioner.
When you run, he advises that you don't keep your chin up.
The posture puts an unnatural stress on the spine and shortens the neck.
Instead hold your head just five degrees lower.
Don't be daft and spend your time looking at your feet, just lead with your forehead.
Treatment can include gentle mobility work, passive stretching movements and physical stimulation.
Who should I contact?
STRESS
Do we have the makings of a champion, or does stress and anxiety get the better of you?
The company Life-Style Management sets out to help you improve your sporting performance; development programmes are designed to enable you to confront any mental barriers in your way.
So, did you line up for London with a positive mental outlook and were you full of confidence?
If not, don't put this magazine down.
‘Stress Release’, including tapes, sensors for self-diagnosis and stress cards are part of this positive thinking treatment.
Director Jane Townsend, a registered sports psychologist and a member of the British Association of Sports Medicine, provided these tips:
Avoid feelings of disappointment or failure if things don't do as planned.
List all your good points, i.e. determination etc, and focus on the next race.
If there were areas where you were weak, don't dwell on them but see how they can be strengthen.
Treat yourself to flowers, aromatherapy or a steam room.
Check that you've not become over-involved in running marathons — your family, friends and workmates could probably do with some of your attention.
Learn to relax (see the range of goods mentioned above to make you calmer) and make sure you've not been overtraining.
When you get back into training, add a little variety and monitor yourself for stress.
If you want to hear more, contact .
Or if you want a ‘Stress Release’ pack take advantage or this special offer.
It normally costs £9.99 (cheques payable to  but if you quote RUNNING Magazine and your race number, you can get a pack for £8.50 plus p & p.
HOMEOPATHY
All , you think it's got something to do with herbs but you're not sure.What does it mean?
Any ideas?
The word comes from the Greek and means ‘similar suffering’.
The therapy works on the principle that like cures like.
If you cannot sleep at night, your doctor will give you a potion to bring on artificial sleep.
A homoeopath, however, would supply you with a minute dose of a substance which in large amounts would keep you awake.
What is the effect?
You sleep soundly.
Practitioners believe that we all have a huge ability to heal ourselves; the day-to-day stresses of life can make us lose our way and illness strikes.
Then treatment is required.
Again, like many other therapies, questions will be asked to give an overall picture of yourself and after a consultation a remedy may be given.
Tablets should not be touched (tip them in the cap of the container and drop them into your mouth for chewing) and don't drink or eat anything 20 minutes before or after taking them.
There are specialist pharmacies to be found which well the medicines, which are all known by their Latin names.
It will set you back between £40 to £80 for treatment which will last up to an hour.
Self-treatment after getting advice is part of therapy.
How can it help?
Enid Segall, General Secretary of the british Homeopathy Association, which celebrates its 90th anniversary this year, says aching muscles, sprains, and cramp are among the woes which can be treated.
Get advice before you try self-treatment as the medicines come in different strengths.
Muscle stiffness and general fatigue can be eased by Arnica.
Hourly doses at first and then tablets take up to four times a day for two to three days are recommended.
Arnica is a winner with sprains as well and that should be followed up with a course of Rhus Tox.
For cramp which won't seem to go away, Cuprum Met is on the menu for a week, taken twice a day.
If you became very dehydrated, still feel tired and edgy, the Association points to China Off for 10 days.
Who do I contact?
Send a Stamped addressed envelope to the  
POLARITY THERAPY This system looks at imbalances in your energy systems and tries to release blockages by therapeutic touch, diet, exercise and counselling.
FLOWER ESSENCES A Method discovered 30 years ago to use wild flower essences to heal through the emotions.
It can also be used to prevent disease before it takes hold.
YOGA/MEDITATION An explanation probably isn't needed but if you're interested just see what your local community or neighbourhood centres are doing.
AND THEN THERE WERE THREE
Physiotherapy
Our own expert Mandy Johnson has been telling you the wisdom of physiotherapy for many, many months and will continue for some time to come.
Do note, though, that a special leaflet entitled Take the Strain our of Sport has been produced by the Chartered Society of Physiotherapy's Council.
It gives tips on clothing, diet, warming-up and down and how to deal with injury.
For a free copy write to the Society at …oh, and keep your eyes open for Mandy Johnson's words of wisdom in the future!
Chiropractic Practitioners
deal with the structural relationships between the nerve tissues and the spinal column.
Your spinal column is made up of 24 movable vertebrae, sacrum and coccyx; if a vertebrae becomes misaligned, the body is impaired.
Sports injuries, headaches, back problems and leg pains, as well as neck, shoulder and arm troubles can be tackled.
Posture advice is also given.
For more details contact:
The Alexander Technique
It teaches you to become aware of your reactions in daily life and to learn how to prevent those that might be causing you physical or mental stress.
Great emphasis is placed on how you use your body, on natural poise and movement.
HYPNOTHERAPY
Let's put a few myths to rest about hypnotherapy.
As you walk in the room, you won't be immediately faced by a swinging watch.
You've just been seeing too many films.
Also, don't think that it will put you into a trance or make you say or do stupid things.
It won't.
The aim is to put you into a state of relaxation and concentration, which is not addictive.
You will be told to try to stretch and relax your body from the feet upwards.
When a colleague had some treatment, a tape was played and he was made to look up at the highest point of the ceiling.
Gradually his eyes felt so heavy, he had to close them.
You have a heightened awareness, which is induced by suggestions, and you can visualise problems and start to deal with them.
The last myth to put from your mind…don't expect the practitioner to click his/her fingers and you suddenly emerge from your stupor.
You'll just be disappointed.
How can it help?
Secretary and Treasurer of the National Council of Psychotherapists and Hypnotherapy Register, William Broom, says:
It can bring mental and physical relaxation and can help you set goals for other races, rationally deciding what is possible.
If you imagined hitting ‘The Wall’ at 20 miles and that's just what you did, treatment could help you face the situation in your next marathon.
The practitioner will be aiming to dispel any negative thoughts about marathon running from your mind.
It will try to analyse your potential and get you motivated — there are lot's more races out there.
Mr Broom says: ‘The hypnotherapeutic approach is considered particularly relevant for assistance in distance running because in a very real sense you are competing against yourself.’
Who do I contact?
For a list of registered practitioners send a cheque or postal order for £1 to the  
LET US KNOW
Don't forget that we are not necessarily recommending any of the therapies mentioned but we would like to hear how you get on if you try any of them.
Send your response to 
NEXT MONTH
Practical Running returns to its usual format in June.
So, look out for your favourite sections, such as coaching, marketplace and active health.
CORPORATE HEALTH
One name to look out for in the fitness world is that of the Coverwood Group, of which Seb Coe, pictured below, is a director.
Its aim is to help organisations and companies of every size improve their fitness and efficiency, to help make their work force ‘Fit to Manage’ in the nineties and to help individuals achieve health and fitness targets.
Is your firm connected or would it be interested?
Among the many items the Group offers are corporate health programmes designed to suit any company's requirements, advice on incorporating fitness equipment, training programmes and seminars and guidance on the best software to buy to inform on exercise and nutrition matters.
It has also launched Sebastian Coe Health Parks, including indoor and outdoor recreation which can be linked to management training, and Seb CoeTraks, Europe's only specialist running/fitness trails, usually with 400, 800 and 1500m models as well as exercise/work stations.
The Group has four sister companies: Comodale, CHCT, Health Promotion (Europe) and Orion.
Indeed Orion Sports Services, whose clients include Ford, The Post Office and Rank Xerox, is the Group's latest acquisition.
Coverwood is based at 
MASSAGE
Ask any élite marathoner what he/she most wants after a race and the answer is very likely to be a massage.
Some top runners swear by it and arrange to have an expert on hand to treat them within minutes of hitting the tape.
That's perhaps not a luxury that you can enjoy immediately after London — although the thought of a couple of thousand masseuses standing by to greet the hordes as they cross Westminster Bridge is a novel one!
Still, it might be worth booking a session as soon afterwards as you can manage it, even if that is the next day.
Massage is one of the oldest forms of therapy and has become popular for its efficient in dealing with stress.
Aches and pains come under attack and niggling doubts are dealt with as the soft tissues, muscles, ligaments and joints of the body are worked on.
If you've got a pulled or strained muscle — massage might help and it's worth considering.
Sometimes natural oils are used to enhance the overall effect on the nervous and muscular system.
A full body massage lasts around an hour and costs in the region of £25 to £30.
How can it help?
Vice-Principal of the London College of Massage, Isabelle Hughes, is so convinced of its being offered to any runners who have run the London Marathon this year.
The discount is on all massage treatment and courses — all you have to do is bring along this copy of RUNNING MAGAZINE and quote your race number.
You'll find the address and telephone number of the College below.
She says a massage will help loosen you up and get the blood flowing normally and warm up those aching muscles.
Particular attention should be paid to the lower spine and leg muscles — they remember every step of the way.
The treatment is ‘restorative’ and will help combat fatigue in the muscles and will remove that waste product we all know and love — lactic acid.
You'll also feel a lot better and more relaxed.
However, she warns: Much depends on the condition of the individual after the event.
Massage for an athlete can be used after the pulse and breathing have returned to normal.
Great care should be taken if the individual is exhausted as every muscle could be extensively sore.’
That shouldn't relate to all you RUNNING readers who have followed Bruce Tulloh's training schedules thoroughly and not just turned up on the day, unprepared and with no training under your belt.
Who do I contact?
Don't forget that 10 per cent discount!
PEAK PERFORMANCE
If you're really interested in running and training seriously, you shouldn't be without our monthly running research newsletter called Peak Performance .
It's packed full of training, nutritional and medical advice, plus it keep you informed about the latest research taking place in this country and abroad.
If you want to subscribe, send a cheque for £35, made payable to  or look out for generous discounts in this issue of the magazine.
So you can see just the sort of material which goes into the newsletter, here is an extract from an article on anaerobic training which will appear in the April issue.
‘In April, hundreds of runners can be found digging around at the back of the wardrobe, trying to find that old pair of track spikes.
A quick dust, to get rid of the cobwebs, and it's off to the track, adrenalin pumping, because that time has come for the first track workout of the summer.
‘You've got to do it haven't you?
The County Champs are only a month or so away, and you're thinking you've got to get some speed in the legs before the serious stuff gets underway.
‘How often do you seriously think about why you are going to the track, what workout you are going to do and exactly how it is going to help you achieve peak performance on the track just when it counts?
‘Most people tend to gather at the track and do the group session, without even stopping to think what the training effect is doing to their body, or how they are going to progress next week, or the week after.’
The writer, Joe Dunbar, continues by outlining the benefits of anaerobic training and provides workouts to help you along.
So, if that sounds up your street, get your Peak Performance subscription in soon!
The Mota way to success
Have we seen the best of Rosa Mota, or has the sprightly Portuguese got something up her sleeve for Barcelona, the last major championships she plans to run?
Prior to London, Jayne Belcher travelled to Portugal to speak to her and coach Joś Pedrosa to find out.
Photos by Mark Shearman
Most people would have bet their life savings on the prospect of marathon runner supreme Rosa Mota striding away with the gold medal at the World Championships in Tokyo last year.
The sight of a jubilant Mota completing a victory lap with flag and flowers in hand and a glorious grin on her face had become as familiar a spectacle as the opening ceremony itself.
In an effortless manner the 33-year-old Portuguese woman had practically swept all before her since bouncing on to the world stage in 1982.
She has won European, Olympic and World titles, was unbeaten in a major championship since 1986 and was racing in a country which has a special place in her heart.
The other girls could be forgiven for being depressed — after all, they were facing a racing dynamo, who seemed indestructible, regardless of weather conditions.
Was it worth watching the race, or was it a foregone conclusion?
True, this time Mota faced the formidable Polish runner Wanda Panfil who was enjoying a two-year unbeaten run and marathon enthusiasts licked their lips in anticipation.
The end result didn't match up to the pre-race hype.
A mysterious abdominal pain struck, presenting Mota breathing properly, and the queen of marathon running was seen by millions walking sadly away at the 27K stage, leaving the event open for Panfil.
Suddenly question marks hung over her head.
Was Queen Rosa's long championship run over?
Had the world seen the best of this smiling champion?
The answers have still to be provided, but six months on Mota and her coach/boyfriend Joś Pedrosa sit happily in their holiday home just outside Oporto and chuckle at the thought that her racing career is in crisis.
1991 was simply a bad year — 1992 will be different.
‘I was definitely not in my best shape because I had had major surgery in May for an ovarian cyst.
That's why when I ran London in April I said I wasn't feeling comfortable.
We investigates and discovered that I was carrying more than half a litre of cyst.
The scar was quite big, so I was only able to start my running in June and I didn't have much time to prepare for Tokyo.
‘If the race had been held in any other  country I probably would not have gone, but I love racing in Japan.
The abdominal cramps are not linked with the surgery.
I had suffered from these cramps four years before and in Tokyo they were bothering me from the start.
I couldn't run as fast as I would have liked.
It got worse and worse.
I didn't know whether I would be bale to finish and thought it best to drop out.
The pain is not something that scares me.
My frustration wasn't losing the medal, it was not even being able to fight for it,’ said Mota, who doesn't question that it was the correct decision to run.
Since Tokyo, Pedrosa explains that Mota has undergone numerous tests to try to find the cause of what he describes as ‘that silly pain’.
Nothing conclusive has been found and it seems only time will tell if the trouble re-emerges.
The couple, however, seem confident that the problem is behind them and anyone with a love of the distance cannot help but hope they are right, particularly in Olympic year.
B arcelona will be Mota's last major championship run and she wants it to be the perfect platform to retire from the international scene.
‘I won't run any of the major three championships after Barcelona, but I still want to do the big marathons, like London and New York.
It's not easy to say when I'll stop entirely; who knows, maybe three, four or five years’ time?
You have got to enjoy yourself to be able to complete at a top level and I still love my running.
I was very happy to win the Olympics last time as it was the only major championship title I didn't have.
I felt I had won several different things at the same time, including my war against the Portuguese Federation.
‘Obviously Barcelona is the most important thing this season but it's going to be different from four years ago.
As I said, I hadn't won it and we were having all this trouble at home with the Federation.
I felt I had to win.
I'm not saying it's no longer important to win, it is, but then it was really vital.
Now I can relax and take things a little easy.
I'm thinking of London now and then I'll think of Barcelona.
When I ran Boston in the spring before Seoul, I was already thinking more of the Olympics.’
Without doubt, her reply shows just how unconcerned she is about her return to top-level racing and much of the credit for that must go to Pedrosa.
Runners, coaches and athletics writers the world over have puzzled at the success of Mota and 38-year-old Pedrosa.
The clichés have abounded; Pedrosa, a larger-than-life character, has been cast in the role of  tough guy, struggling to ensure that his Rosa is given a fair chance.
He's her minder, mentor, best friend and lover.
She has been grateful to leave the arguing to him and has rewarded him with gold medal after gold medal.
Crowds have taken Mota to their hearts.
They love her courageous front running, her smiling ways and the warmth she has extended to them.
Television commentators have given themselves dry throats telling viewers about the imp-like Mota who seems to float effortlessly to the front.
Weighing under seven stone and standing just five feet two inches tall, there have been times when she was dwarfed by her fellow competitors.
They sensibly have tried to keep their eyes on Mota for as long as possible.
Despite her success, she insists on being down-to-earth and believes she has an obligation to give a little back to the sport which shot her to fame.
Before they could tackle the world's best, the duo had their hands full with the situation at home.
A woman out running in Portugal in the early seventies was not acceptable and Mota would hear shouts of ‘go home’.
Years of dictatorship also meant that officials in athletic circles had very little grasp on reality.
The arguments were upsetting, but they gave them a burning desire to win — to prove officialdom wrong.
The couple met through running when Mota, who came from a sporting family, was just 19.
Pedrosa was convinced that this average track runner could be transformed into a top marathoner. he eventually persuaded the authorities to allow her to run the 1982 European Championships marathon in Athens but they insisted she must run the 3000m as well.
She came 12th in the 3000m and the stunned everyone later that week with her victory in the marathon.
It was the same stadium that Melpomene, an unofficial woman entrant, stepped into in 1986 in the first Olympic marathon.
Mota would have won that race by well over half-an-hour.
‘I went to try to enjoy it.
I knew nothing about the event.
I didn't go to complete, just to finish.
We decided to do it as it was the first ever marathon championships for women and because of the sentimental and historical feelings attached to the course.
They gave every athlete an olive branch as a symbol of peace.
I carried mine, then I put it in my pocket and further along the route I gave it to someone in the crowd.’
GRETE THE GREAT
‘There is one particular marathon runner I have always liked and that's Grete Waitz.
At first, she was my running idol and then, when I got to know her, I realised how nice she was as a person as well .
She is important to the prestige and reputation of the marathon.
‘Like Grete, I just try to be the same person.
In marathons, people are much less arrogant than in other events.’
Moto leads Grete Waitz in the 1990 Great London Run
LONDON HERE I COME
‘I hope to do the same in London this year as I did last — win it.
I was very happy there, not just because I'd won but also because the crown was very nice to me and I saw lots of Portuguese people.
‘It's a good course to run as it's so scenic and historical.
There are lots of monuments and buildings.
Last year I ran it because it was missing from my curriculum vitae.
London is so important you should run it at least once.
‘After London, I'll go to train for a while in Boulder in the United States and start preparing for the Olympics.’
Mota had already come a long way since her schooldays when she ran away with the city, area and national cross-country championships.
Pedrosa and Mota erupt into laughter as she explains: ‘I ran in those old-fashioned, flat-soled, shoes with no spikes and I had done no training.
You had to wear long, elasticated shorts and a long skirt over them.
It's only then that you realise just what a dictatorship can be like.’
She still had a long way to go and championship victories in Stuttgart, Rome, Seoul and Split followed, plus city marathons in Rotterdam, Chicago, Boston, Osaka and then London last year.
She quickly became the woman to beat.
‘I felt in Tokyo that the other runners were running my race.
Whenever I wasn't feeling well and had to slow down, everybody else slowed down.
Some athletes thought that the most important thing was to beat me.
They were trying more to come one place ahead of me than to win a medal.
I don't think of winning, just finishing a race.’
Pedrosa waves his arms about in the air furiously when asked if Mota could ever set a world record.
‘People must talk about records on the track and not on the road.
London, Boston, and Chicago are all different.
The winds, temperatures and humidity can change and you could be in your best shape, but the wind is against you.
World records in marathons are not that important.
It's something that's important for the press.
I suppose marathons can be boring, so you have to create interest.’
Mota is envied for her ability to recover remarkably quicker from a marathon.
How does she manage to go out on a training run the same day as she has run a major marathon when most other competitors are sitting with their feet up savouring the rest?
How can an athlete train so well, be so good and take so long to recover?
I don't understand why some athletes take so long to recover.
I have always been very conservative and relaxed in my running.
I don't think I have ever hit ‘The Wall’ and I try not to go out too fast.
Only in Split in 1990 did I start out too quickly and felt bad at the half-marathon stage.
When I finish I think I could have gone faster but during the race, it's a different matter.
When I win there is no such thing as being too tired.
I'm never too exhausted at the end of a marathon.
If the marathon is in the morning, I sometimes run later on.
It's just a question of time.’
It seems impossible to pinpoint the reasons for her success; in many ways she defies normal marathon logic.
She doesn't believe in pasta-loading or any  particular diet, takes very little liquid on board during a race, rarely runs over an hour in training (she runs twice a day) and likes to chat and wave to the crowd as well as take in the scenery, rather than concentrate.
Her chatting has brought her into conflict, albeit in a humorous way, with Pedrosa.
‘I don't say that Rosa talks too much, just that any talk is too much in a major race.
She doesn't accept that and she says she doesn't actually talk.
Sometimes she says brief words to the other athletes or the crowd and unfortunately the video doesn't show it.
In Boston one year she went past a competitor who was pushing his disabled son in a wheelchair and talked to him.
The next time she actually stopped to help him,’ says Pedrosa, smiling in despair.
The couple have yet to think of the future — coping with everyday training and racing consumes their time.
‘Being do busy with running we don't think we have the time necessary to bring up kids.
People are always asking Rosa to go places and talk to schools and she has always tried to say yes.
We feel morally obliged to give something back to the sport and Rosa is in a good position to do so.’
It seems now that all their battles with the Federation were far from in vain.
New rules for athletes in Portugal are being drawn up and Mota is helping with the project.
One day she wants to work within a sporting authority that cares for its athletes.
Besides that, Pedrosa laughs, when she's finished running marathons, perhaps he can start running seriously.
‘I have run New York three times and finished only once, in 2:44.
She paced me and paced me wrong.’
A scowl breaks out on Mota's face and she smiles and shakes her head.
Success doesn't come easily and their lives are devoted to each other and to the cause.
‘We have no time to read newspapers, books, go to the cinema or theatre.
Nothing,’ says Pedrosa, without a trace of regret.
Their pleasures come from their achievements in the sport and the people they have met.
Mota says: ‘I love road races as people become such good friends.
People in marathons are much more relaxed and friendly than those in other track events.
I feel comfortable with everyone.’
The test of Mota's success now depends on Barcelona and no doubt her position in the Olympic marathon will dictate how people remember her and what the history books will have to say.
Both Mota and Pedrosa are confident of the outcome.
The question this time, however, is would you still put your money on her?
The final countdown
We've guided you through your training over the months, now here are a few last-minute tips to see you on your way.
There's a little something for your spectators as well.
TEN VITAL THINGS TO CHECK
Do you have your racing shoes
Have you put emergency first aid supplies in your kit bag?
Have you rubbed on petroleum jelly or applied any necessary plasters?
Have you arranged to meet family/friends afterwards?
Do you know your way to the start?
Make sure you have your race number
Have you packed a pair of flip-flops for after the race?
Have you got your stop watch on?
Are you keeping up your drinking prior to the race?
Have you got a spare T'shirt to put on at the end if it gets cold?
WHATEVER YOU DO — TAKE YOUR KIT BAG!
DID YOU KNOW?
Some 4,574,048 miles have been run at the London since 1981
The number of entries accepted in 1991 was 35,750
Approximately 27,000 cups of tea and coffee were consumed at the start in 1991
Could you put a figure on the number of runners who have finished in the race's history?
The figure stands at 198,006 before this year
Some 1,000,000 water bottles are distributed at each race
£50 million has been raised for charity to date
The oldest female competitor was 80 years old and the oldest male was 84 this year
NEXT MONTH
Sport yourself in our Adidas ‘minutes’ competition.
If you're in it — you'll win it!
If you are a runner
So, after all those months of training, the big race is rapidly approaching.
Don't worry, stay calm and just set out to enjoy the experience.
Below are a few tips from all of us at RUNNING Magazine to help you as the hours count down.
Remember we'll be watching and wishing you well.
The night before
Eat a fairly light meal if you can.
It might well be difficult if you're feeling nervous, but your body will need the fuel.
You're probably sick and tired of the word carbohydrate, but that's what should be on the menu for your evening meal.
Don't drink alcohol as it's a diuretic (and running to the toilet can be a pain), but do keep up your fluid intake.
If you are feeling unwell, have a temperature or an infection, withdraw.
You can reenter automatically next year and might do well yourself more harm than good going to the start line.
Chances are you won't see the finish!
Follow your tried and tested pre-race routine, checking your kit bag is properly packed, your first aid kit is in order and you've gone through your regular stretching programme.
As bedtime approaches, it's as well to linger in the toilet to empty your bowels, or if your nerves are causing stomach jitters, take something, such as Imodium, to calm the situation down before going to sleep.
It's worth checking your feet before retiring for the night.
Any vulnerable parts should be treated with zinc oxide plaster, so the skin hardens overnight.
You'll probably sleep badly, so don't go to bed too early and don't fret about the lost hours.
It will make no difference.
Set all alarm clocks in the house to ensure you get up at the right hour, or if you're in a guest house, ask for a breakfast call, nice and early.
Oh, and no sex please, you're a marathon runner!
The race morning
East a light breakfast, but don't starve yourself.
Bread, rolls, breakfast cereal, bananas and fried fruit are ideal.
If you're away fro home, try to find out what you can expect for breakfast.
You want to stick to foods you know and your body might take exception if you experiment.
Keep drinking.
Take any prescribed drugs with your breakfast and apply the plasters, petroleum jelly etc to help you on your way.
Don't slip into your racing shoes until around an hour before the start; a comfortable pair of well-worn trainers will suffice for now.
Before you leave, double-check your bag has everything any marathon runner could ever need inside and as you arrive (calm and collected, having not lost your temper with the public transport system) do a little stretching and gentle jogging.
Pop to the toilet if you feel the need and say farewell to family and friends, ensuring you arrange carefully how to meet them afterwards.
Don't be grumpy or touchy now — you'll be glad to see them after 26.2 miles and you want them to be happy to see you too.
Good luck — we'll be looking out for you!
How to get there…
The car most definitely isn't king on race day.
You will stand a far greater chance of giving yourself a hassle-free journey if you leave your trusty vehicle at home.
Greenwich Park is closed to the public, but there is limited car parking around Blackheath.
So, if you're still determined to come by car, just follow the parking signs.
Roads around the start will be closed by 8.45am.
As usual, special trains will be running from Charing Cross, waterloo East and London bridge.
The one big difference is that you won't have to pick up a free ticket at the exhibition prior to the race.
The ADT London Marathon organisers  and British Rail have agreed that runners need only show their race number.
Trains will be running from around 7am.
Runners heading for Greenwich Park must make certain that they only use the St Mary's Gate entrance, off William Walk and Romney Road.
Remember to leave yourself plenty of time to get to the start and stay clam if there are delays.
You won't do yourself any favours by getting worked up before you've run a step.
If you're a watcher
So, you've left your loved one at the start line and made all those very necessary noises of encouragement.
Now what do you do?
Head for the nearest café to get away from it all, or strategically follow your sporting hero/heroine along the route?
All right, you'd feel too guilty enjoying your third cup of coffee as your running fanatic slogs around the course, but where on earth do you stand?
Where are the best views?
If you watch the start or the first few miles, you'll see a mass of humanity moving along at a snail's pace.
Move along, say, to Greenwich Village at the six-and-  a -half mile mark.
It's an ideal place to see the action and the race organisers say that if you're fairly fast of foot, you could always dash from the start and catch the race leaders in Trafalgar Road and Romney Road.
That means getting into Greenwich Park and hurtling down the hill.
The most vivid image most of us have of London (besides the finish at Westminster) is the competitors going around the Cutty Sark.
Spectators flock to the historic clipped ship, so make sure you get there early!
If possible, be there by at least 8.45am.
You can get a train to Green which and happily spend the next two hours watching the marathon.
If you're unhappy about spending all your time at the Cutty Sark, you have the option of using the Greenwich Foot Tunnel to cross the river.
You then catch up with the field on the Isle of Dogs at the 17.5 mile-mark.
Alternatively, make for Tower Bridge, but time is again of the essence as huge numbers of loving relatives and friends will try to do the same and space is limited.
Tooley Street and Jamaica Road on the south side or Royal Mint Street and Cable Street to the north will give good vantage points.
Crowds generally thin out around the Isle of Dogs loop between 15 and 19 miles, so if you're looking to get rid of the rest of the watching population, head for Canary Wharf, the complex will be open on the day to spectators.
Use the Docklands Light Railway and travel to Canary Wharf Station.
The route passes beneath the giant tower on the raised roadway section above the Docks.
It's a bit tricky to get to St Katharine's by the Tower at 22 miles, but the views are well worth the effort.
Go on foot from Thomas More Street or Wapping High Street and get there by 9.45am.
If you're the vocal sort, head for Victoria Embankment.
Runners are generally suffering at this stage (23.5 6o 24.5 miles) and will need all the support they can get.
From Blackfriars Bridge to Embankment Station, the runners are on the eastbound section of the road.
Pavements are wide and there's room for a big, happy crowd.
Experienced race watchers swear that the best place to be on the day is at 25 miles by St James's Park and Buckingham Palace.
Both The Mall and Birdcage Walk are open and you can use Horse Guards Parade to get to the inside of the course and Hyde Park Corner, Victoria or Pall Mall to position yourself outside of the railings.
Remember there's only one way to get out of St James's Park and that's through the Horse Guards Parade gateway into Whitehall.
If you're a sucker for tradition, you can always watch the changing of the guard before the leading runners come along.
Hopefully, your loved one is still in one piece and jubilantly striding across Westminster Bridge at the 26.2 mile stage — the finish.
Only officials and special guests are allowed on the Bridge, so Parliament Square is your best bet for a view of the finish.
Who is more relieved now, you or your marathon hero?
Go and celebrate in the family reunion area in Jubilee Gardens.
There were fears that extension work to the Jubilee Line would mean that only half the area would be available this year.
However, the work has been put off a few weeks, so  there'll be plenty of room.
It takes about 20 minutes to reach Jubilee Gardens after finishing.
You can get to the Gardens from Waterloo Bridge and the direction of Waterloo Station.
There are 26 trees marked with letters and if  you're looking for Joe Jones head for that tree with the J on it.
To leave the area, head for Charing Cross over Hungerford Bridge which is a one-way on the day.
Now congratulate your loved one and give yourself a pat on the back as well for your own agility around the course.
See you next year — perhaps in a pair of shorts and wearing trainers!
Is there life after London?
Now it's all over, you may feel a bit of rest and recuperation is in order.
Bruce Tulloh offers his thoughts on getting back into training — how soon and how much
REHABILITATION
There are two ways in which you can react to the aftermath of a successful marathon.
The first, and perhaps most immediate response, is total collapse —‘I've made my effort and that's it.’
The second is: ‘I've never been fitted in my life.
What can I do now in terms of shorter distances.’
Both are right.
It is true that a good marathon time shows that you have both fitness and endurance, but because of the effort you have made, you will not be able to exploit those gains for some time.
Getting going again after a hard race is not easy, but it is much easier if you have a plan to follow.
The logical thing to do is to plan a road racing season which will give you something to aim for in the summer, and then give yourself the option of trying another marathon in the autumn.
The opportunities for road racing in Britain are so frequent that you can be constantly in danger of taking on too many.
You must try to create your own season, based around certain kit events, and then the rest will slot into place.
The RUNNING/Nike road series would do nicely for this, taking in the Loughborough Halfmarathon in July and the Robin Good Marathon in September.
The alternative plan is to get away from road racing for a spell and use the time to do some track training, with the idea of running track races through the summer months.
After all, it is on the track that speed is developed — and you must have that speed to win races.
A change of routine would be invigorating and you would return to the road in the autumn with more enthusiasm as well as more ability.
The plan can be decided as recuperation moves into rehabilitation.
This is a four-week period in which racing should not be undertaken seriously, but during this time training can become harder and as it does so, it must be directed towards the goal, It may be necessary to allow more time between hard sessions and longer recovery times during the session, until your anti-stress systems get back to normal.
The training goals during this period will be as follows:
1
To exploit and maintain the gain in endurance capacity
2
To improve aerobic fitness
3
To restore any loss of flexibility or stride length
Endurance capacity
Once you have a marathon under your felt, other forms of running should seem easy.
A 1 — mile run will be a doddle and repetition miles a cinch to handle, because in comparison they are over so quickly.
The runner with a good endurance base finds training easier, and will recover properly from it — that is why the top-class 10,000m runners run 90 or 100 miles a week.
However, this endurance work alone will not improve your 10K times.
Increasing aerobic fitness
This comes from training which is done at a speed close to, and occasionally above, your aerobic threshold — which is approximately the pace of your best 10 miles.
During a training cycle, your sessions will include some running at 10-mile speed, some at 10K speed, some at 5K speed, with a bias towards the distance you are training for.
Restoring flexibility
The areas you need to work on after a marathon are the hamstrings, the quads and the hips.
To stretch properly you need to be warm, and to give yourself sufficient time.
In this phase it is well worth cutting the running time down, in order to spend 10 minutes on a thorough stretching programme.
The economical shuffle of the marathon runner is useless for the 10K runner, because the latter is developing more power in each stride.
THE ROAD TO RECOVERY
After the race
1
Keep warm
2
Re-fuel with something sweet
3
Drink as much as you feel like
4
Keep walking, if possible for five to 10 minutes
5
Soak in a warm bath
6
Eat some more food
7
Sleep if you want to
Recuperation Schedule
Day One
20 mins walking, 20 mins slow stretching
Day Two
Two sessions of 20 mins walking
Day Three
20 mins walking, 20 mins of alternating walking and jogging
Day Four
30 mins of walk/jog, 10 mins slow stretching
Day Five
30 mins jogging
Day Six
Rest or walking
Day Seven
Five to sic miles slow run, plus stretching
Day Eight
Four miles easy, striding out occasionally
Day Nine
Three miles easy in the morning.
Three miles easy in the afternoon
Day 10
Six miles, steadily, plus stretching
Day 11
Rest of walking
Day 12
Warm-up two miles, two miles brisk, two mile slow
Day 13
As day eight
Day 14
Eight miles, starting easily, speeding up on the way home
Recuperation
How quickly you recover depends on how much you have taken out of yourself, and this will be different for everyone.
A three-and-a-half hour run can be superhuman effort for one person and a slow training run for another.
The simplest rule is to rest until you feel like running again.
My own experience is that the lowest ebb after a very hard run is not the morning after but the morning after that.
You and your body have been through a lot of stressful experiences, both good and bad, and it could be as long as two weeks before you feel like doing anything except the most gently of runs.
Although people do run marathons week after week, I feel that you need at least four weeks, and preferably six, before you can run another one well.
Active rest is better than passive rest, so, unless you have very bad blisters, I recommend walking, cycling or swimming, but the main thing is to get the blood circulating through the working muscles and removing the fatigue products.
Once you feel like running and can do so without stiffness or pain, you can work gently back towards normal training, along the lines of the schedule.
As a rule of thumb, the second week after the race should be only half your normal mileage, and the third week almost back to normal.
several short runs will aid recuperation more than occasional longer ones.
Training speeds and recovery times
As a general guide, the interval training should be around your best 5K speed and total 12.20 minutes of fast work, and the repetition runs at about 10K speed, totally 15–25 minutes of fast work.
The recovery time should be rather longer than the running time, but can be reduced as you get fitter.
Thus an interval session might be 8 × 600m or 4 x 2mins fast + 8 × 1 min fast.
The tempo run would be done at about your best 10-mile speed and would last 15–20 minutes.
Rehabilitation schedule — from road to track
The training goals here are the same as in the previous schedule, with the difference that the muscles are being re-educated to the different rhythm of track running.
It is essential to make the changeover a gradual one, to avoid injury.
When running on the track, I advise doing part of the session in flats, part in spokes.
Later you should do most of the session in spikes.
The running action makes you use your ankles more and gives you a longer stride.
Intensity
Remember that we are adjusting to the track rhythm, not going for all-out speed yet — that would be risky.
The fartlek sessions should be your way of finding this rhythm, running bursts of 150–200m with a long stride and vigorous arm action.
The interval training should be run at your average 5K speed to start with, and your repetition sessions slightly faster than 10K speed — later on you can go faster.
The ‘speed sessions’ are run at 1500m tempo, not at sprinting speed.
In all cases, give yourself time to work into the faster tempo by running the first one comfortably and then gradually applying the pressure.
When you come out to do the same session two weeks later, you know that you can do it, so you can afford to go a little faster.
Steady progression without injury is what we want.
SHOE GUIDE 92
Its that time of year again when RUNNING Magazine offers you a comprehensive guide to over 200 models of show on the market this spring.
You shouldn't even consider buying for the new season until you've consulted our survey, compiled by Steven Seaton.
Over the next 11 pages you'll find…
Shoe company round-up, a guide to jargon and an A-Z of new technology p52
Reports from our testing of five new models from leading manufacturers p54
Choosing the shoe to suit you p56
Extensive listings of every running shoe available in the UK p57
What the companies say
ADIDAS
Torsion A midsole and outsole design in which the forefoot and rearfoot separated by a deep groove to allow natural movement of the foot.
Unwanted movement and twisting is prevented by a connecting Kevlar bar.
Dellinger Web A fabric web imbedded into the midsole, which acts like a trampoline.
Soft Cell Purolite cushioning unit located in the heel and externally visible.
Once the market leader, Adidas has fallen out of favour with committed runners in recent years.
It's markedly looking to reverse that trend in 1992.
The launch of the Equipment range at the end of the last year established a strong foundation on which to build.
This year it has an improved range which again highlights the benefits of Torsion technology, although for the first time it's combined with injected EVA, rather than firmer PU which turned some runners away.
Adidas is also attacking the bulk end of the market by offering shoes at more affordable prices, with greater strength in the £35–£45 range than at the top of the market.
ASICS
Gel Cushioning system using a silicone resin pad which distributes impact forces.
It can be placed either in the fore or rearfoot.
P-Gel is a new semi-fluid adaptation of the same system, with a new intelligent Super-Gel rumoured to be in the technical pipeline.
The choice of brand for many club runners.
Gel remains at the ethical centre of the 1992 range, with a second generation adaptation P-Gel debuting in the Gel Lyte Ultra.
Many of last year's favourites, including the Gel MC and Gel A6, are back in updated form.
Among the new shoes are two highly competitive races, the Gel Elite Racer and the Wakiihuri Racer, while the Gel 120 succeeds in bringing a fresh look to the popular 100 series.
AVIA
Cantilever An outsole which flares out at the bottom to dissipate shock and aid cushioning and stability.
ARC A midsole cushioning system using a piece of Hytrel encapsulated in soft PU and shaped like a jigsaw piece.
On impact the ARC flares out and springs back into shape as the foot comes back to its original position and shape.
After a tough year in 1991, the brand is back with a revamped range for 1992.
There are five new shoes in a range of eight.
Despite the technical sophistication of the shoes, a range which starts at the price of £46.99 may still have trouble finding new converts.
Among the new faces at opposite ends of the 1992 race are two cushioned trainers, the 2030 MXU (£49.99) and the 2080 MHG (£79.99).
BROOKS
Hydroflow A plastic bladder filled with silicone fluid designed to cushion impact forces.
Set into the midsole, usually in EVA.
Propulsion plate A firm carbon fibre plate fitted between the midsole and outsole.
On striking the ground the fibre contracts to ‘store energy’ and propel the runner forward.
Kinetic Wedge This consists of a piece of softer EVA in the midsole which acts as the trap-door for the big toe, allowing it to drop down and flex and causing the arch of the foot to be raised naturally.
Brooks is one of the few smaller brands which can genuinely boast a complete range.
It offers a shoe for every foot and every pocket, with not shortage of technology at any point.
1991 was aground breaking year with the launch of the Fusion; this year its propulsion plate technology is starting to filter down into more affordable shoes, namely the Mojo and Magnum.
Hydroflow, though, has become all-pervasive and is present in almost every trainer in the range.
If your interests are off road, Brooks can make a strong case for your business.
There's a new cross-country spike, a fell show and still the only triathlon specific shoe on the market in the Kona Coast.
DIADORA
Double Action Two reinforcing elements fitted into an EVA midsole, and visible through the outsole.
The first cushions, the second, in the forefoot, is designed to propel you forward.
Diadora, a brand more familiar to football players, is aiming to make an impact among runners with two shoes offering its new Double Action technology.
Price-conscious runners should also take a look.
With six shoes under £37, Diadora is likely to make inroads into the budget end of the market.
ETONIC
StableAir Cushioning system using ambient air-filled units in the heel or forefoot.
Etonic is determined to carve a hole into the cushioning sector or the market.
It plans to do it with a range of shoes, which although a complete change from last year, still concentrates on the technical merits of StableAir.
The main difference from last year appears to be weight.
With the exception of StableAir Guard, the principle motion control shoe in the range, all the shoes come in at under 300 grams.
This should definitely appeal to runners looking to buy a well-cushioned shoe which is equally suitable for both racing and training.
MIZUNO
Transpower A combination of Sorbothane and Mizuno's own H2 compound, designed for cushioning.
Power Pak An update of Transpower, using two portable interchangeable heel implants, one designed for training, the other for competition purposes.
Transtab A further development of Transpower, incorporating an elongated stability element.
This massive Japanese sportswear giant has always had the resources to make an impact in the running market, now it seems to have the will.
Although it still has a stronger name on the track, the 1992 road range builds on the strength of previous  years.
Transpower, or development of it, continue to dominate Mizuno development.
A new technical move is the graphite bridge over the midsole in the HST Stable, its new top-of-the-range stability shoe.
NEW BALANCE
ENCAP Process of encapsulating an EVA in a firmer PU shell, hence providing a combination of cushioning and durability.
C-Cap Compression moulding of EVA to prolong its lifespan.
Dymetrol The latest in upper technology, a one-way stretch monofilament producing superior support, fit and comfort.
For runners who hanker after a British-made shoe, or demand a variety of width fittings, New Balance is still the only choice.
Its shoes have more to offer than these two factors, however.
Every shoe in the range is loaded with technology, from the popular M510 — which is £5 cheaper this year — through to the £100 M1500.
Even the new racer/trainer, the NBX 900, despite its lightweight billing, is not sold short, with an evathane feel plug, metatarsal forefoot pad and Dymetrol upper.
On the stability front the new M1001, is a shoe which New Balance claims is the most consistently stable shoe on the market, but at 410 grams it's also one of the heaviest.
NIKE
Air Cushioning system using inert Freon gas, which does not react to temperature, in a sealed polyurethane capsule.
Air can be present in the heel, forefoot of fell-length in the midsole.
Footbridge A thermoplastic device moulded into the midsole with triangular fingers extending laterally to provide motion control.
Phylon Lightweight cushioning material specifically for the midsole.
The effort and advertising devoted to the Air 180 deflected attention away from one of the innovations of the year, the Air Huarache.
Fortunately, the Huarache has moved to centre stage and is now attracting the support and sales it deserves.
The word is that minimalist Huarache technology with the absence of a conventional heel and the neoprene sock, is a path Nike intends to develop in the future.
As ever, although one shoe steals the show, there six a healthy supporting cast of new characters in the top selling technical range.
Everything still centres on Air Cushioning and is likely to do so in the future.
PUMA
Trinomic Cushioning and stability concept made up of varying configurations of individual hexagonal cells.
Disc Custom fit system.
Sleeves on the side of the shoe are linked into a central control disc on the top via a series of connecting wires.
Turning the disc adjusts the sleeves and, in turn, the fit.
This year Puma is trying to make a big impression on the running market.
Unfortunately it's chosen to do it with the Disc.
Despite the presence of sound Trinomic cushioning and stability technology in the two main Disc shoes, it is hard to believe runners will shell out hefty sums for a central concept which appears to be little more than a glorified lacing system.
REEBOK
Hexalite Lightweight cushioning material said to absorb shock better tan PU or EVA and to compress less.
Honeycomb-shaped plastic fitted into all areas of the midsole.
Pump A custom fit concept using a manually inflated air bladder in the arch and collar of the shoe.
Said to reduce motion injuries and aid shock absorption.
Despite the scepticism which accompanied the launch of Pump technology and surrounded the whole concept of custom fit, it now has a strong band of converts and has even spawned a series of copycat technology among competitors.
Reebok continues to support the concept with a new lighter-weight shoe, the Pump Graphite HXL, which combines Pump with Hexalite cushioning and a new graphite bridge across a cutaway instep.
In the future Reebok intends to make the custom fit more precise by introducing hand-held carbon dioxide canisters and pressure gauges on top end shoes, seemingly a step backwards rather than ahead.
Outside of Pump, Reebok continues to launch new models onto the market — Boston, Inferno and Ventilator 2 — to complement all-time favourites such as the Trek, Rapide and Royale.
SAUCONY
Ionic Cushioning System Triangular pillars of PU located in the rearfoot and surrounded by softer EVA.
GRID New cushioning and motion control system.
A Hytrel cassette, like the strings of a tennis racket, are imbedded into the midsole to cushion and support the foot.
Torsional Rigidity Bar Motion control device which uses a Kevlar or Hytrel bar encapsulated in a compression moulded EVA midsole.
Said to combine compression resistance with shock absorption.
Introduced in the UK last autumn, GRID is one of the few new cushioning ideas to hit the market in recent times.
Saucony has always had a strong reputation for the fit and comfort of its shoes, GRID builds on this reputation.
If there have beeb question marks in the past over Saucony shoes, it's been over the durability of the midsoles in some of the older models.
The use of compression moulded EVA in the GRID shoes and combinations of Resilite PU and EVA in other models will surely answer those questions.
The launch of a new GRID shoe this spring, a lightweight racer/trainer, is the main addition to the range, but there are also upgraded versions of the Courageous and Jazz 3000.
Jargon busting
Achilles Notch
Depression cut into the heel collar, to prevent irritation of the Achilles tendon and provide a snug fit.
Density
Indication of the softness or hardness of midsole or outsole material.
The higher the number, the harder, more durable the materials.
Energy Return
Debateable concept which claims impact forces, rather than being dispersed, are regenerated into the next step.
Flare
An outsole which is wider at the heel than the midsole — designed to improve stability.
Heel counter
Firm collar supporting the heel and preventing excessive rearfoot movement.
Can be internal or externally visible.
Insole
Insert fitted over the midsole on which the foot rests, usually removable and replaceable.
Sometimes contains additional cushioning.
Last
The foot-shaped mound on which the shoe is constructed.
Curved lasts are for speed, straight ones for stability.
Board lasting glues the uppers to an insole board before being attached to the midsole, again designed for stability.
Slip lasting has uppers sewn together under the insole.
Combination lasting combines the two, either with a board in the rearfoot and slip in the forefoot.
Lateral
Outside edge of the shoe
Medial
Inside edge of the shoe
Midsole
Layer between the upper and the outside, usually containing the cushioning or stability features of the shoe.
Lightweight Ethyl Vinyl Acetate (EVA) or harder wearing compression moulded EVA are still the favoured midsole materials.
Polyurethane (PU), which is more compression resistant, is currently making a comeback, though.
Multi-terrain
A shoe with an  outsole profile to suit a variety of surfaces, both on or off road.
Off-road shoes have studs or triangles for extra traction.
Outsole
Outer section of the shoe which comes into contact with the ground.
Usually made from rubber.
Carbon rubber, or derivations of it such as Goodyear Indy 5000 or AHAR, is durable but firm; blown rubber is lighter but less resistant.
Many outsoles now combine the two and use the carbon rubber in the heel or other high impact points.
Pronation
The inward rolling of foot after heel strike as the arch collapses.
A natural action which only becomes a problem in excess and the foot continues to roll inwards.
Saddle
Part of the shoe which wraps over the arch an instep.
Usually where you find the manufacturer's logo.
Spike Plate
Nylon or plastic plate, usually in the forefoot, which holds the spikes.
Stabiliser
A device to check lateral motion and maintain the foot moving in a forward direction.
Supination
Opposite of pronation.
The outward rolling of the forefoot which occurs during the gait cycle.
Some runners oversupinate when the foot remains on the outside edge after heel strike instead of pronating.
Genuine over-supination is rare and almost impossible to rectify.
Tongue
Layer of the upper which protects the instep and top of the foot from laces.
Some shoes now boast a split tongue or an elasticated band which holds the tongue in place.
Upper
Part of the shoe above the midsole.
Most are a combination of durable but lightweight nylon and synthetic leather, although new stretchable uppers like New Balance's Dymetol are becoming increasingly popular.
Variable Width
Designed to accommodate a variety of foot types.
Available either as different width fittings, such as with New Balance, or more often with variable lacing patterns.
One for the road
Judging a shoe merely on technical specifications or on a trial fitting in a retail shop is never totally satisfactory.
To give you a better idea of what you'll be paying for, we put five shoes from leading manufacturers to the test.
Each pair was tested over 300 miles on feet matched with the appropriate shoe.
The results of those road tests are listed on the right
ADIDAS EQUIPMENT GUIDANCE
The Equipment Guidance is one of the standard bearers of Adidas' brave new world.
As such, it's a good indication of the direction in which Adidas wants to take its shoes without actually finding the promised land.
It's a definite improvement over comparable models from previous years, but it isn't quite the finished product which along will bring hoards of committed runners back to the brand.
That's not to suggest there are any major defects with the shoe, merely that some of the vestiges of the past, which turned many runners off the brand, do still remain.
The midsole, in particular, is a case in point.
It's a combination of compression moulded two density EVA in the forefoot with PU in the rearfoot.
The sum of the two, however, is firmer than you would expect and probably firmer than Adidas intended.
Some may dismiss it as too firm and hence lacking the appropriate cushioning, but that contradicts the reports from our testers.
Firmness and good cushioning are not mutually exclusive.
The Guidance has them both.
It proved to be a resilient light, stable shoe with good and resilient overall cushioning.
But there were some aspects of the shoe which confused our testers.
The first was the outsole.
For a shoe specifically designed for forefoot strikers, placing blown rubber at the front of the shoe and more durable carbon rubber at the rear seems a logical inconsistency.
Although the blown rubber keeps there weight down, wear patterns after 300 and 400 miles seem to bear out this view.
The forefoot showed excessive wear while the heel remained relatively unscathed.
Having said that, the deep forefoot outsole was still holding on after 500 miles.
The Soft Cell cushioning in the heel also seems unnecessary for runners striking at the front.
Judging by the relative lack of competition in the marketplace, a forefoot striking oversupinator is quite rare.
If you fall into that category this is definitely a shoe you should look at.
BROOKS BEAST
Brookshas always been a strong influence in the stability market, evidenced by the long-term success of the Chariot.
The Beast is a continuation of that tradition and capitalises on the same merits in combination with a wealth of other Brooks technology.
If the Beast were a car it would probably have to complete with the Land Rover.
You wouldn't expect much speed out of it, but then you could confidentially run it over any terrain without adverse effect.
Unfortunately for Brooks, the potential market share for the Beast is likely to be about as high as that enjoyed by the Land Rover, which is really a function of its specialist design rather than any deficiency in the shoe.
If you put it on the right feet it's clearly one of the best available.
Technically it's loaded.
Seemingly everything Brooks has ever developed finds its way into the shoe.
There's a four density compression moulded EVA midsole, Hydroflow cushioning, double motion control Rollbars and a propulsion plate for motion enhancement.
And it all sits on the fabled Chariot last.
Is all of this over-kill you may well ask?
If you are a heavy runner, struggling with a sever motion p£control problem, as our primary tester was, then it isn't.
If you aren't then take your eyes off the Beast and opt for a more appropriate shoe.
The Beast performed very well.
It's a tremendously stable shoe with good, firm cushioning designed for a heel striker.
After 300 miles none of our testers reported any discernible wear or compression in either the midsole or the outsole, although one did report a slight separation of the midsole from the outsole around the heel.
(That particular pair, however, was an advanced test model.)
Despite the bulky appearance and the wealth of added technology, the shoe is relatively light, both in box and on foot.
At 354 grams, it compares favourably with its competitors which lurch towards the 400 mark.
It's a complete package for heavier runner (12 stone and over) with a high weekly mileage (over 30) and looking for good conditioning and stability.
NIKE AIR HUARACHE
Despitethe fanfare which greeted the launch of the Air 180 last year, the subsequent arrival of the Air Huarache had made a greater impression on our testers, who have found it to be both innovative and effective.
In common with other leading manufacturers, Nike has majored on fit as the latest sports shoe battleground, but the Oregonians have arrived at their solution in a relatively minimalist fashion.
The Huarache employs external strapping in lieu of a heel counter, a neoprene/lycra sock to ensure close fit, and a sculpted midsole to partially enclose the foot.
All this in a package which gives the shoe a radical look which is certain to find favour on the street.
But does all this work for runners?
According to our testers, and to retailers, yes.
Where the Huarache excels is in combining light weight (at 270 grams it competes comfortably as a racer/trainer) with stability.
Without the use of rigid heel support and bracing, which often leaves a shoe feeling somewhat brick-like, the Huarache feels light, secure, and above all, supremely comfortable, with a degree of flexibility rarely, if ever, found in such a well-cushioned shoe.
It prompts the thought that the perception of weight in a shoe is perhaps as closely linked to comfort and ‘feel’ as to straight numbers.
Are £64.99 the Huarache is keenly priced.
Despite our initial suspicions that the shoe's cosmetics and relatively soft midsole material might suffer with heavy use, no problems with durability have yet been reported.
Though available in sizes up to 13, as a lightweight trainer it is probably best-suited to light-to-medium weight runners.
PUMA SYSTEM XC 6000
L et's be honest, the only thing wrong with laces is they're a pain to do up every time and they sometimes seem to untie themselves mysteriously in the middle of a run.
Do they really provide such an appalling fir that they need to be replaced, at no small expense, by a more intricate system designed to provide perfect synthesis between the foot and the shoe?
Or are laces adequate for the majority of runners?
The latter would seem to be closer to the truth.
As an all-round shoe, the System XC 6000 has many of the technical components you would expect from a top-of-the-range cushioning shoe and performed adequately.
The cushioning provided by the Trinonic units in the EVA midsole did the job well and it feels like a very stable shoe.
Durability is also not in question.
But there are problems with the shoe and they start and finish with the Disc fastening system.
Curiously for a shoe which trumpets the benefits of custom fit, it's not particularly comfortable.
Firstly, the wires on the Disc do no extend far enough, so it's always a struggle to put the shoe on.
Once you finally put the shoe on, the adjustment of fit is as haphazard as tightening a pair of laces.
After turning the Disc you have a tighter fit, but not necessarily a better one.
The side stabilising units do add an extra support feature, but except for that, the Disc adds very little to the shoe.
Well actually it does, it adds weight.
At 372 grams the System XC 6000 is one of the heaviest cushioning shoes available.
Even as a hybrid cushioning/stability model, which is a more accurate position for this straight lasted shoe, it's heavy.
Throw away the Disc, slap in some laces and the shoe could be competitive.
As it stands, few serious runners are likely to take up the challenge to turn it on.
SAUCONY GRID 9000 SD
Inthe past, Saucony has always had a low-key approach to cutting edge technology.
The general comfort, feel and fit of its shoes has generally been enough to attract a regular and loyal band of supports.
GRID is a move away from the first, but not the second.
Part of a two-shoe GRID package launched in the UK late last year, the GRID 9000 is designed as a high mileage stability shoe with exceptional cushioning.
GRID — a cassette of interlocking Hytrel strings fitted into the midsole — is the highlighted technology, but it's not alone in a shoe which looks as different as it feels.
The midsole uses a combination of PU in the rearfoot and compression moulded EVA in the forefoot.
This is clearly a step forward for durability over the single density EVA or other Saucony models, which, although softer and more responsive that PU, can compress after heavy mileage.
There's no such problem with the GRID 9000.
We found no discernible compression even after 500 miles with a relatively heavy runner (nearly 12 stone).
As a cushioned trainer it performed well and with the addition of GRID, PU in the midsole and external collar straps, it's far more stable than any of its predecessors.
But it's not a totally new shoe.
The last is the same as the one used for the popular Jazz series, which accounts for the familiar fit and feel.
The triangular lug profile on sections of the outsole has also featured before.
The only complaint we had with the shoe was the weight — it's on the heavy side.
It's 412 grams pit it closer to the specialist motion control trainers of the market than the general all-round shoe it is designed to be.
Nevertheless, it's an excellent shoe for runners looking for a workhorse shoe combining stability cushioning and durability.
Spoilt for choice
Steven Seaton provides a comprehensive guide on how to choose the right shoe for you
The next six pages contain the most comprehensive listings of running shoes available.
To some, it's a frightening array of choice.
But within that list is a shoe perfectly matched to your needs.
Your problem is finding it.
before you rush off to the local retailer, cash in hand, take a little time to consider the type of runner you are and what you really need.
This will narrow your choice to a smaller hit list of suitable shoes.
Despite what the advertisers try to tell you, no shoe is a panacea.
You may not feel it in the shop, or on our first few runs.
But run too far in unsuitable shoes, whether the cheapest or most expensive on the market, and your feet will tell you.
So how do you know what kind of runner you are?
The most accurate way is to have your running style videotaped and analysed by a biomechanics lab.
Unfortunately gait analysis comes at a cost, often a heavy one, and is usually difficult to arrange.
You can do most of the job yourself with that old favourite, the Wet Test, a walk across the floor with damp feet.
This will give you a rudimentary idea of where to start.
High arches generally indicate mid or forefoot strikers and require good cushioning.
Flat feet usually overpronate, and hence need additional motion control and firm heel counters.
Normal feet have a wider choice and often require a more diluted combination of control and cushioning.
certain shoe companies, namely Karhu and New Balance, offer a more precise assessment with fitting machines which not only measures your feet but also indicate foot type.
But you can take home assessment a step further with a thorough post-mortem of your old shoes.
Place them on a flat surface and look at the heel counter from behind.
Any excessive slant will tell you if you have a tendency to overpronate (inward lean) or oversupinate (outward lean).
Outsole wear patterns will support this and also tell which areas of the foot you usually strike on.
Study the midsole for compression.
If they compress more on one side than the other, try differentiated densities, which are firmer and less likely to compress.
Early compression (inside 300–400 miles) also indicates that the cushioning was inadequate for your particular weight or style.
Now you have a rough idea of your foot type, what do you look for?
Overpronators need straight or combination lasted shoes with firm heel counters and higher density materials on the medial side of the midsole to prevent excessive movement.
Feet which overpronate collapse inwards and use the foot's natural cushioning, so you don't need that much in the shoe.
Oversupinators (which are honestly very rare!) need to compensate for a lack of natural cushioning in the shoe.
But the cushioning has to be in the mid or forefoot, where the foot hits, rather than the heel.
Stopping the foot rolling outwards is virtually impossible.
If, after inspecting your shoes and feet, you find no noticeable problems, then you're one of the lucky ones.
You have a normal foot and a neutral action.
You can concentrate your attentions on the feel and fit rather than any corrective properties of the shoe.
Although in today's market you'll find it difficult to buy a shoe without some motion control device.
Your final question before test fitting at the retailers is about yourself.
How many miles a week do you do, what kind of terrain do you usually train on and how heavy are you?
Honesty is the sensible policy.
A lightweight racer/trainer many look sleek on the shelf, but it isn't going to stand up to heavy mileage and regular forays off-road.
Now you've narrowed the choice down to more manageable proportions, it's time for the specialist retailer and test fitting.
Buy in the afternoon when your feet are swollen to simulate the effect of a run.
Comfort is everything.
Make sure there's enough room in the toe box and it fits snugly over the top of the foot.
Leave about half an inch between your big toe and the end of the shoe.
If you are in any doubt about the fit, try another shoe.
Manufacturers' sizing is variable.
If you intend to buy mail order, make sure you are familiar with the shoe and the correct size or send in an outline of your foot to help the supplier.
It's all very simple in theory, now it's time to put it into practise.
Happy testing!
Understanding the shoe guide
All the information listed overleaf has been supplied by the shoe manufacturers.
indicates the shoe is recommended for this purpose or has this feature
indicates it is specifically not recommended for the purpose.
A blank suggests either that the shoe is suitable but not necessarily recommended for the purpose, or that it does not have a feature.
Make and model listed alphabetically manufacturer and model.
(W) is a women's model, which usually has the same features but is built on a narrower last.
Price All prices are in £
Weight Given in grams for a UK size 9
Sizes UK sizes.
HS is half-size. the usual range 6–11 is stocked by most retailers, bigger sizes 13,14,15 often have to ordered separately.
Country Where the shoe is manufactured
CHN China FE Far East FRA France GER Germany IND India INDO Indonesia IRE Ireland KOR Korea PHIL Philippines TAW Taiwan THAI Thailand UK United Kingdom
Designed for Manufacturers information on the type of runner and foot each shoe is recommended for.
Over-pronators are supinators are those with heavy motion control problems.
Heavy runners count as those weighing, in pounds, more than 2.25 times their height in inches (men) or two times (women).
Heel, midfoot and forefoot refer to the area of the foot you strike the ground with.
Flat-footed and high arches also refer to foot type.
A typical overpronator will have symbol for pronators, heavy, heel and flat-footed.
Recommended for Manufacturers guide to suggested mileage and the type of terrain the shoe is suited to.
30 miles is out guide for high mileage.
Off road means parkland and rough terrain.
Racing means road racing and speed work.
Does it have?
Five elements we consider important extras.
Stability is any additional motion control device.
It could be different density midsoles with a firmer density on the medial side, or possibly a specific motion control device inserted into the midsole or upper, such as a Nike Footframe or Adidas Riemans.
Cushioning is some extra form of cushioning, such as an added cushioning unit like Asics Gel of the Saucony GRID or perhaps very soft EVA midsoles.
Modified Tab, most models have a cut-away tab.
Width facility, this could be specific width fittings like the case of New balance or, more commonly, with variable lacing patterns.
Insock are only marked where they are removable.
Race Service EDITED BY JAYNE BELCHER
EVENTS
Our new improved events diary now included more details to enable you to carefully select your future races.
If you are organising an event in the coming months, please send us full details of your race at lest 12 weeks in advance to meet our deadlines.
Runners — please remember to enclose a SAE when entering a race.
Compiled by Nicola Okey 
Details include 
MYSTERY ATHLETE NUMBER 3
Age 31 Female Australian marathon runner.
Strick gold in the 1990 Commonwealth Marathon.
Married to the World 5000m champion.
Placed third in 1991 New York marathon.
Now runs under her married name
RUNNING MAGAZINE NIKE ROAD RACE SERIES
Dead and buried!
From his potion at the back of the field, Steven Seaton offers his personal view of the Bury 20
Start at the back of the field.
Okay, you're out of position for a late charge on the leaders, but you can only go forward from there.
At least that's what I was telling myself at the start line of the Bury 20.
Just enjoy it.
Forget about the time.
Treat it like a training run.
After all, it's only a 20-mile rehearsal for the ‘big one’ on April 12.
No surprises, therefore, what the main topic of pre-race conversation was.
‘First time for London?’
‘Lucky devil, I've been trying for eight years and still haven't cracked it yet.’
‘What time are you aiming for?’
‘No really, you must have some idea.
With that 10K time you'll definitely be able to go sib three.’
Sub three at London?
I couldn't even manage it at Bury.
But I can console myself that at least I had fun.
No that's a lie, I enjoyed the first 15 miles.
After that it wasn't a lot of fun.
Psychologically Bury doesn't quite produce the adrenalin rush one expects at London and you don't have the crowds to pander to.
But that aside, it's pretty much ideal preparation for the marathon, right down to the drinks on offer.
It all starts with a few slow miles in the suburbs, then out into the Suffolk countryside, with a long trail of runner snaking their way along narrow country lanes.
Well, that's the way it looked from the back.
It wasn't much of a race, more like being on a training run with a 1000-odd friends.
But then I don't believe it was much of a race out at the front either.
It seems both Gary Spring and Danielle Sanderson romped home.
The thought that both had finished before many of us reached 15 miles was not a cheering one.
At least the wind, which hampered progress through the more open parts of the course, had died down.
My plan to ignore the time totally (it would only depress me!) went badly wrong.
Unfortunately, I'd forgotten about the check points every five miles.
Once you hear times being shouted out, you just can't stop yourself listening £, can you?
So by 10 miles I was pretty depressed.
By 15 I was desperate.
And no, the man who walked past me as I was running up that long hill at 15 miles didn't help much either.
From then on finishing was the only concern.
All that early conversation and false confidence had dried up.
In fact, all you could hear was the repetitive pounding of rubber on tarmac and a lot of heavy breathing.
My only thought as I collapsed over the line was, ‘never again’.
10K is definitely my distance.
I'm not running another 20, not even to win a bet or to please a dying grandmother!
Well, that is until April 12, when I expect I'll be going a little further.
All systems go!
There's never a dull moment in the office these days as the RUNNING Magazine/Nike Road Race Series leaps into action.
This month we've got coverage from Bury  St. Edmunds as well as the Ballycotton 10 to whet your appetite.
After reading these reports we're sure that you'll feel left out if you haven't run or entered one of our races, writes Nick Troop .
Entries are flooding into the Reading, Lincoln and Liverpool race organisers' offices and word reaches us that the races with the most prestige these days are, of course, those in this Race Series!
As I mentioned last month, we're keen on hearing what you thought about the races.
So, if you've got something to say, write to me,Nick Troop , at RUNNING's offices.
Also keep an eye out for any new races we might be adding to the Series.
They're off in the Bury 20
Right on target
It's no secret that the Bury 20 is one of the premier pre-London sharpeners.
What better place for two of our London-based Target ‘92 candidates to test their training progress.
Both Michael Corson, a Norfolk publican, and Southampton-based Aidan Hewinson made the trip to Suffolk.
For Michael Corson, left of picture, it was his second time at Bury.
His 2:20:36 was an impressive 13-minute improvement on last year, which when projected over 26 miles, should put him comfortably inside his 3:20 target for the ADT London Marathon.
Aidan Hewinson, right, looks similarly well-placed to hit a more conservative 3:40 target.
from a deliberately slow start, he went past 10 miles in around 1:25 then accelerated through the second half of the race to turn in a respectable 2:42:31.
Unfortunately another of our Target ‘92 candidates, Ursula Radley, was on the start list for Bury, but due to a knee injury she was forced to scratch from the race.
Reading — the skies the limit
Entries for the Reading Half-marathon are still flooding in and the organisers are confident of reaching the 6000 entry limit.
It's the 10th time the event has been held and the aim is to make it the biggest and best yet!
For any of you who've never run the race but who'll be there at the start on April 26, be prepared for Killer Kendrick.
It's a hill which begins three miles after the start and once you've clambered over it, you'll really be in your stride.
Needless to say, the course winds its way around the city, but nature lovers will enjoy the two crossings of the River Thames, over the Reading and Caversham bridges.
A few years ago the start was changed from the South Reading Community Centre to the Rivermead Leisure Centre; the new set-up has proved popular with runners.
See what you think.
There's still time to get your entry in; for information.
Mersey magic
A seminar giving training advice prior to the Liverpool Women's 10K proved a runaway success, with guest speakers including Kirsty Wade, Leslie Watson and RUNNING's doctor Patrick Milroy.
More than 100 people attended the seminar, which was mean to last one-and-half hours but continued for three!
May 24 will see the sixth running of the race, Britain's second-biggest women-only event, and the organisers are confident of getting more than 2000 runners.
A slight alteration to the course this year — work going on around the River Mersey means that the runners now have the luxury of running through the elegant Marina Complex, which should speed up the proceedings.
The course records is held by Leicester's Helen Titterington, 33:39 in 1989; and that might well fall.
Last year's winner, Brenda Walker, 36, from the Isle of Man, Titterington herself, Alison Gooderham from Bournemouth and the City of Bath's Zena Marchant are set to line up.
for more details.
Longing for Lincoln?
When you wind your way around the picturesque Lincoln Half-marathon course, look out for a little chap dressed in green who'll be running backwards.
The runner in question hasn't lost his marbles — he's just upholding an old and well-loved Lincolnshire tradition.
He's dressing up as the Lincoln Imp; the original imp is a carving in Lincoln cathedral.
His name is Michael Marsden and he's a local runner, so give him an encouraging word as you pass.
Entries are flowing in — a limit of 2000 has been set — but Malcolm Barham, of the race organisers, says things generally hot up in the last few days before the closing date, which is April 10.
‘We normally get about 100 entries a day then.’
Helen Titterington is due to line up in Liverpool
If you're looking for a fast course — you've found it.
Large chunks of the course are downhill and the course record is held by Luton's Neil Tennant at 1:02:39, set in 1988.
It's hoped that around £10,000 will be raised for two local charities which help the homeless; the Lincoln YMCA and The Nomad Trust.
Interested in running — then send a sae to the Lincoln Half-marathon 
Having a ball in Ballycotton
The Bally cotton 10 isn't so much a race, as a festival for the people of the tiny seaside village in County Cork.
The local pub throws a race night before the event and on the day everyone knows they have a particular task to perform to ensure the race is a success.
A satisfying 862 people finished, the highest total in its 15-year history, and the end result was a repeat performance of previous years.
John Griffin, from St John's AC in County Kerry and Connie Kelly from Blackrock AC, both made it three wins in a row, clocking 48:17 and 57:32 respectively.
Griffin is hoping to run in the London Marathon and is aiming for the Olympic marathon in Barcelona.
Kelly tied her laces around the back of her heel to combat loose shoes but ended up with a rubbed Achilles tendon.
It didn't seem to affect her performance as she finished well ahead of the next woman home, Teresa Touhy, from, London Olympiads.
Third was the Dublin City Harrier Mary Brayley, who is based in Cambridge and is a familiar face at Ballycotton, having previously taken second place in 1987 and 1988.
The course record-holder Jerry Kiernan, from Clonliffe Harriers, who clocked 47:04 in 1983, took second place in one of the closest finishes in years.
Griffin made his break for home in the last half-mile and Kiernnan, who came ninth in the 1984 Los Angeles Olympic marathon, had no reply.
Fifth-placed man Liam O'Brien from East Cork AC has run every one of the 15 Ballycotton races and has never come outside the top five.
The 37-year-old has won the race four times in the past.
One of the most beautiful things about Ballycollton is its setting; runners follow a route along country lane with the sea as a backdrop/ The sounds just perfect, unless it rains!
One of the organisers, John Walshe, said: ‘The weather was beautiful and sunny on the day.
But the day before it was cold and breezy and the day after it rained.
Someone was obviously smiling on us.’
It's hoped that the event will have raised around £1000 for the Ballycotton lifeboat.
WHO'LL BE THE SHEFFIELD STAR?
Look out next month for a full report and picture from the Sheffield 10K.
Coasting along
While most thoughts are still on London, RUNNING Magazine's Publisher Nick Williams looks back on a very different kind of marathon at Lanzarote's Club La Santa
Now in its third year, the RUNNING Magazine/Sports Tours International Challenge has firmly established itself as a favourite with competitors all over Europe.
The strong British contingent was led by the current title holder, Dave Swanson, and the 1989 champion, Bolton's Paul Dugdale.
In effect the Challenge is a marathon spread over four days, taking in a 10K, an 8.6K hill race, a 5K beach race and a cross-island 14 mile to finish off.
Though the races are obviously the centre point of the tour, Lanzarote's Club La Santa offers much more besides.
The superb sports complex — used extensively by the UK's top athletes, including Linford Christie, Peter Elliot and Eamonn Martin, offers an excellent tartan track, plus international-standard facilities for more than 20 Olympic sports.
So, in between training runs our competitors were able to turn their hands to squash, tennis, swimming, mountain biking and other high class activities such as boules and egg-throwing.
The complex also has a variety of restaurants, and a disco bar where those of us with any energy left after a hard day's sport were able to relax the night away!
Another excellent innovation at the 1991 Challenge was a comprehensive training seminar given by Eamonn Martin.
He highlighted the importance of a well thought out training programme, and clearly shared his enthusiasm for running and his intentions for Barcelona.
The well organised races started with the 10K which turned into an all British affair.
Cumbria's Dave Swanson opened up a lead over Paul Dugdale after 5K, and stretched it into a 16-second victory.
The Ladies' race was convincingly won by Debbie Percival (GEC Avionics) in 35:39 — a full 2:40 ahead of the second lady.
The international nature of the event was represented by Charlotte Teske (GER) and Wanda Turo (USA) who were the next home.
The following day's hill race once again developed into a Swanson/Dugdale battle, with Swanson finally pulling away to victory as they completed the race on the stadium track.
The Ladies race produced another easy victory for Percival.
Day three's beach race saw the Irish challenge arrive!
Paddy Murphy and Jimmy Keenan both looked good on the sand but unfortunately an interesting choice of footwear (none at all!) led to Dugdale's retirement with some of the best blisters I've even seen!
Swanson and Percival continued to show excellent form, leading home their respective fields.
With Dugdale retires (to the pool and pool table), Swanson's only real challenge was whether he could win four out of four — a feat beyond him in 1990 when he was beaten on the beach.
Percival faced a similar task.
The race started under heavy cloud — a contrast to the brilliant sunshine of a couple of days earlier and saw many contenders trying to push Swanson to the limit.
As it was, after an excellent first 10 miles, Swanson pulled away to win both the race and the overall challenge.
Percival also achieved her fourth victory of the week, and both were presented with enough cut glass to open a shop.
As is usual with this event, everyone waited for the last competitors to finished, even though some took well over two hours.
Happy that everyone was safely home, we retired to the evening's barbecue and presentation.
Details of the 1992 International Challenge (November 26–December 3) can be obtained from   
The Challenge is a marathon spread over four tough days, though La Santa offers much more besides the races themselves.
Above, it's along way home, but at least the competitors get to take the scenic route.
A smiles back at the base with Eamonn Martin, below left, but it was a rocky ride to get there, below
Next Month in YOUR MAGAZINE
AT THE CROSS ROADS  Cross-training made simple: what to do, what to wear, and how it'll make you a faster runner
ADT London Marathon 92 SPECIAL REPORT UNISYS Whether you were first or 30,001st, it's the perfect souvenir of a day to remember!
All this plus Practical Running, roadrunning and Vets news, plus much more in the June issue of RUNNING Magazine.
On sale May 14 from WH Smith, J Menzies, J Sainbury and all good newsagents.
If you have difficulty obtaining a copy, use the order form on page 4.
RACE AGAINST TIME Will women even run faster than men?
Forget the hype, read the facts
PLUS SPOT YOURSELF IN OUR ADIDAS MINUTES COMPETITION LATEST SISTERS NETWORK NEWS WATCH OUT FOR OUR FAMILY FUN DAY 
Back Chat THE DAVE MOORCROFT COLUMN
Keeping track of time
There are those, like John Walker, who appear to defy the problems associated with the onset of athletic old age.
For most of us the uphill battle to avoid a downhill slide is one of the uphill battle to avoid a downhill slide is one of the hardest challenges in a sport where yesterday was a long time ago.
The slide away that many people accept as being inevitable is based on a number of assumptions we are conditioned to accept which are reinforced by the comments of others.
Statements like: ‘Weren't you Dave Moorcroft?’ and: ‘You're not still running are you?’, don't do much for your confidence and yet, despite that, we runners of a more mature age still share the same crazy dreams as our younger colleagues, we just become better conditioned at accepting, so called, reality.
Reality, though, need not be as hopeless as we think, even if it does appear to take longer to recover from injuries and the task of regaining fitness seems to take an eternity.
As our metabolic rate slows down, it is easier to put on weight and harder to lose it and those first painful steps of the morning crawl down the stairs and out for a run seem to take longer.
The solution is not to stop training, racing and getting up in the morning, but to make a few subtle adaptations, like allowing ourselves rest days we should have given ourselves years ago.
For many of us there are the added problems of the other commitments that are normal at this time of our lives.
Our jobs become more demanding, making it difficult to devote the time to train every day and maintain the routine we once had.
For those with a young family the inevitable taxi duties and watching our children take part in their school and club activities become more important than lying on the settee recovering from the morning session.
Speaking as one who is struggling to maintain a reasonable level of racing fitness, I often question myself as to why I am doing it.
I have no doubt that I will carry on running to keep fit but there is a difference between that and training to race well.
I accept that other commitments interfere, but I have no intention of giving them up — they are an important part of my life.
What I need to do is adapt my approach to training, focus on what I consider I can still achieve and get the maximum amount of benefits and pleasure from a reduced volume of training.
Basically, that means maintaining quality work, but easing down to give my body time to recover and possibly even occasionally allowing myself the luxury of collapsing on the settee, falling asleep and dreaming of all those races I wish I could still win.
A big welcome to former World 5000m record holder Dave Moorcroft who starts a new column this month.
Look out for his words of wisdom.
Poly Power
At the Olympic Games in 1908, the marathon was run over the unusual distance of 26 miles 385 yards.
The 26 miles being the distance from the east terrace of Windsor Castle where the race began, to the stadium at White City, and the 385 years, the distance from the entrance to the Royal Box, where it finished.
The distance was subsequently adopted as the marathon standard and the Poly Marathon was born.
In March, after disappearing from the scene for four years, when lack of interest caused its temporary demise, the event was reborn.
There may have only been just under 500 runners, and it may never rival the London Marathon, but it was good to see this significant part of the running world back on the map again.
It was also fitting that former London Marathon winner Hugh Jones, pictured should take the title to add his name to the list of marathon superstars who have conquered the event.
He will be reporting on the Poly marathon in the June issue of RUNNING.
Walker really left his mark on me, says Moorcroft, pictured in the Olympic 1500 final with the New Zealander in 1976.
My work was cut out
I think it was about halfway round the third lap that John Walker made his mark on me.
It didn't feel like much at the time, but I knew it was him.
We were bunched together in the semi-final of the 1976 Olympic 1500m in Montreal and as we went for the same small gap I felt his spike again my shin.
It caused me little inconvenience and even less pain and I was still able to manoeuvre myself into reasonable position and qualify for the final.
The experience of racing again John at those Games left a small scar (of which I was quite proud) and a big impression.
He had a tremendous presence, an aura of invincibility that was both intimidating and impressive.
Indeed, in the final I had the strange sensation of feeling privileged to be running with him rather than determined to try to beat him.
He spent the final trying to get in the right position to win the race.
I spent most of it attempting to get close enough to him so he could spike my other shin and give me a matching pair.
By now John should have become the first 40-year-old to break four minutes for the mile.
He became a Veteran in January, but instead of celebrating this final milestone, his career has apparently ended the way we all dread, with a long-term, recurring injury.
Walker is more than just one of the all-time great middle distance runners, he was a pioneer, a barrier breaker who set new standards of performance and of attitude towards the art of miling.
Coe, Ovett, and Cram served their apprenticeship shadowing him.
he was the man to beat and the one aspiring middle distance runners learnt most from.
The history books will list the world records, Olympic title and the record number of sub four-minute miles, but that alone doesn't do justice to the man who consistently put his reputation on the line, changed our notions on the possible longevity of a miler's career and who, I believe, was the inspiration that heralded the greatest decade in the history of British middle distance running.
There are many of us who owe him a great deal.