

Bear attack
TWO women were critically ill in hospital last night after they were savaged by an escaped circus bear.
They were attacked after the bear broke free from its cage in central Moscow.
Police marksmen had to fire 16 bullets into the animal before it died.
Santa clawed
A GANG of children scratched, kicked and punched Father Christmas as he delivered presents to a Rotterdam nursery.
Dutch police told off two of the gang, aged 10 and 11.
Sinead: I'll sell my home for charity appeal
Neville Thurlbeck
SINGER Sinead O'Connor stunned millions of TV viewers yesterday by ringing a live show and donating her £500,000 Hollywood home to charity.
The controversial star, who had a Number One hit with Nothing Compares 2U, made the snap decision after watching harrowing film on ITV's This Morning of starving children in Somalia.
During the heart-rending scenes, viewers were told thousands would die unless the Red Cross could raise £2 million by February.
Moments later, bewildered presenter Richard Madeley told viewers: ‘We have some amazing news.
Sinead O'Connor has phoned and donated her house in Los Angeles to the appeal.
‘It's obviously worth hundreds of thousands.
We are thrilled.
She didn't want to come on air.
We are slightly stunned.’
The mansion, set in magnificent gardens overlooking Hollywood's Griffith's Park, has five bedrooms with en suite bathrooms, three huge reception rooms and a swimming pool.
It will be auctioned at the Savoy in London on February 18 next year.
‘It is a beautiful house and Sinead has very traditional tastes,’ Sinead's New York publicist Elaine Shock said last night.
‘It is an amazing gesture, but I'm not surprised.
‘Sinead does a lot of very nice things but only gets negative publicity.
She is a very kind and soft-hearted person really.’
Sinead, who is worth an estimated £5 million, owns one other home — a four-bedroom terraced house in west London.
A Red Cross spokesman said last night: ‘This is a magnificent and extremely generous gesture.
It gets us off to a wonderful start.’
The appeal number for donations is 071-245 1000.
Death wish 5 Bronson 71
ACTOR Charles Bronson is to make Death Wish Five — at the age of 71.
Bronson will return to the role of Paul Kersey to take on the Mafia in the latest sequel to the vigilante saga.
He already has plans to appear in Death Wish Six and Seven.
Producer Menachem Golan said: ‘Bronson is in wonderful shape.
I have never seen him looking better.
‘He works out twice a day.
If you saw him you would not believe it.
As soon as I heard he wanted to work we got going.
‘It was a matter of finding the right story and getting a script he liked.’
Bronson immersed himself in work on television movies after his actress wife Jill Ireland died of cancer two years ago but he is now set to marry girlfriend Kim Weeks, 31.
Singer Carole Lore will star alongside Bronson in the film.
Shooting begins in Ontario, Canada, in February.
Cheltzie, 7, sues school for sexual harassment
Andrew Penman
A GIRL of seven has become the youngest person ever to sue for sexual harassment.
Cheltzie Hentz is taking legal action against two fellow primary school pupils after they swore at her on a bus.
The school authorities gave the boys involved a stern ticking-off, told their parents, and banned them from the bus.
But that did not satisfy Cheltzie's mother who says the incident was a gross infringement of her daughter's human rights.
Mrs Mutziger Hentz, a graduate in counselling and psychotherapy, claims the teasing could have scarred her daughter for life.
The case has attracted nationwide attention and split the community in the small American town of Eden Prairie, Minnesota.
Mrs Hentz filed a complaint on her daughter's behalf with the state Human Rights Department and, still not appeased, took the matter to the US Office Of Civil Rights.
But some people think she is over-reacting.
‘No one trusts her motives in suing the district,’ says a spokesman for the local parent-teacher organisation.
And an education official believes the case has been blown out of all proportion.
‘We don't think this was sexual harassment,’ he says.
‘The boys simply used bad language, and we did something about it.’
Mac movie hits £25m
CHILD star Macaulay Culkin smashed all box office records when his film Home Alone II took £25 million in its first five days.
Takings were even more stunning as most tickets were sold half-price to children when the film went on release in America.
The movie is expected to overtake ET, which made more than £475 million, as the highest earner in Hollywood history.
Experts predict the Home Alone sequel will hit £50 million in just 15 days.
It took the original 23 days to earn that much.
Ticket sales were boosted by the Thanksgiving holidays when millions of Americans headed for cinemas.
Home Alone II opens in Britain on December 11.
Carjack then execution as the terrifying craze sinks to new depths
Tim Miles in Florida
IT started as just another example of the carjacking craze that has swept America and has now hit here.
Four friends travelling home from a Florida nightclub were rammed from behind.
As the driver stopped to check his Nissan Pathfinder for damage, the red pickup truck which hit it pulled alongside.
A group of six men asked if everything was all right.
For that split second, it was.
But minutes later, this carjacking took a deadly new twist.
Each member of the gang pulled out a gun.
Two of them burst into the Pathfinder and bundled the three men and a women into the back.
As they were driven away, she was branded a a ‘black whore’ who was ‘fooling about with white trash’by one of the black gang.
With the car radio blaring and the pickup following, they drove 10 miles to remote farmland near Disney World.
There, the terrified woman could only watch as her three friends were forced to strip in the glare of the Pathfinder's headlights.
They were told to lie down, face first in the damp grass.
Shivering and crying, their pleas for mercy were met with laughter and abuse.
Then the woman watched a gunman fire single bullets, one by one, into the back of their heads.
Her boyfriend and another pal died instantly.
Miraculously, one survived by feigning death.
The bullet gouged through Michael Rentas's right hand, but it was deflected, missing his skull by a millimetre.
To fool the killers, he ‘played dead’ while his two friends were shot in the back of the head.
‘I just lay there and wouldn't move,’ he said.
‘I didn't want to be shot again.
‘My heart was pounding so loud I thought they'd hear it.
I prayed for God to let me live.
‘I heard the shots and held my breath.
I knew my friends were dead.
There was nothing I could do.’
He remembered one of the gunmen kept repeating: ‘If you guys ain't got no money I'm in the mood to kill tonight.’
The woman, Tammy George, 25, was unhurt.
‘They drove us to a lonely creek,’ she said.
‘I was kept in the vehicle while my friends were ordered to strip.
‘They were helpless and scared.
I could do nothing but watch.
‘The guys were shot one by one by this one gunman who was very methodical.
The music was loud and the killers were laughing like it was a picnic.
‘While we were being taken there, one of the gunmen asked me why I was hanging out with white guys.
I don't know why they left me there alive.’
The gang sped off in the Pathfinder after abandoning the overheating pickup, stolen the night before, 30ft from the bodies of the two friends.
Tammy helped Michael stagger naked and bleeding to a road where a passer-by stopped to summon help.
Hardened detectives say the carjacking murders are the worst incident yet in a spate of hundreds nationwide where drivers have been killed, raped and robbed.
The countdown to terror started when Michael and Anthony Faiella, 17, of Kissimmee, Florida, drove to a popular nightclub on the outskirts of St Cloud to pick up Anthony Clifton and his girlfriend Tammy.
Clifton, 20, a high school football hero, had spent the night dancing and drinking.
He needed a lift back to Kissimmee, a dormitory town for Disney World and hotel venue for more than 100,000 British tourists a year.
The friends were carjacked as Failla, the Pathfinder owner, neared Clifton's home in the early hours of Sunday.
The Pathfinder was later found abandoned.
It was the only thing taken other than the victims' clothing.
‘These murders were brutal and evil,’ said Kissimmee police chief Jack Pate.
‘We may be looking at a racial motive, but there is no doubt they were copying the other carjackings.’
‘They left the woman as a witness.
They weren't joking around.’
Dad shoots ‘raid’ girl
A MAN shot dead his teenage daughter after mistaking her for a burglar.
The 16-year-old girl went into her parents' bedroom at 11pm to wake her father when he grabbed a revolver at his bedside and fired twice.
She was pronounced dead on arrival at hospital.
Her father, a farmer from the Hartbeespoort Dam area, north west of Johannesburg, was yesterday appearing in court on possible murder charges.
Sunnie smiled but she knew it was the end
Finlay Marshall
THE years of campaigning for the release of her husband held hostage in Beirut finally took their toll on Sunnie Mann yesterday.
Sunnie, the 78-year-old wife of Jackie Mann, who was freed just over a year ago, briefly regained consciousness before passing away.
‘She and Jack held hands,’ said TV journalist Brent Sadler, who was at her side in Cyprus's Evangelistria Clinic.
‘She opened her eyes and I said, ‘You can beat this again’.
She half-smiled, and one knew that she had decided this was the end.’
Sunnie, who had lung cancer, waged a long campaign for her husband's release.
Her doctor, Helen Soteriou, said it had left her with no resources for her final battle against serious illness.
‘She said Sunnie had finally run out of steam,’ said Mr Sadler.
‘Jackie was called to the hospital early this morning.
He was there for some time, and was with her when she regained consciousness for the last time.’
Mr Sadler said Sunnie was like a second mother to him.
‘We spent so much time together.
She came to rely on me for help and support and I am very, very upset.
She was a tremendous woman.’
Former World War II fighter pilot Jackie, 78, was the oldest Westerner held hostage in the Lebanon.
While some believed her husband was dead, Sunnie — real name Dilys but nicknamed Sunnie because of her happy nature — refused to give up hope.
When he was released in September 1991 after 865 days in captivity the couple moved to Cyprus to begin a new life together.
Friends were manning the telephone at the Manns' home last night.
‘Jackie can't speak to anyone at the moment.
He is very shocked,’ said one.
Jackie's brother-in-law, Joe Rubython, said: ‘Jack phoned last weekend and said Sunnie had had an operation which was 100 per cent successful.
He expected her to recover fully.
‘Sunnie was so full of life and in the past 12 months she and Jackie have lived a whole new lifetime together.’
Prime Minister John Major said he was ‘very sad’ to hear of Sunnie's death.
‘Sunnie's courage and fighting spirit throughout Jackie's imprisonment made her a national figure,’ he said.
Five die in rail crash
FIVE people were killed and 33 injured when a packed train skidded off the rails and spun into trees yesterday.
Wheels and parts of the cars' undercarriage were scattered along the track as rescue workers struggled to pull survivors from the wreckage of the train in the Amsterdam suburb of Hoofddorp.
Four cars derailed, two rolling on their side and ending up 20 yards from the line.
‘It was a nightmare,’ a survivor told Dutch television after crawling out of the mangled wreckage.
‘The train was full.
People were screaming and crying and trying to move.
Some were badly hurt.’
Many passengers suffered broken bones or concussion as they were flung through the car.
Some were catapulted out of smashed windows, while others were trapped and had to be cut free.
Oil chief's killer gets 95 years
A SECURITY guard who kidnapped and killed an oil chief was jailed for a maximum 95 years yesterday.
Former policeman Arthur Seale and his wife Irene snatched Exxon president Sidney Reso from the driveway of his New Jersey home in April.
They demanded £12 million for his safe release.
But during the kidnap they shot 57-year-old Reso in the arm then kept him handcuffed, bound and gagged in a box in a storage vault.
He died in May and the Seales buried him in a shallow grave in a park.
Seale, 45, who was arrested after a massive manhunt, yesterday admitted extortion, conspiracy, and possessing weapons.
Judge Garrett Brown said he would spend the rest of his life in prison with no chance of parole.
The former Exxon security consultant is also expected to be sentenced to life in a separate case for kidnapping and murder.
Mrs Seale, who turned state evidence, admitted extortion.
She faces 25 years in prison.
Reso's widow Patricia, who went to the court, said of Seale: ‘I believe him to be an evil person, a sick person.
‘We're just coming out of shock and are now beginning to pay the price for what he has done.
I don't think he is remorseful.’
Quake alert
THERE is a 12 per cent chance of a major earthquake hitting southern California next year, scientists predicted yesterday.
The figure is three time higher than previous estimates.
British girls in safari murder
Geraint Jones and Matthew Benns
THE mutilated bodies of two British women tourists have been washed up on a deserted South African beach.
Murder victims Julie Godwin, mother of a young child, and Elizabeth Over, both 30, were holidaying at a remote bush camp close to the Mozambique border in Zululand.
The pick-up truck they used to drive to the coast was found abandoned and bloodstained nearby.
Both women's bodies were torn apart from being dashed against jagged rocks ringing the shoreline at the reserve near Sodwana, north of Natal.
Police believe the two friends were attacked while sunbathing and raped and murdered before being dumped in the sea.
A spokesman said: ‘We are working on the theory the motive was robbery or sex or both.
‘There were signs of a struggle and there was a lot of blood around.’
Julie's devastated husband Tim, 32, was last night preparing to fly from their home in Northampton to identify his wife's body.
Elizabeth, of Taunton, Somerset, was working as an advertising executive in Durban and had announced her engagement just three days before her death.
Her distraught South African fiance Cuan Cronje had planned to accompany the two women on their safari trip but cancelled at the last minute.
‘I found I could not afford it so I pulled out,’ he said.
‘Now I just wish I had gone.
But I know that part of the country and have been there many times.
I regarded it as one of the safest areas of Zululand.’
A Foreign Office spokesman confirmed: ‘South African police are treating the matter as murder.
The bodies were washed up on a beach about four miles from where they are presumed to have been murdered.’
The two friends were last seen sunbathing together at the weekend.
Their towels, umbrellas and beach bags were later discovered close to the Isuzu truck.
Police initially believed the two women had drowned.
But then the bloodstained vehicle was found.
Officers said the women's bodies had been viciously mutilated and dismembered.
A spokesman said: ‘The damage may have been caused by the surf dragging them over the rocks.
It is a remote area and it is hard to tell exactly what happened.’
The two women were staying at the Baya Camp at Lake Sibaya, an isolated settlement popular with tourists seeking to experience the African bush in the wild.
One local said: ‘It is a very remote region indeed and very few people ever get up there.’
The two women, who met at college, had excitedly planned their reunion in Durban before Elizabeth's marriage next June.
She was godmother to Julie's 23-month-old daughter Sophie and Mr Godwin and Sophie had been due to fly out to join the group on Friday.
The two friends left Durban in Mr Cronje's truck on Friday for the Maputaland Marine Reserve 120 miles away.
Businessman Tim Godwin last night paid tribute to ‘the remarkable woman I shared 11 years of my life with’.
He said: ‘I am completely shattered.
‘I have just had part of me amputated.
Julie meant everything to me, all of our plans, all of the things we were going to do have been surgically removed.
‘I am numb, I do not even feel anger towards whoever did it.’
Julie was co-director of an information technology firm she helped to establish and which now employs 25 people.
‘My wife was one of life's chosen people.
Everybody who met her said she was extremely special and talented.
‘She was a successful businesswoman, a wonderful wife and mother and a good friend.
‘The only thing that can be said is that somebody has just snuffed out a very special person who was going to achieve an incredible amount in life.
‘She had already done so much and would have done a lot more.
‘This is a completely pointless tragedy.
It was not as if they were going out alone on the High Veld.
This was a government-patrolled reserve and they were staying nights in resorts.
They should have been safe.’
Elizabeth, who met her fiance on holiday five years ago, was described last night as a kind person who ‘would not see evil in anyone’.
She had lived in Durban since February and obtained a residents' permit two months ago.
Her brother Richard, 34, said: ‘I and my family are completely devastated.
What makes it worse is that nobody seems to know what happened.’
Killing fields in the sun
Adrian Lee
SOUTH Africa attracts many UK emigrants, not least because of its paradise sunshine.
But it also has a violent side which has claimed several British victims in the past decade (See graphic, right):
Farmer Anthony Slade, 28, was shot dead in October 1992 by a raider at his home in Somerset West, near Cape Town.
He had emigrated from Hampshire, with 26-year-old girlfriend Tracey Farmer to escape the recession and start a new life.
In November 1991 the mutilated body of Alan Kidger, 48, from Hebburn, Tyne and Wear, was found in the boot of his BMW car near Johannesburg.
Former steelworker Stuart McMillan was shot dead in September 1991 just days before he was due to fly home to Britain for a family re-union.
Stuart, 26, from Lanarkshire, emigrated with his wife and children after landing a job as a mineworker, in Witbank, 95 miles from Johannesburg.
In June 1988 Margaret Turner, 39, of Torquay, Devon, was stabbed to death during a gang attack in Pretoria.
The family moved to South Africa when her husband Tony found work with an engineering firm.
Ann Coghlin, 52, from Harrogate, North Yorks, died in July 1987 when she was stabbed by an intruder at her home on the Natal estate.
More than a million expatriate Britons now live in South Africa, taking advantage of the higher standard of living caused by excellent exchange rates.
Ironically, many also gave the lower crime rate in their adopted homeland as one of their reasons for leaving Britain.
Fergie's all at sea with Budgie
Charles Rae in Poland
THE Duchess of York yesterday left cancer-stricken Polish children lost for words when she handed out copies of her Budgie books in English.
As she dished out three dozen copies of Budgie Goes To Sea, Fergie even boasted: ‘I wrote this myself, you know.’
Nine-year-old Lukas was totally bemused by the book.
He turned to his mother and said: ‘But I can't understand this.’
It followed news of a £3 million deal with Nintendo distributors Bandai to market Budgie — supporting a Polish fortune-teller's revelations that Fergie was about to become a wealthy woman.
Fergie also brought soft toys and play bricks to add to a £25,000 consignment sent by British-based charity Angels International to the Zabrze Hospital in Upper Silesa.
Sebastian Nocon got a huge key ring with the letter S on it from Fergie.
The 13-year-old said: ‘Thank you, what is it?’
After getting an explanation, he replied: ‘But I have only got one key.’
The duchess plans to fly to Cyprus to attend the funeral of Sunnie Mann who she called ‘My adopted granny’.
Sinead is back on song
Jim Gallagher, in New York
SINEAD O'Connor is set to resume her pop career after confessing her decision to quit was too hasty.
The controversial singer vowed to give up after she was booed off-stage at a Bob Dylan tribute concert in New York in October.
The bald star had been left in tears earlier when fans jeered her for ripping up a picture of the Pope on a US chat show.
‘I suppose you could put it down to a bad mood,’ she said yesterday.
‘I just didn't want to have people treat me like an animal.’
Sinead, 25, who has donated her £500,000 Hollywood home to charity, said she did not regret tearing up the picture.
Puma and tabby
No, Minkie the puma doesn't fancy a helping of plump tabby, they're just good friends.
Minkie, 16, and pal Pikantus live with a couple in Munich, Germany.
Lolita gets 15 years for shooting wife
Jim Gallagherin New York
A SCHOOLGIRL who shot her alleged lover's wife through the head was jailed yesterday.
Amy Fisher, dubbed the Long Island Lolita, was described as a wild animal by the judge.
Moments earlier 18-year-old Fisher came face to face with victim Mary Jo Buttafuoco for the first time since the doorstep shooting.
Mrs Buttafuoco, 39, begged the court to order her attacker to serve at least 7½ years.
The mother-of-two is in constant pain.
Her jaw is shattered, face disfigured and she is deaf.
The bullet is still lodged in her brain.
‘If it moves I face paralysis and perhaps death,’ she said.
Her daughter Jessica wrote a letter to the New York court saying: ‘Please make Amy Fisher stay in jail for a long time so she can't hurt my mom again.’
Fisher was ordered to serve five to 15 years.
She made a plea bargain, admitting a reduced charge of assault in return for Joe Buttafuoco escaping sex charges.
Judge Marvin Goodman told her: ‘Your acts were not impulsive.
Motivated by lust you were a walking stick of dynamite.’
Mr Buttafuoco, 36, has always denied the affair.
Fisher insists he encouraged her to kill Mary Jo.
Golf ace Fred faces £10m suit from his spurned wife
Tim Miles in Florida
THE wife of golf star Fred Couples claims he has frozen her out of their marriage — and she intends to make him pay for it.
Blonde, polo-playing Deborah Couples plans to sue for half of Fred's £20 million fortune.
‘I've been a devoted wife to him and done nothing wrong in our marriage,’ said Debbie, 33, at their £1 million home at the Palm Beach Polo Club, in Wellington, Florida yesterday.
‘But he wants out.
He has made that very clear.’
Debbie has filed for divorce from Couples — also 33 — demanding the Florida home, plus generous alimony.
‘I still love him,’ she said.
‘I don't like the fact that I am being pushed out in the cold.
His attitude shows he doesn't want me around any more.
‘I am devastated by it all.
Fred has given me no good reason for wanting us to break up our marriage like this.’
In the past, Debbie has denied infuriating her less-ebullient husband by dancing on a table to the song I'm Too Sexy.
Couples, PGA Player of the Year and Masters Champion, is heading for Bophuthatswana, sp OK South Africa, for the Million Dollar Challenge.
‘I wanted to be with him while he was touring.
But he doesn't want me,’ she said.
‘I don't think there is any hope of a reconciliation.’
Couples, who earns £5 million a year, could be in for a bitter courtroom battle.
Debbie's lawyer, John Christiansen, said she can claim half their assets, because she gave up a promising tennis career for Fred's sake.
The lawyer added, darkly: ‘There are factors Mrs Couples has discovered.
I cannot expand at present.
But she has done nothing to deserve this.’
McEnroe: my wedding woe
TENNIS star John McEnroe admitted last night that his six-year marriage to Tatum O'Neal was in trouble.
He added that both he and his 29-year-old wife had hired lawyers to deal with their difficulties.
‘Tatum and I are having marital problems, just as many other married couples do,’ McEnroe said in a statement.
‘I intend to work hard at finding a sensible solution that's best for our entire family.
This is a very painful time for me and, I'm sure, for Tatum as well.’
The announcement followed revelations that McEnroe, 30, did not want his Oscar-winning wife to resume her acting career.
Tatum fled from their New York home late on Sunday night.
The couple have three children Kevin, six, Sean, five, and Emily, one.
Aids ruling
AIDS victim Alberto Gonzalez, 28, got five years jail yesterday for trying to murder a girl of 17 by unsafe sex.
He was convicted at Portland, Oregon.
Whitney's new role
SINGER Whitney Houston, whose first film Bodyguard is set to become a smash hit, has turned her back on movie stardom.
‘Contrary to public belief, it's not all it is cracked up to be,’ said Whitney, whose first role is opposite Kevin Costner.
Six-months pregnant Whitney, left, says she plans instaed to be a good wife and mother and control her life.
Hotel sued over bedroom spyhole
Liz Hodgson, in Los Angeles
GUESTS staying in Holiday Inn hotels didn't realise they were paying for a surprise extra — a peephole for staff to spy on them in bed.
A search of the British-owned chain's 1,700 hotels around the world was ordered when two guests sued for damages.
‘The only reason for the peephole being there is for employees of the hotel to watch people undressing, showering or involved in sexual intercourse,’ said lawyer Jerry Summer.
He represents Marilyn Heaton and her 18-year-old daughter Tara who are seeking damages in a lawsuit in Tennessee, America.
‘We can prove that Holiday Inn management had knowledge of the peepholes and did nothing about it,’ added Mr Summer.
Earlier this year five other guests were awarded more than £6 million after a jury heard 80 per cent of the rooms in a South Carolina hotel had spyholes.
The sum was later reduced to £300,000 on appeal.
The management had claimed the holes, connected to a maintenance corridor, were put in when the hotel was built.
The construction company denied being involved.
Holiday Inn spokesman Bob Gibbons said: ‘This is not widespread.
However, a single instance is one too many.’
Both hotels involved in the lawsuits were run as franchises, he added.
Britons tell of escape from jet crash carnage
Emma Campbell and Geraint Jones
A BRITISH couple told last night how they jumped for their lives when their holiday jet crash-landed in a torrential storm.
Businessman John Watts, 52, said it was a miracle any of the 340 passengers and crew survived the worst air disaster in Portugal for 20 years.
At least 54 people, including several children, died when the DC-10 split in half and exploded at Faro Airport.
‘I thought we might be talking about hundreds and hundreds dead,’ said holiday operator Mr Watts.
He threw his wife Sheila out of an emergency exit before leaping into the darkness after her seconds before the explosion.
Mr Watts, whose RAF brother died in an air crash more than 30 years ago, said: ‘There were clouds and clouds of thick black smoke and I lost Sheila.
I was wandering around looking for her and the plane exploded behind me.
‘I could hear people screaming on board and there were people lying on the grass by the side of the runway.
People were milling about everywhere.
‘Then I saw my wife, drenched and burned all down one side, and we were together again.
‘I flung my arms round her and we walked the very long way to the terminal in the pouring rain and it didn't matter at all.’
Another British survivor told how the roof caved in before a sheet of flames spread across the fuselage, cutting him off from his wife.
Engineer Gerald Sutherland, who lives in Uden, Holland, said: ‘There were a lot of brave people in that plane.
They were helping each other.
‘One woman near me collapsed and other passengers lifted her out.
‘Eventually I got onto the runway and found my wife.
Then, about a minute later, there was huge explosion which threw debris everywhere.’
Mr Sutherland and his wife, Anita, who were planning to spend Christmas in the Algarve, were last night trying to organise a flight back to Holland.
‘It was going to be a Christmas holiday away from it all, now we don't want to stay out here a moment longer than necessary,’ he said.
Thirteen of the survivors had suffered severe burns.
The pilot and co-pilot of the jet, owned by Dutch charter company Martinair, escaped with broken bones, said a spokesman.
The Foreign Office in London was last night trying to discover if any other Britons had boarded the plane.
A spokesman said there were ‘fewer than 10’ whose surnames could be either Dutch or British.
The airline said they feared one of the dead was a British woman named Rebecca Gunner, who was known to be travelling on the flight but who has not so far been traced among the injured and rescued.
Father-of-two Mr Watts was returning to his home in Portugal after a shopping trip to Amsterdam.
He said: ‘The pilot tried to come down once and aborted it.
‘The second time we came in there was this tremendous bang.
Then chaos.
‘Luckily we were in the very last row.
We are both bruised and feeling stiff, but we know we're the lucky ones.’
Call for a rerun in Serb election
PRIME Minister of former Yugoslavia, Milan Panic, has demanded a re-run of the Serbian presidential elections amid claims of a dirty tricks campaign.
Early returns show bitter rival and outgoing President Slobodan Milosevic well ahead in the race.
Angry spokesman Teodor Olic yesterday claimed TV coverage had shown blatant bias against Panic.
Even though both are Serbs, all TV in the country is run by Milosevic.
Independent monitors also said they are shocked at the abuse against Panic.
Olivia's darkest day
Neville Thurlbeck
BRAVE singer Olivia Newton-John told of the nightmare day she learned she had cancer just hours after her father died.
The double blow left the 43-year-old Grease star numb with shock.
She had lost one of the most important people in her life.
Now she had to face the agony of surgery to remove part of her right breast.
Olivia was on holiday with actor husband Matt Lattanzi, 32, when the telephone rang.
‘It was July 3.
Matt answered.
He heard my father had died and the doctors said they needed to see me.
I knew then it was cancer because doctors don't call you into their office unless there's something wrong.’
At the surgery, Olivia's worst fears were confirmed.
‘I sat down and said to the doctor ‘So I have cancer’ and he said ‘Yes’.
‘I didn't feel anything at first.
Then later, when I was by myself in the examining room, you know, your stomach drops a few times.
I kept telling myself ‘You'll be okay, you've just got to go through this’.
‘When I got home, that's when it hit me.
I woke in the middle of the night and walked downstairs.
My legs felt like lead.
Then I imagined it was all through my body and that I was going to die.
‘That first night was the worst night ever of my life.’
Despite the pain and the worry, Olivia knew she had to be brave for the sake of her six-year-old daughter Chloe, she told Hello! magazine.
Chloe's best pal had died from cancer earlier that year.
To her, the word meant death.
‘She knew I had to have an operation,’ said Olivia.
‘But I never mentioned the word cancer.
It was a rule in my house.’
Olivia — whose hits include You're The One That I Want, Physical and Xanadu — still has a tough fight ahead, but she is a born fighter and is now planning to write a book to help other breast cancer sufferers.
‘I now live for the moment.
When I'm drinking a glass of water, I'm drinking a glass of water and not thinking about five other things at the same time.
That's made me a lot calmer.
‘I don't say, ‘Why me?’
I say, ‘Why not me?’
It could happen to anybody.’
Tragic jetski fiance buried
A JETSKIER who died in a freak holiday accident was buried yesterday.
Martin Sinclair, 38, was mown down by a speedboat only days after arriving in Antigua.
He gave up his Exeter social services job to travel with his girlfriend.
An inquest was opened and adjourned.
A grim echo of Lockerbie
THE disaster was a bleak reminder of four years ago to the day, when a bombed Pan Am Jumbo crashed on the village of Lockerbie.
Yesterday the arguments about bringing those responsible for the 270 deaths to justice were still raging.
A group representing families of the British victims marked the anniversary by handing in a petition to 10 Downing Street calling for a public inquiry.
The group is dismayed by the lack of action by Britain and America.
It wants to know who planted the bomb, who they were acting for and why Flight 103 was chosen.
Group co-ordinator Jean Berkley, whose son Alistair, 21, died at Lockerbie, said: ‘The agony will not diminish, nor will air travellers be safe and secure, until the full truth is known.’
The Foreign Office said it was still determined Libya should hand over two of its countrymen wanted for the attack.
Wall of fire blocked my way out
Geraint Jones
A BRITISH passenger told last night of the moment he was separated from his wife by a wall of flames as their holiday jet crash-landed.
Gerald Sutherland, 41, said: ‘For a few seconds the doors were shut and people were really panicking, then they opened and passengers rushed out as quickly as they could.
‘I lost my wife.
She went out of one door but then a sheet of flame came down and blocked me, so I had to look for another way out.’
Mr Sutherland, who lives in Holland, was reunited with his 27-year-old wife Anita on the tarmac — seconds before the DC-10 exploded, showering them with debris.
Last night, accident investigators were still trying to find out what exactly caused the disaster.
Officials at Faro Airport said the three-engined plane crashed on its second attempt to land in heavy rain and crosswinds of up to 40mph.
The pilot, who survived, gave no indication of technical problems as he came in to land.
He was too shocked to give any account of what had happened.
The ‘black box’ recorder was recovered and is being analysed.
Experts believe there was a last-minute loss of control caused by the weather conditions.
Benno Baksteen, chairman of the Dutch pilots' association, said: ‘A sudden loss of wind can cause the aircraft to lose wind speed suddenly and to such an extent that it can no longer fly and falls.’
One witness said: ‘The plane had already landed, but the wind came under the wings and lifted it back into the air.
‘The right wing hit the ground, the plane flipped over and then exploded.’
Airport director Carlos Saruca Salgado said the jet broke in two, spilling passengers on to the ground and a fire broke out in the rear of the fuselage.
He said 13 of the survivors had severe burns, but many others were suffering from shock.
The wreckage of the plane lay about 100 metres to the seaward side of the runway, where it had broken in two just in front of the wing section.
The wings, tail and engines were charred black and brown and wreckage was seen 200 metres away from the crash site.
A pair of wheels stood next to a red marker beacon.
Passengers' baggage had spilled out of the hold and burst suitcases, charred books, swimming costumes and tubes of sun tan cream were scattered on the ground.
Portugal's transport minister Joaquim Ferreira do Amaral and health minister Arlindo Carvalho went to the scene to supervise rescue operations and set up an inquiry.
‘One factor which certainly exercised an influence was the dreadful weather at the time,’ Do Amaral said.
‘But we will have to wait and see whether this was the actual cause of the accident.’
Do Amaral said the control tower were unaware of the plane being in trouble as it came in to land.
The approach was ‘totally normal’.
The McDonnell Douglas DC-10 has never managed to shake off its jinx-jet image.
A total of 19 have now been involved in disasters which cost the lives of 1,500 passengers and crew.
At one stage in its 20-year production, American aviation chiefs withdrew its licence to fly after doubts about safety.
But 360 DC-10s are still in service throughout the world.
Mia cash to be counted
ACTRESS Mia Farrow was ordered to reveal her fortune and value of a book deal by a judge yesterday.
The New York court is to rule whether former lover Woody Allen, 57, should pick up her £150,000 legal bill in their custody battle.
His lawyer claims Farrow, 47, is worth £1.9 million and has signed a £1.5 million autobiography deal.
The actress says she must sell her home to pay.
I would die for Whitney
A FORMER British bobby is prepared to lay down his life for superstar Whitney Houston.
Minder David Roberts would stand in front of a gunman to protect the singer, who has made her movie debut in The Bodyguard.
In it Whitney plays a singer who falls in love with her bodyguard, played by Kevin Costner, after receiving death threats.
Like Costner, David, 40, has had to guard Whitney from hordes of obsessed fans in the four years he has been working for her.
‘Cranks write to Whitney every day.
But before the letters can reach her, I intercept them,’ he told America's Star magazine.
‘I really do live for Whitney.
I'm her bullet-catcher and would die for her.
‘I'm fully prepared to step in front of her if a gunman suddenly pops up.
‘Unfortunately, she wants to meet her fans and sign autographs.’
But unlike the movie there is no hint of romance with the pregnant wife of singer Bobby Brown.
‘She treats me more like a father figure,’ David said.
Woody ‘abuse’ video anger
FILM director Woody Allen has seen the video tape his former lover Mia Farrow made of his daughter claiming he abused her.
‘The poor seven-year-old is badgered,’ he said.
‘She is made to recite, she is led, photographed naked, and coached by the off-camera voice of her mother.
‘The thought that any mother could manipulate their child into making this ludicrous and wicked cassette and appallingly arrange for it to be bought up by a TV network tells you all you have to know.’
Nigel's room to manouevre
PUNK violinist Nigel Kennedy has escaped having a good behaviour pledge slapped on him after smashing up a hotel room.
‘You may as well ask us to guarantee world peace,’ said record company EMI's Louise Bagshawe.
‘He hardly has a reputation to protect.’
Kennedy, 36, caused £3,000 worth of damage to his £350-a-night penthouse suite in Berlin, ruining sofas, carpets and china.
He is currently No 1 in the classical charts with Beethoven's Violin Concerto.
Deadly jinx of Lockerbie
Adrian Lee
A JET crashed yesterday killing all 157 people on board— bringing chilling echoes of the Lockerbie disaster.
The Libyan Arab Airlines Boeing 727 came down the day after the fourth anniversary of the Lockerbie bomb — allegedly planted by two Libyans — which killed 270.
The Lockerbie flight number was 103.
The Libyan internal flight from Benghazi to Tripoli was 1103.
Officials are investigating Tripoli residents' reports that the airliner hit a military plane.
Dr Jim Swire, of the Lockerbie Action Group UK Families Flight 103, said: ‘The coincidence of the two flight numbers and the anniversary is a bit sinister and I find it hard to believe there is no connection.
‘In the last four years we have been asked to believe too many coincidences.
‘It is certainly very strange but we will have to wait for the outcome of an investigation.’
The Foreign Office was last night checking if any British workers were among the dead.
The plane was due to connect with the hydrofoil service to Malta which is used by British oil workers.
Britons are advised not to use Libyan internal flights because sanctions against export of aviation parts to the country make planes unsafe and uninsurable.
But a British diplomat said there were passengers who ignored the warnings.
Dr Swire, whose daughter Flora was among the Lockerbie dead, said: ‘At the very least I think the Libyans will blame the sanctions imposed after Lockerbie for the crash.
‘But I hope they will allow independent investigators access to the inquiry.’
Dr Swire is still campaigning for a public inquiry into Lockerbie.
He claims security loopholes which allowed terrorists to plant the bomb are still open.
British women on Faro crash flight
A BRITISH woman and her two daughters were last night believed to be among the victims of the Faro air disaster.
Divorcee Rebecca Gunner and daughters Sarah and Nicola were flying from Amsterdam for a sunshine break on the Algarve, Portugal.
The family had tickets for a section of the plane engulfed in flames.
A survivor has told investigators she was sitting next to a British woman who was killed.
Mrs Gunner's ex-husband was preparing to fly to Faro last night clinging to hopes that she may have missed the flight.
Identification of victims is being hampered because passenger lists are inaccurate.
A Portuguese spokesman said: ‘It's distressing.
The only proper list is of those in hospitals.’
Investigators confirmed yesterday that the crash was caused by wind shear — an unexpected gust near ground level.
Everest climb fails
FOUR intrepid Everest climbers had to admit defeat last night as they were beaten back by deep snow and bitter winds on the riskiest bid in history.
Britons Harry Taylor, Mal Duff, Mike Smith and American Bill Pelkey were carrying just half a tent and minimal oxygen when they made their final push.
Five hours later they sent the radio message: ‘It's all over.’
TV Bakker's jail term cut
DISGRACED TV evangelist Jim Bakker has had his 45-year jail sentence reduced to eight.
American Bakker conned followers out of £100 million.
They had already turned against him when it was revealed he paid a secretary to keep quiet about an affair.
Bakker's sentence was recently cut to 18, but the judge in Charlotte, North Carolina, considered that ‘harsh’.
Land here, millionaire tells UFOs
AN eccentric millionaire has built his own UFO landing pad.
In case unearthly visitors miss the spot, 73-year-old Wesley Nunley has had ‘UFO Landing Base 1’ printed in 2ft high red letters across the 100ft-wide concrete base.
Science fiction enthusiast Wesley, of Dallas, Texas, believes Earth is being observed from outer space.
‘This could be big.
No one has ever put up a UFO welcome message,’ he said.
A Few Good Men
COURTROOM drama A Few Good Men starring Tom Cruise and Demi Moore, above, took £7 million in three days to beat off opposition from Mel Gibson, Steve Martin and Robin Williams to be No 1 in America's movie top 10 in the run-up to Christmas.
Basketball women net £17m windfall
A WOMEN'S basketball team scooped £17 million yesterday, thanks to The Fat One.
That's the nickname of Spain's giant Christmas lottery, El Gordo, which this year paid out £836 million in thousands of prizes.
Also among the winners was the country's King Juan Carlos.
He won Pounds 86 when his lucky number came up.
A palace spokesman said: ‘His Majesty, like the majority of Spaniards, likes to have a flutter on the Christmas lottery.’
The Santa Rosa basketball club in Barcelona could have doubled their winnings but had to return half their tickets because players and supporters would not buy them.
One punter ran out of the draw in Madrid screaming.
He had won Pounds 574,000.
Last week Heritage Secretary Peter Brooke unveiled plans for Britain's £1 million a week draw.
So far there are no plans for a Christmas special.
Lacroix cuts catwalk shows
Alison Veness
FASHION designer Christian Lacroix will not be showing his designs at this spring's prestigious ready-to-wear shows in Paris.
His absence has fuelled rumours that the house of Lacroix is about to be closed by owner and financial backer Bernard Arnault.
The news has shocked a fashion industry already reeling from the recession.
Arnault established Christian Lacroix in 1987 at a cost of £5 million.
His first collection took the fashion world by storm, breathing new life into the stuffy world of Parisian haute couture.
His bright, clashing prints and revolutionary puff ball skirts were an overnight sensation.
Well-heeled customers Fashion Editorincluding Lucy Ferry, Ivana Trump and Paloma Picasso flocked to buy his distinctive creations.
But cash from the sale of licensed goods, cosmetics, sunglasses and perfume like C'est La Vie, did not flood in and the company has never made a profit.
Losses since 1987 total £24 million.
Lacroix now plans to show his ready-to-wear collection from showrooms saving Arnault up to £150,000 — the cost of a catwalk extravaganza.
At the recently-opened Lacroix boutique in London's chic Sloane Street the bad news hadn't reached them.
‘We are doing fantastically well,’ insisted a spokeswoman.
Sounds of Waterloo as Major cheers troops
PREMIER John Major dropped in for a chat with British troops in the Bosnian front line yesterday.
Startled squaddies received Abba tapes and videos from the would-be Santa Claus as he reassured them they were not forgotten.
Wearing a flak jacket beneath his dark green anorak, Mr Major flew into the former Yugoslavia amid strict secrecy and high security.
He arrived in Split aboard an RAF VC10, and was then taken to Tomislavgrad and the Redoubt, a high altitude forward post, by helicopter and armoured car.
At the Redoubt Mr Major told the 2,400 troops including those from the Cheshire Regiment and Royal Engineers: ‘I wanted to see what was happening on the ground and particularly to express my thanks to you for the work you are doing.
‘What we have asked you to do is not easy.
Without you a lot of men, women and children simply would not survive this winter.’
Mr Major clearly tried to cheer up the troops, and succeeded by promising them all a free 10-minute call home at Christmas.
To one soldier who told him he worked a seven-day week, the Prime Minister retorted: ‘I know the feeling.’
Another soldier, Private Nigel Walmsley, 19, from Macclesfield, Cheshire, told the Prime Minister: ‘I enjoy it here.
We are helping a lot of kids and that makes me feel good.’
Last night America threatened to use Cruise missiles against Serbia to enforce the air exclusion zone over Bosnia.
Pentagon sources made the disclosure as they and Western allies put the finishing touches to a draft United Nations resolution aimed at forcing the Serbs to stop their aggression.
The Cruise missiles would be used to devastate Serbian airfields which are being used for helicopter flights in defiance of the exclusion zone ruling.
Teller robbed bank for love
A BANK clerk robbed the till of £850,000 to keep her married boyfriend in luxury.
When the fraud was discovered she ran off with him to Italy, expecting to live in comfort.
But he had already spent the lot and their affair turned sour.
Jutta Schreier, 28, of Cologne, idolised Italian Stephano Alotta, 39.
Now facing trial, Jutta said: ‘I realise Stephano misused my love.’
Daryl's giant role
SCREEN beauty Daryl Hannah has signed up for her biggest role yet.
The Splash star, left, is to take the lead in a remake of the Fifties sci-fi movie Attack Of The 50ft Woman.
Daryl, 32, who is dating John F Kennedy Jnr after splitting with Jackson Browne, will play Nancy Archer who grows into a giant after coming into contact with aliens.
Major in war zone to cheer up troops
PREMIER John Major dropped in for a chat with British troops in the Bosnian front line yesterday.
Startled squaddies received Abba tapes and videos from the would-be Santa Claus as he reassured them they were not forgotten.
Wearing a flak jacket beneath his dark green anorak, Mr Major flew into the former Yugoslavia amid strict secrecy and high security.
He arrived in Split aboard an RAF VC10, and was then taken to Tomislavgrad and the Redoubt, a high altitude forward post, by helicopter and armoured car.
At the Redoubt Mr Major told troops including those from the Cheshire Regiment and Royal Engineers: ‘I wanted to see what was happening on the ground and particularly to express my thanks to you for the work you are doing.
‘What we have asked you to do is not easy.
Without you a lot of men, women and children simply would not survive this winter.’
Mr Major clearly tried to cheer up the troops, and succeeded by promising them all a free 10-minute call home at Christmas.
To one soldier who told him he worked a seven-day week, the Prime Minister retorted: ‘I know the feeling.’
Another soldier, Private Nigel Walmsley, 19, from Macclesfield, Cheshire, told the Prime Minister: ‘I enjoy it here.
We are helping a lot of kids and that makes me feel good.’
Mr Major was expected back in London at midnight, after his 12-hour visit.
Holiday jail hell
A BRITISH tourist faces Christmas in a crowded Egyptian jail cell charged with smuggling antiques.
Honeymooners Vernon and Jackie Preston, both 26, were arrested in Cairo, accused of terrorism.
Jackie has since been released and the charges dropped.
In a phone call to Vernon's brother Richard, Jackie said they only had cheap ceramic souvenirs.
Richard, of Cheltenham, Glos, said: ‘Jackie was extremely distressed because Vernon had been thrown into a cell with 100 other prisoners.’
British trio in air crash
A BRITISH mother and her two daughters were almost certainly among 54 victims of the air disaster at Faro, Portugal.
An official in the Algarve Civil Governor's office said he was ‘as sure as we can be’ that divorced Rebecca Gunner and teenage daughters Sarah and Nicola, from East Sussex, died in Monday's crash.
‘Three females with tickets in these names were in the area where most perished,’ he said.
‘Nobody named Gunner was among the survivors.’
Eleven victims have still not been identified.
£17m for breast op
A WOMAN whose silicone breast implant ruptured and caused her to have a partial mastectomy was awarded £17 million by an American jury yesterday.
Pamela Jean Johnson, 45, cried when the jurors in a Houston court read the verdict.
She had sought £43 million but outside the court she said: ‘There's no price you can put on this.
I did this for all the other women.’
Another 1,000 similar cases are pending in America.
Since one of her implants ruptured in 1989 she has been disfigured and still has headaches and joint pain.
Suicide bid number two by Bergerac murder man
Geraint Jones
PRISONER Roderick Newall was critically ill last night after trying to kill himself.
It was the second suicide bid by Newall, who is accused of murdering his wealthy parents on the Bergerac island of Jersey five years ago.
A full inquiry has been launched to find out how Newall, 27, was able to take a drugs overdose.
He has been under 24-hour guard in his cell in Gibraltar's grim 13th century prison since slashing his wrists and groin with a razor blade three months ago.
Newall was discovered unconscious and suffering convulsions in his cell — where the light is kept on round the clock — by guards at midday yesterday.
He was taken to the intensive care unit at the colony's St Bernard's Hospital but his life is not believed to be in danger.
The colony's authorities are privately furious Newall was again able to make an attempt on his life under the noses of his guards.
He has been taking medication and it is believed he may have been able to hide some of the drug.
Lloyd's underwriter Nicholas Newall and his wife Elizabeth disappeared from their Channel Islands home in October 1987 after a celebration meal at a Jersey restaurant with Roderick and his brother Mark, 25.
Their bodies have never been found and Bergerac actor John Nettles made his own investigations into the case.
Newall was arrested in August on his yacht by Jersey police aboard a Royal Navy frigate.
After months of legal moves, the bid to have him extradited to Jersey to face trial for murdering his parents has been stalled.
The case has been adjourned until the Rock's Court of Appeal meets in March.
A spokesman for the Attorney General's office in Gibraltar said: ‘There will be an inquiry about this.
He was under constant guard after his last suicide attempt.’
Cruise rejects baby he planned to adopt
Michael McDonough in Miami
HOLLYWOOD'S golden couple Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman have rejected the child they decided just weeks ago to adopt.
They claim publicity surrounding the adoption means the identity of the unborn child's real mother will soon be discovered.
The two stars are furious with officials in Florida for not keeping the affair secret and want those involved in the ‘blatant breach of confidentiality’ fired.
Their lawyers say the couple have been robbed of the opportunity to become a mother and father and the child has been denied the chance to nurtured by the ‘these loving parents’.
In a letter to Judge Daniel TK Hurley the lawyers explain the sudden cancellation of the adoption.
They say the couple ‘are fearful that the birth mother's identity will be discovered and they cannot deal with the repurcussions’.
A court official admitted: ‘The records should not have been made public and it is understandable people get upset.’
But he added: ‘There is the matter of commitment.’
Top Gun star Cruise, 29, insisted Kidman, 25, take a fertility test before they married on Christmas Eve 1990.
The test was positive.
His first marriage to actress Mimi Rogers, 10 years his senior, broke down after just three years.
The fact that it was childless was cited as one reason for its collapse.
He met Kidman on the set of the racing car movie Days of Thunder in Daytona Beach, Florida.
The fact he had lived in Florida helped with the California-based couple's adoption plans because state law demanded prospective parents must have resided in Florida for at least six months.
The couple, both active members of the powerful Church of Scientology, are still keen to adopt.
Cold war arms deal dilemma
RUSSIA has played down hopes that it is to host a superpower summit and sign a major disarmament treaty with the United States.
The Strategic Arms Reduction Talks treaty between the former Cold War enemies would eliminate all land-based multiple warhead missiles and slash warheads by two-thirds.
But negotiators have yet to complete a deal, said foreign ministry spokesman Sergei Yastrzhembsky.
‘The treaty comes first, the meeting second,’ he said.
US officials say the Russians are trying to put pressure on President Bush to make last-minute concessions, knowing that he would like a summit to end his presidential term.
Russian foreign minister Andrei Kozyrev and defence minister Pavel Grachev were today due to meet US Secretary of State Lawrence Eagleburger in Geneva to try to wrap up the agreement.
Former Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev says he regrets the demise of the Soviet Union but says it would be impossible to bring back.
He said Russian president Boris Yeltsin had failed to come up with new ideas and had put politics above the national interest.
Israel bans food for 400 refugees
MORE than 400 Palestinian deportees shivered in a freezing no-mans-land yesterday as Israel banned mercy food supplies.
The refugees, expelled from the occupied territories last week, struggled to dry their clothes and bedding after a night in the snow.
They have been forced to drink dirty water and ration meagre food supplies while both Israel and Lebanon leave them to starve.
The Israeli cabinet yesterday rejected by eight votes to six a plea from the International Red Cross to allow food aid through.
Sheikh Hamed al-Bitawi, a prayer leader at Jerusalem's al-Aqsa mosque, called on Arabs to quit the Middle East talks because Israel ‘does not understand the language of peace.’
Troops rescue trapped Brits
BRITISH journalists were yesterday rescued from knife-wielding Somali looters after a dramatic dash by US marines.
A three-man BBC crew and Reuter correspondent Frances Kerry were surrounded by the mob when their interpreter fled in fear of his life.
A BBC spokesman said: ‘Our reporter Tom Carver was forced to run as they stole the vehicle.’
The crew, reporter Tom Carver, cameraman Bas Solanki and producer Andrew Roy, dashed to an aid compound in the centre of Bardere, where NBC and Visnews journalists were housed.
Marines raced from mine-clearing operations in Hoddur following a radio plea for help from the NBC crew as looters surrounded them.
The BBC said: ‘It was unpleasant — but no one was hurt.’
Cold Julia is top of the flops
ACTRESS Julia Roberts should make Pretty Woman 2 quickly to revive her flagging career, a magazine survey has urged.
The American entertainment magazine Film Threat rated the Flatliners star as the ‘coldest’ actress in the movie business.
In the survey, dubbed the Frigid 50, the magazine blames her turbulent private life for her public failure.
‘Julia's off-screen lovelife has eclipsed her appeal,’ it says.
Other stars to make the list of celebrities who have fallen out of favour are Kim Basinger, Tom Cruise, Eddie Murphy and Michael Jackson.
Of Basinger the report said her ‘skin deep talent and limited bankability’ had resulted in flops like The Marrying Man and Final Analysis.
Days Of Thunder star Cruise made the list because he has rejected ‘hunky’ roles in favour of films like recent outing Far And Away in which he shared top billing with wife Nicole Kidman.
Comedian Eddie Murphy wasn't funny anymore and should return to Beverly Hills Cop style movies while Jacko needed a decent film role to showcase all his talents.
But he was ‘too eccentric for his own good.’
The survey said: ‘Being hot guarantees the best tables at the finest restaurants.’
Polo club stalker held over threats to Steffi
Malcolm Balfour in Palm Beach, Florida
A STALKER who made threats to tennis ace Steffi Graf has been arrested outside her home.
Michael Salata, 38, who at times claims to be a terrorist and at other times a CIA agent, was last night being held on £150 bail.
Sheriff's Deputy Mark Ray said Salata had been coming to the secure Polo Club development, where 23-year-old Steffi has a home, at least three times a day for three days in an attempt to see her.
According to Ray's report, Salata said he ‘wanted to harm Miss Graf’, but Ray would not discuss the matter further.
Salata was arrested at 12.05am outside the development of luxury homes, centred on a polo club, after reports from security guards that he had been repeatedly coming to the south gate.
Retired tennis champion Chris Evert also has a home at the Polo Club, where she spends most of the year.
Salata gave his address as the Federal Building in Salt Lake City, Utah.
He was charged with trespassing, and Palm Beach County Judge William Bollinger ordered him to see a psychiatrist.
This is not the first arrest in Florida of a man stalking Steffi.
In 1988 Gil Guilemette, of Montreal, was charged with ‘criminal mischief and loitering’ in his attempts to meet her.
He went so far as to bang on the door of Evert's home in an effort to see Steffi.
And in June 1987 a love-sick fan of Evert broke into her home in the hopes of meeting the tennis star.
An undercover detective said: ‘Stalking has become a problem that we must take seriously.’
Golfer on wife charge
A TOP professional golfer has been charged with assaulting his wife after smashing up their home.
John Daly, 26, who won last year's US professional golfers' championship, hit out at 40-year-old wife Bettye during a party in Denver, Colorado, police said.
He was freed on £600 bail.
Daly gave himself up after his wife, who he married in May, accused him of hurting her and wrecking their £300,000 home.
In court documents she said he ‘just lost it’, threw her against a wall, smashed windows and overturned a TV set.
Daly was unavailable for comment yesterday.
Bush now the target after Iran trial fury
Alan Elsner
PRESIDENT George Bush will be sent out of office still haunted by the Irangate hostages-for-arms scandal.
Special prosecutor Lawrence Walsh, who has pursued the case for six years, said he was going after Mr Bush as the key figure in the 1986 scandal.
His pledge came after the president gave a dramatic special pardon to former Defence Secretary Caspar Weinberger and five top aides of former President Ronald Reagan.
They were to go on trial on January 5 charged with lying to Congress about the controversy.
President-elect Bill Clinton, who takes over from Bush on January 20, said Mr Bush's decision gave the message: ‘If you work for the government you're above the law.’
Mr Walsh added: ‘Action will certainly be taken to learn the facts.’
Officials with ‘friends in high places’ could now commit crimes and get away with them, he said.
Mr Walsh said Mr Bush had shown an ‘arrogant disdain for the rule of law’ and called the president's action a ‘final attempt to cover up the scandal’.
He accused Mr Bush, who was vice president at the time of the affair, of misconduct by failing to make his own notes available to investigators.
The president's statement was issued after the Senate and Congress shut for the Christmas holiday.
Mr Bush, who escaped the immediate political storm by heading for his holiday home at Camp David, praised Weinberger as ‘a true American patriot’.
He claimed ‘those who pursue Mr Weinberger are conducting a politically motivated witch hunt’.
The independent investigation of the case has already cost £20 million.
‘The proper target is the president, not his subordinates; the proper forum is the voting booth, not the courtroom,’ he added.
Mr Weinberger said he had no doubt he would have been vindicated if his case had gone to trial.
He admitted: ‘This has been an absolute nightmare for me and my family.’
From the beginning I opposed the Iran initiative.
I co-operated in every way with the investigation.’
Others pardoned were former White House national security adviser Robert McFarlane, assistant Secretary of State Elliott Abrams and Central Intelligence Agency officials Clair George, Alan Fiers and Duane Clarridge.
All had been part of the Reagan-Bush administration which illegally sold arms to Iran in exchange for the release of US hostages held in Lebanon.
Proceeds were channelled to right-wing Contra rebels fighting the Marxist government of Nicaragua.
Don't like film plot? change it
Jane Holtham, in New York
THE rave new ‘interactive’ movie I'm Your Man is coming to Britain.
New Yorkers have already been flocking to see the high-tech film where they decide how to shape the quick-change plot by pressing buttons on a joystick.
Creators of the farce, US cinema giants Loews, say fans would have to go to the cinema 68 times before seeing the same plot.
At one stage, moviegoers can choose to see the villain plummet from a window, rescue the heroine or be sprayed with Mace attack repellent.
‘It's a film about boy meets girl but only the audience can decide if boy actually gets girl,’ said director Bob Bejan.
‘I honestly believe this is the shape of movie future.
We even got backing from Sony.’
The breakthrough, dubbed a ‘quantum leap into the future’ is opening at other cinemas throughout the US over the next few weeks.
Mr Bejan added: ‘We're amazed at its success.
We've been talking to cinemas in London and will bring it over there soon.’
Sony executive vice president Lawrence Ruisi said: ‘This is just a beginning.’
Alan's rude awakening
LONE yatchsman Alan Thomas thought his first Christmas at sea would be a merry one when he awoke to find a copy of girlie magazine Playboy among his presents.
But there were no pictures to look at — just a copy of the Radio Times which had been stapled inside a Playboy cover.
It was one of the bagful of jokes that friends had given Alan, 50, of Henley, Oxon, as he sails around Africa on a four-month trek.
‘I'm sure he'll have a good laugh at the joke,’ said pal Brian Humber.
Brave climbers give victory to the raw power of nature
Stephen Farrell on Everest
CHRISTMAS morning, 18,200ft up Mount Everest and the Darc Star team reluctantly conceded defeat to nature.
Thousands of feet above, towards the elusive summit, lay the wreckage of tents shredded by a storm as savage as it was unexpected.
The TODAY-sponsored team attempting to be the first Britons to climb Everest in winter was desolate at the defeat.
Instead of the glorious celebrations they had hoped for, Christmas Eve saw the climbers racing down the mountain trying to escape 100mph winds in -50C temperatures.
The plan had been simple but risky — ignore orthodox Himalayan techniques, forget about Sherpas, and make a dash for the summit at 29,028ft.
Harry Taylor, 34, the first man to climb the Pinnacles on the north side of Everest, and American Bill Pelkey would climb to the South Col — the last stage before the summit.
Mal Duff and Mike Smith would help carry their equipment, reduced to oxygen and the flimsy inner skin of a tent.
They set out in relatively light winds and gentle snow, with Met Office reports that the winds would drop.
‘We were sticking our necks out further and further but once we got to the South Col we had the same chance to get to the top as if we had 20 Sherpas helping and a brick-built house up there,’ said Harry.
But within a few hours Mal was suffering exhaustion and Bill had injured himself falling on diamond-hard green ice on the Lhotse Face.
Five hours after setting off, they knew their bid was futile.
If they reached the summit they would surely die on the way back.
There were memories of the only team that had ever climbed Everest in winter.
Of the nine climbers who went up, only eight came down.
But after dumping their loads and returning to Camp 3 at 24,000ft, the Darc Star team's problems had only begun.
‘The conditions were colder than I've ever worked in before,’ said Harry.
‘The night we had in that boxed tent at Camp 3 was horrendous.
‘We had over two inches of frosty snow on our sleeping bags as it kept blowing in the tent and we couldn't close the door properly.
Frankly we were so tired we didn't care any more.’
The four — and a sick Jon Tinker who had been unable to accompany them on the summit bid — scrambled from the disintegrating tent at 9am on Christmas Eve and fled downhill.
‘We had the good fortune to have fixed ropes in place all the way down but there were gusts of 100mph which literally lifted us up off our feet and threw us back down again,’ said Harry.
‘We got to Camp 2 at 22,000ft.
We spent another night in ropey tents literally hanging on.
The wind was even stronger that night — it sounded like a squadron of Concordes, absolutely blood-curdling.’
With them back at Base Camp, team leader Lieutenant Colonel Paul Neame, a Falklands veteran, made the inevitable decision.
‘I'm close to tears.
It's two years of effort and dreams down the drain in 36 hours.
‘You only had to look at the faces sitting around the table at base camp to know that they were physically and mentally finished.’
Although they did not reach the top, Harry feels the attempt was no disgrace.
But would he return to Everest again in winter?
‘No.’
How expedition unfolded:
NOVEMBER 22: Main party arrives at base camp (18,200ft) and begins preparations for assault.
DECEMBER 4: A-Team establishes camps at 20,500ft and 22,000ft.
10: Quick ascent postponed due to weather.
Climbers move downhill for a rest.
14: A-Team back up hill ready for longer term push.
23: A-Team in place but high-risk lightweight summit attempt is abandoned due to heavy storm.
24: Storm forces climbers back to Base Camp.
25: Expedition abandoned.
Revenge fear as Iraqi jet is shot down
SADDAM Hussein last night threatened revenge after American pilots shot down an Iraqi jet inside a United Nations' no-fly zone.
The attack happened when two US F-16 jets rushed to intercept two of Saddam's MiGs, spotted over the south of Iraq.
The Americans issued radio warnings but the Iraqi pilots did not reply.
Instead they took up battle positions, said Colonel Marc Martens of US Central Command.
‘One Iraqi aircraft was destroyed.
The other escaped back north out of the no-fly zone,’ he added.
The MiGs had also entered the zone 20 minutes earlier, but fled to safety when asked to identify themselves.
President George Bush said: ‘I don't know what Saddam's doing, but he's made a big mistake.
‘We are not threatening anybody, but we must enforce UN resolutions.
‘I've heard that it might be some test of our will near the end of my presidency, but those F-16s sent the message to him pretty clearly.’
The US pilots later allowed an Iraqi search-and-rescue helicopter to fly to the crash site and then return to its base.
CIA director Robert Gates said the incident was part of a recent pattern of increasing Iraqi aggressiveness against the UN resolutions.
Saddam's motives were still unclear, he said.
‘We don't know whether the Iraqi planes strayed off course or were deliberately challenging the flying ban,’ he said on CBS television.
An Iraqi military spokesman later claimed on Baghdad radio that the plane was shot down ‘on a routine patrol’, adding that the fate of the pilot was not known.
‘We will reserve the right to respond to this aggression,’ he said.
‘We hold the aggressors accountable for their unjustified crime.’
It was the first time an Iraqi plane has been shot down in the southern no-fly zone, set up to prevent Saddam attacking the Shi'ites.
A second no-fly zone covers the Kurds in the north of the country.
Brit officer hurt
AN officer injured in a Serb mortar attack said yesterday he was frustrated at not being able to shoot back.
Lieutenant Justin Freeland, 25, hit in the arm by shrapnel, said: ‘I would very much liked to have returned fire but we could not pinpoint the enemy.’
He was hit as three shells exploded five yards from his armoured vehicle.
‘I got a sharp pain in my right arm.
From that moment I knew I had been hit by something.’
Lieutenant Freeland, from Newbury, Berks, is expected to be fit for duty in six weeks.
He was the second Briton to be injured in Bosnia.
A soldier received a shrapnel wound in Sarajevo on Thursday when a UN headquarters was mortared.
Meanwhile UN officials believe most of the food aid being sent to Sarajevo is being ‘diverted’.
A spokesman said as much as 70 per cent of the food being airlifted and trucked into the city might be disappearing from the distribution system.
He said: ‘People aren't getting the food they are supposed to get.
This is not a Somalia situation, but it is very alarming.’
Wrong men deported
AT least six of the 415 Palestinians expelled from Israel were wrongly identified, it was claimed yesterday.
The number could be far higher because of the haste of the operation, says the Israeli Haaretz newspaper.
An army source admitted: ‘Some were mistaken for relatives.’
The country's High Court has told the government to justify denying aid to the deportees.
Gorby buys £2m house
FORMER Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev has bought a £2 million holiday mansion in the Canary Islands.
Mr Gorbachev bought the property with his earnings from lecturing and writing, according to the German newspaper Bild.
The Gorbachevs fell in love with the islands when they were there as guests of King Juan Carlos in September.
Kibbutz gorl murdered
By Tracey Kandohla
A YOUNG British woman has been savagely murdered by her lover while working on a kibbutz in Israel.
Theresa Stevens, 21, was beaten, repeatedly stabbed and strangled as she put up a desperate fight to save herself.
The 21-year-old's half-dressed body was found covered in blood on a nature reserve after she told her boyfriend their relationship was over.
Her clothing had been ripped away to the waist in the horrific attack, said police spokesman Shlomo Ben Hemo.
She had been left covered by a black bin bag.
Last night Theresa's 28-year-old Colombian boy-friend broke down and admitted killing her to police in 'Arad, southern Israel.
‘They had been living together but she said she was leaving him,’ said Mr Ben Hemo.
‘An argument broke between them.
He told us he wanted to quieten her — so he strangled her.’
Police said the man's body was covered in scratches where Theresa had desperately fought him.
‘In the course of our questioning, he suddenly broke down and confessed,’ Mr Ben Hemo added.
Theresa had been on an adventure working holiday at the agricultural settlement, the Neot Hakikar in the Negev desert, for just three months.
The alarm was raised when she went missing after Christmas celebrations.
Her mutilated body was discovered the following evening.
Colleague Nurit Tzabar, from the settlement which is located six miles from the biblical town of Sodom, said: ‘She was a modest girl who kept herself to herself.
‘She never used to go out and get drunk like some of the others.’
Theresa had been at the settlement since September, helping to harvest tomatoes and melons.
Police in Herefordshire were last night trying to trace Theresa's relatives, who are believed to be on holiday.
Serious fit of giggles
A PAIR of TV newsreaders have been suspended from duty after they burst out laughing during the evening news.
Tsitsi Vera and Noreen Welch, co-anchors of the main news, ‘lost their composure’ when Vera read a report of a woman who gave birth in the toilet of a train.
They dissolved into laughter when the report, broadcast on Christmas Eve, told how the baby fell through the toilet onto the track but survived.
Several complaints were received from viewers, a spokesman for the Zimbabwe Broadcasting Corporation said.
The presenters have been suspended for three months.
Sylvester Stallone and Arnold Schwarzenegger
TOUGH guys Sylvester Stallone, 46, and Arnold Schwarzenegger are squaring up for their latest film The Last Action Hero.
Schwarzenegger, 45, plays a famous actor while Stallone appears as his rival.
Wife shot by driver
A YOUNG mother died after she was shot by a motorist because her husband was driving too slowly.
Pamela Mascaro, 32, was shot in the head as her husband John, also 32, drove home in New York with their three-year-old daughter Holly.
A police spokesman said: ‘The gunman was probably trying to strike Mr Mascaro and hit his wife instead.
This is a depraved individual.’
Unique appeal of hard work
By Graham Brough
ADVENTURE-seeking Britons have been flocking to Israel for years to sample communal living on a kibbutz.
School leavers and university graduates have been attracted by the unique system, in which people share work and property.
Hundreds have gone off ‘to find themselves’ before settling down to a career or further studies.
They join a rural community life and a society based on mutual aid.
Youngsters often leave home to spend anything from two months to a year on one of the country's 273 kibbutzim.
The kibbutz, the Hebrew name for a collective settlement, has also proved to be a firm short-term favourite among travellers.
There they join around 130,000 native Israelis, about three per cent of the population, and pay for their keep by helping to harvest fruit and vegetables.
The kibbutz craze hit a peak in the late 1970s and early 1980s before travellers embarked on what is now the latest adventure — working holidays in Australia.
Last year it was revealed that many collectives had managed to run up enormous debts.
But despite severe financial problems they have been growing in number and now produce around 40 per cent of Israel's agricultural output and almost seven per cent of its industrial goods.
We've found the real Mario
From Fergus Kelly in New York
HIS name is Mario.
He's a squat little plumber and he's from Brooklyn in New York.
He even has a bushy moustache and cares for a very special princess.
While he may be a dead ringer for the hero of Nintendo's Game Boy, Mario Zupanovic can never hope to earn the hundreds of millions of pounds that the ‘other’ Mario has already made around the world.
And although he has seen some strange sights down the Big Apple's drains, the real-life Mario has never had to fight off fire-breathing dragons or deadly piranha flowers.
Princess Daisy is constantly in danger on the Nintendo screen.
The real Mario has no such problems with damsels in distress.
The woman in his life weighs 225 tons, has a 420in waist, a 4½-foot long nose, and celebrated her 100th birthday six years ago with a $66 million facelift.
Mario Zupanovic holds a torch for America's most special lady — the Statue of Liberty.
For he is responsible for maintaining the sophisticated plumbing system inside the famous landmark.
Nintendo's Super Mario has achieved worldwide sales of more than 100 million games, and will soon be immortalised by Bob Hoskins in a Hollywood movie.
Despite the super hero's millions of fans, including Macaulay Culkin and General Norman Schwarzkopf, Mario isn't that impressed by his namesake.
‘Sure, I heard of the game, but computer games ain't exactly my strong suit,’ he says.
‘Besides, I'm not married so I don't have kids who play it.
‘Some of the guys at work have joked with me about it, so now I'm thinking maybe I should cash in on it.’
In the best-selling Super Mario World, the dumpy plumber and the rest of the gang go through hair-raising adventures on 96 levels.
The other Mario, all 5ft 6ins of him, faces as tall a challenge on the 151ft statue.
His enemies are not the fearsome ape Donkey Kong or King Bowser the dragon — though they can be as deadly.
Since the firm he works for won the contract for the Statue of Liberty, it has been responsible for protecting her from the ravages of harsh Atlantic weather.
That means maintaining 1,800ft of copper piping installed during the statue's centenary in 1986 to syphon off rainwater, as well as the stainless steel vacuum cleaning system needed to keep the interior spotless.
Mario also maintains the drainage system behind the two toilets in the statue itself, plus the one at its foot, that cater for about 1.8 million visitors every year.
‘It's not the sort of work Super Mario has ever had to do, but I feel a little more patriotic about this than any of my other jobs,’ he says.
Considering the Statue of Liberty has been a beacon of hope for generations of newly-arrived immigrants, it's appropriate that Mario arrived in New York with his parents 30 years ago.
Now 43, he's a few years older than Super Mario who made his screen debut in a 1980 arcade game.
Like Super Mario, our Mario's family is Italian but he was born in Croatia and now worries about his homeland's problems.
‘I used to go back there on holiday, but it's not the sort of place you'd want to visit now,’ he says.
‘I have friends over there and keep in touch by phone to make sure they're OK.’
Unlike his Game Boy alter ego, Mario's hobbies do not stretch to space travel — a bit difficult on a £19,000 salary.
Like his namesake though, he is a dead shot, and can frequently be found hunting in upstate New York at weekends.
Super Mario exists on a sole diet of mushrooms, which he gobbles up during the game, but Mario's favourite food is pasta.
‘Hey, cooking is one of my great loves, and naturally that means Italian.’
Nintendo claims that 50 per cent of British households now own one of their games, and research shows that the little man on the Game Boy screen is recognised by more children in America than Mickey Mouse is.
This success is even more surprising as Super Mario hardly conforms to the traditional image of the American superhero.
Japanese computer genius Shigeru Miyamoto based the character of Super Mario on the caretaker at Nintendo's first offices in New York.
He explains: ‘He is a kind of Everyman, who rises to heroism in the face of adversity and whose insignificance makes him appealing.’
Mario Zupanovic hasn't had anyone stopping him in the street for autographs yet.
But that may change with the release of the £22 million Super Mario film next summer.
‘I sure haven't heard of a film starring a plumber before,’ says Mario.
‘I suppose plumbing isn't the most glamorous job in the world.’
Not until now, anyway.
Dances with sharks
ACTOR Kevin Costner has landed the lead role in a £50 million movie about life after a nuclear holocaust.
The Hollywood heartthrob, who directed and starred in the Oscar-winning Dances With Wolves, will team up with Prince Of Thieves director Kevin Reynolds to make Waterworld, in which survivors have to live in undersea domes.
Deportees can return
TEN Palestinians deported by Israel were yesterday allowed back into the country.
But the alleged Islamic activists will have to stand trial.
More than 400 are still stranded in no-man's land after Lebanon refused to allow them in.
US aircraft carrier sails for the Gulf
Eben Black
AMERICA ordered an aircraft carrier into the Gulf yesterday as Iraq threatened revenge over the shooting down of one of its warplanes.
The USS Kittyhawk, carrying 70 combat aircraft and 5,500 troops, left its station off war-torn Somalia as a direct warning to Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein to back down.
The Iraqi jet was shot down inside a United Nations' no-fly zone after it turned to challenge an American F-16 pilot.
And yesterday, state-run newspapers in Baghdad warned Western forces of ‘violent wrath’ if the ‘aggression’continued.
‘Iraq no longer fears anyone,’ said the official defence ministry newspaper, al-Qadissiyah.
But US President George Bush and president-elect Bill Clinton are united in their determination to control Saddam.
‘He is mistaken if he believes the United States or United Nations lacks resolve,’ said Mr Clinton last night.
As the US stepped up its moves against Saddam, British pilots flying from Turkey were put on high alert.
Although there are no plans yet to increase their presence in the Gulf, a defence official said last night: ‘We are ready to deal with anything that confronts us.’
The no-fly zones were imposed in August.
The air battle was the first time Allied planes have been forced to respond to a breach.
As the tension between Saddam and the West rapidly increased, one of his top henchmen pleaded for peace in London yesterday.
Nizar Hamdoon, the Iraqi envoy to the United Nations, denied the pilot was under deliberate orders to provoke an attack.
He also accused Western forces of aggression and demanded more understanding of Iraq from the international community.
‘Iraq is not interested in escalating the situation or creating any crisis,’ he told BBC Radio 4's Today programme.
‘The message is to stop weakening Iraq and start to deal with the government of Iraq.
‘It is the only way this whole issue should be addressed.’
Serbs praise ‘cool’ Major
PREMIER John Major was last night handed a peace offering as tension mounted over attacks on British forces by Serbs.
To defuse British anger, the hardline leader of the Bosnian Serbs, Radovan Karadzic, said he would agree to UN monitoring of Serbian planes to prove they were not involved.
In an attempt to sweeten the premier, he praised Mr Major's, ‘cool and calm approach’ to the conflict in the former Yugoslav republic.
He said in a letter: ‘Attacks on British personnel resulted in injury to Lieutenant Justin Freeland.
‘But there is no evidence they were by Bosnian Serb forces.’
He also promised Mr Major an ‘unlimited number’ of troops could secure land corridors for relief convoys.
In a swipe at President Bush — whose aides have branded him a ‘war criminal’— the Serb leader said: ‘I pay tribute to Mr Major.
Some think this war is no more complicated than a Kansas City saloon brawl — that they can send the cavalry.’
Somali peace bid
THE leaders of Mogadishu's two warring factions united in a peace move yesterday soon after a Somali was shot dead by US Marines.
More than 10,000 joined the peace meeting celebrating the dismantling of the ‘Green Line’ war boundary which has divided the capital for over a year.
The two warlords, General Mohamed Farah Aidid and Ali Mahdi Mohamed shook hands to the crowd's applause.
But the incident at the US-controlled airport illustrated continuing security problems in a city ravaged by conflict and still stalked by muggers.
The man who was killed was one of three people who attacked a crew from the international television news agency, Visnews, 50 yards from the Marines' post at the airport entrance.
US and French troops have killed at least five Somalis since their arrival on December 9.
Fergie's the snow queen
Charles Rae, in Klosters
THE Duchess of York staged a royal coup yesterday when she ousted the King of Sweden as number one VIP at a top ski resort.
Mountain guide Bruno Sprecher dumped King Carl Gustaf after getting a phone call from Fergie.
The king and his wife Queen Silvia had booked royal favourite Bruno for their two-week holiday in the exclusive Swiss mountain resort of Klosters.
The guide, who helped save Prince Charles's life in an avalanche four years ago, dropped them and told the duchess: ‘You can rely on me.’
With her were daughters Beatrice, four, and Eugenie, two, who wasted no time in getting kitted out in matching silver ski suits.
Also along were Fergie's big sister Jane Makim, father Major Ronald Ferguson, his wife Susan — Fergie's stepmother — and their three children.
The family is staying in a private apartment loaned by Fergie's friend, brewing heir Peter Greenall.
Tape ‘proves spy Spiro shot family’
Jane Holtham
BRITISH spy Ian Spiro killed his wife and children before swallowing cyanide because he was depressed over debts, it was claimed yesterday.
A tape recording believed to be of his last words proves he executed his young family then killed himself, according to a newspaper report in America.
The tape was discovered hidden among luggage and files belonging to Spiro, three miles from where his body was found in the California desert.
Spiro's wife Gail, 41, and children Sara, 16, Adam, 14, and Deana, 11, were murdered at their £3,300-a-month ranch in November.
All four had been shot through the back of their heads with a single bullet as they slept.
Police believe the tape was made over a period of time.
In it a deeply depressed Spiro, 46, makes several rambling statements about his money problems.
And although, he makes no mention of the killings, a source said he carried them out because he could not bear to tell them he was penniless.
‘He couldn't face the harsh, cold reality of telling his wife and children that the good life was over, that his days of living in lovely Rancho Santa Fe were numbered,’ said the source.
‘With that in mind, he killed them instead.’
Singer faces jail over illegal gun
SINGER Harry Connick Jr faces up to a year in jail after being found carrying an unlicensed gun as he tried to board a plane.
Connick, 24, was arrested at New York's Kennedy airport after he declared the unloaded 9mm pistol to security guards.
The jazz star, who recorded the soundtrack to the hit film When Harry Met Sally, told them he had forgotten about the weapon, which was a Christmas present from his sister.
He was held overnight in police cells but freed without bail yesterday to await trial.
Death-bid Lolita tells her story
THE story of the Long Island Lolita who shot her love rival was screened on US TV last night.
Network giant NBC won the battle for the love-triangle tale, Amy Fisher: My Story.
Fisher, 18, is serving up to 15 years for blasting mother-of-two Mary Jo Buttasuoco, 37.
She claimed she had been having a passionate affair with Mary Jo's husband Joey, 36.
Next Sunday, TV rival CBS will show the Buttasuoco side of the story while ABC also screens its version of events.
A fairytale wedding day
BRIDE Laura Browne, 34, arrived in Cinderella's glass coach yesterday as she and fiance Robbie Carter, 38, from Silsoe, Beds, became the first British couple to marry at Disney World, Florida.
Foul move, pet
SOCCER star Paul Gascoigne flew back to his ransacked Italian villa yesterday — to tick off the guard dog who let in raiders.
Alsatian pet Lupa tucked into a hearty meal as thieves searched Gazza's empty home in Rome over Christmas while he was in Gateshead, Tyne and Wear.
‘I don't know how much was taken,’ said Gazza, 25, as he left Heathrow with girlfriend Sheryl Kyle.
‘But I'll have to have a word with that dog!’
Wife No 3 for Cleese
Cheryl Stonehouse
JOHN CLEESE married for the third time last night and, like his previous wives, his new bride is an American.
Just a few relatives and close friends were invited to watch him wed psychoanalyst Alyce-Faye Eichelberger at a beachside ceremony in Barbados.
Cleese, 52, fell for her after his divorce two years ago from his second wife, film director Barbara Trentham.
His first wife was his co-author and co-star of Fawlty Towers, Connie Booth.
He admitted needing four years of therapy to get over their 10-year marriage.
The Monty Python star recently said: ‘I find myself attracted to American ladies in a way I don't to English ladies — odd, isn't it?’
And after starring in the hit movie A Fish Called Wanda with Jamie Lee Curtis, he said: ‘The Wanda character Jamie played was wilful, determined, exciting and manipulative.
I suppose that is what I find so fascinating about many American women.’
Friends said last night that Cleese and his new bride had decided Barbados was the perfect place for the wedding after holidaying there.
Guests at the ceremony held in a beautiful beachside house included director Micahel Winner and millionaire Robert Sangster.
When he first fell in love with Alyce-Faye, Cleese revealed: ‘I've got this new relationship right because of a mixture of learning from therapy and meeting the right person.
‘I've got rid of almost all the ideas associated with romantic love just in time to settle down with someone I like and respect.’
The newlyweds have an instant family.
Cleese, whose fortune is said to be £10 million, has two daughters — 21-year-old daughter Cynthia, from his marriage to Connie, and eight-year-old Camilla from his second marriage.
Alyce-Faye has a 22-year-old son from her marriage to American golf professional David Eichelberger.
Five die in ‘killing for fun’ bloodbath
Cheryl Stonehouse
A GANG went on a killing spree, shooting five people dead, when a robbery attempt on a shop went wrong.
The gang picked their victims at random after hijacking cars and driving through Dayton, Ohio.
One was a 16-year-old girl.
Last night a detective hunting the killers said: ‘They were like sharks, once they tasted blood, they couldn't stop.
We think it turned into a joykilling.
‘It certainly seems that having killed once, it became easier and easier for them.
It began as greed to steal and ended up at the point where they really weren't concerned about who they shot or why.
It almost seems as though they shot people for the hell of it.’
A 34-year-old woman died after being gunned down as she used a phone box.
The 16-year-old girl and a man with her were shot in the head and dumped on wasteground.
Four more victims were left seriously wounded.
One man was shot four times in the legs as he went for a walk.
A woman shot in the mouth and dumped by the side of the road after the gang hijacked her car was last night critically ill.
County prosecutor Matthias Heck said: ‘One of the victims, a man killed as his house was ransacked, was not discovered until we began tracing back through the string of stolen cars.
‘The community is deeply shocked.
This is a law-abiding county, and this is the worst homicide case I have seen in more than 20 years as a lawyer here.’
Two men aged 19 and 17, a girl of 16 and a 20-year-old woman have been charged.
Julia faces cash storm
MISS World flew back to her Russian homeland yesterday to face up to profiteers trying to cash in on her success.
It will be the first time Julia Kurotchkina, 18, has seen her parents since clinching the title in South Africa earlier this month.
Unscrupulous model agencies and sponsors claim she is under contract to them and owes them part of her winnings.
Worried Julia has even asked the Russian ambassador in London for advice on how to deal with the problem.
But yesterday as she prepared to jet off with contest organiser Julia Morley for the three-day visit she said she was very excited.
‘My parents have been pestered by people who want to know when I am coming home,’ she said.
‘But I don't think there will be a problem — I hope not.’
Mrs Morley said: ‘The people who claim they have a share of Julia are just trying to get publicity.’
Taxing time for ‘jobless’ Thatcher son
MARK Thatcher was facing a big tax increase last night after his the Swiss-based bosses reportedly ended his £80,000 contract six months early.
As the holder of a coveted Swiss resident's permit, the former premier's son is taxed at just 12 per cent.
But Federal Justice spokesman Viktor Schlumpf said yesterday: ‘He will lose his resident status if he cannot prove he has a professional link here.’
If he loses his job Mark could be taxed at the US rate of 33 per cent or Britain's 40 per cent.
He and wife Diane have luxury homes in both countries as well as a rented penthouse in Lausanne.
The 39-year-old works for the Lausanne-based finance house Compagnie Financiere Espirito Santo.
Bosses are said to have decided to terminate his contract on December 31.
Company partner Frederick Strittmatter reportedly told one journalist: ‘We will have no more to do with Mr Thatcher by the end of the year.’
Dan makes an exhibition
FANS of bungling American vice-president Dan Quayle plan to honour their hero with a museum.
Members of the Dan Quayle Commemorative Foundation hope to display memorabilia he has donated at a converted church in his home town of Huntington, Indiana.
Spy's 3 days in the attic
A LOVELORN man hid in a woman's attic for three days and recorded her every move on video after she spurned his advances at work.
The man, arrested after the woman called police, admitted entering her Tokyo flat several times in six months using a stolen key.
He faces burglary charges.
TV soap star kills actress
A TV soap opera star has confessed to stabbing to death the actress who plays his screen lover, police said yesterday.
The body of Daniela Perez, 23, was found in a luxury beachfront area of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
She was stabbed 15 times with scissors.
Guilherme de Padua, Perez's boyfriend in the Of Body And Soul series, was arrested for murder.
He killed Perez because ‘she wanted to stay with him but he did not want her’, police said.
Raquel won't play me in new film, vows Liz
Andrew Penman
SCREEN goddess Liz Taylor is furious that she is to be portrayed by Raquel Welch, the star she dislikes more than any other, in a film.
Liz's anger towards Raquel dates back to a charity dinner this year.
Raquel was about to introduce Liz, but she was absent from the room.
A friend said: ‘Instead of being a trouper and covering for Liz, Raquel announced: ‘Let's face it, Elizabeth had to go to the toilet.’
‘When Liz came back there was raucous laughter and she felt humiliated.’
Now American producers are tactfully claiming the script is not based on Liz's life and marriage to builder Larry Fortensky, even though there are striking similarities between her past and the film's plot.
Alarm bells rang with Liz when she heard it tells the story of an ageing, boozy Hollywood star who falls for a young construction worker she meets in a clinic.
Her lawyers are likely to demand changes to Torch Song, based on the romantic bestseller by Judith Krantz.
Liz is said to have commented: ‘I'm sorry Raquel is so hard up she has to do a film that rips off my life.
I'm not going to let her do it.’
To prevent a messy legal battle, the TODAY casting couch has come up with alternative stars for the role of Liz and seventh husband Larry.
Roseanne Barr would make a great Liz during her older, fatter days but could have trouble slimming down for scenes of a 60-year-old Liz in her more glamorous days.
Zsa Zsa Gabor could bring some special knowledge to portraying the much-married superstar.
She has had eight husbands, one more than Liz, who married Richard Burton twice.
Dawn French would put her weight behind the role and she's already had a go at playing Liz in her TV comedy show French and Saunders.
Joan Collins has the glamour but with just four husbands is under-qualified.
Jason Donovan would make an ideal husband.
With all those loud Versace designs Larry favours, Jason and his Technicolor Dreamcoat would come in handy.
Bob Geldof would shine as scruffy Larry but cleaning him up for the post wedding scenes could be hard.
Parents leave two children ‘home alone’
Cheryl Stonehouse
A COUPLE who left their two children ‘Home Alone’ while they jetted off for a sunshine Christmas holiday were being questioned by police last night.
Unlike child star Macaulay Culkin in the hit film, nine-year-old Nicola Schoo was bewildered and frightened when police found her and her sister, Diana, 4.
They had already been alone in the house for 24 hours.
The girls would have stayed undiscovered while parents David and Sharon Schoo spent a week in Acapulco, Mexico, if a smoke alarm in their home near Chicago hadn't gone off.
Nicola phoned the fire brigade, who then alerted police and social workers.
‘For a long time I was feeling really lonely and wondering what they were doing,’ she said.
Her parents offered no explanation when police boarded their plane at Chicago airport yesterday to arrest them for abandoning their children.
Social workers later discovered that one of the children's grandmothers had offered to look after them, but was told other arrangements had been made.
After spending a night in a foster home, both girls went to spend Christmas with their grandparents.
Mel to kick Lethal Habit
CHAIN-SMOKING actor Mel Gibson will make a New Year resolution to kick the habit — for the 10th year running.
This time the star of Lethal Weapon believes he can finally do it, using acupuncture.
‘I've been treated like a pin-cushion, but it seems to be working so far,’ he said.
‘Once they jam in the needles, it distances you from thinking of smoking.’
Fergie's laughter and jeers
Charles Rae in Klosters
THE Duchess of York flashed a rare smile during a day of tantrums when she posed with daughters in the snow yesterday.
Fergie's ill temper was thought to have been caused by an argument on the telephone with Texan pal Johnny Bryan.
He was said to be fuming because she hadn't told him where she was staying during her family skiing holiday in Klosters.
Bryan, who was pictured sunbathing with a topless Fergie earlier this year, called a mutual friend to get the number of the five-star Walserhoff.
Bryan wanted to join the duchess, but it is understood that her father Major Ronald Ferguson — who is in Klosters — bluntly told her it would be a ‘bad mistake’.
The duchess caused more ill-feeling and was jeered when she jumped hour-long queues on the slopes.
Gift for needy
A MOTHER of four who could afford only one present for each of her children and nothing for herself has won £660,000.
‘We've been struggling for years.
It's been a Christmas we will never forget,’ said the winner of the Australian $1.5 million lottery.
Soldier beats up four women
A BRITISH soldier beat up four women after a drinking binge.
The 20-year-old threw his first victim to the ground and kicked her in the face.
A 57-year-old woman who tried to help her was grabbed by the throat and had her head smashed on railings until she was nearly unconscious.
He then knocked a 21-year-old girl over and kicked her in the face, before half choking and battering a 23-year-old.
All the victims were kept in hospital.
The corporal was being questioned last night by police after the attacks in Paderborn, Germany.
Newlyweds take Mickey
A ROMANTIC couple have become the first Britons to wed in Disney World, Florida.
Bride Laura Browne, 34, arrived to tie the knot with 38-year-old Robbie Carter in Cinderella's glass coach, drawn by six white ponies.
Her dress and veil featured sequinned pictures of Mickey Mouse.
The couple, from Luton, Beds, and many of the 44 guests even wore Mickey Mouse ears for the official photos.
‘We are complete Disney fans, so it was the perfect place,’ said Robbie.
Twitty, Twitty fan ban
AMERICAN country singing star Conway Twitty, 59, is being hounded by an obsessed fan who claims to be his long-lost son.
A Florida judge has ordered 24-year-old Thomas Fry to stop harassing Twitty or his family.
Fry claims he was conceived during a drunken tryst between his mother and Twitty.
The singer — three times married, father of four children — denies the claim.
He has offered to take a blood test to disprove it.
‘Problem is, the boy just won't believe it,’ said Twitty's lawyer, Rose Palermo.
Twitty, who was born Harold Lloyd Jenkins, has had more than 40 Country and Western hits, including the No.1 success, It's Only Make Believe and Mona Lisa.
Britain on brink of war in the Balkans
Paul Wilenius, Political Editor
BRITISH troops are on the brink of being sucked into a war in the blood-stained Balkans.
The United Nations last night warned Serbia it would face military attack and the wrath of the world if it tried to spread the conflict.
The Serbs will also be given an early deadline to stop flying helicopters and planes over Bosnia.
Foreign Office chiefs last night said the latest UN crackdown would happen ‘sooner rather than later’.
Even though the Ministry of Defence has already drawn up plans to pull Britain's 2,400 troops out of the danger zone swiftly, they could find themselves caught in the crossfire very quickly.
For the first time, UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali last night issued an ultimatum to the Serbian warlords.
‘Let us give one more chance to the peace process,’ he said.
It was a clear signal that if talks failed, the UN would pass a resolution next week allowing world forces to shoot down Serbian planes.
A full-scale attack would then only be weeks away if American and other jets enforce the no-fly zone.
Humanitarian aid would have to be halted if an attack was sanctioned, Mr Boutros-Ghali added.
President George Bush bluntly warned Serbia yesterday that America would launch air strikes against them if the war spreads.
Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd yesterday paved the way for British involvement in the conflict.
He said he did not want to involve British troops and planes in action, but admitted for the first time that it was a possibility.
‘The Serbs should note a change,’ he said.
Mr Hurd said he opposed military action, but conceded the time had come where he could ‘imagine armed action against Serbia to prevent a general Balkan war’.
This means using soldiers and air power to stop military attacks in Macedonia and Kosovo, areas south of Serbia.
Many ministers and senior civil servants are convinced Britain will be dragged into the civil war in 1993.
Thousands more troops and RAF strike jets could join a major international effort to end the fighting.
The former American ambassador to Yugoslavia, Warren Zimmerman, confirmed the US had made its position clear to Serbia over broadening the war from Bosnia.
‘We've given some very explicit warnings on that,’ he said.
The Americans are reluctant to put in ground troops, but are willing to use air power.
Zimmerman was ambassador to Yugoslavia for three years until he was called home in May.
He now heads the State Department's Bureau for Refugee Programmes.
News of the UN ultimatum was delivered yesterday to Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic and Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic in Belgrade by the peace envoy Lord Owen.
He told them time was running out, but it is clear Milosevic, boosted by his recent election victory, is determined to spread the war and his power.
Mr Hurd's words that the ‘bloody-minded cruelty’ of the Serbs was pushing the West towards military action was supported by other parties.
Shadow foreign minister George Robertson said: ‘We are right to maintain pressure on Serbia and we must do so increasingly through sanctions.
‘It would be wrong to rule out military action for all time.’
‘The priority at the moment is the safety of the UN troops on the ground and being wary of the dangers of long-term military entanglement.’
But David Howell, Tory chairman of the Foreign Affairs select committee, said there was a risk Britain could become ‘dragged into a major war and military commitment’.
‘The danger is there and is one that many people including myself are very worried about,’ said Mr Howell.
Liberal Democrat leader Paddy Ashdown said Government thinking on the Balkan conflict was muddled and needed redefining.
‘I just wish the Cabinet would clear its lines and start producing some kind of simple understandable message,’ he said.
‘It seems to change not just by the day but almost by the hour.’
Plane lands on M-way
A PLANE crash-landed on a busy motorway yesterday with three Britons on board.
Robert MacLaine, 43, and wife Miranda, 44, of Glasgow, and John MacDonald Brown of London were on a sightseeing trip around Mont Blanc when their light plane developed engine trouble.
Pilot Gerard Gaillard landed the stricken aircraft on the A40 in the French Alps and steered it into crash barriers.
Miraculously no one was hurt.
And the hotel is basic too
Alan Watkins
THE HOTEL where Diana and the boys are staying is described as ‘basic and spartan’ in one holiday guide.
The Montpelier Plantation Inn, run by James and Celia Milnes-Gaskell, is only a quarter of the cost of the most expensive accommodation in the Caribbean.
At £200 a day, it is not even the most expensive on Nevis itself.
However, the guide adds: ‘It will be appreciated by those who understand the Caribbean lifestyle.’
One feature which will please the princess is the huge swimming pool and its imposing location 650 ft feet up the cliff.
It will be almost impossible for photographers to sneak pictures of her there although the guide says: ‘It is advisable for guests to draw their curtains if they want privacy because footpaths lead past many of the rooms.’
Nevis is one of the most popular holiday destinations for the rich and famous.
With a population of just 9,000, the sun-soaked hideaway guarantees privacy.
Even more exclusive than its larger neighbour, St Kitts, the former British colony was dubbed the Queen of the Caribbean two centuries ago for its elegance and gracious living.
It is fringed by sandy beaches and coconut groves, and dominated by the 3,500ft Mount Nevis.
It has a rainforest and coral reefs, wildlife and watersports.
Last night temperatures were in the mid-70s compared to -3C in London.
Crime on the island is comparatively rare but tourists are warned not to leave valuables on the beach.
Home Alone couple are jeered on holiday jet
THE couple who left their daughters, aged just nine and four, Home Alone while they jetted off on holiday were booed and jeered when arrested at the end of their trip.
Electrical engineer David Schoo, 45 and his 35-year-old wife Sharon were stunned as police put them in handcuffs when their plane landed at Chicago airport.
The casually-dressed and suntanned pair were led through the airport building to shouts and insults from outraged travellers.
The couple were unaware they had hit the headlines around the world after leaving Nicole, nine, and four-year-old Diana alone while they enjoyed a nine-day Mexican holiday in Acapulco.
Unlike Macaulay Culkin in the hit film Home Alone, which was filmed in their Chicago neighbourhood, the girls were terrified at finding their parents gone.
Police were alerted when they accidentally set off a smoke alarm.
The Schoos have been charged with abandoning the children and cruelty and are due to appear in court.
‘I don't think this couple had any idea what was going on,’ said an arresting officer.
‘I don't think they knew anyone was looking for them.’
The girls are now in care but hundreds of US families have swamped police with calls offering to adopt them.
Last night the girls' grandmother Della Schoo, said: ‘I have no idea why the children were left alone.
‘I would have taken the girls.
I feel sick.
‘I hope and pray this is a misunderstanding.’
US hanging sparks row
A CHILD murderer set to become the first person to be hanged for 28 years has sparked controversy across America.
Triple sex killer Westley Dodd, 31, has chosen the gruesome method because he hanged one of his young victims.
Washington is one of only four US states which still allow hanging.
Dodd's mother said: ‘I wish he would choose a lethal injection.’
Boss quits in neo-Nazi row
A TOP boss of the German Daimler-Benz firm is quitting his £300,000 a year job in a row over a neo-Nazi flag.
For years, Karl Dersch has flown the emblem of the Third Reich in the garden of his Munich home.
The eagle and iron cross symbol is being used by thugs firebombing immigrant hostels.
Dersch, 57, said: ‘I thought it was beautiful.’
A Daimler spokesman said: ‘Dersch's offer to resign will be accepted.’
Romance is dead with a double bed
DOUBLE beds were branded passion killers by lovers yesterday.
Seventy-five per cent of couples said sleeping together all the time was a turn-off.
A psychologist who helped organise the German survey said: ‘The double bed should not be treated as a self-service supermarket for sex.
Love dies when couples share the same mattress night after night.’
Single bed sales are booming in Germany.
One woman who sleeps apart from her husband said: ‘When he comes into my room at night I feel like a girl of 18.’
Country ‘is not fit for humans’
Mervyn Rees in Durban
THE killing of two British tourists is the latest murder in a crime wave that has made South Africa one of the most violent nations in the world.
‘This country is not a humane place to live in,’ said Cuan Cronje, fiance of one of the victims, Elizabeth Over.
Political violence alone claims an average of 10 lives a day.
Police investigating the crimes are themselves primary targets.
More than 200 have been murdered on duty this year.
Many of their colleagues are off work sick for long periods being treated for nervous disorders.
The army has been drafted in to cover the staffing crisis.
Foreign tourists are also in the firing line.
Some Johannesburg hotels provided armed escorts for their guests after a spate of muggings recently.
Soldiers guard a three-mile section of the ‘Hell's Highway’ to the popular Natal coastline where 70 motorists have been stoned and shot at.
About 50 UN envoys monitoring the violence moved from their Johannesburg hotels to the suburbs after four were attacked.
The elderly live in fear of assault and murder.
On Saturday, four people died as gunmen opened fire on a wine society's Christmas dinner at a King William's Town golf club in the east of Cape Province.
Claiming responsibility for the attack, the Azanian People's Liberation Army said: ‘There is a war on and there will be more attacks of this nature, especially in white areas.’
Unemployment mixed with the political and racial problems have been blamed for the soaring crime rate.
As the politicians try to find a mutually acceptable way forward towards democracy, it is feared disillusioned activists are no longer answerable to the higher echelons of their parties and are turning to crime.
With citizens arming themselves for protection, police claim more than 10,000 violent crimes have been committed with stolen weapons.
And over 3,400 gun owners have been prosecuted for the loss of firearms through negligence.
Boss quits over neo-Nazi flag
A TOP boss of the German Daimler-Benz firm is quitting his Pounds 300,000-a-year job in a row over a neo-Nazi flag.
For years, Karl Dersch has flown the Third Reich emblem at his Munich home.
The eagle and iron cross symbol is being used by thugs in racist attacks.
Dersch, 57, said: ‘I thought it was beautiful.’
A Daimler spokesman said: ‘His offer to resign will be accepted.’
Macaulay dumps love
HOME ALONE star Macaulay Culkin has ditched his first love.
Laura Bundy, 11, is said to be heartbroken.
‘I don't see Laura any more,’ said the 11-year-old multi-millionaire.
‘I've got lots of other girlfriends.’
TV Luke ‘to die of Aids’
TV heart-throb Luke Perry wants his Beverly Hills 90210 character to die of Aids.
Luke, 27, wants to concentrate on his film career and has suggested his character Dylan catches the disease from a girlfriend.
I suffered anguish of loving the wrong baby
Margaret Hall, in Washington
TEENAGER Kimberly was the brightest thing in the life of widower Bob Mays.
The girl Bob thought was his daughter had become more and more precious to him since the death of his wife Barbara.
Their happiness was to be destroyed by the heart-rending realisation that Kimberly was not his child.
She had been swopped with another baby 13 years before in a tragic hospital blunder.
Bob Mays had to confront the fact that for years he had been loving someone else's daughter.
The story of Bob and Kimberly captures the emotional torture of families across America whose lives have been blighted by baby swops.
It began in the Hardee Memorial Hospital, Wauchula, Florida with Kimberly's birth.
Whether on purpose or by mistake, Kimberly was exchanged for the baby who came to be known as Arlena Twigg.
The swop did not come to light until Arlena, who suffered from a congenital heart defect, had to undergo surgery.
Blood tests revealed that she was not the Twiggs' natural child.
The Twiggs hired a private investigator to find their real daughter.
It didn't take long to track down Kimberly.
For Kim and her widowed father Bob, the sudden intrusion into their specially close lives was shattering.
Bob's wife Barbara had died of cancer when Kim was two and she was the only thing left in Bob's life.
The Twiggs, who have seven other children aged from eight to 23, have never made any apolgies for turning their lives upside down.
‘Once we knew we had a daughter someplace out there, what could we do but try to find her?’ they said.
But the Twiggs have done much more than that.
They have broken a court-made promise to Bob Mays that if he would agree to testing to prove whose child Kim was, they would not seek custody.
Terrified of losing his only child, mindful of Kim's sobbing pleas not to leave her, Bob had fought off earlier legal actions to win his co-operation.
He said: ‘My stand was that even if Kimberly was their biological daughter, was it right to put her through this?’
This time he agreed, confident that the Twiggs would stick to their part of the bargain.
‘I wanted them to understand that there was no way they were going to get Kim,’ he said.
For the Twigg's undertaking came as enormous relief.
She said: ‘I felt better when Dad told me there was no chance I was going to have to go live them.’
But the blood tests brought a double blow to the Kimberly and Bob.
First, they proved she was the biological child of the Twiggs.
Their close relationship could cope with that, but worse was to come.
After a series of tense bitter-sweet meetings between the two families and hours of probing by child psychiatrists, visitation rights for the Twiggs were established.
But the onc-a-month get togethers with her new family took a terrible toll on Kim.
Although early on she sheepishly confessed to enjoying the visits, she didn't like the way the Twiggs expected her to call them Mom and Dad.
Kim's good grades in school plummeted.
She became moody and unhappy, just like Bob who was having to cope with sharing Kim.
Now the Twiggs are now demanding custody and Kimberly's heartbreaking story probably won't end until the Supreme Court has had its say.
The court ruled this week on the case of Pauls and Moores of Georgia.
It ordered Jodie Paul to give back her four-year-old biological son Melvin to Eugene and Edith Moore, the couple who adopted him and raised him since birth.
For all the victims of baby swops the details my be different but the anguish is just the same.
Last night Britain's leading childbirth writer Sheila Kitzinger said the couples involved in the British mix-up should get over the trauma.
She said: ‘I think support from family and friends is best.
They don't want a completely unknown counsellor to come in at this time.
They don't want the experts to come in and advise because it is the experts that have let them down.’
Hospitals follow rigorous procedures to prevent such errors.
In Britain newborn babies are identified with name tags before they leave the delivery room.
These are usually fixed around the ankle, where they are more secure than on the wrist.
The tags are put on in front of the mother and she is asked to confirm that the name is right.
Executioner's song
A KARAOKE singer pulled out a gun and shot two men because they laughed at him.
Tan Ngoc Le, 22, was killed instantly.
His friend Khanh Van Cao, 25, was seriously injured.
‘The gunman got the wrong impression,’ said Detective Sergeant Mike Hamel.
‘The victims were just having a good time.’
Police in Toronto, Canada, are hunting the gunman.
£131m coup makes Mickey Mouse squeak
Gerard Evans in Los Angeles
DISNEY shares went into freefall yesterday as its chairman made a £74 million killing on the stock market.
The huge two-hour buying and selling coup, boosted by his pay and other bonuses, makes Michael Eisner the highest paid business executive in the world this year with a total salary of £131 million.
But it had a dramatic effect on the entertainment giant's stock.
Eisner shocked Disney when he took up an option in his contract to buy 5.4 million blue chip shares at bargain basement prices.
He paid £2.39 for each share and sold 3.4 million of them the same day for £26 apiece, walking away with £82.5 million in cash and two million shares still in his possesion.
Eisner's colleague, Disney president Frank Wells, joined the sell-off by trading 1.6 million shares at the same price and reaping £38.6 million profit.
Wall Street was rocked by the news and Disney shares fell 4.3 per cent by the end of trading as rumours spread that the stock may have reached peak price.
Disney and Eisner denied the rumours but one stock market source said: ‘Whenever you get a clearing of the decks like this it sparks concern in the market.’
The Disney chief swooped to avoid losing a fortune in tax when Bill Clinton takes office.
His action may spark a flood of similar moves from America's corporate chiefs, whose pay often includes performance-related stock options.
Leaks from Clinton's team suggest Democrats may clamp down on the massive amounts executives can earn.
They are also planning to raise tax rates on higher incomes.
Last year Eisner, 44, earned £3.6 million in salary and bonuses, even though his basic pay is a relatively modest £500,000.
One business source said: ‘He has a low base salary and he has to stand out in the sun a great deal longer before he gets a bonus at the oasis.
‘So he's probably earned every cent.’
You're welcome Chez the Clintons
Margaret Hall, in Washington
IT will be open house at the White House when Bill Clinton is sworn is as the new American President.
A five-day, inaugural celebration will start on Sunday January 17 when Clinton, his vice-president Albert Gore and their wives will travel 155 miles by bus from Charlottesville, Virginia to Washington.
There will be fireworks, concerts, parties, dinners, church services, receptions and a parade.
The climax will be the swearing in of Clinton as the 42nd President on January 20.
An invited audience of at least 250,000 is expected at the outdoor event.
The next day, Clinton and his wife Hillary will host a three-hour open house in their new home to greet well-wishers from poor to rich.
Inauguration chairman Ron Brown said the £15 million extravaganza would be ‘open, accessible and dignified’.
Barred by law from taking an official Cabinet job, the next First Lady Hillary is sitting in on all the meetings of her husband's transition team, helping to map out policy and pick his Cabinet.
Journalist Meredith Oakley, of the Arkansas Gazette in the Clintons' home state, said: ‘If America had been ready for a female President she would have run herself.
‘She has worked and planned towards this dual-presidency for a long time.’
Krabbe to run radio
DRUGS scandal athlete Katrin Krabbe, right, is to become a radio presenter.
The former double-world sprint champion, 23, is one of the investors in the private radio station Antenne MVP broadcasting in Germany.
Her aim to play a leading role and become a radio show personality could lead to the station becoming known as Radio Krabbe, says Germany's daily Bild newspaper.
‘Katrin is keen and will present her own commentaries on the air,’ said her father, Peter.
Katrin may use the new station to win support for her campaign to overturn the ban imposed by the German Athletics Federation for taking anabolic steroids.
Drew clinches Lolita TV deal
ET wild child Drew Barrymore will star as Long Island Lolita in an American TV movie about the true story of a schoolgirl who shot her married lover's wife.
ABC TV have signed the former cocaine addict to play the 16-year-old girl in Beyond Control: The Amy Fisher Story.
Hijack to order mob stole 50 cars
Jane Holtham in New York
A GANG of machine-gun toting carjackers were arrested by police after a year-long reign of terror in which at least 50 luxury cars were stolen to order.
The 16 members of the New York-based ring, which netted about £2 million, even carried business cards advertising their violent trade as Midnight Auto Supply.
Each card displayed a pager number and a drawing of an old-time gangster spraying machine-gun fire from a vintage car.
Yester-day police claimed gang members were issued with machine-guns and semi-automatic pistols and told to shoot terrified motorists who got in their way.
The mobsters forced motorists from Mercedes, Porsches and BMWs at gunpoint in petrol stations, car parks and on streets throughout the city and its tree-lined suburbs.
One terrified victim was shot in the legs as he sat in his top-of-the-range Mercedes at traffic lights.
The stolen cars were taken to garages in the Bronx, where their identification numbers were changed.
The gang then bribed border officials in Mexico before driving the vehicles to South America, where a steady stream of clients were waiting for delivery.
Alleged ringleaders Israel Galarza, 43, and Mike Chuba, 33, plus 14 others have been charged with racketeering and theft.
War on famine
THE world's biggest armed humanitarian rescue mission was approved by the United Nations last night.
An American-led task force of 28,000 troops will ‘use all necessary means’ to crush Somalian bandits and feed thousands of starving people.
The unanimous Security Council vote came as 1,800 US marines arrived off the coast of the East African nation.
Catfight socialite is guilty
Brendan Bourne in Los Angeles
A DICTATOR'S widow last night admitted slashing a rival socialite's face with a champagne glass.
Dewi Sukarno, 52, attacked her victim at a jetset Christmas party in Aspen, Colorado, attended by Ivana Trump, Barbra Streisand and model Elle MacPherson.
The widow of Indonesian dictator Ahmed Sukarno pleaded guilty to assault and disorderly conduct in a plea bargain.
Dewi, a former Tokyo bar girl, had faced up to 16 years in prison but could now avoid jail completely if she behaves for two years.
Sentencing will take place next month.
Victim Minnie Osmenia, a member of a powerful Philippines family, underwent four hours of micro-surgery for three jagged wounds to her left cheek as a result of the slashing.
Both women, who live in the same fashionable apartment block on New York's Upper East Side, are now suing each other for nearly £7 million over the incident.
Sukarno was represented by top New York lawyer Barry Slotnick, whose previous clients have included Mafia godfather John Gotti and subway vigilante Bernhard Goetz.
Beach girls' brave fight
TWO women tourists murdered on a South African beach were hacked to death as they tried to flee, police revealed last night.
Britons Julie Godwin and Elizabeth Over, both 30, died in a hail of blows from a 3ft sugar cane knife and a 12in bush knife.
Elizabeth was slaughtered at the wheel of her boyfriend's four-wheel-drive truck as she desperately tried to escape.
Julie was cut down beneath a nearby tree on the beautiful nature reserve 220 miles north of Durban.
The last minutes of their lives were pieced together by forensic teams hunting the killers.
Chez Clintons
FRIENDS of Bill Clinton have found a new home for the president-elect and wife Hillary.
TV producers Harry Thomason and Linda Bloodworth-Thomason have offered them a high-security estate, close to Beverly Hills.
The Clintons will have exclusive use of the house during their term at the White House, although they will not own it.
Major John Harvey and wife Lorna murder
A BRITISH couple who befriended TV explorer Michael Palin, above, have been murdered by bandits in their Zambia farmhouse.
Wealthy Major John Harvey and his wife, Lorna, in their mid-sixties, played host to Palin and a camera crew from the BBC's Pole to Pole series.
Two robbers raided their home in the Chisamba region and shot the couple.
Julia Roberts charity gift
PRETTY woman Julia Roberts, above, bought £9,000-worth of toys in a two-hour spree — to give to a children's charity.
Julia, 25, splashed out on two £1,500 pedal cars — a Mercedes and a Jaguar — at a toy store in Beverly Hills, Hollywood.
She also bought teddy bears, dolls, games and sports equipment.
‘She was in festive mood,’ said an assistant.
‘It seemed to give her real satisfaction.’
Chateau Yul
WINES once owned by actor Yul Brynner were auctioned at Christie's for more than £80,000 yesterday.
Brynner, who died in 1985, kept his collection at his home in France.
20ft oil waves race to holiday coastline
David Jones
GIGANTIC waves of oil 20 ft high were being whipped by gale force winds towards Europe's finest beaches last night after a tanker broke up off the Spanish coast.
The slick, measuring 12 miles long and two wide, threatens to become one of the world's largest.
It seems certain to blacken miles of pristine coastline, kill hundreds of birds and wreck lucrative shellfish grounds.
So far only one of the tanks on the Greek ship Aegean Sea has been punctured.
But if all 22 million gallons escape the disaster will be twice as bad as the 1988 Exxon Valdez spill off Alaska.
The clean-up could take four years and cost £80 million.
Thousands of fishermen stand to lose their livelihoods.
Scores of volunteers were desperately trying last night to protect the shore with booms but the huge waves, whipped by 50mph winds, will almost certainly lash the oil over them.
The slick, which formed after the vessel hit rocks and broke in two as it waited to dock in heavy seas off La Coruna, was being driven East into the Bay of Biscay towards popular resorts like San Sesbastian.
Thousands of wintering birds that spend the summer in Britain, including guillemots, razorbills, shags, skuas, kittiwakes and gannets, are in the path.
Dolphins and whales are at risk, and the pollution endangers some of Europe's finest oyster and mussle grounds.
The 60,000-tonne Aegean Sea was shattered by a series of explosions, setting the surrounding seas ablaze.
Dense black smoke billowed 3,000ft into the air, forcing police to evacuate coastal towns.
The worst oil slick disaster was caused by the Atlantic Empress off Trinidad in 1979, when 70 million gallons were spilled.
Next came the Castillo de Belvier: 68 million gallons off South Africa, 1989.
Third worst was the Amoco Cadiz, which leaked 65 million gallons off France in 1978.
Then comes the Torrey Canyon, which dumped 35 million gallons into the English Channel in 1967, followed by the Exxon Valdez (11 million, 1980).
Butchered safari girls' battled for life
Bob Graham, in Nine Mile Reef, South Africa
THE last desperate moments in the lives of murdered British tourists Julie Godwin and Elizabeth Over were revealed here last night.
Detailed police forensic work uncovered how the two young women — best friends on a holiday together — fought frantically to save themselves from slaughter.
Their attackers hacked them to pieces with hundreds of blows from a 3ft panga sugar cane knife and a foot-long bush knife.
Detectives are convinced 30-year-old Elizabeth battled bravely for her life and tried to escape by fleeing in her boyfriend's four-wheel-drive truck.
She was butchered at the wheel of the vehicle by her attacker who hung through the passenger window, repeatedly slicing her with the panga.
Her vain escape bid lasted less than 60ft and a few nightmare seconds, before she crashed the white Isuzu van into a ditch in a haze of blood and pain.
Even as she died her foot stayed on the accelerator, leaving the wheels spinning in the white sand to carve out a 2ft deep hole.
Her companion Julie, also 30, at the start of a holiday from her home in Northampton, tried to run.
But she died the same merciless death at the remote nature reserve on the Indian Ocean, 220 miles north of Durban — repeatedly stabbed and hacked to pieces.
Julie fell dead beneath a tree, its lower branches hacked off in the frenzied attack.
South African detectives yesterday combed the entire deserted coastline area for clues in the hunt for the killers.
Accompanied by TODAY, Detective Sergeant Louis Van der Merwe and Detective Sergeant Riaan Render gathered up gruesome pointers to the two young women's life-and-death struggle.
In the fine white sand, the pools of dark blood stains stood out in stark contrast to the natural beauty of the coast.
Close to the tree was a shattered tumbler, which police believe Elizabeth used to try to defend herself.
A vital thumb print, which they discovered was not Elizabeth's, has been taken from it.
In an intensive hunt thousands of Zulus on the nature reserve are to be fingerprinted.
‘Make no mistake, we will find the killers,’ said Detective Sergeant Render.
‘No matter what it takes and how long we have to investigate it we will find out who did it.’
A post mortem yesterday at the Natal State Mortuary in Durban revealed that both women died from multiple wounds from the panga and bush knives.
The Chief State pathologist, Professor Jan Botha, could not determine just how many stab wounds they had suffered — he said he lost count.
The examination also revealed that both women were dead before being dragged across the beach and dumped into the ocean.
Professor Botha also said neither woman had been raped, although he added that further tests are to be conducted on the bodies.
Elizabeth, who is originally from St Albans, Herts, discovered the remote area, world-renowned for snorkelling, diving and fishing, with her South African fiance Cuan Cronje, several months ago.
After she moved to Durban in February to be with her boyfriend, she vowed she would show the beautiful region to Julie, her best friend from college days.
Despite the striking natural beauty of the national parkland's hundreds of miles of beaches, rich in wildlife from crocodiles to hippos, it is an area many white South Africans will no longer visit.
They fear that increasing raids from bordering Mozambique just a few miles away, together with the lack of any local security, has turned the area into a no-go zone.
Although many white South Africans carry guns for security, the only protection Elizabeth and Julie carried on their five-day trip was a can of CS Gas.
Detectives believe that Elizabeth managed to grab the canister, but it was wrenched from her grasp.
Her bloodstained finger marks still cover its side.
The motive for the slaughter is now believed to be robbery.
Police know that on Saturday — two days before the murders — Julie cashed £340 in travellers cheques and carried the 1,500 South African rand in her wallet.
Elizabeth's distraught fiance Cuan, who visited the murder scene on Wednesday, told police the money was missing, together with two tyre pumps.
The attackers ignored a valuable camera and both women's credit cards.
The full horror of the attack was revealed yesterday by the bloody scene inside the white van.
Inside the rear compartment, the blood covered everything.
A foam mattress was still saturated and a bottle of Johnson's Baby Sun Block was unreadable because of the blood.
A Marie Claire magazine horoscope supplement lay in a puddle of blood, which had trickled down into small pools in the sand.
Everywhere the white sides of the van and its tailgate were splattered.
Detective Sergeant Render said: ‘It is sickening that human beings have done this to two innocent young women.
‘This is more than just a robbery, it is so frenzied and angry, the work of animals, that it is beyond the comprehension of the human mind.’
The officers believe Elizabeth and Julie had been sunbathing naked on the remote beach, confident they would not be seen.
Although there are rumours among local Zulus that the two women were seen earlier that day with two black men, police have not been able to confirm the reports.
The only witness who saw the women on the beach is another tourist, a South African businessman named Ockert Cameron.
He told police that shortly before 6pm on Monday he spotted them sunbathing naked, but did not go near.
When he returned 30 minutes later he saw their truck in a ditch, and both women gone.
Steffi's race ace
THE new man in Steffi Graf's life has been named as 24-year-old racing driver Michael Bartels.
The couple are enjoying their first holiday together travelling around California in a caravan, according to German newspaper Bild.
‘It appears Steffi has finally found Mr Right,’ said the report.
The couple were introduced by Steffi's racing driver brother Michael.
Bartels has been credited with helping Steffi, 23, over the past two years in which she has been plagued by illness and unhappiness.
Tatum seen with new ‘love match’
Jim Gallagher, in New York
TATUM O'Neal has a new man in her life following her rift with husband John McEnroe, it was claimed yesterday.
The 29-year-old actress is said to have shared romantic dinners with a handsome, blond, ‘surfer-type’, near the couple's California home.
During one date in Malibu they sat holding hands and gazing into one another 's eyes, according to witnesses.
‘McEnroe was on the road and there was Tatum and her fellow in this private, romantic booth,’ said one.
McEnroe, 33, who has taken their three children to Fort Worth, Texas, where he is in training, refused to comment.
Sylvester Stallone
SYLVESTER Stallone, 46, says he is ‘flattered’ that a spoof of his Rambo films is being made.
Charlie Sheen, who will play a dim-witted muscleman in the film, Hot Shots 2, said: ‘I'd be flattered if a spoof was made of one of my movies.’
Travolta stays quiet over hero pilot claim
Margaret Hall in Washington
ACTOR John Travolta was at the centre of a mid-air mystery last night.
The star, hailed a hero after reports that he piloted his crippled executive jet to safety, refused to confirm that he had been flying the plane.
The Gulfstream jet crash-landed with him, his wife Kelly Preston, their baby daughter and five others on board at Washington's National Airport after a mid-air power failure.
Travolta is a keen and experienced pilot.
He has even called his daughter Jett.
The plane was flying the Travolta family from Florida to Maine when it suddenly lost all its electrical instruments.
The three major airports in the Washington region were shut down until it was clear which one the plane was heading for.
The anonymous pilot displayed skill and nerve to land the crippled plane at screeching high speed at the city's National Airport.
One of the tyres burst but the Travolta family and the others on board scrambled to safety.
After initial claims that Travolta was the hero of the hour, the star ordered his Hollywood spokesman not to comment, other than to confirm the plane landed safely.
Washington National Airport would also not discuss the incident last night.
A spokesman claimed it did not even have a record of the name of the hero pilot or a list of the passengers.
But airport official Frank Walton, who is in charge of private plane facilities, said: ‘I spoke to the man who said he was the pilot of the plane several hours after the landing and he definitely wasn't John Travolta.’
Giant baby's first in the pecking order
IT could be a chilling scene from Alfred Hitchcock's classic The Birds.
A line of black crows gather ominously on the body of a giant baby.
But wait before you rush to call the NSPCC.
This is no horror movie, but a baby pictured on an advertising hoarding in Bill Clinton's home town of Little Rock, Arkansas.
Perhaps the birds are no more sinister than storks with a special delivery.
Justice of the gun on the Gaza Strip
In the refugee camps of the Gaza Strip, there is only one law — the law of the gun.
For 32-year-old Palestinian Jamal Fadda, accused of helping the hated Israelis, tha He is seized, above, left, by gunman Yasser Abu Samahdaneh in the Shabura camp and forced to the ground, centre, a gun to his head.
A moment later, right, he is d 
Everyone swears by Macaulay
Cheryl Stonehouse
NICE little earner Macaulay Culkin, probably the richest 12-year-old in the world, hit on another money spinner while making Home Alone II.
He installed a swear box on the set and demanded a fine every time the language of his adult colleagues became too mature.
One of his best customers was Oscar-winning tough-guy actor Joe Pesci, who ran up a £300-plus bill while recreating his bungling burglar role from the original Home Alone.
‘I owe 500 bucks but I haven't paid yet,’ said Joe.
‘Anyway, that boy's so rich, I don't think he'll call in my IOU.’
Macaulay already has a fortune from the first Home Alone, third biggest movie money-maker of all time after ET and Star Wars, grossing Pounds 300 million.
For the sequel, he has been guaranteed £3 million plus five per cent of takings.
Experts forecast world earnings of Pounds 320 million, which would mean £16 million for Macaulay.
‘Money is just money, though,’ he says.
‘If I need money, I still have to ask my parents.’
Soon-Yi slams ‘jealous’ Mia
Jim Gallagher in New York
FILM director Woody Allen's young lover yesterday dismissed rumours that their affair was on the wane.
Soon-Yi Previn, 21, adopted daughter of Allen's former lover Mia Farrow, said the gossip had been started because her mother was jealous.
‘She's just mad he never married her.’
Soon-Yi said it ‘wasn't true at all’ that 57-year-old Allen was cooler towards her.
‘It's just Mia's jealousy because he preferred me.’
Soon-Yi was responding to a televised statement by Allen that he only sees her on weekends and holidays.
‘He loves me,’ she insisted.
‘It's the first time in my life that someone really cares for me.
‘And I don't care what people say about the age difference.
It's just pure jealousy and you shouldn't believe anything you hear.
‘Mia is very different from what people think.’
The affair between Allen and Soon-Yi, a refugee saved from the streets of Seoul in South Korea by Mia, has grabbed the headlines for months.
Allen is involved in a bitter custody battle for his and Mia's three children.
The actress claims that he molested Soon-Yi's adoptive seven-year-old sister, Dylan.
Soon-Yi, a student, was tracked down at her college in New Jersey and asked whether she and Woody planned to marry.
‘I can't talk about that,’ she said.
‘You have to leave.’
She seems to have grown unpopular with fellow students.
A classmate said: ‘We used to talk about the affair all the time at first.
Now we're fed up with it — it's just disturbing.’
Tatum learns to enjoy her life without John
Gerard Evans, in Los Angeles
TENNIS widow Tatum O'Neal has acquired a string of handsome admirers, now she has split from husband John McEnroe.
Mother-of-three Tatum, 29, has had cosy, flirtatious nights out with at least four different men at the trendy Granita restaurant near her home at Malibu, California.
Staff claim they were shocked by her blatant flirting and handholding.
‘She is a naughty lady, naughty,’ said one employee.
‘It's not a question of whether she has any boyfriend, more a case of which boyfriend she'll be with.
She is very flirtatious with them.
You don't do that with friends.
‘When Tatum is with her friends, they come in a big bunch and have a good time.
‘But Tatum has often dined alone with guys.
‘They are usually very goodlooking actor types, but nobody famous.
‘Occasionally McEnroe comes here, but he's not around often.
We weren't that surprised to hear of them splitting.’
Champion McEnroe, 33, practising with the Davis Cup team at Fort Worth, Texas, issued a statement this week confirming that he and Tatum, who won an Oscar as child star of Paper Moon, have seen lawyers about ending their six-year marriage.
They are also discussing custody of Kevin, six, Sean, five and one-year-old Emily.
The split apparently came after the fiery-tempered pair had a row about Tatum wanting to go back to acting — leaving McEnroe to look after the children while she makes movies.
‘I'm bored,’ Tatum has told friends.
‘I feel like life is passing me by.
John has had his career and I sat by and supported him.
Now it's my time, and he should be backing me all the way.
‘I just want to make a couple of movies a year.’
In the McEnroe camp, it is being said that the Wimbledon ace wants to continue a career in TV commentary — and has traditional views on marriage.
‘He is also very insecure and jealous,’ said one of his friends.
‘He is really worried that Tatum will be swept off her feet by some Hollywood stud.
You hear of that happening.
‘And he is so much in love with her, he's acting irrationally.’
RAF joins U.S. food convoy to starving
BRITISH fliers are to help bring food to the starving people of war-ravaged Somalia.
RAF transport aircraft will join US troops in the UN-backed effort to get famine relief past bandits and local warlords.
The British move follows a request from Washington and at least four Hercules aircraft are expected to take part.
The RAF is well equipped for such a role after taking part in food drops in Ethiopia and northern Iraq.
A defence spokesman said: ‘We are glad to be able to confirm at the request of the United States that the UK will participate in the operation.’
There are no plans to send British ground troops into Somalia at the moment because 2,400 are already committed to food convoys in Bosnia.
The US is preparing to send 28,150 troops for ‘Operation Restore Hope’, one of the last foreign policy moves by out-going President Bush.
The first soldiers, a 1,800-strong US marine force equipped with helicopters, are on standby off the Somali coast.
France is expected to send 2,000 troops.
Tons of food have been sent to Somalia but armed gangs have hijacked lorries, plundered stores and intercepted convoys before they can reach starving villagers.
Some military observers fear the US could get entangled in another Vietnam but President Bush warned: ‘Our mission is humanitarian and we will not tolerate armed gangs ripping off their own people.’
From his desk in the Oval Office, Mr Bush added: ‘The people of Somalia, especially the children, need our help.’
His successor, Bill Clinton, said: ‘I share his determination to ensure the success of this important mission.’
Oil spill captain quizzed
THE captain of a blazing tanker threatening an environmental disaster along the Spanish coast was interrogated by a judge yesterday.
Konstadinos Stavridis, 43, was arrested after the Aegean Sea, carrying nearly 80,000 tons of crude oil, ran aground on rocks near La Coruna.
The judge demanded to know why Stavridis tried to enter the port without a local pilot on board.
As firemen finally brought the tanker blaze under control, the captain was asked why he tried to dock his ship in fog, rain and seas whipped up by a force nine gale.
Normally, the pilot would have been on board before the ship ran aground 100 yards off the Tower of Hercules navigation light.
The weather was so bad he could not attempt to join the tanker.
It is believed Stavridis told the judge in a behind-closed-doors grilling that the pilot was directing him from shore.
Student shot pimp
Jim Gallagher in New York
A GIRL student who became a vice girl ‘for kicks’ ended up shooting her pimp.
Blonde, 21-year-old Elizabeth Dugan, who comes from a respectable family, went on trial yesterday for attempted murder.
She pleaded self-defence.
She is said to have shot Robert Staudinger, 27, in the head twice.
The prosecution claims she turned vicious in a row over £1,300 she claimed Staudinger owed her and also because he threatened to tell her mother she was a prostitute.
The bright 21-year-old New York University un-dergraduate turned to a secret life of vice after answering a newspaper advertisement for ‘Fun-loving Ladies — Beginners Welcome’.
She was earning up to £180 an hour from rich clients.
After her arrest, she told police why she became a call girl.
‘It seemed a fascinating lifestyle,’ she told detectives.
‘I just wanted to experience the thrill of it all.’
At first, Dugan denied the shooting.
She claimed to have been shopping with a boyfriend at the time.
But as the trial opened, she changed her plea and admitted shooting Staudinger last December, at his Manhattan apartment.
She claims it was self defence.
Staudinger survived and will be the main witness for the prosecution.
Defence lawyer Franklin Mandel insisted that the 6ft 3in pimp had threatened Dugan.
‘She acted only because she was defending herself,’ Mandel said.
‘Anyone in her shoes would have done the same thing.’
The court heard that Dugan's relationship with Staudinger was volatile.
She regularly fended off his advances.
He pressured her to take more well-heeled clients.
But, it was said, she had sex with her pimp at least twice — including in a three-in-a-bed romp with his regular girlfriend.
Dugan has claimed that she never had sex with clients.
‘We talked about computers,’ she said.
The trial continues.
Trace of makeup creates nine lives
THE swept-back hair, the manly shoulders, the suave moustache — of course, it's Tracey Ullman.
Air steward Trevor is just one of nine guises the comedienne creates for her £750,000 British comeback, Tracey Ullman: A Class Act.
The 32-year-old spent 24 hours in makeup for ITV's New Year special, co-starring Michael Palin.
The experience came in useful for another role right — as a makeup girl.
US troops for Somalia
US troops prepared to storm into war-ravaged Somalia last night to help get food aid to starving civilians.
Britain is expected to send RAF transport planes to support the UN-sanctioned action.
The move is opposed by many Americans, who fear it could be the start of another Vietnam.
Military analysts say President Bush is deluded if he thinks the 30,000 troops will be home by January 20, when Bill Clinton takes over.
Troops face a tough time from bandits and war lords.
‘Clearly there will be some encounters,’ said a Pentagon spokesman.
Jilted John is £150m better off
WAYWARD American heir John Haggin Jr was £150 million better off yesterday after the collapse of his seven-week marriage.
His Palm Beach socialite mother Naoma was so outraged when John, 35, wed the notorious divorcee Roxanne Pulitzer in Las Vegas, she cut him off.
But he is back in the fold now the marriage has collapsed.
‘This is an affair of the heart,’ rags to riches Roxanne had said before the wedding.
She became notorious during her divorce from publishing heir Peter Puliter amid claims of society drug taking and kinky sex.
Neither is saying what went wrong.
How Daryl got her man
SPLASH star Daryl Hannah fell in love with John F Kennedy Junior on a blind date set up by step-dad Jerry Wexler, friends have revealed.
Property tycoon Wexler hated blonde Daryl, 31, dating rock wildman Jackson Browne and asked who her fantasy date would be.
When she named the 31-year-old son of President Kennedy as her ideal man, he called his uncle Teddy Kennedy to arrange the meeting.
‘Jerry worked hard to break them up and this phone call was a master move,’ said a friend.
Drug split
ACTOR Mickey Rourke has been separated from his model wife for at least a month by her drug habit.
Carrie Otis, 24, booked into a Santa Monica, California, hospital after becoming suicidal, friends said.
Carrie had to say a tearful farewell to 41-year-old Rourke, who she married in the summer, when doctors ruled she should not have any visitors for 28 days.
She will be allowed to use a payphone, but only once a day.
‘She is being treated for drug abuse and depression,’ a hospital source said.
Russians put bark into park
THE Russians are to build their first Western-style theme park — and the inspiration behind it is British cartoon dog Digswell.
He became a cult figure in Russia as the first cartoon character in space, the guest of honour on board a rocket celebrating the end of the Cold War.
His creator James Driscoll has just returned to Britain after signing a £20 million deal to create the 40-acre fun park in Samara, 600 miles east of Moscow — where Digswell has been made a Freeman of the City.
The park will also feature the Storm Group cartoonist's other characters, The Shoe People, whose TV series is watched by 70 million Russians.
‘This is a marvellous opportunity for a British firm to pioneer the way ahead for a new style of entertainment in Russia,’ said Mr Driscoll.
Rourkes split by drug habit
ACTOR Mickey Rourke has been separated from his model wife for at least a month by her drug habit.
Carre Otis, 24, booked into a Santa Monica, California, hospital after becoming suicidal, friends said.
Carre had to say a tearful farewell to 41-year-old Rourke, who she married in the summer, when doctors ruled she should not have any visitors for 28 days.
She will be allowed to use a payphone, but only once a day.
Patients have to obey a strict regime and Carre is forced to share a room and bathroom with another addict.
Only a curtain separates the iron frame beds.
Television and radio is forbidden and reading material carefully monitored.
‘She is being treated for drug abuse and depression,’ a hospital source said.
‘Carre is very quiet and nervous.
She looked frightened when she arrived.
But there are no special perks for anyone, no matter how famous they are.’
President Bill freezes out Major
BILL CLINTON has snubbed Premier John Major by refusing to meet him in Washington later this month.
The United States president-elect has refused Mr Major's request for an informal, getting-to-know-you meeting.
The snub has sparked fears that the Clinton administration is about to put the two countries' special relationship on hold in retaliation for Tory support of George Bush in the presidential campaign.
The strain will only be heightened by revelations at the weekend that the Home Office looked for political dirt on Mr Clinton during the US election.
Minefield halts convoy
A MINEFIELD yesterday blocked the path of a United Nations aid convoy trying to reach a beseiged Bosnian town.
The 17 trucks were halted 25 miles short of the town of Tuzla while UN aides negotiated for a path to be cleared of mines.
Spokesman Peter Kessler said: ‘Negotiations are progressing pretty well, but there has been a little bit of foot-dragging on the Serbian side.’
He was optimistic that a path would be cleared today.
Tuzla is choked with refugees — and under attack by Serbs.
An Ocean apart
Russell Jenkins
BILL CLINTON has given a chilling warning that Britain's cosy relationship with the United States is heading for the big freeze when he takes over the White House.
In the first icy transatlantic blast, he pointedly refused to meet Premier John Major, who visits Washington later this month.
After such a calculated and insulting snub, the Government fears that Mr Clinton may be trying to punish the Tories for supporting George Bush's presidential campaign.
And new claims over the extent of that support are said to have made the president-elect furious.
Home Office officials have admitted combing through dusty immigration files from the 1960s looking for evidence that Mr Clinton considered applying for British citizenship to avoid the Vietnam draft.
No material was found, and the Home Office insisted that if it had been it would not have been made public.
But Mr Clinton, putting together his administration in Arkansas, stormed: ‘They should have more pressing business.’
For weeks Downing Street has been talking about bringing Mr Major and Mr Clinton together when the premier travels to the States to take part in US-EC summit.
But Mr Major will now just see Mr Bush to bid him a personal farewell from office.
It would have been unthinkable for former premier Margaret Thatcher to go to America without being received by then-president Ronald Reagan amid tributes to the two country's ‘special relationship’.
However, Mr Clinton is looking to form a new relationship with Europe as a whole, following the collapse of Communism in the East.
A spokesman at Number 10 played down the snub.
‘We understand the president-elect is not seeing any heads of government,’ he said.
‘Instead he is busy sorting out his own administration.
‘Meanwhile we are going to be very busy during the summit.
We don't have time for the sort of substantive exchanges we would like.
‘We welcome the delay until the New Year.’
But Downing Street mandarins grew so alarmed at reports of a snub yesterday that the text of private diplomatic traffic, a telex sent by Mr Clinton on Saturday, was made public.
In it, he says: ‘I place a high premium on the historic and special relationship between the United States and Britain.’
He added that he hoped Mr Major would understand that a meeting was impossible because he is busy setting up his administration.
Following the release of the telex, shadow foreign secretary Dr Jack Cunningham said: ‘It is almost certain that Downing Street and the Foreign Office are trying to manoeuvre to cover up their embarrassment.’
The snub is badly timed for Mr Major, who is looking to the US for a vital settlement in tough talks over farm subsidies to avert a damaging trade war.
It also follows similar personal rebuffs by Chancellor Helmut Kohl and President Mitterrand.
The German and French leaders told the Prime Minister they did not want to see him in the run up to the Edinburgh summit, which begins on Friday.
Iraq Brits ‘are fine’
PRISON conditions for two Britons jailed for illegal entry to Iraq have improved.
A British Embassy spokesman said diplomats who visited Paul Ride and Michael Wainwright in a Baghdad jail last week ‘were pleased to see they were fine.’
French open fire at Gatt trade deal
FRANCE will launch a bid today to sink the Gatt trade deal between the EC and America.
They will use a special joint session of Community farm and foreign ministers in Brussels to start undermining the accord, reached last month.
First in the firing line will be EC Agriculture Commissioner Ray MacSharry, who will be quizzed closely by the French, who claim Europe's farmers will have to make extra sacrifices for the Gatt deal.
An effigy of Mr MacSharry was burned by protesting farmers in Strasbourg last week in a violent protest against the deal.
Britain supports the trade deal, which could form the basis of a wider Gatt accord for 100 countries.
Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd will chair the meeting and hopes to clear the way for success at Friday's Edinburgh EC summit.
British officials believe the key summit issues are solving Danish doubts over the Maastricht Treaty, and agreeing on EC finances for the rest of the decade.
Mr Major produced proposals which meet Denmark's demands, but they were rejected by Germany, Belgium, Luxembourg and Greece.
Mosque vandals spark India crisis
HINDU militants yesterday destroyed a mosque at Ayodhya in the north of India.
Prime Minister Narasimha Rao appealed for calm in the face of what he called a ‘grave crisis’.
Swiss reject Europe deal
THE Swiss dealt another blow to European union last night.
Early referendum results showed voters were likely to reject joining the European Economic Area.
Opponents say the EEA is a first step towards full EC membership and the loss of Swiss independence.
A ‘no’ vote is likely to delay the start of the EEA planned for January 1 to coincide with the launch of the EC's single market.
Official results in 13 of the country's 23 voting regions showed eight had voted resoundingly against in an 80 per cent turnout.
If 12 or more say ‘no’, the EEA is rejected.
The debate over whether European Free Trade Association members like Switzerland should join the extension of the EC's single market was bitter.
In a final TV appeal president Rene Felber said: ‘A negative vote would compromise our future and hurt Switzerland's image abroad.’
Other EFTA members like Austria, Sweden and Norway have already ratified the EEA.
Dashing premier
PREMIER John Major flew to Holland last night in a desperate attempt to salvage something from Britain's EC presidency.
He was trying to persuade Dutch leader Ruud Lubbers to help restart stalled moves towards European Union at this Friday's Edinburgh summit.
Former Prime Minister Sir Edward Heath told him before he left that the Government should have pushed ahead with ratification of the Maastricht Treaty, despite Denamrk's no vote.
He said: ‘Many of our colleagues think we are sheltering behind the Danes because of the opposition there is in part of Parliament.’
Mr Major flies to Dublin today to meet Irish Premier Albert Reynolds.
Eddie Murphy
EDDIE Murphy has declared himself a servant of God.
‘God sent all artists here because it can be such a drag to be on this planet,’ said the star.
Murphy, 31, above, says his next mission is to make Beverly Hills Cop III.
Flogging Briton risks 100 lashes
Christian Gysin
A BRITON sentenced by a Saudi court to a flogging for allegedly swearing at his staff may have the sentence doubled for appealing.
Hospital executive David Brown, 32, could suffer 100 strokes from a 6ft bamboo cane if his attempt to have the ruling reversed fails.
The Foreign Office, aware of a new £40 billion arms sale to the Saudis, last night played down the case.
Senior British officials in Jeddah refused to discuss Mr Brown's plight.
Consul John Dimmock said: ‘Why are you ringing me about this?
Why is there so much publicity about it?’
Foreign Office sources said public floggings were designed as a ‘humiliation’ and ‘not to draw blood.’
‘The man who beats the victim holds a Koran under his arm,’ an official said.
‘That limits the force.’
Mr Brown went to Saudi Arabia last February to increase efficiency at the British-run King Khaled National Guard Hospital, near the Saudi capital, Jeddah.
He allegedly called hospital workers ‘lazy bastards’.
Despite his apology, a religious court convicted him of using insulting language.
Last night a storm of protest was growing over the Government's ‘do nothing’ approach.
Labour MP Bob Cryer said: ‘They are prepared to accept medieval barbarity rather than strain trade relations.’
A doctor who works in Saudi said: ‘The floggings are ferociously inflicted.
A hundred lashes could cause severe internal injuries.’
Mother fights to keep killer in jail
Jane Holtham, in New York
A MOTHER is fighting to keep the man who killed her daughter behind bars.
Robert Chambers, 26, could be freed after serving just 4½ years for strangling girlfriend Jennifer Levin.
Her mother Ellen has gathered 35,000 signatures to try to block his parole.
‘This is not enough time to pay for my daughter's life,’ she said.
Chambers, whose parents are British, claimed he killed Jennifer, 18, after a passionate sex session ‘got rough’.
He later pleaded guilty to manslaughter.
He was sentenced to between five and 15 years after a trial which exposed the privileged lifestyle of rich New York youngsters.
We regret these ‘unfortunate’ killings but please keep sending your tourists
Bob Graham
THE price of the savage murders of two British tourists has finally begun to sink into South Africa's brutal society.
In a country where 60 people are slaughtered every day, the beach killings of young mother Julie Godwin and her best friend Elizabeth Over hardly rated a second thought.
Certainly it wasn't likely to put a spark into the amateurish, bungling ways of the local police.
Until the impact of the murders in Britain began to filter back to South Africa.
And with it, the sudden fear of what it could do to the tourist trade.
For two days, police in the remote coastal region around Sodwana Bay had stumbled and fumbled their way into the case.
Then State President F.W. de Klerk got an anxious call from Tourism Minister Org Marais.
‘These unfortunate deaths,’ Minister Marais warned, ‘could have a severe effect on the nation's economy.’
Suddenly South Africa, which desperately wants to lure tourists, was facing a nightmare for its holiday trade.
The multi-billion-pound business had already taken a severe thrashing last year, as the outside world began to shrink away from growing violence.
This year, a huge worldwide advertising campaign was launched to bring back the lost visitors, to a ‘new, kinder, more ethnically integrated’ country.
It was hoped that the average 12,000 British visitors a month would swell to over 22,000 in the next few months.
The last thing South Africa needed was for tourists, especially British tourists, to be murdered on the beaches.
‘Tell your countryment we will catch the killers,’ spokesman Colonel Bill Dennis pleaded yesterday.
‘It is important not to frighten tourists away.’
At first, the deaths of Julie and Elizabeth, both 30, were not seen as particular human tragedies.
‘The attitude to murder in South Africa is callous,’ a top-ranking Foreign Affairs official admitted.
‘We have a lot of murders.
It is a dangerous place.
But usually tourists are not affected.
‘As a consequence of these deaths, the very highest levels have been cranking up the troops to find who did this.’
So, suddenly, the local police station is swamped with detectives from all over the region.
When local police were told of two female bodies on the beach, it had been just a nuisance.
And they proceeded to make Inspector Clouseau look like Inspector Morse.
Vital evidence was ignored or destroyed.
And the victims' relatives found policemen more worried about where the next beer was coming from, than catching killers.
Elizabeth, from St Albans, Herts, and working in Durban, had just become engaged to fisherman Cuan Cronje, 32.
‘The girls had taken my truck for their trip,’ he said.
‘I got a call from a cop who asked if I owned it.
‘When I said Yes, he just said, ‘Yeah, well, it's here covered in blood, and we've got two women's bodies on the beach’.’
Today, Cronje and three grieving relatives, including Elizabeth's brother, Richard, will take a ‘swim of defiance’ off the murder beach.
Julie's husband, Tim, 32, caring for baby Sophie in Northampton, will be represented by her father, Derek.
‘It's part of a healing process,’ he said.
Oil covers 60 miles of coast
OIL spilled from the wrecked Greek tanker Aegean Sea covered 60 miles of northwest Spanish coast yesterday.
The ship was carrying 80,000 tons of oil when it hit a rock off Corunna last Thursday.
The vessel broke up and caught fire.
Explosions ripped through the blazing wreck.
The cost of the disaster is estimated at £280 million.
Ship's captain Konstantino Stavridis, 43, arrested after the shipwreck, was freed yesterday on £5,000 bail.
He is said to have been trying to get his ship into port in a force nine gale with almost no visibility — and guided by a pilot on shore.
Corunna's Civil Governor, Pilar Lledo, said: ‘There is evidence to show he is at fault.’
But pilot Rodolfo Garcia is expected to share the blame.
Everest climbers in dash to the summit
Stephen Farrell
THE TODAY-sponsored team of climbers hopes to make a unique dash to the summit of Everest within a week.
Confidence is high among the experienced Darc Star team hoping to be the first UK successful attempt on the mountain in winter.
None of the members has seen such mild weather in winter.
Their idea of mild is relative, though.
In the base camp, 12,000ft below the summit, equipment has to be able to work at -20°C inside tents and — 40°C outside.
So far there is no sign of the savage 140mph jetstream wind which descends on Everest in December.
The team, which includes two TODAY journalists and is partly funded by this newspaper, is led by Lieutenant Colonel Phil Neame, a Falklands hero and veteran of a successful British 1976 Everest expedition.
He has ruthlessly pruned his original plans for a quick dash to the top.
A first summit attempt by selected climbers has been pencilled in for between Friday and next Monday.
‘The ice fall is in dreadful condition.
It's like Russian roulette up there,’ said Lt Col Neame.
‘Our best chance is to get up there and get back as soon as we can.
‘If that doesn't work we will then dig in and do it the long and hard way.’
The spirit of the team is high.
Our Sherpas watched in amazement as a solitary piper welcomed the British Everest expedition to their temporary ‘home’ at the base camp.
Territorial Army Sergeant Bob Vowles piped a march from the top of the 18,100ft peak Kala Pattar.
Twenty people have died on the treacherous glacier which we have to scramble up and down transporting supplies from the base camp to higher camps on the path to the summit.
Many of the expedition have passed rigorous SAS courses.
All have mountain experience.
But nothing prepares you for four and a half hours climbing up crumbling ice.
Then comes the journey back.
Then 24 hours rest.
Then up again, all in oxygen so thin that your pulse rate is 50 per cent higher.
Everest is a hard enemy, and has already dispatched four of the expedition back down the valley.
Base camp manager Jim Wilkinson, 54, was helicoptered out with bleeding peptic ulcers.
Reserve Marine Myles Morley, 37, from Greystoke, Cumbria, developed eyesight problems and had to move to a lower altitude.
‘That's it.
18 months' work down the drain,’ he said.
‘I'm gutted, but my eyesight's more important than any mountain.’
The third to fall by the wayside was Lake District Mountain Rescue member and TA Lieutenant Brendan Conlon, 31, who collapsed halfway up carrying his first load of supplies.
A Sherpa also broke his ankle.
Although confident, we know the odds are stacked against the climbers.
Only nine people have made it to the top in winter — and one died on the way down.
The advance party has now returned to base camp to spend a few days feeding up on military rations of sausage and beans and chocolate and pear ready for the final push.
Conditions in the base camp that is home to me, photographer David Hill, the remaining 15 expedition members, 18 Sherpas, three cooks, three kitchen boys, and one mail runnner are harsh.
We reached the camp after an arduous 12-day trek.
Although a long way off the summit, it is still higher than the tallest mountain in Europe.
The trek took its toll.
Medic Dr Christine A'Court was forced to supervise a makeshift saline drip to treat herself when she became dehydrated.
She said: ‘One of the Sherpas came in, got down on his knees and said a little prayer over me.
‘I felt awful but I thought, ‘Things aren't that bad, are they?’’
I also suffered temporary blindness caused by altitude sickness.
My immediate fear was being banned from going on so I didn't mention the problem.
But after a few hours it became hard to disguise.
I was lucky — after a good night's sleep the blindness disappeared.
The rest of the expedition members are hoping their luck holds.
The land of I'm free
CAMP British sitcom Are You Being Served is the latest craze to hit San Francisco.
Fans can see it on TV three times a day and are holding parties dressed up as their favourite characters.
The ‘I'm free’ catchphrase of limp-wristed Mr Humphreys and the double entendres of Mrs Slocombe echo around the city's fashionable bars.
John Inman, 56, who plays Mr Humphreys, said: ‘It's wonderful.
It's like living your life all over again.’
Briton who swore at Saudi workers escapes flogging
Christian Gysin
BRITISH hospital manager David Brown, sentenced to 50 lashes in Saudi Arabia for swearing at staff, has won his appeal against the punishment.
Foreign Office sources confirmed the news yesterday, only hours after Mr Brown, 32, was warned the penalty might be doubled if the appeal failed.
He will return to Britain for Christmas, before going back to his job at the British-run King Khaled National Guard Hospital, near Jeddah.
He refused to discuss the case yesterday.
But a colleague said: ‘Officially, David won't be cleared until he and the British Consul meet Saudi officials in the next 24 hours.
‘The sentence will then be formally withdrawn.’
Mr Brown was arrested by Saudi religious police two weeks after beginning work at the hospital in February.
He allegedly called the staff ‘idle bastards’, pointed at them with his forefinger and ‘put a foot towards the face of a man’.
Later he apologised.
But a religious court convicted him of using insulting language and ordered 50 lashes with a 6ft bamboo cane.
Mr Brown was freed while waiting for a decision on the appeal.
He and his family asked the Foreign Office not to give the case any detailed publicity, for fear of jeopardising his chances.
Foreign Office staff refused yesterday to give any personal details about Mr Brown — or about behind-the-scenes diplomatic activity leading to the climbdown by the Saudi authorities.
Hospital project director Nigel Wheel said: ‘We believe David wishes to stay in the country and continue with his work.
He does not wish to talk about this matter.’
The case had led to criticism against the Government for taking a ‘do nothing approach’.
Labour MP Bob Cryer said the matter should not be dismissed just because Mr Brown had won his appeal.
‘The British Government should bring pressure on the Saudis to halt this barbaric medieval punishment,’ he said.
The MP said it was the duty of the Government to ask the Saudis to give special consideration to Britons working in their country and, in effect, to give them dispensation from certain of the Islamic punishments.
Officials had stressed that the proposed flogging would be to humiliate Mr Brown, not draw blood.
But a doctor working in Saudi Arabia told TODAY: ‘These floggings are ferociously inflicted.
They can cause severe internal injuries, particularly to the kidneys.’
Pavarotti's poor start
OPERA maestro Luciano Pavarotti met a frosty reception when he returned to his old theatre after a five-year absence last night.
Critical buffs at Milan's opera house whistled during his performance of the Infante in Verdi's Don Carlo.
The rest of the 2,000-strong La Scala crowd cheered and threw flowers to the 57-year-old tenor.
‘The contrasts are amplified because of the the massive media presence,’ said one critic.
Culkin's home run
CHILD star Macauley Culkin's Home Alone 2: Lost In New York has topped US box office takings for the third week in a row, earning Pounds 8 million.
The Bodyguard, starring singer Whitney Houston and Kevin Costner, moved up to second from third with £7.2 million.
Houston's music from the movie, including the single I Will Always Love You, is also topping music charts.
In third place was Aladdin, which grossed £7 million.
Tragic safari photos
THE last hours in the lives of two British women murdered in South Africa were brought vividly to life yesterday in photographs taken just before they died.
The pictures were developed from a film found in a camera belonging to Elizabeth Over, 30, murdered on a lonely beach at Sodwana Bay, in Zululand.
They include happy shots of her friend, Julie Godwin, also 30, who died with her in a vicious panga-knife attack.
Family and friends yesterday paid a poignant tribute to the two at the murder scene.
Irish fuel trade row
IRELAND last night backed France in its battle against the Gatt world trade deal, as angry EC farmers attacked police and stoned buildings in Brussels.
Irish agriculture minister Joe Walsh said European farmers would bear too much of the cost of reform if the current agreement on subsidy cuts went through.
Top Gun Tom in secret mission to adopt baby
Tim Miles in Palm Beach
HOLLYWOOD golden couple Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman are to adopt a baby.
After two years of marriage, they appear to have given up hope of having a child of their own and have filed adoption papers in Palm Beach, Florida.
Whether the son or daughter, which Cruise has said would be better than winning an Oscar, will be with the cou ple before Christmas is unclear.
‘The document stipulates intent to adopt,’ said a lawyer.
‘That means they are waiting for a baby from a ‘broking’ company, a children's home society or even through a privately-reached financial agreement with the natural mother.’
‘Whether the child has arrived or is yet to be born is unclear.
The couple are legally required to show they are the prospective parents.’
The adoption, which will cost up to £20,000, is shrouded in mystery.
Under local laws, Cruise, 30, and 24-year-old Australian-born Kidman have to be resident in Florida for at least six months before they can adopt.
Property and tax records show the pair, who live in California, do not own a home there.
But Palm Beach lawyer Peggy Lynn said: ‘They could get round that if the birth mother picks a specific couple to adopt the baby, the child has special needs or the mother is related.’
The couple are disciples of the controversial Church of Scientology, founded by guru L Ron Hubbard.
Its national headquarters are in Florida.
A spokesman for the Palm Beach County circuit court yesterday confirmed adoption papers had been logged by local lawyer Weston Sigmund.
The baby will bring joy to Top Gun and Rain Man star Cruise and his wife.
The couple, who worked together in the film Far and Away, are billed as Tinseltown's most romantic couple.
Their high-profile status is matched only by their notoriously secret private life.
Recently he said about starting a family: ‘We're undecided.
We're going to wait a little while.’
One reason given for Cruise's divorce from his first wife, 39-year-old actress Mimi Rogers, in January 1990, was their inability to have children.
Both had intensive fertility treatment in their 30-month marriage.
‘Hollywood can keep the Oscars,’ said Cruise after the £6 million split.
‘The only reward I want is a baby of my own.
‘I have cried tears of frustration.
I would love to have kids.
I would turn down an Oscar to see my boy at a baseball game or my girl at a song recital.
‘I loved Mimi and having a family was always an important issue.
We both had our share of troubles in that area and it was a major factor in our divorce.’
Cruise and Kidman are among Hollywood's highest earners, having made about £100 million.
They met on the set of the race car drama Days of Thunder in 1990.
A publicist for Cruise said she could not confirm the plan.
A Hollywoood spokesman for Kidman said she could not be contacted.
Bus dive swim for life
TERRIFIED college students were forced to swim for their lives after their bus plunged into a water-filled ravine in Calais, northern France.
The 63 students and teachers from Weston-super-Mare College, Avon, were returning from a day trip when the coach skidded and crashed.
One girl had a lucky escape when a fence post narrowly missed her head.
Two other students were taken to hospital.
Flogging reprieve
BRITISH hospital manager David Brown, sentenced to 50 lashes with a bamboo cane in Saudi Arabia for swearing at staff, has won his appeal against the punishment.
Mr Brown, 32, who allegedly called staff ‘idle bastards', ' was warned the penalty might be doubled if the appeal failed.
He will return to Britain for Christmas, before going back to his job at the British-run King Khaled National Guard Hospital, near Jeddah.
Italy cheers on AC Milamb
THE football stars of AC Milan are helping sell British lamb to soccer-mad Italians.
The Meat and Livestock Commission has paid £16,000 to put the club logo on all cuts sold in Italy over the next two years.
Every joint of ‘Agnello Britannico’ will also carry a message saying the meat has been endorsed by the team.
‘Young Italians follow football like we follow the Royal Family,’ said commission spokesman David Lewis.
‘We expect them to go home now and say, ‘Mamma gimme lamb’.’
At the moment Italians only eat 5,000 tonnes of lamb a year.
Although that's 445,000 tonnes less than Britain it's becoming more popular as the EC breaks down borders.
‘They eat it with oil and pasta,’ said Mr Lewis.
‘We have issued the team with a recipe for a lamb based spaghetti bolognese.
‘We hope that by the end of the season every fan will be calling them AC Milamb and flocking to buy British.’
Their final happy moments
Bob Graham at Sodwana Bay, Zululand
THE warm ocean cascades with a deafening roar on to fine, white sand.
The South African sun burns down from a cloudless sky.
Here, in this almost-deserted paradise, British tourist Julie Godwin posed and laughed, as her best friend Elizabeth Over snapped away with the camera.
Taking souvenir pictures neither of them would ever live to see.
Within hours of taking these photographs, Elizabeth was dead.
So was Julie.
Both hacked to pieces with 3ft-long panga cane-cutting knives.
Then their killers dumped the bodies into the Indian Ocean, hoping they would be swept out to sea and eaten by sharks.
But the bodies were seen, floating on the waves.
On the beach was the crashed, blood-spattered white Isuzu truck that Elizabeth had borrowed from her fisherman boyfriend, Cuan Cronje, 32.
In the truck, among the women's belongings, was the camera.
And in the camera, when police eventually got round to checking, were 17 pictures of the last hours of their lives.
Among them, the photos on these pages, published with the permission of the victims' families.
Most of the pictures were taken in the Sodwana Bay area.
It is a stretch of coast that 30-year-old Elizabeth, from St Albans, Herts, working in Durban, had come to love for its wildlife.
Here, on a nine-mile reef just off the coast, boyfriend Cuan had taught Elizabeth to scuba-dive.
And when Julie, also 30, came for a visit — leaving husband Tim, 32, to look after 22-month-old Sophie back home in Northampton — Elizabeth was longing to introduce her friend to the beauties of Sodwana Bay.
Their last, idyllic day on earth had started at magnificent Lake Sabaya, six miles inland from the ocean.
The friends laughed and squealed with delight as they took a short boat trip to see the crocodiles and hippos that live on the lake.
In one photo, small groups of hippo huddle in mid-lake.
At the water's edge, a crocodile is lurking.
In the trees are monkeys, a pack of bandit mongoose and — right on a treetop — a large African fish eagle.
From the lake, the trippers drove the white Isuzu to Sodwana Bay.
To the perfect, shifting sands where they planned to sunbathe and then camp overnight.
They had not come unprepared.
The friends joked about the amount of luggage Julie wanted to take.
‘She had enough clothes for a month, never mind a few days,’ said one of Elizabeth's friends, who helped them get ready for the trip.
‘Julie had packed every conceivable item, from a packet of ginger-nut biscuits to a canister of CS gas, for protection.’
On the rough drive over dunes to the beach, Elizabeth stopped the truck and took a picture of the path through the trees.
Little realising it was their road to Eternity.
Down on the beach, marvelling all over again at the sheer sweep of it, Elizabeth took a series of picture-postcard shots.
Of sand, surf and sea stretching for mile after mile after mile into the blue haze.
Soon after lunch, as they sheltered from the blazing heat, Julie stretched out on a towel and blanket.
She covered her body with a multi-coloured cotton tunic.
Elizabeth crept closer to snap a close-range shot of her friend's sand-flecked face.
Julie, surprised, burst out laughing.
And Elizabeth snapped her again.
Soon afterwards, the killers pounced.
Julie, it is believed, tried to run for it, back along that treelined path Elizabeth had snapped.
Elizabeth attempted to escape in the Isuzu, but crashed as her attacker hacked at her through the window.
The pictures Elizabeth took that day have become more than just snaps of a holiday that turned to horror.
They have become part of a stinging indictment of the way the South African police, blase about murder in a brutal society, have been handling this investigation.
Elizabeth's last film reveals vital clues overlooked by clumsy Clouseau-class coppers who had already wiped out other vital evidence.
At first, they claimed that the only items missing from the murder scene were about £400 in cash and two car-tyre pumps.
A close look at the pictures reveals that Julie's colourful, distinctive top had vanished.
And though the photos show that Julie, too, carried a camera — dangling round her neck — that had also disappeared.
‘We made several errors,’ a detective admitted yesterday.
But, police say, they have now taken charge of the film, as part of an intense investigation.
A single red rose bobbed gently on the ocean waves at Sodwana Bay yesterday.
A bittersweet tribute to Elizabeth.
Further along the lonely beach, bunches of flowers marked the spot where she and Julie were murdered, eight days agao.
The flowers were part of a sad pilgrimage by the victims' relatives.
Elizabeth's older brother, Richard, 34, had come from Somerset to see the place where his ‘little sister’ died — and to join in a defiant swim from the murder beach.
Julie's younger brother, Marcus Stuttard, had also made the 6,000-mile journey.
‘I wanted to show the people who did this terrible thing that we are defiant,’ he said.’
Julie's grieving husband and baby Sophie were represented by her father Derek.
There, too, was bearded Afrikaaner Cuan who had won Elizabeth's heart, and become engaged to her only weeks ago.
The four men stripped to their swimming-trunks and walked out into the ocean surf.
A strange, sad commemoration of the murders that ruined paradise.
Hand of JR saves Burgess
TV BAD guy Larry Hagman rescued veteran actor Burgess Meredith from drowning as storms flooded their Malibu homes.
Larry, 61,— who played JR in Dallas — reached through a window to pull his neighbour to safety.
Meredith, 84, who starred as the boxing coach in Rocky and as Penguin in the Batman TV series, said: ‘I was in my bathrobe in the house and suddenly I tripped and disappeared under water.
‘But luckily my saviour, Larry, was on hand to help me.’
Male mummy
A MUMMY 1,900 years old has been unearthed in Syria.
The adult male, found in Palmyra, 120 miles from Damascus, is Syria's fourth.
Mummification was not used in Syria in the first century, but the bodies may have been preserved in Egypt.
Mudslide kills 50 miners
AT least 50 people were feared dead last night after an avalanche of rain-soaked mud buried a gold mining camp.
Hundreds more may be missing in the disaster at Llipi, in Bolivia, which lies in the foothills of the Andes.
Great rift goes back 500 years
Matthew Benns
THE political and religious crisis gripping India and Pakistan goes back hundreds of years.
Dr Robert Bradnock, of London's School of Oriental and African Studies, said current problems can be traced to when Moslems held power in India and built mosques on Hindu shrines five centuries ago.
Militant Hindus have been trying to destroy the mosque at Ayodhya for years because they believe it was built by the 16th Century Moslem invaders.
The site is the birthplace of a major Hindu god.
More than 300,000 Hindus had converged on the town last week to destroy the temple.
The dispute exploded once before in 1990, when about 1,000 people died after Hindus stormed the building.
That unrest brought down the government of Prime Minister V P Singh.
There are two other disputed holy places in India where Hindus want to destroy Moslem mosques.
Recently the extremist BJP, a Hindu nationalist party, has strongly promoted a staunchly Hindu culture.
India's 870 million population is 82 percent Hindu but there are 100 million Moslems and other minorities under the rule of the Congress party.
The BJP fired up the population by playing on political rifts in the Congress Party and on the Hindus' problems with the caste system and love of religion.
Death toll hits 400 as troops go in
THE death toll rose to 400 yesterday as violence spread to 14 of India's 25 states.
Many victims, Hindu and Moslem, were shot by police or stabbed.
Others died in arson attacks.
Soldiers herded 50,000 Hindus onto buses and trains out of Ayodhya, where the violence was sparked by the destruction of a Moslem mosque.
The Hindu BJP party has called a general strike today to protest against the arrest of two of its leaders, accused of inciting Hindus to tear down the mosque.
Safe escape from Sarajevo
THOUSANDS of people have been offered free passage out of war-torn Sarajevo.
Bosnian Serbs, who have occupied the city for eight months, admitted freezing weather and famine had made life intolerable for its 380,000 residents.
They promised ‘food, accommodation and absolute safety’.
Aid flights have been suspended for a week after fighting near the city's airport yesterday continued to block flights.
Hatred stalks Cindy's mother
Kevin Smith in DeKalb, Illinois
CINDY Crawford's mother has received death threats as jealousy and hatred split the home town the model left behind for fame.
While Cindy, 26, married to heart-throb actor Richard Gere, jets around the world, her mother Jennifer Moluf lives in fear.
Jennifer told me: ‘One guy wrote telling me he was going to burn me out of town, burn my house down.
He even called the police to tell them.’
I discovered the dark secret of DeKalb in Illinois after arriving in search of the childhood influences that shaped the life of the world's top cover girl.
Civic leaders have thrown a protective barrier around Jennifer and are loathe to admit some people resent the success of their most famous daughter.
Strangers asking questions find more doors closing than opening.
DeKalb High School principal Jed Dunbar is reluctant to allow visitors a glimpse at the 1984 year book with rare pictures of Cindy.
And chief of police Don Berke told me: ‘You are not welcome.
You will get no help from us.’
Jennifer wears a sable fur coat around town and drives to her job as a receptionist in a Cadillac.
Townsfolk, it seems, don't like that.
When Cindy returned home to the small Illinois farming community of 39,400 to look up old friends two Thanksgivings ago, the resentment only increased.
Childhood friend Lesley Nolin said: ‘She was holding court in Molly's Bar where people wear jeans, baggy sweaters and drink beers for a dollar.’
Cindy was sitting on a stool resplendent in a black Chanel blazer, her expensively manicured fingers circling a glass of wine.
‘I can see how it got people's backs up,’ says Lesley.
‘But beneath the glitz, Cindy was friendly.
She wanted to know what her old friends were doing.’
In another local bar, student Betsy Goodman says: ‘Cindy doesn't keep in touch with anyone and her mother has a real attitude now.’
Everyone claims to know some young stud who had a fling with Cindy before she left DeKalb but none can produce names.
It seems Cindy's only serious boyfriend was Bill Cordes, the DeKalb High School football team quarterback.
Lesley says Cindy left him because she felt he was tying her to DeKalb.
Although Cindy still leaves her new base in Manhattan and heads for DeKalb several times a year, she now divides her time between her divorced parents and two sisters.
Jennifer and insurance salesman Dennis Crawford split up when the model was a teenager.
Her mother married housing manager John Moluf four years ago and moved to a big house in neighbouring Malta.
Cindy is said to have been spurred on to achieve by the death of her four-year-old brother Jeff, a leukaemia victim.
She was 10.
In her teens, she set her sights on a teaching career and she held a Sunday school class for four years.
Life began to change at 16 when a shop asked Cindy to model for a fashion show.
Then, the DeKalb Nite Weekly invited her to grace their front cover.
Lesley says: ‘She used to have hair all the way down to her waist.
Then one time she came back from a job and had a trendy, short cut.
It was the talk of the town.’
After leaving Dekalb at 20, Cindy always returned to her mother for advice — except when it came to Gere, 17 years her senior.
‘Richard was my worst nightmare,’ Jennifer said.
‘But I couldn't have been more wrong.
‘He is nothing like the gigolos he plays in the movies.
He lies around in jeans strumming his guitar.’
Gere now calls her for advice on Cindy.
‘He tells me she has nagged him to do the housework.
He asks if he should and I tell him, ‘Yes, that is part of sharing’.’
Cindy has reportedly been spotted in Los Angeles buying a home pregnancy testing kit.
Jennifer's reply is: ‘I've already got little blankets knitted and all ready to go.’
It's cheerio Cheers as Ted calls time
CHEERS barman Sam Malone has finally called last orders.
Actor Ted Danson has turned down £7.5 million to make a 12th series of the hit American sitcom, dealing a death blow to the show.
The decision to drop the hit that has won 26 Emmy awards has shocked viewers.
NBC president Warren Littlefield: ‘We, along with millions of fans, salute what we feel is one of America's all-time great comedies.’
Danson, 42, has earned over £65 million during the 11-year run.
Other stars are furious at losing their £65,000 an episode pay cheques.
Boris offers service on the forecourt
TENNIS star Boris Becker is moving into the motor trade with Mercedes-Benz, it was revealed yesterday.
The three-times Wimbledon champion is paying more than £8 million for two dealerships selling the luxury saloons and sports cars built by the German marque.
They will be called Autohaus Boris Becker.
The takeovers in the eastern German coastal towns of Stralsund and Ribnitz from next July will create 70 jobs.
Becker, 25, and Mercedes chairman Werner Niefer will sign a contract on Friday.
Killer filmed victims dying
A WEALTHY furrier tortured his boss's wife and a former lover, then filmed them as he finally murdered them.
Lutz Reinstrom, 44, later boiled his victims' remains in an acid bath after the killings in a nuclear bunker in his garden in Hamburg, Germany.
He hid the bodies in barrels buried in his garden.
He confessed while in jail for blackmailing a woman over their brief affair.
She told how he kept her prisoner in the bunker for a week when she refused to pay up.
US saves Somalia but TV is there first
Adrian Lee
TIMING was crucial for yesterday's dramatic US Marines landing in war-torn Somalia.
As the elite Navy Seal commandos stormed up the beach, cameras rolled to catch live prime-time TV back home.
Anxious that none of the drama should be missed, commanders had planned the landing to the second.
Then tipped off the TV crews about exact time and place.
And to make sure everybody knew exactly what was going on, planning chiefs held a press conference on the beach, while the SAS-style commandos held a photo-call.
In homes across the States millions of Americans were switching on for an evening's viewing.
They watched spellbound as a dozen navy kayaks landed on Mogadishu beach for the the start of the US led Operation Restore Hope, which will safeguard the supply of relief to starving Somalis.
Washington ordered the initial 1,800 heavily armed troops to sweep into the capital to save up to a million Somalis starving to death.
Rival warlords Mohamed Farrah Aidid and Ali Mahdi Mohamed have been looting Western emergency aid supplies sent to the area.
The advance forces feared a major confrontation with militiamen.
But they only shots they encountered were from cameras.
The operation will eventually involve more than 35,000 troops from at least nine countries.
Later today, 80 servicemen from RAF Lyneham in Wiltshire will fly to Mombasa in Kenya on standby for action.
The personnel include air and ground crews, communications experts and air traffic controllers.
A Ministry of Defence spokesman said the crews were there on ‘humanitarian grounds’.
The entire operation is being led by British-born Lieutenant General Robert Johnston.
The 55-year-old's icy calm distinguished him as one of General Norman Schwarzkopf's closest aides during the Gulf War.
Born in an Edinburgh tenement in 1937, he emigrated to the States at the age of 18 and has spent 31 years in the Marine Corps.
Rock-solid back cure
SPECIAL cement injected into damaged vertebrae is the latest cure for backache.
French doctors have treated dozens of patients in minutes using only a local anaesthetic.
Doc flies to rescue at 30,000ft
Ian Key
A PLANE was turned into a makeshift surgery when a doctor was forced back to work early on a flight home from the sun.
At 30,000ft, Dr Trevor May treated one passenger who had a heart attack and several others with stomach pains.
He had just settled in his seat for the 10-hour journey from the Caribbean, when the captain called for a doctor.
As the Boeing 767 diverted to Bermuda after leaving Puerto Rico, the GP treated the 54-year-old heart attack victim on the floor of the holiday jet.
He kept the man's airway clear and blood circulating until the plane landed and an ambulance took him to hospital.
When the jet took off again, Trevor found himself with more patients.
One man fainted with stomach pains and an elderly couple were taken ill.
As the 62-year-old doctor went from one passenger to another, two more needed treatment.
‘It was as hectic as a Monday morning surgery,’ said Trevor, back home in Sheffield.
‘Before I got on the plane, I had to treat a woman on the island of St Thomas, when she fell from a balcony, fracturing her skull.
‘The man who had the heart attack would have died within five minutes if we hadn't moved him.
‘After taking off from Bermuda, I thought I could catch up on some sleep.
‘Then a stewardess said they had another passenger with stomach pains.
‘In the end there were five sick passengers.
It was a pretty exhausting trip.’
Little Mac completely at home in Big Apple
Sue Heal
THE McCallister family urgently need some professional counselling.
They seem incapable of going on holiday without a) general mayhem breaking out and b) losing wee Kevin.
This, as you may have guessed, is the phenomenally successful Home Alone formula and all characters are firmly in situ for the sequel which opens in Britain on Friday.
Kevin, alias Macaulay Culkin, this time runs riot through New York's high life and low life.
In his wake is left a highly-professional movie with some excellent knockabout acting and a level of pace and tension which exceeds the breakneck delights of its predecessor.
Macaulay has certainly grown in acting stature if not in height.
This is an alarmingly grown-up piece of acting from such a small boy and it is obvious why he is paid so much money to do it.
The mayhem begins with the McCallister family en route to Miami, with the flurry of misplaced tickets, the argumentative large brood of children and general panic from mother, Catherine O'Hara, and bemused confusion from father, John Heard.
Macaulay gets on the wrong plane and ends up in the Big Apple where he books into the palatial Plaza Hotel, much to the suspicion of various flunkies including a camp Tim Curry.
Meanwhile, Joe Pesci and Daniel Stern, as good old burglars Harry and Marv, have just escaped from prison.
They plan to rob a toy store on Christmas Eve and just happen to bounce up against Macaulay in a busy New York street.
The movie firmly puts its hands up and admits this is a retread of Home Alone 1 by constant references to the last time the McCallisters lost Kevin.
However, this time director Chris Columbus show us everything from Macaulay's perspective.
The surrounding characters — including Brenda Fricker as a lonely bag lady with a pigeon fetish — are merely incidentals to help flesh out his role.
There is one aspect to Home Alone 2 which calls into question its appeal as a children's movie.
When Macaulay holes up in his uncle's deserted house, he treats Pesci and Stern to a cartoon-like sadistic onslaught which goes way beyond what was served up in Home Alone 1.
It made me cringe at its over-the-top violence.
But Macaulay has a charisma that attracts pre-pubescents like flies, and Home Alone 2 will go through the box office roof.
But goodness knows where Macaulay goes from here — Lost In Space perchance?
Tourist raped in murder land
A BRITISH woman tourist was raped twice in a brutal attack on a South African beach.
It comes just a week after the murders of holidaymakers Julie Godwin and Elizabeth Over.
The latest victim was a 44-year-old woman on holiday with her boyfriend at a caravan park south of Durban.
She was reading a book as she sunbathed on the beach at Umgababa on Tuesday, when two teenagers, armed with a knife and screwdriver, pounced.
They dragged her into bushes, ordered her to strip and took turns to rape her.
Then they fled with her watch, camera and handbag.
This latest attack has horrified tourist officials, anxious to play down the murders of Julie and Elizabeth at Sodwana Bay, Zululand.
‘It is distressing,’ said South African Tourist Board director Spencer Thomas yesterday.
‘Very, very unfortunate, at this time.’
Police chief Johan van der Merwe, in charge of the murder hunt, denied TODAY reports that the initial investigation was bungled.
‘The investigation was and is being conducted in a professional manner,’ he said.
Fergie wins £86,000 over pool snaps
Alison James in Paris
THE Duchess of York and John Bryan, the man she turned to when her marriage collapsed, yesterday won £86,000 damages over pictures showing them frolicking in St Tropez.
The sum is a huge award by French standards even though Fergie and Bryan had tried to win £2.5million under strict privacy laws.
‘It is roughly along the lines were were expecting,’ said the duch-ess's lawyer Henry Page.
The pair were not in court to hear the verdict in Nanterre, Paris.
The money will go to charities including the Motor Neurone Disease Association and the British Institute for Brain Injured Children.
The written judgment said Daniel Angeli's pictures were taken in ‘surreptitious, indelicate and disloyal conditions’ and encroached on part of the duchess and Bryan's ‘intimate private lives’.
Angeli, who also was not in court, had committed a fault in selling them to the press last August.
He was ordered to pay half the award and £860 costs to each.
The magazine Paris Match printed them with ‘the intention of doing serious harm and with manifest indelicacy’ for commercial ends.
Publishing representative, Cogedipresse, was also ordered to pay half the damages and legal costs.
Claudette Schmitt, Paris Match's legal adviser, said: ‘It's too early to say what we'll do.’
Jacques Kohn, for Angeli, said: ‘Given they wanted £2.5 million, it's not a big award.’
Let's get to work
Margaret Hall
AMERICAN troops began delivering food to starving Somalians yesterday just hours after a disastrous televised arrival in the country.
Heavily-armed soldiers blundered ashore in the glare of TV camera lights and began strong-arming innocent bystanders.
Locals were forced to spreadeagle themselves on the ground at gunpoint.
During the pre-dawn beach landing — seen by millions on prime-time TV — one bunch of marines crashed into a waiting press team.
But US army chiefs were putting a brave face on things as the distribution of stockpiled aid relief began.
Defence Secretary Dick Cheney was so cock-a-hoop about the first day in Somalia he started talking about the pull-out.
‘If everything goes as well as this, we can look forward to the combat troops coming home before the end of January,’ he said.
President Bush watched the landing and reported he was ‘heartened’ by the way things went.
Marines stormed into the ruins of the deserted US Embassy and hoisted the American flag.
However, the hard part of Operation Restore Hope may have only just begun.
Soldiers now face the harsh reality of their mercy mission in the barren country.
They work under the grim threat that armed and dangerous rebels could pick them off at any time.
Even as Day One was spent securing the capital Mogadishu's airport and port, there were occasional skirmishes with back street snipers.
A UN official was shot but there was no news of the victim, believed to be a Jamaican.
In the countryside where up to 1,000 people die of starvation a day, heavy fighting between rival clans was reported.
Looting of emergency supplies was heavy.
Ian McCloud, of Unicef, celebrated as he saw off the first UN convoy of food in weeks.
‘We don't know what lies ahead but it's something to build on,’ he said.
UN officials hope the troubled aid programme in the country can return to normal within a week of the arrival of its 35,000-strong force led by 28,000 US troops.
Briton raped on beach in South Africa
Bob Graham in Durban
A BRITISH tourist was repeatedly raped on a South African beach, just one week after the savage murders of Elizabeth Over and Julie Godwin.
The 44-year-old woman was sunbathing when two black teenagers, armed with a knife and a screwdriver, dragged her into nearby bushes.
They ordered her to strip, then took turns to rape her in a terrifying hour-long ordeal.
The woman, who is on holiday with her boyfriend, was later taken to a hospital suffering from injuries and shock.
The incident has horrified South African tourist officials who have been anxious to play down the murders of Julie and Elizabeth, both 30.
They were hacked to death as they sunbathed at Sodwana Bay, Zululand.
The latest attack — a five-hour drive away — has increased fears that the multi-million pound tourist trade between Britain and South Africa could suffer untold damage.
The woman had been in the country for less than a week when she went to the beach at Umgababa, just south of Durban, after breakfast on Tuesday.
She told police she was sitting on rocks at the edge of the Indian Ocean beach reading a book when the youths, aged around 15, struck.
They also stole her watch, handbag and camera.
She was last night being comforted by her boyfriend at a caravan park near the beach.
South African Tourist Board executive director Spencer Thomas told Today: ‘It is a most unfortunate incident.
It is very, very unfortunate to come at this time.’
He was asked if he could reassure the expected 135,000 British tourists to his country of their safety — Britain is the most important country to South Africa's lucrative holiday trade.
‘One can't give cast-iron guarantees, just as you can't give me guarantees about my safety if I was to go to Birmingham,’ Mr Thomas replied.
‘You could not guarantee that I wouldn't be blown up.
‘Clearly we have sporadic outbreaks of violence, but then, we are not unique in that in this world.
‘It is important to stress that both of these incidents are not politically-motivated crimes.’
It's LA gun law for Pamela
COMEDIENNE Pamela Stephenson is considering buying a gun to protect herself in Los Angeles.
Pamela and husband Billy Connolly already have high security at their Hollywood home.
But Scotsman Billy said last night: ‘My wife wonders if we should get a gun.
‘She told me, ‘Everyone we know has a gun, should we get one?’’
He added: ‘I was in a place once when a man fired a gun at me and I did not like it at all.
‘There's all this violence and stuff.
It's a weird city.
‘But I don't think we should bother with a gun.
‘When I was fired at, he missed and that gave me a love of life.’
Mia Farrow autobiography
ACTRESS Mia Farrow will be paid £2 million by publisher Doubleday for her autobiography.
The ‘tell-all’ book will reveal details of her bitter split with lover Woody Allen and his affair with her adopted daughter, Soon-Yi.
‘Yet again Mia Farrow is forcing her children into the limelight for a dollar,’ said Allen's spokeswoman Leslee Dart.
O'Neal son escapes jail for shooting
ACTOR Ryan O'Neal's tearaway son was yesterday put on five years' probation for shooting up his ex-girlfriend's car.
Griffin O'Neal, 27, was only saved from jail after 24-year-old Lynn Oddo, the woman he beat up, pleaded with the court for mercy.
The sentence is another blow to 51-year-old Ryan, star of Love Story and Paper Moon.
Just weeks ago his daughter Tatum split from tennis star husband John McEnroe.
At an earlier hearing police said Griffin blasted Lynn's car with a. 44 Magnum after she broke up their affair.
He knocked her to the ground, punched her and threw her over her bonnet, the court heard.
When the terrified actress locked herself in the car, he rammed it with his Ford Bronco.
Before driving in a drunken rage to her house, he is said to have told a friend: ‘If she is there I am going to burn the house down and burn her down too.
I'll kill any man she dates.’
But assault charges were dropped in a plea bargain.
Griffin spent three days in jail after he refused to give a breath sample.
The part-time actor was sentenced last month to a year in a tough drug rehabilitation unit on associated charges.
District attorney Lauren Weis said after the case in Santa Monica, California: ‘If he falls by the way it's serious jail time.’
New alert as Brit dies on mountain
Bob Graham in South Africa
A BRITISH tourist who vanished while sight-seeing in South Africa was found dead in a ravine yesterday.
Police using tracker dogs and a helicopter found the body of 25-year-old Sharon Webb on Cape Town's Table Mountain.
It was not immediately clear whether she had fallen or been murdered.
The death sent new shudders through South Africa's trouble-torn tourist trade.
It's already reeling from the murders of British tour-ists Elizabeth Over and her best friend Julie Godwin and the gang-rape of a 44-year-old woman in the last 10 days.
Sergeant Raymond Mitchell, of Cape Town police, told TODAY: ‘Sharon had not been seen for 24 hours, and in the current climate in the country, we were anxious for her welfare.
‘We believe she arranged to meet someone up the mountain.
The last time anyone saw her was shortly after 7pm, when it was getting dark and she was returning to catch the cable car.’
Blonde, green-eyed Sharon arrived to stay with friends Andrea and Chris Moody, who live in Clifton, a pretty Cape Town suburb, a week ago.
She set off to walk a mile to the mountain cable car on Wednesday.
Police said Sharon gave her address to immigration officials as Aimberworth, England.
Shocking all over the world
GERMANY'S press came down firmly on the side of the Princess of Wales.
‘Di's sacrifice for England: A marriage with no husband,’ screamed the headline in the daily BZ newspaper.
Only Diana's deep sense of patriotic duty made her agree to the arrangement, it told its readers.
The Bild newspaper accused Charles of being a hypocrite and said a man who refused to divorce his wife because it would ruin his ambition to be king must have ‘ice-cold blood’ in his veins.
It described the separation as a ‘warped, hypocritical, half-hearted remedy’ and said plans for the royal couple to avoid divorce were hopelessly unrealistic.
‘Time stood still’ in England as John Major made the announcement, said Bild.
Radio and TV shows were interrupted by live reports from the Commons and the ‘fateful moment’ left Britain in a state of shock.
‘The country listened with astonishment and sighed.
Cars stopped on the street.
‘In clubs everywhere Guinness beer was left to go warm.
Tube travellers and shoppers shouted the news to one another.’
Shocking all over the world
MADRID'S five big daily newspapers carried dozens of pages on the split and only one gave more front page space to another story.
El Mundo said: ‘It not only benefits Charles and Diana, but the prestige of the Crown.’
Diario 16 also carried a cartoon portraying Diana as Cinderella with a glass slipper bouncing off her head after being thrown at her from the palace.
It described her marriage as the ‘most famous and most disgraced’ in the world.
Shocking all over the world
THE royal separation commanded France's front pages yesterday.
‘Charles and Diana — It's Really Over’ ran the headline in the daily Parisienne, above photographs showing them in happier days.
The daily France Soir devoted two broadsheet pages to the end of ‘11 Years of Love, Romance and Tears’.
It told readers: ‘The couple were no longer any more than a cracked facade.
Separation was imperative.’
Pointing out the differences between them it added: ‘And now?
For him, hunting, fishing and water colour painting.
‘For her, rock music, fashion and freedom.’
The left-wing Liberation commented that ‘the Windsors' Annus horribilus ends in a nightmare’.
Every stage of the rift has been reported in France in detail, leving royal watchers saddened — but not surprised by news of the final separation.
Shop-owner Claudine Millet, of Paris, said: ‘They'll be better off now.’
And secretary Marie Daimier, 25, said: ‘They are just like the rest of us — but it's a shame for the children.’
Shocking all over the world
Margaret Hall in Washington
BANNER headlines screamed the news across America.
The royal split overshadowed coverage of Somalia, where US troops had stormed ashore just a day earlier.
TV programmes were interrupted and whole shows devoted to it.
Newspapers splashed feature stories across inside pages talking about the separation.
Even the sober New York Times filled the top of its front page with the crisis.
The New York Post, declared simply in huge type ‘Splitting Heirs’.
Next week's magazines, from seri ous-minded Time to the show-bizzy tabloid The Enquirer, will bombard the US public with more in-depth coverage.
The thrust of The Enquirer's story is that the final straw for Diana came when she was given a transcript of the alleged taped conversation between Charles and Camilla Parker Bowles.
Breakfast TV programmes aired several segments each — hauling into American homes, via studio and satellite link-ups, The Sunday Times editor Andrew Neil and TODAY royal correspondent Charles Rae.
Steph's lover guilty
THE father of Princess Stephanie of Monaco's newborn baby was yesterday given a 15-day suspended jail sentence for beating up a motorist.
Daniel Ducruet, 28, was also fined £500 and ordered to pay Pounds 120 towards repairs to Dr Jean-Christophe Raymond's car.
The former bodyguard to the Princess faces a second trial next month.
He is accused of a vicious attack on a farmer, which left Francis Clary, 45, in hospital with a broken nose, detached retina and a split lip.
Princess Stephanie gave birth to their son Louis just over a week ago.
Jacko's chapel
LOVELESS Michael Jackson is spending £57 million on a giant wedding chapel in gambling capital Las Vegas.
It will include a hotel for honeymooners.
Relaxed laws make Vegas the home of quickie weddings, although Jackson himself has never had a girlfriend.
British tourist falls to death on mountain
Bob Graham, in South Africa
A BRITISH tourist who vanished while sight-seeing in South Africa was found dead in a ravine yesterday.
Police using tracker dogs and a helicopter found the body of 25-year-old Sharon Webb on Cape Town's Table Mountain.
‘It looks at the moment as if she has fallen to her death,’ a spokesman told TODAY.
‘But we won't be able to say what happened until we have looked at the area in daylight.’
The death sent new shudders through South Africa's trouble-torn tourist trade.
It's already reeling from the murders of British tourists Elizabeth Over and her best friend Julie Godwin and the gang rape of a 44-year-old woman in the last 10 days.
The country has spent millions of pounds this year on advertising to attract visitors.
Police know Sharon, of Cumberworth, Lincs, went up the mountain on Wednesday afternoon on the cable car.
She was photographed taking the scenic ride.
They believe she later tried to walk down the mountain, lost her way and fell to her death.
Sergeant Raymond Mitchell, of Cape Town police, told TODAY: ‘Sharon had not been seen for 24 hours, and in the current climate in the country, we were anxious for her welfare.
‘We believe she arranged to meet someone up the mountain.
The last time anyone saw her was shortly after 7pm, when it was getting dark and she was returning to catch the cable car.’
Sharon arrived to stay with friends Andrea and Chris Moody, who live in Clifton, a pretty Cape Town suburb, a week ago.
Tin star Costner
KEVIN Costner is to play Wild West marshall Wyatt Earp in a new movie.
Filming will take place near Earp's Dodge City, Kansas.
Last stand
A COWBOY who spent the last six years of his life in a wheelchair got his dying wish, to be buried standing up with his boots on.
Jimmy Dale Struble, 49, from Colorado was paralysed during a fight.
‘He hated lying flat on his butt for six years, and he didn't want to be buried that way,’ said a friend.
Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman
Hollywood glamour couple Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman, 25, steal a kiss at the premiere of 30-year-old Cruise's latest film A Few Good Men.
Bond is back with a licence to thrill
JAMES BOND soon be returning to the big screen for his first film since 1989.
Producer Cubby Broccoli, who owns the rights to the 007 character, has finally settled a long-running legal battle with movie company Metro-Goldwyn-Meyer.
He claimed that they lost him money by selling Licence To Kill cheaply to boost company finances, when they were raising cash for a takeover bid.
‘I hope to announce exciting new plans soon,’ said Broccoli.
Macaulay far from alone
THOUSANDS of parents and their children crammed into cinemas across Britain yesterday for the opening night of Home Alone 2: Lost In New York.
More than one million fans are expected at box offices this weekend to see pint-sized superstar Macaulay Culkin's new blockbuster.
Movie-goers began queuing hours before doors opened for the film, in which the 12-year-old again takes on robbers Joe Pesci and Daniel Stern.
‘It's an absolute knockout,’ said Mike Turner, manager of the Odeon cinema, Ipswich.
Computer nerd ‘a spy’
A COMPUTER hacker is to be charged with spying after allegedly testing American Defence Department security.
The Pentagon claims Kevin Lee Poulssen, 28, stole military secrets.
His lawyer says he is just ‘a curious computer nerd’.
Zulu held as beach murder squad set blood test trap
Bob Graham
SOUTH African detectives hunting the killers of tourists Julie Godwin and Elizabeth Over are holding a Zulu found with bloodstained clothes.
Tests last night confirmed the blood matched that of the two women, hacked to death at an isolated beach next to the Indian Ocean.
The 25-year-old man was arrested after being named by tribal elders, shocked by the brutal killings at the Nine Mile Reef beauty spot 12 days ago.
Police, who swooped on Thursday after offering a £2,200 reward, are awaiting the results of more tests on the suspect's blood and hair.
One jubilant officer said: ‘If the test results we have now are anything to go by, we have our man.
‘We now want him to give us the name of his accomplice.’
Authorities admit the deaths of Julie, from Northampton, and Elizabeth, from St Albans, Herts, both 30, sent shock waves through the lucrative South African holiday trade.
The business, in which Britain is the largest market, was hit again this week by the rape of a 44-year-old Briton on a beach near Durban.
Senior detectives have told TODAY: ‘While we must treat these deaths as another murder, it has political overtones because of the tourist business with your country.
‘We cannot be seen to be throwing more resources at solving this murder, but the truth is, that is what we are doing.’
Under South African law police could hold the man for questioning for up to 48 hours before seeking the permission of magistrates for an extension.
But one police source said last night: ‘We are now holding the man on another charge, that of possessing stolen goods.’
The goods are not related to the cash, camera, jewellery or other items stolen from the two women when they were killed.
Inquests were opened in Britain yesterday into the deaths of the two friends, after their remains were flown home.
The hearings were adjourned to a later date and the bodies released for burial.
A post mortem found both women died from multiple injuries caused by a machete.
The area where Julie and Elizabeth were killed is sparsely populated and most of the Zulu inhabitants live off the land or do odd jobs.
Many locals admit that justice in this society is often handled on a summary basis, with criminals punished by traditional methods, including beatings and mutilation.
One Zulu chief said: ‘It is better for the man that he is being held by police.
‘If he did kill the girls, he would die amongst his people.’
BT worker shot dead in Nigeria
A BRITISH Telecom worker has been murdered and another badly hurt by bandits in Nigeria.
David Parsons, 44, was shot dead while sightseeing near the capital Lagos.
Pal Peter Barrett, 45, in the country with him to instal a communications network, was badly injured.
The pair were shot when three gunmen hijacked their car, even though they did not resist.
Married Mr Parsons, from Grafham, Hunts, was hit by a bullet in the back of the head from point blank range.
Mr Barrett, father of two, of High Mickley, Northumberland, had to crawl for help after being hit in the leg and stomach injured.
Last night he was satisfactory in a Newcastle upon Tyne hospital.
Jamaica move couple butchered
by Ian Key
A COUPLE have been murdered after emigrating from Britain to Jamaica with the dream of starting a new life.
Josie and Margaret Clarke were found butchered in the bedroom of their new home, next door to the bar they ran in St Mary.
Police believe they were killed by burglars.
Partially-sighted Mr Clarke, 72, had been tied up and stabbed more than 40 times.
His 55-year-old wife, an ex-nurse, had been trussed up, beaten and strangled.
They moved to the Caribbean in 1984 after Mr Clarke's mother left him a small banana plantation in her will.
He had been born in Jamaica but came to England in the 1940s to work in the steel industry.
Mrs Clarke's brother, Norman Wilce, of Blyth, Northumberland, said yesterday: ‘We are all devastated.
They had gone out to Jamaica to start a new life.’
Police are questioning two men about the deaths.
Brit shot and left in swamp
THE body of missing British businessman Howard Bates has been found in a Florida swamp.
The killers shot Mr Bates in the back of the head and then dumped his body.
Mr Bates, 43, of Hawkhurst, Kent, had flown to Miami in February last year to recover £500,000 he had lost in a crooked business deal.
After phoning his wife Sheila to tell her he had arrived safely, the computer boss was never seen again.
The former RAF Hercules pilot and director of Hastings-based South East Computers, which has since folded, had planned to spend just two days in America.
A Florida police spokesman said: ‘He found out he was being cheated and arrived here to confront the people.
He was shot in cold blood.’
Two men have been charged with his murder.
Mrs Bates was being comforted by her three children Matthew, 20, Jonathan 18, and Becky, 12 yesterday.
A relative who refused to be named said: ‘She is obviously very shaken and upset.’
US troops take airfield
US Marines took control of an airfield in Somalia yesterday in their first major sortie out of the war-torn country's capital.
The 200 Marines are to use the disused Beli Dogle airfield, 60 miles north-west of Mogadishu, to distribute food to the starving Somalis.
They aim to secure other air bases to lead the United Nations relief action.
450,000 in racism vigil
HALF a million Germans held a mass protest against racism last night.
In Hamburg, 300,000 children and adults joined hands for 7.5 miles in a silent candle-lit demonstration against neo-Nazi attacks.
Seventeen people have died so far this year.
Earlier, 150,000 people were at a rock concert in Frankfurt.
Melanie gets stung
Gerard Evans in Los Angeles
ACTRESS Melanie Griffith is in constant pain after cosmetic surgery for lip implants triggered a violent reaction.
Her lips are so swollen she is unable to eat and can only sip drinks through a straw.
She may have to undergo more surgery to have the implants removed.
Husband Don Johnson, who begged her not to have the operation, refuses to sympathise, say friends.
‘She looks like someone has punched her in the mouth,’ said one pal.
The 34-year-old star of Bonfire Of The Vanities has had the implants — which only last a few months — twice before.
She has spent £60,000 on cosmetic surgery, and had silicone breast implants two years ago.
‘She wants to be perfect for Don,’ said the friend.
Clint Eastwood gets awards
CLINT Eastwood, right, grabbed a fistful of awards last night for his western The Unforgiven.
The movie — about an ageing outlaw — took five honours from Los Angeles film critics, including best picture and best supporting actor for Gene Hackman.
Britain's Emma Thompson was voted best actress for Howard's End.
Clinton's think tank
BUSINESS, labour and academic leaders were called together by US president-elect Bill Clinton yesterday to thrash out an economic blueprint.
The think-tank will have florists rubbing shoulders with the chief of Apple Computers.
Vice president-elect Al Gore said: ‘We want to gather the thinking of men and women with expertise in all aspects of our economy to fine tune the proposals.’
Hopes rise in Sarajevo
WARRING factions in Bosnia ordered a ceasefire yesterday and agreed to open three routes for the safe passage of civilians out of the stricken capital Sarajevo.
Details for opening the ‘corridors’ are to be thrashed out over the next four days.
UN Commander Phillippe Morillon said his troops would begin preparations today for the mass evacuation.
Amid the renewed glimmers of hope is the knowledge that this is the 19th attempt at a ceasefire.
Sinead's sorry
REBEL pop star Sinead O'Connor apologised to 3,000 fans yesterday for missing a sell-out show billed as a farewell concert.
The controversial Irish singer said she skipped the appearance in Zurich, Switzerland, last Friday because of‘private pressures’.
She told a Dublin newspaper: ‘I wish to express my apologies to those I let down.’
The promoter claimed he was told of her decision one hour before the show.
Mel's on the blink
ACTOR Mel Gibson has had to take his driving test again — for blinking.
His photograph on the licence had his eyes shut, making it illegal in California.
The 36-year-old Lethal Weapon star took so long to change it that officials cancelled his certificate.
‘I had to take the whole test again because I blinked,’ he said.
Floods hit New York
NEW Yorkers awoke yesterday to find boats in their front gardens and neighbours swimming down their street after the region's worst storm in decades.
Twelve people were killed and thousands of homes flooded in two days of ferocious gales.
More than 130,000 houses and businesses were still without power yesterday.
Damage in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut was estimated at hundreds of millions of pounds.
One Queens district resident said: ‘Yesterday I looked out my window and I saw a guy doing the back stroke down my block.
I am just lucky to be alive.’
Bottom line
MODEL Cindy Crawford said yesterday that men should worry about their flabby bums.
Cindy, 26, the wife of movie heart-throb Richard Gere, said she had seen some ‘pretty sad ones’.
A ‘bit of a jiggle’ was nice, she said, but too much and it wasn't.
‘Having a good body is not the best thing in the world,’ Cindy told More! magazine, ‘but it does give you a lot more self-confidence.’
Swayze hit by housing slump
ACTOR Patrick Swayze has slashed £200,000 off the wooden mansion he built himself because of the US property slump.
The six-bedroom replica of a traditional Pennsylvania Dutch-style home in Hollywood Hills, is now on offer at £1.8 million.
Two months ago he put it on the market for £2 million.
Swayze, 38, star of Dirty Dancing and Ghost, was a carpenter before he turned to films and still owns a building firm.
It took Swayze two years, in between filming City of Joy, to complete his labour of love.
Property expert Kevin Dibben said: ‘It's a nice house but he has spent more time and effort on the property than it is worth.
‘It is still overpriced in the current market.’
Farmers attack ferry trippers
DOZENS of French farmers staged an anti-British protest at Calais at the weekend, throwing stones and hurling insults at Britons coming off ferries.
Around 80 demonstrators, angered by the Gatt deal, laid stones across a road and set fire to tyres in an attempt to prevent British cars and coaches leaving the port.
Despite a 150-strong police presence, traffic was held up for two hours as the farmers taunted Britons, shouting and waving banners which read ‘Britain is an island.
Let it stay that way.’
Motorists removed the barricades and continued on their way.
No one was hurt and no arrests made.
1,200 quake toll
RESCUERS have recovered 1,226 bodies after an earthquake and tidal waves devastated parts of the eastern Indonesian island of Flores.
Local officials who gave the figure appealed yesterday for tents and medicines for the survivors of the country's worst earthquake in years.
‘This is a national disaster,’ a government spokesman said.
‘We fear the death toll will go higher.’
The earthquake, which measured 6.8 on the Richter scale, struck early on Saturday.
Its epicentre was in the sea 19 miles from the town of Maumere, with its 70,000 inhabitants.
Huge tidal waves swamped the town, damaging almost half the buildings.
Last night families were huddled in fields fearing further tremors.
Axl Rose buys new home
ROCKER Axl Rose, above, has bought a £3 million mansion in Malibu after selling his home in Hollywood for £500,000.
His new Mediterranean-style home has five bedrooms and eight baths.
There is also a guest house, studio, tennis court and pool.
The Guns ‘N’ Roses singer's old house had just two bedrooms.
Wife saws self in two
A WIFE who got tired of life with a drunken husband cut herself in half with a circular saw.
The 63-year-old woman, named only as Christel R, threw herself on to the spinning blade at Beverungen, Germany.
Her husband Karl, 63, found her in half on the toolshed floor.
He had gone looking for her because his breakfast failed to appear.
Tom and Geena taste success
TOM CRUISE and Geena Davis were named Stars of the Year at Hollywood's Golden Apple awards.
Top Gun star Cruise made a six-hour journey from the set of his latest film The Firm to collect his award.
Thelma And Louise co-star Geena told award organisers the Hollywood Women's Press Club: ‘I've had an extraordinary year.’
Madonna beat Woody Allen and Sinead O'Connor when she was awarded the Sour Apple for being the most disliked celebrity.
The singer did not appear to receive the carved wooden core from former winner Zsa Zsa Gabor.
Ashdown in war close call
A MORTAR bomb exploded only yards from Liberal Democrat leader Paddy Ashdown in the Bosnian war zone yesterday.
Mr Ashdown ducked as shrapnel sprayed the convoy of armoured vehicles he was travelling with.
Luckily, he escaped injury.
The former soldier said: ‘It was a bit like being mortared at any time.
It is much the same anywhere.’
No one was hurt in the attack from Serbian forces.
£300,000 raid at Niven home
DETECTIVES are investigating the theft of £300,000 of gems belonging to a high-class madam from the home of actor David Niven's son.
Niven Jr was tied up by two gunmen, who made off with the haul belonging to Elizabeth Adams.
Adams left the jewels at Niven's Hollywood mansion after being arrested for running a call-girl ring.
Movie jackpot
JACK NICHOLSON'S latest blockbuster A Few Good Men smashed box office records taking £10.6 million over its opening weekend.
Tom Cruise, 30, is tipped to win an Oscar for his performance as a navy lawyer who teams up with Demi Moore, 30, battling against tough base commander Nicholson, 55.
£40m crowns Barbra queen of Hollywood
Gerard Evans, in Los Angeles
ACTRESS Barbra Streisand is set to become one of Hollywood's highest paid entertainers with a film and record deal worth £40 million.
The contract with the Sony Corporation is expected to be signed today.
It makes her the most powerful woman in Hollywood and outstrips deals signed by Michael Jackson, Prince and Madonna.
Sony will pay Streisand about £1.2 million a year for an estimated 10 years to develop projects through her film company.
The money will be used to hire writers and executives and Streisand, 50, will either direct, act or produce.
She will also receive a £2.2 million advance for every film in which she acts plus another Pounds 500,000 for each one she produces.
She is guaranteed a £3 million advance and 42 per cent royalty on new albums.
Entertainment lawyer Peter Dekom said: ‘This is no vanity contract.
She is worth it.’
Streisand has made 15 hit movies in a 30-year career and has world record sales of some 60 million albums.
Israeli soldier shot in ambush
PALESTINIAN gunmen shot and wounded an Israeli soldier in the occu pied West Bank yesterday, as army patrols searched for a kidnapped border guard.
The military wing of the Islamic resistance movement Hamas threatened to kill Nissim Toledano unless their founder is freed from an Israeli jail.
Eleven Palestinians and five soldiers have died in clashes in the West Bank and Gaza this month.
Four of the Israelis were shot dead in the past week.
It's war…only joking
THE world teetered on the brink of a new Cold War for 30 minutes yesterday after an astonishing speech by Russia's Foreign Minister.
Andrei Kozyrev told a 51-nation meeting to end sanctions against Yugoslavia otherwise ‘mighty Russia’ would intervene.
‘We see it as necessary to take unilateral steps to defend our interests as this is causing us economical damage,’ he said.
‘In its struggle the current government of Serbia can count on the support of mighty Russia.’
American Secretary of State Lawrence Eagleburger rushed to meet him, as the story from Stockholm was flashed around the world.
Even Kozyrev's own delegation was astounded.
But half an hour later he again addressed the Conference on European Security and said his speech had been a spoof.
He wanted to show how bad things could become if the hardliners won power in Russia, he said.
ozyrev later shrugged off the alert, saying his speech ‘was only as dangerous as smoking cigarettes.’.
His counterpart, Mr Eagleburger, is a smoker.
SIA'S prime minister Yegor Gaidar, architect of President Boris Yeltsin's economic reforms, was ousted yesterday.
The more conservative Viktor Chernomyrdin was voted in after Yeltsin was pressured into withdrawing his support for Gaidar.
Somali attack on Brit pilot
A BRITISH pilot was among the officers who helped destroy Somali armoured vehicles after coming under fire, it was revealed yesterday.
Captain Paul Denning, 31, has been on exchange with the US Marine Corps from his base at Yeovilton, Somerset, for a year.
He was in control of one of two US helicopter gunships attacked with four bursts of automatic gunfire.
‘I was looking at a muzzle shooting at me and I was quite content.
I knew what was happening,’ he said after.
Misery for dream nurses
NURSES had to sleep rough in laundrettes after being dumped in Germany by a recruitment agency without money and shelter.
Newly-weds Nigel and Emma Thorpe were just two of the nurses enticed by a job at Heidelberg University Hospital, accommodation and language training.
The couple paid £1,000 to London-based European Recruitment Services after leaving Basingstoke District Hospital, Hants.
Emma, 22, said: ‘The agency has got our deposits.’
Nobody at the agency would comment yesterday.
Police are investigating.
New clue to swamp shooting
A WOMAN is believed to have lured British computer boss Howard Bates to his death and then helped bury his body in a swampland grave.
Police in Florida believe Magaly Carr, 29, telephoned father-of-three Mr Bates and set up the fateful meeting where her boyfriend carried out the killing.
The body of Mr Bates, 44, was found shot through the head at a derelict factory site in Miami at the weekend.
He went missing after flying to America to confront partner Albert Lucio over problems in their medical supply business.
Carr was secretary of the company which later collapsed amid allegations of fraud.
‘He was shot in cold blood because he knew too much and was about to blow the whistle,’ a detective said.
His widow Sheila said last night she had hoped and prayed her missing husband would be found alive.
‘We're naturally very upset,’ she said at their converted barn home in Hawkhurst, Kent.
‘But it is a relief for me and my family to grieve for our loss.’
Lucio, 32, and partner Wayne Merced, 26, have both been charged with murder.
Pay up, Mia tells Woody
FEUDING ex-lovers Mia Farrow and Woody Allen are now locked in a battle over money.
Friends of Mia, 47, say director Woody owes her £195,000 after she agreed to appear in his movie A Manhattan Murder Mystery.
Farrow says she was guaranteed the sum, even though she pulled out of the film in August after discovering Woody was having an affair with her adopted daughter, Soon-Yi Previn, 21.
Sources close to Woody, 56, say Mia is owed nothing.
Antarctica team halfway to pole
EXPLORER Sir Ranulph Fiennes and companion Dr Michael Stroud were almost halfway to the South Pole yesterday in their attempt at the first unaided crossing of Antarctica.
Sir Ranulph, 48, and Dr Stroud, 37, had covered 380 miles of the 2,200-mile trek across the continent by Day 35.
They have allowed just over 100 days for the whole journey, which is raising money for the Multiple Sclerosis Society.
The Britons are trying to keep ahead of Norwegian lawyer Erling Kagge, who hopes to make up for a late start in bad weather.
New film role for Macaulay
CHILD superstar Macaulay Culkin's next role could be as a boy who gets divorced from his own parents.
Macaulay, 12, star of the blockbuster Home Alone movies, would play a nine-year-old whose parents never stop fighting.
The script mirrors the real-life case of a boy who recently succeeded in divorcing his mother in order to live with his foster parents.
Since Macaulay's latest film Home Alone II: Lost In New York was released three days ago it has taken £2.2 million at the box office and a million people have packed cinemas across the country to watch it.
Palace of the bores
THE Royal Family have been voted bores of the year — ousting 1991's top yawn Madonna.
The Boring Institute of America placed the royals first thanks to their never-ending marriage troubles.
Founder and chief bore Alan Caruba said: ‘It's getting tiresome.’
Revenge fear as soldier is murdered
THE family of a kidnapped Israeli soldier wept openly yesterday after his body was found near a road in the occupied West Bank.
Nissim Toledano, 29, was taken hostage by the military wing of the Islamic resistance movement Hamas, who threatened to kill him unless their leader was freed from jail.
Police were called in to the border guard's home in the town of Lod as hundreds of Jews gathered demanding vengeance against Arabs.
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin said: ‘Toledano was murdered by the lowest of men, the wild animals of the Hamas organisation.’
He was killed in a campaign to halt the Israeli-Palestinian peace talks which began nearly 14 months ago, Rabin told parliament.
‘We have no intention of stopping the peace talks under way in Washington,’ he pledged.
Rabin had said he was willing to talk to the kidnappers — demanding the release of Sheik Ahmed Yassin — if he received proof Toledano was alive.
More than 1,200 Palestinians were rounded up by Israel in the hunt for his abductors.
Eleven Palestinians and six soldiers have been killed in clashes in the West Bank and Gaza this month.
Toledano, who was bound and gagged, was the third soldier kidnapped and killed by Hamas in the five-year revolt against Israeli rule.
The leader of the radicial Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine yesterday urged militants to abduct more Israelis to win Yassin's release.
‘This operation is only the start,’ said Ahmed Jibril.
‘It will be repeated more effectively.
We are sure after the second, third and fourth operation, the Zionist enemy will submit.’
The call came as Israel arrested a freelance Palestinian journalist covering the latest upsurge in violence.
Human rights groups and international news organisations called for the release of 32-year-old Taher Shriteh, who was seized from his Gaza home.
‘We are particularly worried about his safety because he was mistreated when he was last held for questioning,’ journalists told Rabin.
New blow for Woody
ACTOR Woody Allen was heartbroken last night after being told he could not see his children for Christmas.
A New York judge refused to allow the 57-year-old to give presents directly to the children.
Allen is fighting a bitter custody battle for the children with long-time lover Mia Farrow, who has accused the actor of child abuse.
Capriati mum walks out over pressure from dad
Chris Hutchins
THE parents of Jennifer Capriati are splitting up and last night friends were blaming the rift on the teenage tennis sensation's success.
Former airline stewardess Denise Capriati has left her husband Stefano at their home in Saddlebrook, Florida, after frequent rows over the Olympic gold medallist's future.
One friend said: ‘Denise believes that her husband was pushing their daughter too far, too fast, too soon.
Jennifer is 16 now but she has hardly had a moment to enjoy things other teenage girls experience.
‘If she's not playing in tournaments then she is giving exhibition matches.
I know she walks away with a hundred thousand dollars from each of those but money is not everything.
‘Stefano reckons he sacrificed his own life for his daughter's career but he was only a waiter and a boxer and stuntman before that.
Jennifer pleaded with her mother to get him to switch the pressure off.
‘She chews gum, she likes going to Guns N' Roses concerts and wearing funky clothes — she has even taken to wearing black nail varnish.
But Stefano just wants her to play tennis.
‘It caused so much pressure inside the home that I'm not surprised Denise has had enough.
It would severely test any marriage.’
Jennifer, whose meteoric career has earned more than £5 million, burst on the scene reaching the final of her first professional tournament aged just 13.
She was reportedly close to open rebellion against her father earlier this year.
At the Italian Open in Rome in May his suffering showed as he watched the family breadwinner losing to Amanda Croetzer who Jennifer was expected to breeze past on her way to more glory.
After her defeat a distressed Jennifer rushed past her father, ‘cutting him dead’ according to one writer.
Her defeats have led to numerous stories of the youngster being ‘burnt out’ by the gipsy life of constant worldwide travelling on tour and for exhibitions.
Last month she threatened to walk away from tennis completely.
She said: ‘When I look back on 1992 I know I didn't give 100 per cent.
I think I've got through that negative stage now, I like playing again and next year will be different.
‘But if I'm not enjoying it I won't make the mistake of going through the motions like I did this year.’
Stefano has denied pushing his daughter too hard.
He said: ‘I'm just the guy who helped put the parcel together.
I'm here to protect and oversee everything.’
Boris Becker and Barbara Feltus
Tennis star Boris Becker, who says he has to be happy to win, trains with girlfriend Barbara Feltus in Phuket, Thailand.
Actor's son in prison
THE son of French actor Gerard Depardieu was in jail last night charged with heroin trafficking.
Guillaume Depardieu, 23, was arrested selling packets of the drug at a railway station in Paris.
Police found six more packets and thousands of francs at the film star's Luxury home nearby.
Guillaume was one of five people charged on Monday after an eight-week police operation.
‘Depardieu junior made more than 15 trips to Holland recently,’ said a police spokesman.
‘We estimate they brought more than a kilo of heroin into France.’
Flush of success for cats
THE ultimate gift for cat lovers is a video which shows your pet how to use the bathroom.
The training film, produced in Japan, teaches clean-living moggies to use the toilet and even flush it afterwards.
Owners are told to start with a children's toilet seat taped to an ordinary cat litter box.
‘The training challenges the limits of your cat,’ says presenter Shiho Wakabayashi, who is assisted by a feline called Rocky.
She insists the gruelling teaching process is fun but warns: ‘Patience is most important for the training.’
New ‘confession’ in Newall case
POLICE have new evidence of an alleged confession by the son accused of murdering his parents in Jersey five years ago, a court was told yesterday.
Lawyers trying to have Roderick Newall extradited to Jersey told Gibraltar Supreme Court they had an affidavit from a woman.
Newall, 27, was arrested by a Royal Navy frigate sailing his yacht off Casablanca.
Postman killers still on the run
THE muggers who shot dead postman Keith Thompson in Florida have still not been caught, an inquest was told yesterday.
Mr Thompson, 42, of Chelmsford, Essex, was murdered in October in a hotel car park on the first day of his holiday.
Chelmsford coroner Malcolm Weir was told American police were still investigating the crime but had not made any arrests.
Verdict: Unlawful killing.
Shannen paid to keep clothes on
BEVERLY Hills 90210 actress Shannen Doherty turned down a Pounds 60,000 offer to pose for Playboy because her bosses wouldn't let her strip.
Instead, they matched the magazine's money for Shannen, 21, to keep her clothes on.
The star was desperate to pose after shedding 15lb.
‘For the first time ever she had the figure she always wanted and wanted to share it with her fans,’ said a friend.
Threat to peace force
PREMIER John Major last night refused to be intimidated by a chilling threat to the lives of 2,500 British troops in Bosnia.
Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadjic said his forces would declare war on the troops, firing at them with guns and mortars, if Britain backed a United Nations move to shoot down Serb planes violating a no-fly zone.
Downing Street declared that Britain would not be bullied.
400 Arabs deported
BUSES carrying up to 400 Palestinian deportees crossed the Israeli border and entered the Jewish state's security zone in south Lebanon yesterday.
The deportees, bound and blindfolded, entered from the Israeli town of Metulla, eyewitnesses said.
Their long line of headlights was led by an escort of Israeli troops.
Lebanon ordered its troops to close checkpoints to traffic, but they were unable to stop the convoy getting through.
Wins galore as the fat one hits 180
THE national lottery may be new in the UK but in Spain the big gamble game has been running for 180 years.
The biggest draw of the year, El Gordo — the fat one — takes place next Tuesday when hundreds of millions of pounds will be won.
There will be 105 first prizes of £1.7 million each.
in the mammoth There are other big prizes during the year, and the normal weekly gamble costs about £2.70 a ticket.
The Spanish lottery pays out 70 per cent in prizes, 25 per cent goes to the State and the rest is swallowed by administrative costs.
Death city gets food
US Marines yesterday patrolled famine-hit Somalia's ‘City of Death’ and escorted a food convoy in their first sortie into the countryside.
A 31-man foot patrol walked through Baidoa — where up to 90 people die of hunger and disease every day — from an airbase secured on Wednesday.
Patrol leader Captain David Hall said: ‘We're letting them know they can get food without instability.’
A helicopter gunship escorted 10 lorryloads of food to nearby villages.
Depardieu son faces 4 years
ACTOR Gerard Depardieu's son faces up to four years in jail if found guilty of drug pushing.
Guillaume Depardieu, 23, was arrested on Saturday with four other men after a surveillance operation.
He was allegedly caught selling heroin to an addict.
A court official in Paris said: ‘There is a feeling he just wanted to copy his friends.’
Aussies vow to scrap loyal oath to Queen
Isobelle Gidley in Sydney
THE Queen is to be dumped from Australia's Oath of Allegiance as premier Paul Keating forges ahead with his plans for a republic.
Instead of swearing allegiance to the Queen, members of the armed forces and new citizens will pledge their loyalty to Australia.
They will say: ‘From this time forward under God (the reference to God is optional) I pledge my loyalty to Australia and its people, whose democratic beliefs I share, whose rights and liberties I respect, and whose laws I will uphold and obey.’
Monarchists condemned the move yesterday.
‘I'm absolutely disgusted,’ said Brigadier Alf Garland, president of the Returned Servicemen's League.
‘My members swore allegiance to the Queen and fought for Queen and country.
He is desecrating all they fought for.’
Labour premier Mr Keating has moved rapidly towards his dream of an Australian republic.
He first caused outrage last February when he put his arm around the Queen's waist during a Royal visit.
Then followed a speech in her presence hinting that it was time Australia went it alone.
He later declared that the Union Jack should be removed from the Australian flag.
He has also fought in vain against the Queen's head appearing on the new $5 bill.
The change to a republic is said to have the backing of most Australians.
Spycatcher lawyer Malcolm Turnbull said: ‘Australians are passionately proud of their country, and, no matter what respect they might have for the Queen, they want their country's symbols to be Australian.’
Give us £23m or we blow you up
Wayne Bodkin in France
EVIL robbers turned a terrified bank guard into a human bomb and threatened to blow him up before stealing £23 million in cash.
In France's biggest bank raid, two men held the night security chief and his family at gunpoint for more than 12 hours after breaking into their home at dawn.
The men stayed all day with the family, who were tied up in different bedrooms, calmly eating and watching television as the hours ticked by.
As night approached, the man was forced to put on a belt packed with plastic explosives and connected to a detonator.
With military-style precision, one gunman stayed to guard the man's family, while the other took him to the Banque de France where at least four others were waiting.
The guard — who has not been named — was told he would be blown up and his family killed if he made one false move.
After being driven to the bank, in the centre Toulon, in southern France, he was made to open the door.
The robbers then used computer key-codes to open the strongroom, and packed the 200 million francs into bags.
Before driving off, they threatened to kill his wife and young daughter if he did not wait before raising the alarm.
That is exactly what he did — and at 7.30pm on Wednesday night police first learned of the daring raid.
Inspector Paul Delvi said: ‘They knew exactly what they were going to get, where, how and when.
They have taken cash that was not in any number order.
Identifying this money will be impossible once it's in circulation.’
The robbers would have needed at least 16 large suitcases to carry off the cash, said bank spokesman, Jean-Claude Bach.
‘This raid was carried out with commando-like accuracy,’ he added.
‘The gang were well-informed and had obviously done their homework.’
The bank is a clearing house for cash used to supply shops, commercial centres and commerce in the wealthy Cote d'Azur.
It is the third raid at branches of the bank, the French equivalent of the Bank of England.
A review of security was underway yesterday.
For children robbed of their father
I FELT compelled to reply immediately to your story about the four children robbed of a father this Christmas by the carelessness of an alleged drunken driver.
My heart goes out to them.
They deserve our sympathy and help.
Perhaps an emergency line could be set up to raise money for them.
Threat to kill troops
PREMIER John Major last night refused to be intimidated by a threat to the lives of 2,500 British troops in Bosnia.
Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic said his forces would declare war on the troops if Britain backed a United Nations move to shoot down Serb planes violating a no-fly zone.
As Mr Major flew to Canada for talks on the crisis with US President George Bush and Canadian premier Brian Mulroney a Downing Street spokesman said: ‘We are not going to be intimidated.’
The UN is on the brink of enforcing a no-fly zone over Bosnia, in which jets from the United States, Italy and France would shoot down Serb planes.
Nato leaders announced in Brussels a zone would be ready in 24 hours, although the UN is not expected to give the go-ahead until next week.
Mr Karadzic warned Mr Major and UN Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali he would not be able to control his troops if Serb planes were shot down.
Peace talks fall apart
ALL four Arab delegations walked out of the Middle East peace talks yesterday in protest at the deportation of 400 Palestinians from Israel.
The 400 deportees, bound and blindfolded, were driven to Israel's security zone in Lebanon.
They were accused of belonging to Islamic groups that attacked Israeli soldiers.
Lebanon ordered its troops to close checkpoints to traffic, but they were unable to stop the convoy getting through.
Storm blows weary Major to breaking point
by Eben Black in Washington
EXHAUSTION was etched on Premier John Major's face last night as he embarked on another hectic round of talks after a gruelling 13-hour journey to North America.
While he soldiered on, wife Norma was unable to stand the pace.
She went to bed complaining of feeling sick and missed a dinner thrown in the couple's honour by Canada's leader Brian Mulroney.
A worried Mr Major hurried to her bedside before the meal was over, disappointing their 200 guests.
The high-profile trip was meant to be an upbeat and cheerful end to the toughest year of their lives — instead they appeared to be at breaking point.
There was no rest the following day.
After an early morning meeting with Mr Mulroney they flew to Washington.
Mrs Major emerged from the plane at Andrews air force base looking pale and drawn.
She told TODAY: ‘I am just not a good traveller.’
But she retained her sense of humour, adding: ‘I suppose people will now be sending me remedies.’
Concern over his 50-year-old wife's health were clearly on Mr Major's mind during crucial talks on Bosnia with President George Bush last night.
Her illness followed a disastrous flight from Heathrow to Canada.
The plane took off an hour behind time thanks to EC president Jacques Delors' late arrival.
Then the prime minister's Tristar jet was buffeted by freak 200-mile-an-hour winds before being diverted from Ottawa to Montreal due to fog.
The Majors were forced to endure a 2½-hour drive to the Canadian capital but even that did not go smoothly.
One of the motorcade cars carrying the only TV crew due to film their arrival broke down.
Mr Major fidgeted nervously throughout a press conference with Mr Mulroney.
The relentless grind of international summiteering was taking its toll.
It is not the first time the 49-year-old premier's health has been threatened by his demanding schedule.
Shortly after becoming leader in 1990, he flew home from Bermuda struggling with exhaustion.
The only rest he is likely to get this weekend is at Camp David.
Even then fitness-fanatic Mr Bush is likely to drag him out for an early morning swim.
Major air strike threat to warlords of Serbia
SERB warlords were last night warned to keep their planes away from Bosnia or risk having them blasted out of the sky.
Premier John Major and President George Bush also threatened to cut all Serbia's links with the outside world unless it stopped atrocities.
Their tough stance followed talks at Camp David in which Mr Bush agreed to delay action until the new year.
Mr Major fears revenge attacks against British troops helping with relief work.
He is also worried Serb guerrillas could start taking hostages in retaliation.
Major and Bush ready to blitz Serb warlords
Eben Black in Washington
PREMIER John Major and President Bush last night warned Serbia: Stop the fighting in Bosnia or else.
American war planes will launch lightning strikes against the Serbs if they continue to breach the no-fly zone over the former Yugoslav republic.
The two leaders threatened Serbia with complete isolation from the international community unless it immediately stops atrocities against Moslem and Croat women and children.
They also agreed to send observers into potential flashpoints of neighbouring Kosovo and Macedonia to prevent a repeat of the civil war in two regions that have so far escaped violence.
Following two days of talks at Camp David, Mr Major and outgoing president Mr Bush flew to the White House to issue their ultimatum.
But a cautious Mr Major made plain his concern that British troops might be taken hostage by guerrillas if the West goes into action.
‘The British are worried about the situation,’ US Secretary of State Lawrence Eagleburger confirmed last night.
Until now, Mr Major's biggest fear has been of revenge attacks on the 2,400 British troops.
But the prospect of hostage-taking opens up a new quagmire.
The Prime Minister is determined Britain will not be dragged into an unwinnable war on the scale of the American involvement in Vietnam.
Mr Bush has agreed to delay action until after Christmas to allow British forces to take defensive positions.
United Nations approval for the tough measures is expected next week.
The Serbs will then be given 15 days to stop all flights over the country, US Defence Secretary Dick Cheney said.
After that, any planes in the air will be tracked to their bases and destroyed.
The Americans also spelt out to Serb warlords that attacks on British troops will be met with America's full military might.
Mr Bush said: ‘I salute the British role.
They are doing the Lord's work in terms of bringing relief.’
Mr Major added: ‘It is necessary to enforce the no-fly zone but there is more than one way of doing that.
‘It is not just for the UK and US.
It will have to be agreed by the UN.’
Despite his fears, Mr Major is determined to see an end to the unspeakable atrocities in Bosnia.
He said: ‘Sanctions will depend on a rapid and radical change of policy by the Serbs.
Depending on their response, we will be ready to impose new sanctions.’
Unless Serbia obeys the ultimatum its phone lines will be severed, borders shut and it will be shunned ‘for years to come’.
As Serbia yesterday voted on a new president, incumbent Slobodan Milosevic, accused of war crimes by Mr Eagleburger, was neck and neck with the prime minister of what is left of Yugoslavia, Milan Panic.
Indifferent proposal
DEMI MOORE claims that filming sex scenes with Cheers star Woody Harrelson was like holding a woman's hand.
She explained that she was left cold by Harrelson — her co-star along with Robert Redford in the forthcoming Indecent Proposal — because he is a close friend of her husband Bruce Willis.
‘I met Woody five years ago,’ she said.
‘I mean, he's been to my house and played with my kids.’
Harrelson was equally unexcited.
He told her: ‘It's hard to think of you in an attractive way — you're my friend's wife.’
Demi, left, said her dealings with director Adrian Lyne were even colder.
‘There was a scene where I wanted to keep my clothes on and I told Adrian ‘They don't have to see my breasts in every shot, do they?’
‘I don't want to say he's chauvinistic but he has a traditional view of women.’
Marines shoot Somali gunner
AMERICAN troops shot a Somali rebel who aimed a machinegun at them yesterday.
The young gunman was on a truck fleeing the scene of a shoot-out with marines in Mogadishu.
As it sped away, he swung the mounted machinegun around and took aim.
He was wounded as the marines opened fire.
US and Belgian forces landed at the of Kismayu yesterday, scene of some of the country's worst clan carnage.
Fly Freedom: the sequel
AN air force officer who fled Communist Cuba in a stolen MiG 23 jet fighter has snatched his wife and children to freedom in a new daredevil flight.
Ex-major Lorenzo Peres, 37, tried in vain to persuade the Cuban authorities to let his wife and two children leave after he defected last year.
At the weekend, he climbed into a twin-engined, four-passenger Cessna-310 provided by a human rights group…and headed back to the homeland he had abandoned.
He flew the 90 miles at a height of less than 100ft, to dodge both Cuban and American radar defences, until he reached his home city of Matanzas.
Then he swooped down and landed on a road near Varadero Beach, right in the middle of evening rush-hour traffic.
His wife, Victoria, was waiting at the roadside, with sons Reyniel, 11, and Alejandro, six.
They quickly scrambled into the plane.
And Papa Peres took off again, skimming the waves all the way to Marathon Key, on the southern tip of Florida.
His wife and children were released by immigration officials and taken to a secret hideaway.
They are seeking political asylum.
Holding son Alejandro in his arms, Peres told interviewers: ‘My family are my life — and now they are free.’
About the great escape, he said: ‘I landed before a car, a truck and a bus.
They stopped, and I turned the plane round.
I opened the door, and my family went in.
‘The bus passengers were watching it all.’
Peres added: ‘Our love is the love of freedom.
Today, I think love won.’
Human rights organiser Armando Valladares said: ‘Lorenzo had tried to get his family by legal means.’
Giant quake shakes city
AN earthquake big enough to destroy a city rocked northern Australia last night.
Buildings in Darwin shook but the centre of the tremor, which measured 7.3 on the Richter scale, was hundreds of miles out to sea.
More than 2,000 people died when a quake hit the nearby island of Flores last week.
Experts said the two events were not related.
Snake tries to eat boy
A WILD snake mistook a three-year-old boy for its favourite snack of baby wombat — and tried to eat him.
The 6ft carpet snake crept into Calan Lavender's bed, wrapped its body around him and plunged in its fangs.
His mother, awoken by screams, managed to pull it off.
Calan was recovering at home in Brisbane, Australia, yesterday.
Sylvester Stallone rescue
TOUGH guy Sylvester Stallone, left, lived up to his image when he helped rescue girlfriend Jennifer Flavin from a mountain.
The couple were left dangling after a ski lift at a Colorado resort broke down.
‘Jennifer thinks I'm a real hero,’ said Sly.
Royals bullfight
SPAIN'S King Juan Carlos has vowed to fight off any attempts by the EC to ban bull fighting.
He described the blood sport as his country's ‘national feast’, but his opinions are not shared by his wife Queen Sofia.
The Spanish royals revealed their clash over bullfighting in interviews with Selina Scott.
Selina's A Year in Spain, to be shown on ITV on January 3, also includes an interview with the royal couple's unmarried son, Crown Prince Felipe.
He told Selina: ‘When I find somebody who is capable of taking on all the duties of a queen, it won't matter whether she is Royal, aristocratic or a commoner.
I'll know she's right when I find her.’
One that got away
ROBBERS ran from a bank in Milan, Italy, into the arms of the law after their car was stolen.
‘They didn't think there were other thieves about,’ said police.
Fan takes the pizza
BEVERLY Hills 90210 star Luke Perry had to throw a girl out of the men's room at a Hollywood pizzeria after she followed him to ask for his autograph.