

Property giant goes to wall
ONE of Britain's most prestigious property firms has gone bust with debts of £350 million.
The crash of the giant Rosehaugh development company, once the most glamorous outfit of the Eighties, is the most graphic evidence yet of the slump in property values.
It has fought for two years to survive the recession, selling assets to cut spiralling debts.
In 1990 the firm that jointly backed the £2.4 billion Broadgate development around London's Liverpool Street station, lost £165 million.
A year later it had lost £227 million.
A refinancing deal to save Rosehaugh, led by Barclays Bank, has failed and the receivers were expected at its offices this morning.
Its collapse is a blow to high street banks who have spent millions of pounds to stave off receivership — particularly Barclays which lent £75 million.
Shares in the company were yesterday suspended at 7.25p.
At their height, before the 1987 Stock Market crash, they were worth Pounds 11.75p.
Disaster No 2 hits village
A VILLAGE was last night mourning the loss of a second group of fishermen in a matter of days.
Skipper Paul Masters, 24, his cousin David Masters, 24 and crew member Peter Hope were presumed dead when the wrecked hull of the 27ft Peganina was found within sight of the harbour at Padstow, Cornwall.
Last week Neil Harding, 27, and Arnold Murt, 42, perished.
MP Glenda in forged votes row
LABOUR MP Glenda Jackson was at the centre of a political row last night after it was discovered that forged proxy votes were used in her constituency during the General Election.
Miss Jackson snatched the north London seat of Hampstead and Highgate from the Tories by a majority of 1,440.
Police have not been able to find out who was responsible for the forgeries.
And, although a file was sent to the Crown Prosecution Service, no action will be taken because of lack of evidence.
Furious Tory MPs now want to go to the High Court to force a new ballot.
But Miss Jackson said: ‘I would certainly dismiss any allegations of impropriety by the Labour Party.’
£350 each on package hols
THE price of a sunshine package holiday has gone up by eight per cent— to an average £350 a head.
Tour operators have been licensed to sell 14.3 million holidays in the coming year, Civil Aviation Authority figures reveal.
Jobless up three-fold
DOLE queues in parts of London have tripled in two years, a new report reveals.
One in four people are now jobless in inner areas like Tottenham and Peckham.
And unemployment is growing faster than anywhere else in Europe.
Striker's elbow tackle was assault, court told
Simon Trump
A FOOTBALLER deliberately struck an opponent in the face with his elbow, shattering his cheekbone and fracturing his eye socket during a match, a court heard yesterday.
In the first case of its kind, Brentford striker Gary Blissett is alleged to have assaulted John Uzzell of Torquay United during the Third Division game.
Uzzell had to have a piece of plastic inserted into his eye and a metal plate put in his cheek to repair the damage.
Andrew Chubb, prosecuting, told Salisbury Crown Court: ‘The ball was kicked high and hard out of the Brentford half.
Uzzell saw the ball approaching and ran to meet it.
‘It hit the ground and bounced.
He jumped to head it clear and by now Blissett was approaching.
‘He too jumped and raised his right elbow so that it projected outwards.
‘The ball was headed away by Uzzell but as he came back down Blissett's elbow was thrust into his face.
The effect was devastating.’
Film of the incident, captured by two cameras at the ground, was played to the jury.
‘Football is a contact sport,’ said Mr Chubb.
‘People play hard, they push one another, they strike opponents.
‘There has to be a dividing line.
It's a matter of common sense.
Blissett cynically and deliberately brought his elbow into con-tact with the other man.’
Blissett, 28, was sent off after the incident in December 1991.
He later told police the clash had been accidental.
‘I very much regret the injuries he sustained,’ he said.
Uzzell told detectives: ‘The ball was cleared towards me.
I moved to clear it as I was the last defender in front of goal.
‘I was aware of players from both sides running towards me and I shouted I would clear it.
‘I remember going to head the ball.
The next thing I remember was lying on the ground surrounded by players and officials.’
Uzzell was stretchered off the pitch and taken to hospital in Torquay.
Blissett, of Rickmansworth, Herts, denies assault.
The trial continues.
Landlady killer jailed
A LODGER strangled his landlady after charming his way into her bedroom and having sex with her.
Oktay Oczelebi, 28, was yesterday jailed for life for the murder of Feriha Apa, 48, at her home in Wood Green, north London.
Oczelebi fled the country with his victim's jewellery, the Old Bailey heard.
He was arrested 18 months later by British detectives at Milan airport, Italy.
Copter crash men drowned
ELEVEN people drowned after a helicopter plunged into the North Sea during a 47-second flight, an inquiry heard yesterday.
Six people survived when the chopper crashed on the flight from Shell's Cormorant Alpha oil platform to an accommodation ship in March.
Pathologist Dr James Grieve told the fatal accident inquiry in Aberdeen the dead men only suffered superficial injuries in what was a relatively soft landing.
The tragedy was the worst North Sea helicopter incident since 1986, when 45 men died in a crash off Shetland.
The inquiry is expected to last six weeks.
Girl friday pestered by her boss
A GIRL Friday who quit her job because she could not trust her boss to leave her alone was yesterday awarded £2,390 for sex discrimination.
Siobhan Coulson, 25, of Davyhulme, Manchester, told the industrial tribunal how Doctor Ettore Flore tried to kiss her and hold her hand while on a business trip in The Gambia.
Asked not to touch her, he replied: ‘It's my way because I'm Italian.’
She was awarded damages of £1,500 for ‘injured feelings’ plus £890 for loss of earnings.
Flore, chairman of E F Mining, of Gatley, Cheshire, which has ceased trading, was also ordered to pay her legal bill £840.
Hot date for party firemen
A FIRE crew's Christmas outing turned into a busman's holiday when their coach caught fire.
The crew, from Crook, Co Durham, were off to their annual dance when the bus filled up with smoke.
The men ushered their wives and girlfriends to safety and then trudged the last mile to the party.
‘It was a bit embarrassing, but if your bus has to catch light, having a party of firemen on board is handy,’ said one of the crew.
The price of boy's lost love
A BOY of eight whose mother bled to death hours after he was born won £56,250 damages in the High Court yesterday.
Stephen Stewart has been brought up by his grandparents Eworth, 50, and Iris, 58, of Mitcham, Surrey.
‘You have done a marvellous job,’ judge Mr Justice Otton told them.
Constance Stewart, 31, died after an emergency caesarean at Dulwich Hospital, south-east London.
The Camberwell Health Authority denied negligence.
Price on 007's life
THE secrets behind the world's deadliest secret agent, James Bond, are to be sold to the highest bidder.
Author Ian Fleming's original unpublished notes on his most famous creation are to go under the hammer at London auctioneers Sotheby's on December 15.
Fleming's notes, compiled over seven years, detail Bond's thoughts on subjects ranging from drink and sex to gambling and fast cars.
Of alcohol, Fleming wrote: ‘Drink relaxed Bond.
His only rule was not to get drunk.’
And on sex he notes: ‘The older women are best because they always think they may be doing it for the last time.’
The dossier is being sold by Fleming's step-daughter Mrs Fionn Morgan and is expected to raise up to £30,000 for the London Library Appeal.
Lamont to be quizzed by MPs in new probe over cash
Paul Wilenius and Eben Black
A FULL-SCALE inquiry has been launched into the use of public funds to pay Norman Lamont's legal bill.
Auditor general Sir John Bourn will personally conduct the probe.
He reports to the powerful Commons Public Accounts Committee which may call the Chancellor to answer questions from MPs later this month.
The dramatic move followed last night's revelation that the £4,700 payment sneaked through the Commons hidden as ‘Treasury running costs’.
This emerged as the Treasury took the extraordinary step of releasing internal letters justifying its decision.
In one the department's top civil servant said it would be ‘unreasonable’ for Mr Lamont to pay all of the £23,000 cost of evicting a sex therapist from his London home.
Meanwhile, two men involved in the uproar surrounding the Chancellor's visit to a west London off-licence have been suspended.
Thresher chiefs said both staff had admitted lying.
But the girlfriend of deputy manager John Onanuga leapt to his defence.
She said: ‘I feel very bitter about all this.
John is taking the blame.’
100 Victims
Christian Gysin
A HARLEY Street doctor jailed for seven years for a series of sex attacks on women visiting his surgery may have had 100 victims.
Evil charmer Thomas Courtney, 46, was found guilty yesterday of drugging and raping two women and indecently assaulting two others.
But seven more victims came forward during the police investigation and ‘as many as a hundred’ may have been abused by the smooth-talking doctor, a senior detective admitted.
Even Princess Diana was almost duped.
She was considering becoming a patron of his charity-registered foundation for Aids work when she was warned off by suspicious hospital authorities.
Behind the imposing facade of his Georgian headquarters, Courtney served his victims spiked drinks before attacking them.
Detective Inspector Mike Bennett said: ‘He was as close to being the perfect rapist as you could get.
Many women left not knowing if they had been attacked or simply been through a formal examination.’
One married woman who moves in high society circles came forward during the nine-day trial and said Courtney had raped her.
Another alleged he carried out an illegal abortion at her home.
A senior detective said: ‘The married woman said she met him on a plane.
On their third date he took her back to his surgery and raped her.
‘All she could remember was waking up in a shower with him four hours after drinking with him.
‘She did not wish to press charges because of the prominent position she and her husband hold in London society.’
The well-connected woman was typical of the alleged victims officers found as they investigated Courtney.
Another complained she was attacked by Courtney after they attended a medical conference at a south coast hotel six years ago.
One detective said: ‘It is not an exaggeration to assume that during his career as many as a hundred women could have been abused by him using his evil methods.
‘Many of these poor women, we believe, have been too frightened or too confused to admit what happened to them.’
Courtney had set himself up as a pioneer working with women victims of sex abuse, drug addiction and Aids problems.
He convinced VIPS, politicians and businessmen at home and abroad that he was an eminent doctor.
But he never even qualified as a gynaecologist, the Old Bailey jury heard.
Instead he ‘seriously abused his position as a doctor’ by using young women he enticed to his surgery for his own sexual gratification.
His first victim, a 26-year-old secretary, was raped after being served spiked champagne at his surgery before they went to a mutual friend's home for dinner in February 1991.
His second victim was drugged and raped when she went to see him for advice about work three months later.
Courtney was also found guilty of indecently assaulting a German student and a 17-year-old factory worker when they went to his surgery for part-time jobs.
He argued he had been giving them a practical demonstration of his work as a ‘psycho-sexual’ counsellor and doctor.
Courtney, who had denied all charges, showed no sign of emotion as the guilty verdicts were announced to a packed courtroom.
His wife, also a doctor, was not in the court.
Judge Lawrence Verney jailed him for seven years foreach of the rapes and four years for each of the indecent assaults, all to run concurrently.
‘You took advantage of your position as a doctor to commit offences which cannot be forgiven,’ he told Courtney.
The indecent assaults did not go as far as the rapes but were ‘equally repulsive’.
‘The victims thought they could trust a doctor.
How wrong they were,’ he said.
A spokeswomen for Women Against Rape hit out at the ‘low’ jail sentence last night.
‘He was a man in a position of trust,’ she said.
‘The courts should be signalling, by the sentence, the gravity of the offence.’
Charity Commissioners are to investigate the Courtney Foundation's accounts after complaints from members of the public.
Nick Partridge, chief executive of the Aids charity the Terrence Higgins Trust, said last night Courtney was a ‘vile man’.
He added: ‘We are glad to see the back of him.’
The bill you paid for Lamont
Paul Wilenius and Eben Black
CHANCELLOR Norman Lamont's secret £4,700 payout for a private legal bill was sneaked through the Commons hidden as Treasury running costs, it was claimed last night.
The facts emerged as the Treasury took the extraordinary step of releasing internal letters in a bid to justify the decision.
In one Sir Peter Middleton, the department's top civil servant at the time, said it ‘would be unreasonable’ for Mr Lamont to pay all of the £23,000 bill he faced last April.
Labour chiefs branded the rush of openness too late after the Government had hushed up the payments for 18 months.
The public and Parliament might never have known about the payment, even though Premier John Major has pledged a new age of open Government, Labour MPs angrily pointed out.
Yesterday the National Audit Office, the official public spending watchdog, admitted it missed the legal aid bill — run up as Mr Lamont evicted a sex therapist from his flat — when it went through the Treasury accounts.
Shadow Chancellor Gordon Brown stepped up the onslaught but his Commons demand that the Chancellor should be dragged to explain himself before MPs was unsuccessful.
Mr Brown said it was ‘included only under the broadest heading — Treasury running costs — was never drawn to the attention of the Audit Office as a special feature and has never been investigated by the Audit Office, something which should now happen’.
He added: ‘The chancellor must come to explain why the secret arrangements were such that the public were never to know that this payment had been made.’
The chancellor answered by fighting fire with fire.
In a letter he attacked Mr Brown for ‘wasting so much time and energy on an issue which is totally irrelevant to the concerns of the British people.’
Earlier Liberal Democrat Simon Hughes said that in a month Mr Lamont could announce proposals which would make 10 million people ineligible for legal aid yet at the same time he had been ‘allowed £4,000, his own private legal aid scheme, to pay his own private bill for an entirely private matter’.
He demanded: ‘What has Britain come to and where is there left any integrity in Cabinet ministers and officers of the Crown?’
The latest developments came as a survey of top City businessmen revealed that 91 out of 100 senior executives want to see Mr Lamont sacked.
Three out of four in the study, for Access, feel his performance has been poor, showing Mr Lamont's standing among businessmen is at rock bottom.
Also for the first time, the chairman of Mr Lamont's Kingston constituency, Dr Geoffrey Riordan, said he is concerned about the storm surrounding his MP.
Off-licence men suspended
TWO staff were suspended yesterday from their jobs at the Thresher off-licence at the centre of the Norman Lamont credit card controversy.
Assistant John Onanuga and manager David Newton said the chancellor bought cheap champagne and cigarettes in seedy Praed Street, Paddington, on Monday November 16.
But till receipts back his claim that he bought three bottles of red wine for £17.47 in the firm's Connaught Street store a day earlier, helping push his card over the limit.
‘They made it all up,’ said Thresher's Jayne Bridges.
But Mr Onanuga's girlfriend said last night she still believed him.
The woman, who gave the name Bernadette, said from their home in Tulse Hill, south London: ‘Before all this was in the papers John told me he had served Mr Lamont.
Why would he make the story up?’
Mrs Bridges maintained: ‘Mr Newton admitted on Friday that he had made up his end of the story.
‘We did not interview Mr Onanuga until Monday and he then also admitted the story was made up.’
But asked if Mr Onanuga was sticking to his story, Bernadette, 26, replied: ‘John is not a liar.’
Village hit by second disaster
A VILLAGE was last night mourning the loss of a second group of fishermen in a matter of days.
Three men are missing, presumed dead, after their boat sank in a severe gale within sight of the harbour at Padstow, Cornwall.
The latest tragedy brings to five the total of fishermen lost from the village in a week.
Last Sunday, Neil Harding, 27, and Arnold Murt, 42, perished when their boat capsized at the mouth of the treacherous Camel estuary.
Yesterday members of the close-knit community huddled on the rain-lashed quay waiting for news of skipper Paul Masters, 24, his cousin David Masters, 24, and young crew member Peter Hope.
But hope faded after the wrecked hull of their 27-ft vessel, the Peganina, was spotted.
Harbour commissioner Frank Sluman said: ‘The sea is a cruel master and it takes its toll over the years.’
An appeal has been set up among the village's 2,800 residents to help all the victims' families.
Firm cheats face fines
FIRMS could face fines of £1 million under tough competition rules to be introduced next year.
Consumers will have the right to hit back hard if they suspect overcharging or cheating by firms including banks, stores, BT and water companies.
‘Competition policy is good for industry, for commerce, for small firms and for consumers,’ said Board of Trade President Michael Heseltine.
Shares top new peak
SHARES soared by more than £3 billion to another all-time high yesterday as the Bank of England indicated that spending was rising in the High Streets.
The latest official figures show a big rise in the amount of money in the economy.
This backs up the evidence unveiled in TODAY yesterday showing that people are once again out in big numbers in UK shopping centres and malls.
House fire kills three
MOTHER Jenny Weightman returned from shopping yesterday to find her parents and son had died in a fire.
Housebound Anne McDonald, 66, and her husband Gilbert, 70, were looking after four-year-old Tony when flames engulfed their bungalow in Thornaby-on-Tees.
A Cleveland fire officer said: ‘It appears the fire broke out in an airing cupboard.’
£3m Budgie deal has Fergie in whirl
Emma Campbell
NO wonder Fergie's smiling.
Even blindfold she can see it won't be long before she's very rich.
Agents for the Duchess of York have signed a series of deals which will make her at least £3 million for her Budgie the Little Helicopter books, it was revealed yesterday.
Budgie toys, books, comics — and even socks — will flood shops from next year.
At the heart of the bonanza will be models made by Bandai, distributors of Nintendo and Teenage Mutant Hero Turtles.
Spokesman Martin Green said: ‘Budgie is a classic, like Thomas the Tank Engine.’
Licensing agent Janet Lees added: ‘It's difficult to give a total but Thomas the Tank made £250 million in the UK alone.’
The duchess put on the blindfold as she visited an orphanage in Kochedwice, Poland, on a visit for British charity Angels International yesterday.
Minutes after playing blind-man's buff she burst into tears at their plight.
The loyal wife who forgave affairs
THE wife of the rapist doctor stoutly defended her husband during the trial.
Parul Courtney told the court that she knew he had made love to other women, but added: ‘My husband is not the first person to have an affair, nor the last.’
Slim, dark-haired Parul has stayed loyal to Courtney throughout their 11 years together, first as his lover, then as his wife.
She first met him when she studied at Trinity College, Dublin, as he neared the end of his degree course.
Parul, an Indian doctor's daughter, had already gained a Master of Science degree in London before travelling to Ireland.
Fellow students remember her being smitten by the tall, good looking Courtney who was 11 years her senior.
The couple's love even endured three years of separation as Courtney worked in the Gulf to raise the money to buy their home in Cricklewood, north London.
When he returned they lived together before marrying in a quiet register office ceremony in December 1986.
But a friend of Courtney said: ‘Soon after they married Tom told me they had problems.
‘Parul knew he had been with other women and they rowed about it.
‘I once asked him why he did it and he just said he and Parul were sexually incompatible.
‘That seemed, for him, to be a good enough excuse to play around.’
Parul, an eye specialist, is better qualified than her husband.
She is a fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons and the College of Ophthalmology.
She worked at an Oxford hospital before joining Moorfields Eye Hospital in London.
The 35-year-old gave birth to his son a year ago and stood up for her husband during his trial.
Although she did not know he had sex with Miss A in a bathroom above his Harley Street surgery, she claimed she did not feel threatened by another of his affairs.
‘It was a one-off thing, it was not a sexual relationship,’ she said.
Asked about such behaviour she added: ‘I would be annoyed by it, but I would not feel threatened that he had sexual intercourse with other women.
‘If I asked my husband about sex with other women he would give me an honest answer.’
At the couple's £200,000 semi-detatched home yesterday she refused to discuss her husband.
Through an entryphone system at the front door, she would only say: ‘Thank you for calling — I really have nothing more to say.’
Smooth-talking charmer was perfect rapist
THE DOCTOR — HE posed as the distinguished society gynaecologist.
A smooth-talking charmer who helped women with their health problems.
He led a worthy charity.
But to detectives who investigated the crimes of Dr Courtney, he began to emerge as the perfect model of a rapist.
Behind the expensive Georgian facade of his Harley Street headquarters, Courtney drugged women with spiked drinks and then raped or molested them.
The four women victims involved in the Old Bailey trial were not the end of the story.
Since inquiries began, the police have been approached by nine women who say he attacked them.
And detectives believe there could be as many as 100 Courtney victims who have not reported his attacks.
‘He was smooth, plausible and charming,’ one officer said.
‘The women he assaulted would think no one would believe their word against that of a respected doctor.
‘But when there was a little publicity, after we had charged him with rape, other women came forward with similar stories.
‘And we expect others to keep coming forward.’
Two women came forward during the trial.
One said she had been raped.
The other said that Courtney carried out an illegal abortion at her home.
Yet another woman, who moves in high-society circles in London, told police that she was raped by the smooth-talking Irishman.
‘She was a married woman, who said she met him on a plane,’ a senior detective told TODAY.
‘They went out together twice after the first meeting.
‘And on the third date, she told us, he took her back to his surgery in Harley Street — and raped her.
‘All she could remember was waking up in a shower with him, four hours after drinking with him.’
The woman did not want to press charges, the detective said, because of the prominent position she and her husband hold in London society.
The woman was a typical example, officers found, as they dug deeper into the secret life of Thomas Courtney.
Another victim complained that he attacked her after they attended a medical conference at a South Coast hotel six years ago.
During the attack he grabbed her and pushed her against a conference table, she told detectives.
‘I remember my diamond ring scratching the table as he pressed against me,’ the woman said.
‘At the time I had lost my husband and was very depressed.
I told others about the attack.
I wish I had told the police.’
When police investigated Courtney they found an empty appointment book and now believe that few — if any — people were given medical advice.
One detective told TODAY: ‘He was going on overseas trips, he dressed in designer suits.
‘He always kept bottles of champagne in his fridge at work and he moved in very high-society circles.
‘He claimed to be a expert on child abuse and once even offered his services to the Metropolitan Police — although we did not use him.
‘He was a doctor but that was about the only genuine thing about him.
‘In reality, we believe he was simply the perfect rapist.’
One woman who met Courtney socially was sex therapist Sara Dale, 49 — the Miss Whiplash evicted from Chancellor Norman Lamont's London home.
‘I met him six years ago, as I was going through my divorce,’ Miss Dale said yesterday.
‘He wanted to set me up in a flat he said he owned.
He said he would provide me with male clients for sex therapy.
‘I was a bit unsure about the offer, to say the least.
‘He took me to a few parties but I was uneasy about him.
He told me he was a bit of a swinger but he never said he was married.
‘On one occasion, I rang his home and a woman I assumed to be his wife answered.
‘I didn't have much to do with him after that.’
Thomas Patrick Courtney was born 46 years ago in Newtonbutler, Co Fermanagh.
His father Vincent, now 70, holds an OBE awarded when he retired after 40 years as an executive with the Agriculture Ministry.
Even in his boyhood days, Tommy Courtney was the charmer who had a way with the girls.
‘He was the original tall, dark, handsome boy at school,’ said a woman who knew him at his senior school.
‘Loads of girls fancied him.’
Courtney often claimed that six of his eight brothers and sisters were also qualified doctors.
It was truer than many of his tales.
Yvonne is a GP, Irene a World Bank nutritionist, John a radiology professor.
Marie Therese is an ophthalmologist and Gary is a gastroenterologist.
Eamonn is a scientist and Arthur an anaesthetist, both in Dublin.
I can still see his grinning face as he tried to chase me.
I just want him to be locked away
Christian Gysin
THE VICTIM — ALL she wanted was a Saturday job.
But a pretty blonde German girl's ‘interview’ at the hands of Thomas Courtney has left her life in ruins.
‘I have not been the same since the assault,’ the 20-year-old student said at her flat near Hanover, where she is continuing her biology degree course.
‘I have broken up with my boyfriend and I can't bear to let any man touch me.
‘I still have male and female friends.
But I shy away from hugs and normal bodily contact.’
Ever since Courtney indecently assaulted her at his Harley Street clinic in October last year, the girl known to the jury as Miss C has been having nightmares about the attack.
‘Every time, I just see his grinning face as he tried to chase me,’ she said.
‘I wake up sweating.
The dream is always the same.
A long chase, and me never getting any further away.’
In the assault, Courtney used a sex aid on the girl, then forced her to touch him intimately.
Afterwards the girl, who had few close friends in Britain, returned to University College, on the outskirts of London, unable to tell anyone of the ordeal.
Weeks later, her boyfriend visited her from Germany.
And at last she broke down and told him what Courtney had done to her.
‘I felt ashamed at what happened,’ she said.
‘When my boyfriend tried to touch me, I couldn't stand him to be near me.
The doctor has put me off men for life.
‘I have not been able to build a normal relationship with any man since the attack.
I don't want to know about men, really.
‘My brother, who is 17, is perhaps the only man I trust now.
‘He has talked to me about what happened, and I think that helps.
But I feel very bitter.’
Miss C's mother has never been told of the attack, because she was undergoing a series of operations at the time.
‘I tried to tell my father, but he wanted to blank it out,’ Miss C went on.
‘He couldn't live with the thought that someone had touched me in that way.
‘Any man who has a daughter would understand how he feels.
‘And my mother still does not know about it, because she has been so ill.
The family has kept her away from the details of the attack.’
The girl said she still thinks fondly of her time in England — but could not bear to stay at University College any longer.
‘Everything about the college reminded me about the attack,’ she explained.
After the assault, and before she broke up with her boyfriend earlier this year, Miss C went to a German gynaecologist, in her own home town.
‘Even though I had known this man for years, I could not cope with seeing him alone,’ she said.
‘My boyfriend had to sit outside his surgery with the door open, calling to me: ‘It's all right— I'm right outside if you need me’.’
She confessed that before she was due to give evidence against Courtney at the Old Bailey, she nearly ran away.
‘But now I'm glad I went through with it and that the jury believed me,’ she said.
‘I felt Dr Courtney enjoyed watching all the girls give evidence.
All the way through, he was grinning.
That made me feel sick.
‘Now I am just glad he has been locked up, so he can't do this type of thing to anyone again.
I just wanted to hear he had been locked away.’
When Miss C gave the evidence that helped put the doctor away, she broke down in tears.
But her plucky manner in the witness box clearly won over the jury of eight men and four women.
Speaking in fluent English, she even raised a laugh in court, as she was grilled by defence barrister Anthony Arlidge, QC.
‘Why on earth did you not go and see a doctor at your college, after this alleged incident had taken place?’ the lawyer demanded.
‘See another doctor?’
Miss C retorted.
‘Not another doctor — I'd had enough of THAT doctor for quite a bit.’
She gazed defiantly at Mr Arlidge as she awaited the next question.
And Judge Lawrence Verney allowed himself a wry little smile.
Recalling that horrifying October day when she visited Courtney in Harley Street, Miss C told the jury: ‘First, he took me into his office and asked me to go out and buy baby oil.
‘He told me he was a sex therapist and helped people with their sex lives and personal problems, and did sex-change operations.’
Later, she said, Courtney asked her several personal questions.
He also asked if she had any sexual problems sleeping with her boyfriend.
Courtney asked her to undress, and she did.
She was lying on an examination couch before she realised that he had undressed, as well.
‘I had always been taught in Germany to trust my doctor, and obey what he said,’ she explained.
Courtney, in his own evidence, claimed to have heard that Miss C gained a reputation for being ‘easy’ during the first few weeks of her stay at University College.
‘That really angered me,’ she said.
‘But by then I suppose he was having to say anything to the jury to save himself.
‘I hate that man for what he did to me.’
Diana nearly fell for con
PRINCESS Diana was lured by smooth-talking Courtney after he was described as one of the country's top pioneers in Aids research.
Diana had read newspaper reports praising his work, and instructed her staff to make inquiries at the Royal Free Hospital in London.
‘The health authority was approached very quietly on behalf of the Princess of Wales and asked for details,’ a senior source at the hospital told TODAY.
‘Our message was: ‘Don't touch this man with a bargepole’.’
Courtney boasted to friends he could tempt Elizabeth Taylor — well-known for her relentless work for Aids research — to back his Courtney Foundation, set up in 1985.
He hinted that she might even receive an honour from the then Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher if she gave her support.
But Taylor's staff checked with Downing Street — and discovered he was in no position to offer anything.
‘He came to see me and said ‘What am I going to do — I'm in trouble with Mrs Thatcher’,’ said David Missen, 51, the lover of sex therapist Sara Dale, alias Miss Whiplash, who met Courtney when the pair became involved in the Life Shield Association.
Glossy brochures claimed Courtney's foundation was a registered charity, employing doctors and nurses.
But the only doctor was Courtney — and even his qualifications were misleading.
Maxwell's treasure trove
Matthew Benns
PRIDE of place in Robert Maxwell's study goes to a photo of him with President George Bush.
Its position sums up the massive ego of a man who plundered millions from his empire's pensioners.
Now it is to be sold, along with snaps of the late Mirror newspaper tycoon with Ronald Reagan valued at up to £300.
Sotheby's yesterday opened the doors of Headington Hill Hall, the Maxwell family's Oxford home since 1959, for a viewing of its contents to be sold at auction in January.
Everything must go.
The only exceptions are items that his widow Betty can prove she inherited from her family.
‘Like the man, the house and its contents are bold and larger than life,’ said Sotheby's director James Miller.
A 19th century mahogany desk dominates Maxwell's study.
The silver cigar box on it was empty — the last £200 Corona taken by a mystery smoker before it could be sold.
The bookcase, labelled Robert Maxwell Chairman in mother-of-pearl, contains some of the 6,000 tomes in the 29-room mansion.
Receiver Peter Phillips hopes this third sale will raise up to Pounds 333,000.
Mrs Maxwell will then move out of her £10,425-a-year rented home.
Her family has celebrated its last Christmas at the 24-seat, 18th century dining table, expected to fetch £12,000.
They probably ate off the 87-piece Berlin dinner service, valued at £7,000, and drank from a set of 95 Venetian glasses worth around £1,200.
The new tenant will face a complete refurnishing job, even the washing machines, dryers and irons are being sold in a £200 job lot.
Not everything is that cheap.
A view of Jerusalem by Israeli Reuven Rubin is expected to fetch £25,000.
Sotheby's Harry Dalmeny said: ‘You can't estimate the price of notoriety, his Military Cross and other medals may fetch more than the £2,000 we estimated.’
Souvenir hunters could bid for Maxwell's engraved 18ct gold Parker fountain pen, estimated at £220, or his gold dress watch and alarm calendar watch, a snip at £1,000.
The feminine French-style drawing room reflects the good taste of Mrs Maxwell.
Here a pair of 1850 card tables are for sale at up to Pounds 10,000 and a Louis XVI-style suite, £5,000.
A gilt harp stands in the bay window.
A workman observed: ‘Maxwell won't be playing that where he is now will he?’
Four Louis XVI wall-lights valued at £3,000 are being sold from the French-style drawing room along with the £5,000 giltwood suite and 1850 card tables.
Even kitchen utensils are being sold along with a job lot of washing machines, dryers and ironing machines for £200.
Mosaic wall tiles dominate one of the hall's bathrooms.
England's finest council house, Headington Hill Hall, with its pool and 14 acre grounds, was thrown open for viewing.
A magnificent four-poster bed dominates this room.
Guest bedrooms were all equipped with TVs and trouser presses.
A devilish Maxwell put this cartoon on a corridor wall.
Maxwell spent £350,000 on the house, installing a stained glass window and glitzy Fifties Neptune statue in the hall.
No more Maxwell family dinners at the £15,000 Regency table with silver coasters, Venetian glass and Berlin plates.
A gilt harp sits in the bay window of the sitting room.
The tycoon's empire was run from this giant double bed.
House for £1 deposit
FIRST-TIME buyers are queueing to snap up homes for a £1 down-payment.
A building firm is getting rid of properties it took in part-exchange for new homes in a huge sale.
Hassall Homes, of Wakefield, Yorkshire, is even offering the normal five per cent deposit as a free gift.
Buyers are guaranteed a 95 per cent mortgage to cover the rest.
Sales manager Viki Rowland said: ‘There's no catch — we've had hundreds calling.
They pay £1 plus legal fees and move in.
Ten of our 20 houses were snapped up on the spot.’
The scheme lasts until Christmas.
Rod's car love token
ROCKER Rod Stewart's Lamborghini was bought for £61,500 yesterday — in memory of a fan's wife.
Dave Bennet paid £11,000 over reserve for the Countach QV at an auction in Blackbushe, Hants.
‘I fell in love with my wife dancing to Rod's hit Maggie May,’ said Mr Bennet, 42, of Glasgow.
‘I was devasted when she died.’
Drug party girl doomed to 25 years in coma
A SOLDIER who doomed a teenage girl to a living death with a dose of pure heroin was jailed for five years yesterday.
Suzanne Calvert has been in a coma for five months since being given the drug at a party by Army deserter Sean O'Brian.
Suzanne, 16, has severe brain damage and will be unconscious for the 25 years doctors say she'll survive.
O'Brian, 24, was on the run from the Royal Regiment of Fusiliers when he took a small glass tube of diamorphine — described in court as pure heroin — to the house in Guide Post, Northumberland.
He laid out lines of the drug in a bedroom for Suzanne, her 19-year-old boyfriend Neil Young and friends Steve Richmond and Graham Longstaff.
Michael Hodson, prosecuting, told Newcastle Crown Court that some of them, including Suzanne, were already high on alcohol and Ecstasy.
Guests were too frightened to call an ambulance straight away and when one arrived Suzanne's brain had been starved of oxygen.
‘She is in a vegetative state and the prognosis is that she will remain in that condition for up to 25 years,’ said Mr Hodson.
‘She has minimal response to pain and noise, there is little eye movement, she is unable to communicate, she can't move her limbs or eat on her own.’
Suzanne, from Bedlington, Northumberland, needs 24-hour care from parents Michael and Jennifer.
O'Brian, also of Bedlington, admitted supplying diamorphine and may face further charges if Suzanne dies.
Christopher Knox, defending, said O'Brian had been just 100 yards from where nine men were killed in the Gulf War friendly fire blunder.
He returned to Germany with his unit to find his wife had run off with another man.
Judge Gerard Harkins told him: ‘When people get involved in the unlawful use of drugs they do untold harm to themselves.
‘The deplorable state it has left Suzanne in shows that all too well.’
Freed rapist strikes again
A CONVICTED rapist carried out another sex attack months after being freed from a 14-year jail sentence.
Uriel Ennis, dubbed the Mitcham Monster for a string of rapes near the Surrey town, pounced 17 days after the end of his parole.
Ennis, 33, of Roehampton, south London, was convicted by Kingston Crown Court yesterday of indecently assaulting a 25-year-old student last November.
He gouged her cheek with a screwdriver, but failed to rip off her clothes.
Female jurors wept after hearing of his 1983 convictions for three rapes.
Sentencing was adjourned for reports.
Animal house
WRITER Carla Lane has bought a £2 million, 26-bedroom mansion to house her 2,700 rescued birds and animals.
Carla, 58, who wrote the TV series Bread, will move her pets into Broadhurst Manor, West Sussex — the new HQ for her Animal Line charity.
Hostage flies home
HOSTAGE Allan Nicklin flew home from Saudi Arabia yesterday in time to celebrate his silver wedding anniversary.
Mr Nicklin, a 48-year-old insurance manager, was kept captive for two years by the Saudis, who held him responsible for the debts of his American-owned firm.
Back home in Perton, Staffs, he said: ‘I am delighted and relieved.’
Since 1990 he has been either under house arrest or in jail.
He said: ‘Conditions were not as bad as one might expect but still bleak for someone who is innocent.’
Now he is looking forward to celebrating his anniversary with wife Maragaret tomorrow and spending Christmas with children Sarah, 23, and Matthew, 17.
Mr Nicklin praised his wife for her campaign to free him and keeping their home going with little money.
Now he must start jobhunting.
‘It will take me a couple of days before I can get organised,’ he said.
Free drinks for drivers
MOTORISTS will be served free soft drinks by a restaurant chain to cut road deaths at Christmas.
The Beefeater group will give away £250,000 worth of drinks to ‘designated drivers’ from December 5 to 31.
Wife beater's jail break
A HUSBAND who beat his wife in a savage three-hour assault can wait until his holidays before going to jail.
Alex Tate, 34-year-old ship's cook, was told by Judge Alan Simpson that the assault merited a short prison sentence but that it should not interfere with his work.
Hull Crown Court heard his estranged wife Jackie was left covered in cuts and bruises and with two black eyes after being kicked and punched for three hours.
Judge Simpson said: ‘I suspect there might have been a hint of sexual promise in the air but Mrs Tate changed her mind.
Frustration came out in this way.’
Tate, who admitted assault, was told he would get a five-week sentence when he next appeared to fit in with his break from the ship.
It means he will serve three.
‘I am afraid it will not be a very happy Christmas for you but you will not lose your job,’ said the judge.
Footballer's elbow tackle ‘was assault’
A FOOTBALLER deliberately struck an opponent in the face with his elbow, shattering his cheekbone and fracturing his eye socket during a match, a court heard yesterday.
In the first case of its kind, Brentford striker Gary Blissett is alleged to have assaulted John Uzzell of Torquay United during the Third Division game.
Film of the incident, captured by two cameras at the ground, was played to a jury at Salisbury Crown Court.
Andrew Chubb, prosecuting, said: ‘The effect was devastating.’
Blissett, 28, of Rickmansworth, Herts, was sent off after the clash in December 1991.
He denies assault.
Mine leader Roy ousted
THE man who led the breakaway Union of Democratic Mineworkers lost his job yesterday as national president.
Moderate Roy Lynk, 59, who staged a week-long underground protest at Silverhill Colliery over plans to shut 31 pits, was ousted by rival Neil Greatrex.
Mr Lynk blamed the Government's announcement for damaging his credibility.
‘Members have voted for a change of leader.
But I'll still fight closures,’ he said.
£56,000 for tragic son
A BOY of eight whose mother bled to death hours after he was born won £56,250 damages in the High Court yesterday.
Stephen Stewart has been brought up by his grandparents Eworth, 50, and Iris, 58, of Mitcham, Surrey.
‘You have done a marvellous job,’ judge Mr Justice Otton told them.
Constance Stewart, 31, died after an emergency caesarean at Dulwich Hospital, south-east London.
The Camberwell Health Authority denied negligence.
Gut too big for gutter
A SEWER worker too fat to squeeze through a manhole was given six months off to shed some of his 22 stone.
But when his time was up, Gary Cannon still weighed 21 stone, instead of a normal 12 stone.
And that was still much too fat to be a ‘flusher’— a cleaner-out of sewers — an industrial tribunal heard.
Thames Water Utilities wanted to put him on light duties.
But his own doctor said he was not fit even for office work and signed him off for another six months because of‘obesity and hypertension’.
A year after the first warning, Mr Cannon still weighed over 20 stone.
So he was sacked from his £255-a-week job at Drayton Park Sewage Works, in west London.
‘We had no option,’ company executive Alan Lenander told the London tribunal.
‘He had been warned to make himself fit for work.’
Another manager, Malcolm Dowty, said: ‘With breathing apparatus on his back, he would not be able to descend through a 2ft manhole.’
Mr Cannon, 37, of Highbury, North London, claims unfair dismissal.
The hearing continues.
Mercy doc's new deadline
THE mercy death doctor has been given more time to consider his future.
Dr Nigel Cox, 47, convicted of attempting to murder a terminally ill patient, has until Thursday to decide whether to return to his post at the Royal Hampshire County Hospital in Winchester next year subject to certain conditions.
‘This will allow us to address details raised by Dr Cox,’ said Wessex Regional Health Authority after extending today's deadline.
Dog chews off finger
A DOG bit the top off Jayne Clark's finger and ate it when she posted a Yellow Pages through a door.
The 32-year-old delivery girl was left screaming in agony after the alsatian-collie cross snapped at her and took the top of her ring finger off during her round in Canterbury, Kent.
Police broke down the front door to take the dog away.
Owners Diane and Trevor Smith have agreed their pet should be put down.
U-turn on refugees
BRITAIN did an about-turn over Bosnian refugees yesterday and offered sanctuary to 4,000 people.
The first of the 850 former concentration camp prisoners and their families will start arriving from the war-torn former Yugoslav republic within days.
Home Office Minister Charles Wardle told the Commons: ‘I am sure that we all hope these evacuees will be able to return in due course to their own country.
‘They will be admitted to this country, exceptionally outside the immigration rules, for six months initially.’
A decision will then be taken on letting them stay longer.
The move follows a row last week after the Government refused to take 170 men, women and children stuck in Austria.
Price on 007's life
THE secrets behind the world's deadliest secret agent, James Bond, are to be sold to the highest bidder.
Author Ian Fleming's original unpublished notes on his most famous creation are to go under the hammer at London auctioneers Sotheby's on December 15.
Fleming's notes, compiled over seven years, detail Bond's thoughts on subjects ranging from drink and sex to gambling and fast cars.
Of alcohol, Fleming wrote: ‘Drink relaxed Bond.
His only rule was not to get drunk.’
And on sex he notes: ‘The older women are best because they always think they may be doing it for the last time.’
The dossier is being sold by Fleming's step-daughter Mrs Fionn Morgan and is expected to raise up to £30,000 for the London Library Appeal.
Floods danger the worst for 22 years
Brendan Berry
BRITAIN was facing its worst flooding crisis for 22 years as torrential rain and gale-force winds swept the country last night.
Red alerts are in force on 11 rivers and a close watch was being kept on the Thames as the National Rivers Authority opened a flood incident room.
Emergency services in south Wales were at full stretch after the wettest November since 1970.
Weathermen say the drought-hardened ground cannot absorb the water.
‘There is a lot more wet weather to come so there is bound to be a lot of flooding,’ said a spokesman.
Train services in the Welsh valleys were in chaos and 100 homes were flooded in Tredegar, Gwent.
In Powys, a search for eight scouts missing on the nearby Black Mountains, was called off when they walked into a police station.
A pregnant woman had to be rescued from her car by ambulance crews on the A48 in Gloucestershire.
A 25-mile stretch of the River Severn overflowed in the county.
Elderly people had to be rescued from their homes as ‘a tidal wave of water’ hit Lydney.
Horse racing at Worcester was abandoned as the course was submerged.
Residents were warned to prepare flood defences.
In Bath, Nicholas Godfrey, 16, was plucked to safety from the swollen River Avon as he clung on to a branch.
The Wiltshire villages of Lacock and Staverton were cut off by impassable country lanes.
Two llamas had to be rescued from an ‘island’ in Dartmoor.
Several Devon roads were closed with the Otter and Dart rivers on red flood alert.
The Exeter to Barnstaple rail line was under water at Yeoford.
In Cornwall, a flock of 94 sheep had to be rescued by boat near Launceston.
Drivers faced lengthy delays on the sodden A4 between Newbury and Hungerford.
The A423 on the Berkshire-Oxfordshire border was flooded…near the Flowing Springs pub.
Webber's date with success
SIR Andrew Lloyd Webber's new musical Sunset Boulevard is to open in London next June, it was revealed last night.
The show, already tipped as a hit, will feature Broadway star Patti Lupone in the lead role at the Adelphi Theatre.
The multi-millionaire composer picked the actress after her performances in Evita and Les Miserables.
Patti, 43, will play faded screen star Norma Desmond — a role immortalised by Gloria Swanson in the classic 1950 Hollywood film.
She pipped actress Meryl Streep to the part — although Streep could still take over when the show opens in the US.
‘I am delighted,’ said Lloyd Webber.
Last chance
BANKER Lorrain Osman, 60, held in custody for 5½ years, was yesterday granted a final appeal by the High Court against being sent to Hong Kong on fraud charges.
Work, rest and steal
SWEET-TOOTHED thieves made off with 230,000 Mars Bars in a cheeky raid on the world-famous chocolate factory.
The crooks drove into the factory at Slough, Berks, and towed away a trailer containing £36,000-worth of the bars.
‘They're probably feeling a bit sick,’ said a police spokesman.
‘It will fill a few stockings at Christmas.’
Boy three times lucky
A BOY cheated death after falling 20ft on to an electrified high-speed railway line.
Paul Auty, 14, of Acomb, North Yorks, hit a 25,000 volt overhead cable and landed inches from a speeding train.
He was in hospital yesterday with body burns and a broken wrist.
‘It's a miracle he wasn't killed either by the electric cable, the fall or an oncoming train,’ said police.
Blast firm faces trial
A CHEMICAL firm was committed for crown court trial yesterday charged with failing to protect its workers in a £6 million fire.
Allied Colloids is accused of failing to store dangerous substances safely and not taking proper fire precautions.
Bradford magistrates heard how an explosion ripped through the company's premises in July.
There were no serious injuries.
Dad's plea to outlaw alsatians
THE parents of a little boy whose nose was almost bitten off by an alsatian have called for the breed to be added to the dangerous dogs list.
Five-year-old Lee Finnigan was playing on the grass outside his home with friends when the dog ran from a neighbour's house, sank its teeth into his face and shook him back and forth.
‘It's not the first time a child has been attacked by an alsatian — even a crossbreed like this can be savage,’ said Lee's father John, 37.
‘They should change the law to include them with dogs like pit bulls which have to wear a muzzle.
‘That's the only way to save someone else's child from going through what Lee has.’
Doctors said Lee — who will be scarred for life — was lucky not to lose his nose or an eye.
He was in a satisfactory condition in Newcastle hospital last night, with dozens of tiny stitches in his face.
‘I nearly fainted when I saw him,’ said his mother Mandy, 27.
‘There were loose flaps of skin hanging from his face and I could see the bone around his eye socket.’
The three-year-old alsatian, called Sam, was at an animal shelter in Gosforth, Newcastle upon Tyne, yesterday waiting to be put down.
Cement mixer rips off arm
A TEENAGER had his arm ripped off at the shoulder by a cement mixer yesterday.
Ambulance men stemmed the flow of blood from 19-year-old David Mellor and packed his arm in cool bags before taking him to Warrington hospital.
An ambulance spokesman said: ‘A clean cut is better to save the limb, but it was quite rough at the end so it doesn't sound too good.’
Hospital for psycho killer
A KILLER who carried his victim's body through the streets in a wheelbarrow was yesterday sent to a special hospital indefinitely.
Michael Pearson, 19, of Leeds, battered 19-year-old Dean Fisher to death after meeting him in a pub.
A doctor had diagnosed that Pearson, who admitted manslaughter at Leeds Crown Court, was a dangerous psychopath.
Viz comic in art sale
RARE issues of bawdy adult comic Viz are to be auctioned at a fine art sale.
A first issue from 1979, one of only 150, and drawings by editor Chris Donald are expected to fetch £500 at the Anderson and Garland showrooms in Newcastle next Wednesday.
‘I had no qualms about putting them in a sale of fine art,’ said manager John Anderson.
Major sinks French with Trafalgar snub
Eben Black, Political Correspondent
PREMIER John Major is preparing for a showdown with France over the crucial Gatt trade deal.
Despite violent protests by 40,000 missile-throwing farmers yesterday, he will not accept a ‘non’ from President Francois Mitterrand to the agreement.
He is also ready to deliver a second snub to France by naming a new public holiday Trafalgar Day in celebration of Admiral Horatio Nelson's defeat of the French and Spanish in 1805.
On that historic morning Nelson sent a signal to his fleet saying: ‘England expects that every man will do his duty.’
Mr Major aims to echo the resounding naval victory by forcing President Mitterrand to surrender his objections to the Gatt deal.
The French government has threatened to veto the vital Gatt agreement, aimed at averting a damaging international trade war, if its demands for a better agriculture deal are not met.
During a visit to Spain yesterday, the Prime Minister declared he will not allow the French to stop the deal being ratified at the EC's Edinburgh summit later this month.
Mr Major, who has not included Paris on his whirlwind European tour in the run-up to the meeting, said: ‘I do not anticipate us failing to agree.
I have found no contrary feelings among any of the heads of government I have met.’
In a clear message to the French, he added: ‘All of us recognise the importance of reaching agreement on a whole series of complex matters.
‘I think it would be damaging for the economies of the community if we were unable to reach agreement.’
Meanwhile in Strasbourg, EC farmers were out in force to demonstrate against the deal.
Thousands went on the rampage, ripping up paving slabs, trees and street signs to hurl at riot police who responded with teargas.
More than 4,000 officers were on standby after running battles broke out between farmers and police during a protest march in Paris last week.
Yesterday, French farmers were joined by others from Spain, Belgium and Germany marching through Strasbourg behind a milk float loaded with vegetables, milk and wine to a football stadium rally.
The authorities took no chances, doubling the number of police on duty, closing schools along the march route and diverting the farmers away from both the European parliament and US consulate fearing they would come under attack.
In a second clash, about 100 protesters fought with police near a railway line.
Several farmers were injured.
But most were content to chant slogans and burn effigies of Ray MacSharry, the Irish Commissioner who finalised the deal.
Farmers fear their livelihoods are threatened by cuts in EC agriculture under the Gatt deal with America.
European farmers' leader Constantin Heereman said: ‘We refuse to be sacrificed for the sole interest and profit of the US and a few multinational corporations.
‘We must put an end to their threats and arrogant blackmail.’
Another march is being held in Bonn next Monday, three days before the summit, when 50,000 Germans are expected to be on the streets.
Despite French government threats to prevent the deal going through, and criticisms by Belgium and Italy, few farmers believe politicians will scrap the Gatt agreement without massive pressure.
‘Strasbourg is our last chance,’ said one young French farmer.
‘If they don't listen to us today, God knows what will become of us.’
The French are also likely to be infuriated by plans to replace May Day with Trafalgar Day.
The change is unlikely to help heal relations between Downing Street and France, reported to be at an all-time low.
Mr Major and President Mitterrand have not spoken for weeks, relaying any necessary messages through Germany's Chancellor Helmut Kohl.
Employment Minister Michael Forsyth told the Commons yesterday that May Day is to be scrapped.
It will be replaced either by Trafalgar Day in October or an extra day tacked on to the existing August Bank Holiday.
Mr Forsyth said: ‘May Day has attracted criticism since its inception.’
Privately, Downing Street says Trafalgar Day will win the vote to be introduced during 1995.
In London last night, a French Embassy spokesman said: ‘This is a decision for the British Government.
We have nothing to say.’
Push for poll
THE Government was put under fresh pressure yesterday to hold a referendum on the Maastricht Treaty.
The cross-party calls came as MPs considered the treaty bill line by line.
Senior Euro-rebel Sir Teddy Taylor said people should have a say about ‘handing over’ their rights and freedoms.
‘Why, why, why can't we have a debate on a referendum?’ he asked.
Chairman Michael Morris said a debate was out of order, but hinted it may be permitted later.
Labour's Dennis Skinner joined in the calls.
‘It's high time that the voice of the British people was heard in this House,’ he said.
What a fowl-up
DAVID MELLOR and Eldorado were in the running but the judges agreed there could be only one Turkey of the Year — the European Exchange Rate Mechanism.
It was named the biggest flop of 1992 by the British Turkey Federation which presents the award at an annual charity luncheon.
Comedian Rod Hull and Emu, representing European Monetary Union, collected the award on behalf of EC Commissioner Jacques Delors, who apparently answered ‘Non’ to an invitation to attend.
The fall from grace of Heritage Secretary Mr Mellor earned him joint second place with the BBC's ratings disaster Eldorado.
Home tax ‘flood’ for town halls
MILLIONS of families are expected to appeal against the valuations of their houses for council tax.
They yesterday found out which rating band their houses had been placed in for the new tax, which starts next April.
Officially, the Government has been expecting up to one million appeals.
But the Association of Metropolitan Authorities called that ‘an underestimate’ and more than two million appeals are predicted.
Taxpayers' anger is expected to be hottest in London and the southeast, where property values have collapsed since they were assessed 21 months ago.
‘If people think there has been a mistake, they have a right to appeal,’ Environment Secretary Michael Howard said yesterday.
But there can be no appeal on the grounds that a house is worth less than when it was valued.
Defending the use of out-of-date prices, he said: ‘You cannot levy tax from April 1, 1993 and make your valuations on March 31.’
True values, he insisted, don't matter.
Tax depends on relative worth.
27 hurt by office bomb
Joe Oliver in Belfast
TERRIFIED office workers hurled furniture through windows in a bid to escape the flames licking around them after an IRA bomb blast yesterday.
Twenty-seven people including a pregnant shop assistant were injured in the Belfast attack.
A warning phonecall said the bomb would go off in 15 minutes, but the device exploded just 90 seconds later in the stairwell of the Catholic-owned office complex.
The ground floor was devastated and 20 workers were trapped by flames.
Two escaped down a drainpipe.
Firefighters winched others to safety.
‘Office girls were screaming uncontrollably and walking about in a daze with blood pouring from them,’ said witness Helen Millican.
One badly burned man was last night fighting for his life in hospital.
Cliff admits: ‘I'll never wed’
CLIFF Richard has admitted he will probably never marry.
‘I'm not averse to marriage but I don't believe I'll ever do it’ the singer, 52, told Woman's Own magazine.
‘I'm not homosexual or asexual.
I've been in love and fallen out of love so I know how it feels to have been divorced without the formalities.’
Burglars torture man, 80
A FRAIL pensioner was tied up and tortured in his bed by masked raiders.
Leonard Perkes, 80, was beaten, jabbed with a screwdriver and had his toes cut with a knife.
He gave up his £60 pension money but the men continued to torture him at his home in Basingstoke, Hants.
One sat on Mr Perkes while the other put the knife to his throat before he told them where his dead wife's jewellery was hidden.
The thugs fled, threatening to kill him if he called police.
Judge frees wife killer
A MAN who killed his cheating wife walked free yesterday after a judge heard how he had dedicated his life to his family.
Taxi driver Dermot Smith stabbed his wife Norma, 45, four times after she taunted him about his sexual performance compared to her lover.
He then made a botched but ‘genuine’ suicide attempt, later telling police he had ‘killed the only person he had ever loved’, Preston Crown Court was told.
Smith, 44, of Hyde, Cheshire, who had been married to Norma for 23 years, snapped when she told him she wanted him out of the house and made ‘unflattering comparisons’ between him and her lover, Kenneth Ormiston.
‘He dedicated himself to his marriage and never once questioned his wife's loyalty,’ said Richard Henriques QC, defending.
Smith admitted manslaughter on the grounds of diminished responsibility.
Placing him on three years' probation, Mr Justice Hodgson said: ‘This is a tragic case.
It would be wrong in principle to pass a prison sentence.’
Whopping pay packet for Whoopi
COMEDY star Whoopi Goldberg has trebled her money to make a sequel to the hit film Sister Act.
She will be paid £4.5 million for the follow-up, compared with the £1.5 million she got for her first Disney singing-nun movie.
Sister Act has already grossed £150 million around the world.
In the sequel, Whoopi will play a nun who helps a gospel choir in a city slum.
Filming starts next spring.
‘I'll fight palace ban’
A BLIND computer expert yesterday vowed to beat the Buckingham Palace ban on guide dogs.
‘I don't see any reason why a dog should have been a problem,’ said Dr Julia Schofield after collecting her MBE from the Queen.
The 40-year-old scientist had to leave her labrador Amber in an office because the Palace argues that guide dogs would get in the way at complex investiture ceremonies.
She had hoped to raise the matter with the Queen but ran out of time.
Theft shock kills woman
A MOTHER who returned home to find she had been burgled, collapsed and died minutes after the discovery.
Sarah Farrell, 59, had been visiting her daughter who lives nearby in Darlington, Co.
Durham.
She ran to a neighbour for help when she found her front door bolted.
Mrs Farrell complained of feeling unwell and collapsed after noticing her remote control TV was missing.
Police say the shock of the burglary could have caused her death.
Mrs Farrell, who lived alone with her dog, had five grown-up children.
Jennifer Ehle
NEWCOMER Jennifer Ehle, who graduated from drama school only two years ago, won Best New TV Actress In A Drama for The Camomile Lawn.
The 23-year-old played Calypso in Channel 4's steamy story set during Second World War.
Girl drops bid to divorce parents
Nick Craven
A SCHOOLGIRL yesterday dropped a legal bid to divorce her parents after she made up with her mother.
The 14-year-old had asked the High Court to rule that she could live with her boyfriend's family.
The deal was struck after talks between lawyers and Official Solicitor David Venables.
But it is not yet known whether the teenager is returning to her mother or remaining with her 18-year-old boyfriend's family.
The girl lived with her divorced mother in London.
She went to her boyfriend's in Surrey when her father planned to move back.
Sir Stephen Brown in the Family Division said: ‘This is not a wilful young lady seeking to assert independence.
This is a troubled girl who felt pressures at home.
She needed help.’
In October the girl won an order under the 1989 Children's Act to stop her parents forcing her home.
Market surges to new peak
HOPES for an end to the recession rose yesterday after the London Stock Exchange soared to a new high.
An extra £2 billion flooded into the market as the top 100 share index rose by over 13 points.
High Street stores including Marks & Spencer, Boots and Argos were among the best performers in trading on hopes that consumer spending is at last picking up.
One dealer said: ‘It looks as though we'll enter the New Year on the crest of a wave.’
Axe to fall on 610 more jobs
BRITAIN'S biggest regional electricity company has cut 450 jobs because of falling trade.
Suffolk-based Eastern Electricity, which last year made £157 million profit, has asked 1,700 workers aged over 50 to apply for early retirement.
‘We see these job losses as a kick in the teeth,’ said a spokesman for the Amalgamated Engineering and Electricians' Union.
Norweb, the Manchester-based electricity company, is to redeploy 159 workers from its electrical contracting business because of the slump in the construction industry.
They will be re-trained and transferred to other parts of the country in the New Year.
A company spokesman stressed there would be no redundancies.
Fine china maker Wedgwood is to shed 160 jobs when it shuts the Johnson Brothers' Hanley Pottery in Stoke-on-Trent.
Managers have warned another 250 could go.
Group chairman Kneale Ashwell said the deepening world recession had left them with no option but to cut jobs.
Gummer quits church over vote
LEADING Tory John Gummer quit the Church of England yesterday over its move to bring in women priests.
The Agriculture Secretary is the most senior politician in the church's General Synod.
‘I cannot continue as a member of a body which pretends it has power to make priests without the authority of scripture or tradition,’ he said.
‘Nothing in creeds or orders is safe from any two-thirds majority.’
1,000lb bomb in West End
THE IRA planned to rip the heart out of the West End last night with a 1,000lb bomb.
The terrorists home-made device was discovered in a van just yards from the packed Dominion Theatre.
A detonator had failed to set it off.
Police said after the bomb was made safe that it was ‘either a sheer fluke or a bloody miracle’ that London had escaped carnage.
IRA drive van bomb into heart of London
Bob Graham and Adrian Lee
IRA terrorists coolly drove a bomb packed with 1,000lbs of explosives through rush-hour traffic and into the heart of London last night.
It was timed to explode just 30 minutes later but because of a blunder the detonator failed to explode — the capital's second lucky escape in just 16 days.
The terrorists dumped the Ford Transit van with its deadly cargo on double yellow lines off Tottenham Court Road, just 100 yards from the Dominion Theatre where a performance was in full-swing.
They then made two coded telephone warnings to Scotland Yard at 8pm claiming there were four bombs planted in a one-mile radius of the West End which were set to explode at about 8.30pm.
One police source said last night: ‘They gave us 30 minutes to find four separate devices in a huge area like that.
‘The vagueness of such a warning, we believe, was callous and designed to confuse and cause as much damage as possible.’
Streets stretching from Oxford Street to Euston Station were sealed off and three tube stations were shut.
Theatres, cinemas and restaurants in the area were also evacuated as police launched a frantic search and found the B-registration van.
Hundreds of thousands of people travelling home or heading out for the evening were caught up in the ensuing chaos.
Two hours after the explosions were due, bomb disposal experts moved in.
They made a first controlled explosion on the van at 10.10pm.
That blasted off a window and they discovered the deadly load.
A second controlled explosion at 10.55pm made the bomb safe.
A final controlled blast was made in the early hours of this morning.
Police sources said it was the detonator — with a small package of Semtex at its core — which failed to ignite and set off the bags of nitrate-based fertiliser which were packed into the rear of the van.
Chief Superintendent Paul Green of Holborn Police said at the scene last night: ‘The only thing that can be said about the target is that it was in one of London's main streets at a very busy time.
‘The potential was enormous in terms of injury and deaths to the public.’
Businessman Paul Jarvis, who heard last night's blasts, said: ‘There were about three huge bangs, I have never heard anything like it.
‘It sounded to me as if there was a lot of explosives in the van.
It would have meant utter devastation.’
Sales manager Richard Stallworthy was working at PNR AudioVision in Tottenham Court Road when the area was evacuated.
He said: ‘The van was not there at 6pm but I noticed it a little bit later.
It was just sitting there with its headlights on and the battery was running down.
‘Then the police came along and told us we should stay inside and keep away from the windows.
I decided it wasn't a good place to be and left straightaway.
‘The police were searching the whole area but then they seemed to realise that it must be the van.’
Police are appealing for witnesses who may have seen the van being parked to come forward.
They have also appealed for help in tracing the blue van's movements since it was sold privately three weeks ago.
The registration number is B706 DVX.
Much of the West End was still sealed off early today as police combed the area for more bombs.
Just 16 days ago a one-ton van bomb dumped at East London's massive office development Canary Wharf also failed to explode although experts have been unable to find any fault.
A one-ton bomb intended for the Lord Mayor's parade the previous day was also foiled when an alert police officer discovered a lorry full of explosives.
Anti-terrorist squad officers have been on maximum alert for several months and have been expecting ‘a spectacular’ IRA bomb in the run-up to Christmas.
The terrorist organisation has said that so far it has simply been ‘unlucky’.
Pop star Lynsey trapped by rape doctor
Christian Gysin and Karen Mellor
POP star Lynsey de Paul was lured into the surgery of depraved Harley Street rapist Doctor Thomas Courtney.
She told TODAY last night: ‘He came to my home when I was alone and I went to his surgery.
‘It's chilling and frightening to realise I could have been one of his victims.’
Lynsey, glamorous singer-songwriter, met Courtney after a friend gave him her telephone number.
And she was subjected to the same technique Courtney used to ensnare women he assaulted after offering them drugged wine.
He made persistent phone calls to Lynsey, visited her home, invited her to drinks and dinner — and trapped her in his surgery when he was alone.
After his first phone call he turned up at Lynsey's north London home only hours later.
He suggested he drive her to his Harley Street surgery as they chatted on a quiet Bank Holiday Monday last year.
The petite blonde star refused to go in his car and drove her own vehicle to his central London offices.
Other staff had long since gone home.
And as she was shown around his premises he offered her a glass of wine.
Lynsey, a non-drinker, refused.
‘I'm just grateful I was assertive enough to escape,’ she said.
Major in Trafalgar showdown
Eben Black
PREMIER John Major is preparing for a showdown with France over the crucial Gatt trade deal.
Despite violent protests by 40,000 missile-throwing farmers yesterday, he will not accept a ‘non’ from President Francois Mitterrand at the Edinburgh summit later this month.
The French government has threatened to veto the vital agreement if its agriculture demands are not met.
During a visit to Spain yesterday, Mr Major said: ‘I do not anticipate us failing to agree.
All of us recognise the importance of reaching agreement.’
In Strasbourg, thousands of protesting farmers ripped up paving slabs, trees and street signs to hurl at riot police who responded with teargas.
Farmers fear their livelihoods are threatened by Gatt cuts in agriculture.
Meanwhile, Mr Major is ready to deliver a second snub to France by replacing May Day with a new October bank holiday, Trafalgar Day, to celebrate Admiral Nelson's historic naval victory in 1805.
Norman's bill mystery grows
THE mystery of Chancellor Norman Lamont's off licence visit deepened yesterday when the store claimed price tags had been changed to back bogus allegations.
Thresher manager David Newton and assistant John Onanuga are suspended on full pay for ‘inventing’ a story that they sold him Champagne at £15.49 and Raffles cigarettes at £1.98.
The bill, for £17.47, matched the Chancellor's Access card statement.
But yesterday the company said the Raffles cigarettes sold in the shop were £2.02, not £1.98, and therefore did not add up to £17.47, implying that the two men changed the display price to suit their story.
It said the chain sold the cigarettes at four prices throughout the country — £1.92, £1.94, £1.96 or £2.02, but not £1.98.
Council tax bands fury
MILLIONS of families are expected to appeal against the valuations of their houses for council tax.
They yesterday found out which rating band their homes were in for the tax which starts next April.
Officially, the Government has been expecting up to one million appeals.
But the Association of Metropolitan Authorities predicted more than two million would complain.
Taxpayers' anger is expected to be hottest in London and the South East, where property values have collapsed since they were assessed 21 months ago.
‘If people think there has been a mistake, they can appeal,’ said Environment Secretary Michael Howard yesterday.
But there can be no appeal on the grounds that a house is worth less than when it was valued.
Diana spreads word to deaf
PRINCESS Diana let her fingers do the talking yesterday as she launched Britain's first sign language dictionary.
She told an audience of deaf and hearing people: ‘I am very happy to be here at the launch of the dictionary and I hope it will help people to greater interaction.’
Diana, who is patron of the British Deaf Association, won warm praise for her use of the complicated communication technique.
Deaf people in the audience waved their hands in the air — the sign for applause.
‘She has obviously been practising hard,’ said a BDA spokeswoman.
In a foreward to the book, The Dictionary of British Sign Language ‘English’, Diana wrote: ‘As a consequence of my involvement with deaf people, I have become aware of the richness of BSL as a distinctive and inedependent language.’
She stayed behind at the launch at London's City Livery Company to chat to organisers and watched youngsters play a word game using the dictionary.
The book took 10 years to compile by a Durham University team.
It will be available in the New Year.
Why I will always buy British, by actor Tom
Ivan Waterman, Showbiz Editor
ACTOR Tom Conti is doing his bit to help the ailing economy by buying only British goods.
He regularly hunts through supermarket shelves for home produced items after deciding six months ago to boycott foreign products.
‘I only wear British clothes and I'm extremely glad to be advertising a British car on TV, the Vauxhall Astra,’ he said yesterday.
‘It's completely disgraceful and depressing that we buy so many foreign products when there are British alternatives.
Nobody cares any more.
‘I would turn down ads for foreign foods if I was offered them,’ added the Scottish-born actor, who owns a Jaguar and a Rolls Royce.
The trouble with the EC was that Britons obeyed the rules while the Europeans bent them, he said.
‘We're too naive and everybody else cheats.’
Conti, of Hampstead, north London, was speaking at the unveiling of the BBC's £27 million package of films, comedy and drama to pull in viewers over the festive period.
Topping the list will be the film Shirley Valentine, in which he co-stars with Pauline Collins, to be screened on Christmas day.
Other favourites include Del and Rodney who go ‘green’ to help save Peckham in Only Fools and Horses.
Veteran Agatha Christie sleuth Miss Marple, played by Joan Hickson, takes on her final case in The Mirror Crack'd.
Even Eldorado gets in on the act and two episodes of EastEnders will be screened, one on Christmas Eve and the other on Christmas Day.
Lenny Henry, Victoria Wood and Harry Enfield have special shows and Bruce Forsyth celebrates 50 years in showbusiness with his friends.
Viewers can also see Birds of a Feather, Last of the Summer Wine and Jasper Carrot.
Ian McShane's roguish antique dealer Lovejoy goes to Prague in search of treasures, Casualty gears up for a busy time and on BBC2 Robbie Coltrane and Fiona Fullerton star in The Bogie Man, about a dangerous fantasist who escapes from a Glasgow hospital.
Michelle Pfeiffer appears in three box office blockbusters on BBC2, Dangerous Liaisons, The Fabulous Baker Boys and Married to the Mob.
A total of 24 top films will be screened over the festive period by both BBC channels.
These include Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade, with Harrison Ford and Sean Connery, Twins starring Arnold Schwarzenegger, When Harry Met Sally, and Dead Calm with Nicole Kidman.
Charles to go it alone on American visit
PRINCE Charles is to visit the United States and Mexico next year — alone.
The announcement fuelled rumours that Charles and Diana's tour of South Korea last month was their last joint tour.
The couple appeared particularly ill at ease with each other.
Buckingham Palace stressed yesterday that the solo trip was nothing unusual, as Charles and Diana have a full individual diary each year.
Charles will visit Williamsburg, Virginia, for the 300th anniversary of the College of William and Mary, of which he is an honorary fellow.
£2m BBC plug for ITV rival
BBC2 is giving over a whole night's programmes to a £2 million tribute to ITV rival Granada.
The channel will celebrate the history of Manchester-based station on December 28.
The tribute includes a 1960s episode of Coronation Street and the comedy Nearest and Dearest.
BBC2 controller Alan Yentob said: ‘It's a fascinating story about a family business which led to the formation of the commercial network.’
CORONATION Street favourite Vera Duckworth saved a couple's dream cruise after they lost their luggage.
Vera, actress Liz Dawn, offered her own wardrobe to district nurse Diana Davies, cruising the Caribbean with husband Rex.
‘She was wonderful,’ said Diana, of Exeter, Devon.
Cash row boss quits
THE BBC's finance director has quit just two months after accounting errors led to an overspending of £20 million.
Ian Phillips resigned as the BBC's audit-committee launched an investigation.
The quality of programmes may now be affected as cash cuts to offset the overspending are needed.
‘Ian has decided to pursue other activities,’ said a BBC spokesman yesterday.
River Avon floods
The River Avon, having swollen to ten times its usual size, floods Hilperton, near Trowbridge, Wilts.
Its usual course flows from above the lorry park, round the trees and down to the lower bridge which marks its normal width.
Cars at the bottom have to use roads awash with water to cross the appropriately named Hilperton Marsh.
Bomb terror in the West End
THE IRA planted a bomb in the heart of London last night, bringing the West End to a standstill.
The device, discovered inside a Ford Transit van, was made safe after controlled explosions carried out by bomb squad officers.
A coded telephone warning led police to the van in Tottenham Court Road, just 100 yards from the Dominion Theatre where a performance was in full-swing.
An area stretching from Oxford Street to Euston Station was sealed off and bomb squad officers carried out a first controlled explosion at 10.10pm.
The blast blew the window off the van and bomb disposal experts found a device planted inside.
A second controlled explosion was carried out at 10.55pm and people were told to stay up to a mile away from the scene.
By late last night, the size of the bomb was still not known.
Mr Kipper warning to house girls
WOMEN estate agents are being lured to empty homes by a man copying the methods of the mysterious Mr Kipper who snatched Suzy Lamplugh six years ago.
Posing as a London businessman, he has already tricked at least two female estate agents in the North into meeting him alone.
Police say his victims ignored the risks because they were so desperate to make a sale after the slump hit their business.
Golf club fined for watering greens as country floods
Matthew Benns
A GOLF course was fined for watering its greens yesterday as most of them disappeared under rainwater.
As the heavens continued to pour down water, Hermon and Martin Bond, owners of the championship St Mellion course near Saltash, Cornwall, were fined £150 each for taking water without a licence.
Anthony Daniel, defending, said: ‘It is ironic.
We are here today talking about a tiny amount of water when in the past seven days billions of gallons have descended upon us.
‘St Mellion is absolutely awash.
Some of the greens are capable of sustaining fish.
There is so much water it is unbelievable.’
Weathermen yesterday warned there would be no respite from the deluge.
Heavy rain driven by gales predicted for last night was forecast to continue for much of today.
But water chiefs were still saying we have not got over the drought.
The worst hit areas yesterday were the South West and Wales.
Flooding disrupted rail services in three areas of Devon and Cornwall where flood warnings were issued on 33 rivers.
One flow contaminated with metals was still gushing from the disused Wheal Jane tin mine into the River Carnon, Cornwall.
The river Exe on the outskirts of Exeter was so high that it was too dangerous for trains to use bridges and flooding closed two other lines.
In the South-west many towns and villages were saved from serious damage overnight by a £100 million network of flood defence schemes, though thousands of homeowners are still on alert.
It was a similar story in Wales.
As disrupted transport services were getting back to normal and thousands mopped up, police issued a warning of two more inches of rain last night whipped up by 60 mph winds lasting until this afternoon.
A spokesman for the local NRA said: ‘Another downpour could send the rivers over the top.’
In Dorset pounding waves breached the famous Chesil Beach natural shingle sea defence.
Now it is a race against time to rebuild it before high spring ties later this month.
At West Bay a £25,000 flood protection scheme was launched to keep water out of 30 homes.
Bristol Rovers soccer boss Malcolm Allison arrived at his team's training ground at Keynsham yesterday to find pitches under two feet of water.
He said: ‘We should be having swimming training, there are ducks on the pitch.’
In Birmingham water caused an explosion in an electricity sub-station which cut supplies to 3,000 homes.
Five couples were marooned in their caravans on a holiday site at Offenham near Evesham, Worcs, when the Avon broke its banks.
At Frampton Cotterell near Bristol, Avon, a canoeist was plucked to safety after being swept away in the fast-flowing River Frome.
The man, in his 20s, clung to an overhanging tree when his damaged craft was in danger of carrying him to his death over a raging weir.
Firemen and a passer-by dragged him to the bank after cutting his trapped legs free from the canoe.
A man in Chippenham, Wilts, had to clamber on the roof of his car after being marooned by floods.
He was rescued after waving for help.
In Taunton, Somerset, as many as 200 sheep were swept to their deaths when the River Tone burst its banks after rising eight feet overnight.
Firemen waded through waist-high water to pluck 50 more to safety.
In Lydney, Glos, a group of pensioners were evacuated when a ‘tidal wave’ swept down their road sending 18 inches of water into their homes.
The NRA is on constant flood alert.
It said the deluge had eased the drought caused by several years of dry winters but had not ended it.
A spokesman said: ‘The problem with heavy rainfall and flash floods is that a lot of it runs away before it can soak through to the underground aquifers.’
Bear a thought for the locals in the Sutton District Water Company area on the edge of London — they are still under a sprinkler ban.
No let-up in sight
PEOPLE mopping up their homes were yesterday warned the heavy rains could continue until after the weekend.
‘There is going to be no let up,’ said TODAY weatherman Philip Eden.
‘Overnight gales and rain will continue today and those areas which have already been flooded in Wales and the West will be hit again.
There will be more rain in Wales and south-west England with up to two inches on the hills and high ground.
This could lead to flash flooding in the valleys which have already been badly hit.’
Four inches of rain have fallen in four days in the south-west, making it the region's soggiest November since 1940 and Britain's wettest autumn since 1984.
‘The disturbed weather will continue as far as the eye can see,’ said Philip.
Divorce plea teenager, 14 makes it up with mother
Nick Craven
A SCHOOLGIRL yesterday dropped a legal bid to divorce her parents after she kissed and made up with her mum.
The 14-year-old girl had asked the High Court to rule that she could live with her boyfriend's family.
The friendly deal was struck after lengthy negotiations between lawyers and Official Solicitor David Venables, the girl's court-appointed guardian.
But because the case was heard in private it is not known whether the teenager is returning to her mother or remaining with her 18-year-old boyfriend's family.
Her parents are divorced and she lived with her mother in London.
But when there was talk of a reconciliation and her father moving back, she went to stay with her boyfriend in Surrey.
Head of the court's family division, Sir Stephen Brown, said: ‘This is not a case of a wilful young lady seeking to assert her independence.
‘This is a troubled girl who felt pressures at home.
She needed help.’
The sensitive girl had a bright future after kissing and making up, he added.
She suffers from a hereditary high-cholesterol condition and was under severe stress when she walked out.
In October the girl won a temporary order under the 1989 Children's Act, which gives youngsters more say in their future, barring her parents from forcing her to return.
The case is just one of a spate reaching court after September's ruling in America in which 12-year-old Gregory Kingsley won a divorce from his mother.
Last month a 12-year-old Devon girl became the first in Britain to win an order allowing her to live with her grandparents.
An 11-year-old Leeds girl is attempting to divorce her parents, accusing her mother of treating her like a slave.
A nine-year-old boy and his sister, 11, who live with their grandparents in Reading, Berks are trying to stop their mother embarrassing them by turning up drunk at the school gates.
Cooper's gloves off for burglars
FORMER boxing champ Henry Cooper yesterday threatened to ‘break the legs’ of the burglars who stole his wife's jewellery in a Pounds 16,000 raid.
‘I'd make sure they would never do this again,’ said the still fit 58-year-old.
Thieves broke into his home in West Hendon, north London, last Sunday.
Topping the pops
MORE than 52 million single records were sold in Britain last year, nearly one for every man, woman and child in the country.
Sales of 0.98 singles per head put Britain well ahead of every other country.
Japan, in second place, sold just 0.71 for every person.
America trailed eighth in the singles stakes.
Biggest buyers were the eight million pop fans aged between 12 and 25, says a report by Music Business International.
Lady Sarah's unlucky in love again
LOVE turned sour for Lady Sarah Graham-Moon for the second time this year.
The woman who gave away her straying husband's vintage wine and poured paint on his BMW was caught speeding in Love Lane near her home.
Lady Sarah, 55, of Lambourn Woodlands, Berks, drove at 47mph in a 30mph area.
Sentence was adjourned yesterday.
She said later: ‘I gave the officer a ticking-off for calling me love.’
Job offer for mercy doctor
MERCY death doctor Nigel Cox has been offered a job at another hospital.
Dr Cox, 47, who gave a dying patient a lethal injection, would not name the hospital yesterday.
‘It's not as attractive as my old position,’ he said.
He has the option of returning to Winchester's Royal Hampshire County Hospital under certain conditions.
Clean car
BRITAIN'S ‘greenest’ car is the Subaru Vivio 660cc which has only just gone on sale.
The £6,697 vehicle shared first place with the Volkswagen Polo deisel in a list by the Environmental Transport Association.
Schoolboy, 11 is cleared of killing widow
Cheryl Stonehouse
THE youngest defendant to appear in the dock at the Old Bailey in more than 150 years was cleared yesterday of killing a blind 93-year-old widow.
The 11-year-old, who was barely able to see over the dock rail, looked frightened as he pleaded not guilty to the manslaughter of Rosetta Fort.
His mother sat beside him in the dock holding his hand throughout the short hearing.
The prosecution decided not to proceed because medical experts could not be certain what caused Mrs Fort's death.
Martin Heslop, prosecuting, said: ‘I do not feel I can ask a jury to convict with the measure of certainty required.’
On hearing the decision the boy leapt up and hugged his mother.
He was restrained as he tried to rush from the dock before the judge left the court.
The boy was finally allowed to run across the courtroom and threw his arms around his barrister, Mr George Kyatt, QC, and said: ‘I'm glad.
Thank you.’
Mrs Fort, of Dagenham, Essex, died last year, five days after being punched and kicked by a boy who knocked on her door asking if he could search her garden for a lost football.
The boy was arrested and has since been in care because of ill-feelings in Mrs Fort's community.
He is expected to be returned to his family.
Outside court his mother said: ‘I am relieved.’
The dead woman's daughter, Joyce Gale, 71, was led away sobbing.
‘Nothing will bring mum back anyway,’ she said.
‘I'm so upset I just can't stop crying.’
Jail attack on Nikki suspect
THE man accused of murdering schoolgirl Nikki Allen has been stabbed in the forehead.
George Heron, 23, had to have four stitches after being slashed on the forehead by an inmate in Durham jail.
He had appeared on remand accused of killing the seven-year-old girl the previous day.
Heron was arrested six weeks after Nikki's body was found in a derelict warehouse near her home in Sunderland, Tyne & Wear.
Three weeks ago another prisoner in Durham, with the same surname, was found hanged in his cell after being mistaken for the alleged killer.
Fly like a virgin (pilot that is)
Ellis Plaice, Aviation Correspondent
TYCOON Richard Branson yesterday came up with the Christmas present for the person who has everything — the chance to pilot a jumbo jet.
Taking off from London's Heathrow you can pilot a 300-ton Boeing 747-200 to New York, landing on the runway of JF Kennedy Airport.
Or you can head for Hong Kong, and circle the island's skyscrapers.
Beware, though.
There is always the chance you might encounter storms, even an engine fire.
But if you do land with a thud, you'll still be fit enough to manage a post-flight pint in the local.
For what the Virgin Atlantic boss is offering is the ultimate video game.
He is giving the public the chance to experience Virgin's flight simulators at the company's £3 million pilot training centre at Burgess Hill, West Sussex.
The recently bought simulators will be used to teach pilots from Virgin and other airlines who might otherwise have to spend thousands for training from American companies.
But Branson, 42, does not want the simulators sitting idle and sees them as a new money-spinner.
Simulated flights are being sold at around £200-an-hour from early next year.
Video pictures capable of reproducing flight conditions and any city skyline or airport in the world are projected onto windshields to make a flight seem just like the real thing.
During taxi manoeuvres and take-off the pictures will show ground views to get those at the controls set for a flight to remember.
The simulators can even be programmed to fly the Atlantic at night.
If pilots do get into trouble an instructor will be on hand to put them right.
Those who do not fancy long haul can share short flights between two or three budding pilots.
Deals are also being offered to companies as alternative incentive perks to top performers.
Virgin hopes a day in the cockpit will become as popular as a day at the races for company gatherings.
Budding pilots will go through briefings just like the trained professionals.
‘As they strap in for holiday flights, how many people imagine themselves at the controls?’ said a Virgin spokesman.
‘The simulator will even smell just like the real thing.
We expect plenty of interest from those who want to make an unforgettable gift to their partners.’
Danger of coma victim decision
DOCTORS would be handed dangerous powers if they were allowed to starve patients to death, Appeal Court judges were warned yesterday.
The three judges must decide whether Hillsborough coma victim Tony Bland should be allowed to die as his parents wish.
‘Whether a patient's life is valuable or not is none of a doctor's business,’ James Munby QC for the Official Solicitor told them.
‘If he once permits such considerations to influence his actions, the doctor will become the most dangerous man in the state.’
A court ruled two weeks ago that Tony, 21, who has been in a coma for 3½ years, could have his feeding tube removed.
But the Official Solicitor immediately launched an appeal.
Robert Francis QC, for the Airedale National Health Trust which cares for Tony, told the court yesterday he objected to the term starving to death.
‘The proposed course would not result in doctors starving Tony to death, but in failing to avert his death,’ he said.
The case continues.
Elbow in face was ‘normal’
A FOOTBALLER who elbowed an opponent in the face, shattering his cheekbone, made an ‘ordinary aerial challenge,’ a top soccer official told a court yesterday.
Football Association chief executive Graham Kelly, giving evidence for the defence, told Salisbury Crown Court he could see 200 similar clashes in a week by watching just four matches.
Brentford striker Gary Blissett, 28, who denies causing grievous bodily harm to Torquay United defender John Uzzell, said the incident was just an accident.
The jury was shown a video of the clash during a Third Division game on December 14 last year, which left Mr Uzzell with a broken cheekbone and a fractured eye socket floor.
The prosecution alleges that Blissett ‘cynically and deliberately’ thrust his elbow into his opponent's face during a mid-air duel for the ball.
But Blisset, of Rickmansworth, Herts, told the jury: ‘No that's completely wrong.
I wanted to win the ball.’
The striker, married with two young daughters, said there had been no unpleasantness or ‘aggravation’ before the game.
The trial continues today.
Diets a fat lot of good
LOW fat diets do not significantly cut blood cholesterol, a health expert claimed yesterday.
They can also cause stress for individuals and their families, said Professor Larry Ramsay.
He said the diets, recommended by many GPs, have little impact on blood fats — believed to contribute to heart disease.
Mr Ramsay, a heart specialist at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital in Sheffield, urged people to avoid DIY testing kits.
‘Knowing your cholesterol level can turn healthy individuals into worried patients,’ he said.
Think young
MEDITATION can make you feel up to 10 years younger, says a new study, published in the Journal of Behavioral Medicine, which measured hormone levels in more than 1,600 people.
Sack for a handcuff prankster
A COMPUTER expert was sacked when he handcuffed himself to his woman boss while she was on the phone to a customer.
Genaro Santagata, 33, refused to free 32-year-old Joanne Cooper as soon as she complained.
Next day he was fired from his job as a £25,000-a-year programmer for Nexus Payments, of Welwyn Garden City, Herts.
‘In my view, he committed an assault by restraining Miss Cooper against her will,’ computer services manager Sandra Lord told a London industrial tribunal yesterday.
‘I am sure the customer could overhear something was wrong.’
Miss Cooper said that Mr Santagata told her it was just a joke.
‘He did not appreciate that his colleague had not taken it that way,’ she added.
‘I thought dismissal the appropriate reaction, as he had refused to obey a reasonable request from a senior member of staff.’
Mr Santagata, of Greenford, Middlesex, lost a claim for unfair dismissal.
Tribunal chairman David Williams said the employers had acted reasonably.
Girl crushed by goalpost
A GIRL was crushed to death by a falling goal post as she played football with her brother, an inquest heard yesterday.
Emma Butler, 12, was at a sports day with her family in May when the accident happened at the European School for children of nuclear scientists near Abingdon in Oxon.
Emma tried to run from the falling post, which weighed 120lb, but tripped and fell.
Verdict: Accident.
Flying cow wrecks car
A COW plummeted 10ft on to a car bonnet yesterday after leaping a guard rail while escaping from an auction.
Shocked driver Shaun Robinson crashed into a fence, writing off his Capri, but escaped injury.
The animal bounced back to its feet only to be killed by a bus.
Student Shaun, 23, was driving home in Newcastle upon Tyne when the cow crashed onto his bonnet.
He said: ‘My insurance company will never believe I was hit by a flying cow.’
Rain row cricket bosses face bill for £250,000
Rob Perkins
FIVE cricket fans, refused a ticket refund when an England game was rained off, were celebrating a test case victory yesterday.
More than £250,000 gate money was taken for the second day of the June test against Pakistan, and the decision could open the floodgates for other claims.
Only two balls had been bowled when play was cancelled.
Disappointment turned to disbelief among the 18,000 crowd packed into Edgbaston when they were told they would not get a refund.
Cricketing authorities ruled ticket money could only be reclaimed if there was no play.
But trading standards officers Peter Pawlowski, David Ravenscroft, Kevin Mitchell and Tony Quigley plus pal David Smith decided it just was not cricket.
And they took their case to the small claims court.
A judge yesterday made a unique ruling against Warwickshire County Cricket Club that could have repercussions in all sports.
He decided the five were entitled to their £13 ticket money back plus £7 costs.
Delighted Mr Mitchell, 32, from Birmingham, said: ‘Ours was a victory for the paying customer.
‘The terms for refunds were on the back of our tickets which meant we did not see them until after we had made the purchase.’
Warwickshire refused to comment.
The Test and County Cricket Board were last night seeking urgent talks with major counties to consider an appeal.
Grieving family evicted
THE grieving family of a New Age traveller killed in a road accident was evicted yesterday.
Sarah Duncombe's two children and boyfriend Adrian Foster were among the last to be moved off a disused farm in Ibstock, Leics.
The travellers were reprieved two weeks ago after Sarah's death.
She was killed in Nottinghamshire while trying to get help after her car ran into a ditch.
Her children Rohan, three, and Jasmine, 18 months, were left strapped into the back of the car.
Ginnie prescribes drugs shake-up
PATIENTS will be able to write their own prescriptions as part of a plan to cut the £3 billion NHS drugs bill.
Many drugs will be available over the counter instead of by doctor's order only, Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley told the Medical Journalists' Association in London yesterday.
The changes should reduce the 150 tonnes of unwanted medicines that are thrown away every year.
‘The volume of unused medicines in the nation's bathroom cabinets is a serious problem,’ she said.
The drive to take more medicines off the prescription-only list is part of the Government's aim to make people more responsible for their own health.
Mrs Bottomley also warned the drug companies that the prices of medicine would be closely watched.
Maybe this one will float, say pensioners
HUNDREDS of pensioners yesterday took a 16ft-high blow-up Robert Maxwell on parade to demand tough new laws protecting retirement funds.
Angry trades unions and pensioners' action groups launched their own ‘national charter’ calling for trustees to be elected by scheme members.
They also called for pension assets to be kept separate from company funds in the wake of the Daily Mirror scandal when Maxwell stole Pounds 400 million from his pensioners.
Brian Revell, of the Transport and General Workers Union, told their London conference: ‘We have a watchdog without teeth that cannot bark.’
Bill Day, of the GMB said: ‘We need a new Pensions Act to remove the climate of fear.’
Robert Maxwell's sons, Kevin and Ian, were yesterday remanded on bail until April 1 by City of London magistrates.
They face theft and conspiracy charges.
Wheelchair friend ‘killed rival for love’
Andrew Russell
A WHEELCHAIR-bound man beat his love rival to death after luring him into a field, a court heard yesterday.
Spina bifida victim Mo Langton has no use of his legs.
But he was able to propel himself along the ground ‘like a gorilla’.
Langton, 20, was besotted with the young wife of his victim, the jury was told.
He killed 19-year-old Walter Smith because he believed he had been mistreating his childhood friend Sharon.
After smashing Smith's skull with a hammer, Langton went to Sharon's house and said: ‘I did it for you,’ it was alleged.
She gave him rags to wipe off blood and soil from his body and helped him change out of his blood-stained clothes, the jury heard.
Prosecutor Michael Maguire said Langton and his accomplice Joseph Lee, 24, lured Mr Smith to the field near their homes in Blackpool in October last year.
Mr Smith was later found lying in the field making sounds like an injured animal.
‘He had suffered appalling injuries.
His teeth had been literally knocked down his throat.
‘His brain was bruised and many bones in his head were broken,’ Mr Maguire told Preston Crown Court.
Mr Smith died two days later in hospital.
The victim's father, Raymond Smith, said his son had been ‘good mates’ with both the accused men.
He told the jury: ‘Mo is disabled but he can crawl and he also has a car.
‘He moves by putting his fists down and dragging his legs behind him.
The propulsion comes from his shoulders.’
Walter Smith's sister Dawn said she visited her brother in hospital before he died and he had squeezed her hand when she asked: ‘Was it Mo?’
Langton and Lee both deny murder.
Sharon Smith, 23, denies perverting the course of justice.
The trial continues.
Rod Stewart selling luxury cars
ROCK star Rod Stewart is selling another of his luxury cars — a 15-year-old Porsche 911.
Rod sold a Lamborghini at auction this week for £61,500, a Pounds 73,500 loss.
His Porsche is in a showroom at Penn, Bucks, priced at £14,000.
Experts' advice on how to beat medical sex pest
Jackie Annesley
WITH women's trust in male doctors shattered by the Thomas Courtney case, a top consultant is advising patients to take extra care before letting a man conduct an intimate examination.
Joe Jordan, a spokesman for the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, says women should not allow doctors to carry out such examinations unless there is someone else in the room or close by — normally a nurse, relative or friend.
He says that a good doctor should always make the patient feel comfortable about examinations, but patients should also make sure that another person is on hand.
‘It is especially useful for them to have someone else at the surgery, not only for reassurance but to add to the discussion,’ he explains.
Mr Jordan's advice to any woman who thinks her doctor has behaved unprofessionally or asked her to do something humiliating is to refuse straightaway and report the incident.
If an incident takes place in a local GP's surgery, you should complain to the local Family Practitioner Committee, whose number will be in the Yellow Pages.
If the incident happens in a hospital, whether private or NHS, you should report the doctor to the hospital administrator.
‘If all else fails, make a complaint to the General Medical Council where all medical practitioners are registered,’ says Mr Jordan.
If you are seeking a consultant's advice, always check first that they belong to the appropriate governing body of their branch of medicine.
Thomas Courtney was not a member of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists.
Heseltine defies calls to quit in new pits fiasco
Russell Jenkins
MICHAEL Heseltine last night defied calls for his resignation after his pits closure plans turned into a fiasco.
The High Court granted a reprieve to the coal industry — and 30,000 miners — when Lord Justice Glidewell and Mr Justice Hidden ruled that plans to close 31 pits were illegal.
The Government and British Coal ‘unlawfully and irrationally ignored miners' rights’, they said.
The men had been denied the agreed consultation period.
Mr Heseltine, President of the Board of Trade, admitted the Government had ‘got it wrong’, but said he would not be resigning.
‘My position has not changed,’ he said on Channel 4.
‘Nothing today has added to or subtracted from the controversy of the closure announcement.’
He added that he may appoint independent assessors to review the viability of the 10 pits that have already been closed.
Shadow trade spokesman Robin Cook described the judgment as a humiliation for Mr Heseltine.
NUM leader Arthur Scargill said all 31 pits should now be kept open.
Joanna's tragic secret
Nick Craven and Bob Graham
TRAGIC aerobics teacher Joanna Grenside faked her own dramatic kidnap because she could not face Christmas.
The slim, attractive 25-year-old is believed to be suffering from the same bulimia eating disorder as the Princess of Wales.
Sad Joanna told detectives she dreaded the thought of eating and drinking at parties over the holiday period.
She broke down in tears and confessed to making up the story of how she was abducted and held by two men for 36 hours.
As a matter of police routine a report will be sent to the Director of Public Prosecution.
She could face a charge of wasting police time — but action is unlikely because of her illness.
‘Joanna has a medical problem,’ said Detective Superintendent Ian Whinnett, the officer in charge of the investigation.
‘She is clearly ill.’
Joanna staged her abduction a week ago.
She abandoned her car in the car park of Harpenden Leisure Centre, Hertfordshire, where she worked.
A rape-alarm siren was on the ground nearby — but detectives were puzzled because the car was locked.
And no one had seen or heard any struggle, although Joanna went missing shortly before 7pm last Tuesday, when she was due to take an aerobics class — and when the car park would have been busy.
A £100,000 nationwide search, involving a helicopter, was launched.
Joanna suddenly wandered into the leisure centre 36 hours later.
She had headed for Heathrow airport, not to fly anywhere but because she could be warm and alone.
Joanna worked at a casino in Australia with a nightclub singer who staged an identical disappearing act a year ago, it was revealed last night.
Fairlie Arrow, 28, who vanished in a publicity stunt to boost her career, was fined £2,300 plus £8,000 costs by a Queensland court for wasting police time.
Yesterday, Fairlie confirmed that her disappearance had occurred exactly a year before Joanna's, and added: ‘The coincidences between what I did and this affair in England are far too great to dismiss.’
Joanna's ex-boyfriend, Frank Tadgell, spoke for the first time about her disappearance last night.
Mr Tadgell, 32, rented a flat in Australia with Joanna as she progressed from a cleaner to a waitress at the casino.
He said: ‘It's possible she saw Miss Arrow around the place.
‘She was a happy-go-lucky girl but she became a bulimia victim.
‘She suffered for a long time and although her father never knew about it, her mother did.’
‘We drifted apart.
She can be domineering at times and she wanted her own way,’ he said.
Joanna is now undergoing psychiatric counselling at her home in Harpenden.
Sufferers from bulimia are prone to eating binges, followed by bouts of self-induced vomiting.
One police source said last night: ‘They have to face up to Christmas with all the eating and drinking that involves.’
Joanna's sister, Lucy, 22, said: ‘My sister is still very upset and she is being looked after by her mother.’
Norman to stay at No.11
Eben Black
PREMIER John Major yesterday assured the Chancellor his job was safe and ruled out a festive Cabinet shake-up.
Norman Lamont will stay until at least the next Budget in March to have the chance to take credit for next year's expected economic recovery.
His mind was put at rest by Mr Major as he flew home from Washington.
‘I am not anticipating a January reshuffle,’ he said.
‘I take the view that it is wise for ministers to have sufficiently long in a job to get thoroughly on top of it.’
A shake-up is now not likely before the summer.
Mr Lamont was seen as a prime candidate for the chop after a series of disasters including Britain's exit from the ERM.
He is also facing an inquiry over the taxpayer picking up part of his £24,000 bill to evict a self-styled sex therapist from his home and was embarrassed by revelations about his Access card.
New figures yesterday showed the first signs of an upturn in the economy.
The gross domestic product rose between July and September compared to the previous three months.
It was still lower than the same period last year.
6 days to nail rapist doctor
THE Attorney-General has just six days left to decide whether to ask the Court of Appeal to reconsider the sentence of Harley Street rapist Dr Tom Courtney.
Courtney was jailed for seven years on November 30 following his conviction for two rapes and two indecent assaults.
The gynaecologist could be free in a little over two years if his case is not referred within 28 days of sentencing.
TODAY believes the sentence is too lenient.
Last week the Attorney-General, Sir Nicholas Lyell, took up our call to examine the case.
Gongs to stay
PREMIER John Major has backed down from promises to stop Civil Service time servers being rewarded through the honours system, say No 10 sources.
He now plans to create a new gong.
One who won't return to pits
Dominic Midgley
LIFE looked bleak for miner Martin Barsby and his family two months ago.
His pit was earmarked for closure, his redundancy money would not pay off the mortgage and other work was scarce.
Martin's doleful face on the front page of TODAY last October mirrored the despair of thousands of fellow miners.
Now his Silverhill Colliery is one of 10 given a High Court reprieve — but Martin has a different reason for smiling.
He found another job last month, at the local tights factory in Sutton in Ashfield, Notts, and he took voluntary redundancy.
Now Martin, 28, and wife Vicky are looking forward to a happy Christmas with their children.
Despite taking home around half his £300-a-week mining wage, Martin said: ‘I wouldn't go back to Silverhill now if they asked me to.
I get tired but you get more tired working down the pit.
And I feel better within myself.’
It's back to work we go
Russell Jenkins and Rob Perkins
THE Government's coalfield massacre plan was in total disarray yesterday after the High Court ruled it was illegal.
Miners at threatened pits greeted the ruling with the demand: Now let us get back to work.
As Government and British Coal lawyers last night pored over the fine print of Lord Justice Glidewell's surprise decision, Board of Trade President Michael Heseltine faced an avalanche of calls to quit the Cabinet.
It will take a political Houdini escape trick to keep him from being sucked further into the mire.
Lord Justice Glidewell and Mr Justice Hidden decided that the Government and British Coal had unlawfully and irrationally ignored miners' rights in announcing the closure of 31 pits, with the loss of 30,000 jobs.
Twenty-one had been reprieved to await a Government review.
The other 10 have already shut.
The judges ruled that they had denied miners the agreed consultation period.
No final decision on the fate of the 10 pits earmarked for immediate shutdown must be made until they, too, had been reviewed by Mr Heseltine's Department of Trade and Industry, said the judges.
Those 10 mines are in Yorkshire, the north-east, Nottinghamshire, the Midlands and Wales.
Calls for Mr Heseltine's resignation were growing louder last night.
Labour's Trade and Industry spokesman, Robin Cook, said: ‘This judgment is a humiliation for Michael Heseltine.
‘This Government has been pursuing an energy strategy that was wrong in conception and incompetent in execution.’
Miners' Union solicitor Mark Stephens claimed after the hearing: ‘This is the most amazing Christmas present from the judges to the miners.
Santa Claus has come early.
‘The decision to shut the 31 pits has gone.’
Union leader Arthur Scargill said: ‘We are asking that the 10 pits earmarked for immediate closure are put into full operational order again, immediately.’
He added: ‘As a result of the enormous loss of taxpayers' money involved, Michael Heseltine and the chairman of British Coal should certainly resign.’
But the legal battle is not over.
British Coal will lodge an appeal against yesterday's decision.
And the Government is likely to spend the Christmas break weighing up the political options before deciding what to do next.
‘The judge has declared the original decision illegal,’ said a Trade and Industry insider last night.
‘Now, everyone is trying to work out what that means.
‘I don't think anyone knows what the immediate future holds at the moment.’
Another political time bomb, waiting to go off in the New Year, is a Select Committee inquiry into Britain's overall energy needs.
Elton's £15,000 lifeline
SINGER Elton John has donated £15,000 so two boys can be treated for kidney disease.
Elton, 45, sent a cheque to Weston Park Boys School, Southampton, after hearing how the 12-year-olds had to make 180-mile journeys for treatment.
Other stars have donated items for auction to help buy a dialysis machine for their local hospital, but Elton's gift was a surprise.
‘It almost covers the cost of the machine,’ said head teacher Peter Coote.
Strip and dales
WHAT would Amos Brearly make of it all?
Times certainly are changing down on the farm in the TV soap Emmerdale's new calendar.
Farmhand Michael Feldmann, played by Matthew Vaughan, makes hay with screen girlfriend Rachel Hughes (Glenda McKay) right and top left.
Kim Tate (Claire King), centre, appears in another provocative picture as does Rachel's brother Mark, bottom, played by Craig McKay.
He is also seen in a clinch with girlfriend Melanie (Joanne Woodcock).
Starr splits from wife
Clive Nelson
COMEDIAN Freddie Starr is splitting up with his wife after 18 years of marriage.
The outrageous comic's friends blamed ‘work pressures’ for the rift between Freddie, 47, and his wife Sandie.
The couple are still sharing their £300,000 home, near Maidenhead, Berks.
However, Freddie will not spend Christmas Day there with Sandie and children, Donna, 17, Jodi, 11, and six-year-old Stacey.
Freddie's spokesman Gordon Blair confirmed last night: ‘Divorce proceedings are already under way.’
He stressed there was no one else involved in the break-up which comes just days after comic Jim Davidson revealed he was splitting from his fourth wife.
Mr Blair said: ‘It is extremely sad, particularly at this time of year for all concerned.
‘There is no one else involved and it will be an amicable situation all round.’
The Starrs — who met when Sandie, 38, was a dancer in Freddie's show — were said to have one of the most solid marriages in showbusiness.
Friends were ‘flabbergasted’ by the split.
One said: ‘We always saw the marriage as being a great survivor despite Freddie's unpredictable personality.’
Nigel's suite revenge
SCRUFFY violinist Nigel Kennedy went on a £3,500 wrecking spree at a plush German hotel, it was claimed yesterday.
He and some friends were accused of smashing a bottle of champagne against the wall of his £700-a-night suite and tearing down Christmas decorations.
Carpets were drenched with alcohol and condoms were scattered around his room, said a spokesman for Berlin's Grand Hotel Esplanade which is sending the bill to Kennedy's record company EMI.
But the musician blamed the staff for starting trouble.
‘Some bloke tried to stop us jamming in the lobby and gave us loads of attitude,’ he said.
‘When my mate asked him to let us finish our song he tried to shut the piano lid on his fingers — that could cause a musician some serious grief.’
Worms turn
AN angler dug into the annals of history to win the right to search for bait.
Two High Court judges ruled yesterday that the Magna Carta, dating from 1215, gave the public rights to dig up lugworms on beaches.
But that does not include commercial use and is subject to local by-laws.
Fisherman Anthony Anderson had already had his conviction quashed.
Death in the fog that will haunt every motorway driver over the Christmas holiday
Richard Creasy
SEVEN people were killed yesterday, victims of the fate that lurks in wait for every driver over this Christmas holiday.
Sudden, violent death in the fog.
Freezing fog shrouded a horrific trail of carnage on Britain's roads, with hundreds of people maimed.
The mist heralded the traditional festive curse: motorway madness.
And weathermen warn that worse is to come.
In a tragic start to the Christmas week, major roads across the Midlands and North of England resembled battlefields as police struggled to cope.
With visibility down to 25 yards in places, three motorists were killed in the M1 in Derbyshire.
Two died in massive 60-vehicle motorway shunts in Yorkshire.
Two more dead were trapped in other multiple pile-ups.
Motoring organisations slammed senseless drivers for travelling too fast.
One despairing police chief pleaded for sanity.
‘We could have freezing fog for the forseeable future,’ he said.
‘For God's sake slow down.’
The accident black spot was Derbyshire where four people died — three following a multiple smash on the southbound carriageway of the M1.
The crash, between junctions 29 and 28, near Alfreton, closed the carriageway at lunchtime as emergency services were stretched to the limit.
A few miles away another motorist was killed after a pile-up on the A38, which feeds onto the M1 at junction 28, following a crash which involved 20 vehicles.
Both pile-ups happened in freezing fog.
Services in Derbyshire were so busy that they needed to call for assistance from neighbouring Nottinghamshire.
In West Yorkshire one person died and four were seriously hurt as 60 vehicles, including six lorries, drove into each other in the dense fog.
The smash paralysed the notorious M62 Pennine Way in West Yorkshire and 70 firemen helped to douse blazing wreckage.
Another 20 people, many suffering cuts and shock after being cut from the tangled wreckage of their cars, were taken to hospital.
Motorway police chief Inspector David Haikings said: ‘It was six degrees Centigrade below and drivers were driving too fast and too near to each other.
‘There was another accident a little way down the carriageway and people slowed down to rubberbeck and drove into the back of each other.’
Some drivers were still trapped more than two hours after the crash.
Rescuers sent out requests for supplies of drugs and were hampered reaching the injured because of tailbacks caused by earlier crashes.
Ten ambulances ferried the casualties to hospital and medical teams from Huddersfield Royal Infirmary worked at the roadside.
An ambulance spokesman said the ‘vast majority’ of the casualties were suffering from minor injuries, shock and the effects of cold on the exposed stretch of trans-Pennine motorway.
Pile-ups involving 60 vehicles on A1 and A1M near Doncaster left one dead and 26 injured.
And eight miles further north, at Wentbridge on the A1, another motorist was killed in the fog.
A spokesman for South Yorkshire police said: ‘It's a nightmare.
Traffic is tailing back miles and miles from dozens of accidents.
‘The worst situation you can have on a motorway is vehicles standing still as others approach the scene of a crash.’
The sudden cold snap meant the RAC were inundated with 3,000 call-outs in one hour — a 50 per cent increase on a normal Monday morning.
Most were for cars not starting due to battery failure and people forgetting to put anti-freeze in their radiators.
The ice and poor visibility caused minor accidents all over the country.
A spokesman for the AA Roadwatch unit said: ‘There have been lots of shunts with people going too fast and being unable to handle their car.
‘Slow down, take care and drive according to the conditions.
There is a lot of sheet ice and it is treacherous, even not taking into consideration the poor visibility.’
Among the worst affected areas were Lincolnshire, where visibility was down to 50 yards, Cumbria, where roads were described as ‘hazardous’, and the M25 in Hertfordshire, which was hit by ice and freezing fog.
In some areas council gritters failed to arrive in time to prevent skid-pan surfaces.
But the big freeze suprised the weathermen with warnings coming as late as 4am to council depots.
Parts of Surrey and the M20 in Kent remained ungritted.
A policeman was one of the first victims, injured when he was hit by a car as he tried to direct rush-hour traffic around an accident on icy roads.
Ambulance crews had already taken one patient from the pile-up, on the Uxbridge Road in Slough, Berkshire, to the town's Wexham Park Hospital.
The injured police officer had been trying to get drivers to slow down when he was hit by a car that lost control.
A Thames Valley spokesman said: ‘It was like a skating rink out there.’
Worse to come
ROADS will remain freezing, with ice and fog causing dangerous conditions throughout the holiday, drivers were warned last night.
The wet spell has been replaced by a cold, dry front which will last until at least the New Year.
‘Overnight temperatures could plummet as low as -10C (14°F),’ said TODAY weatherman Philip Eden.
‘In areas of the country where fog fails to clear thoughout the day temperatures will remain below freezing, creating difficulties.’
An AA spokesman said: ‘Motorists must slow down and take extra care.
Ice could be a big problem.’
Increased traffic could create hold-ups, he said.
The only good news for drivers was that there will be no snow.
Victim's family forgive
THE family of a father mown down by a suspected drink-driver wept at his funeral yesterday and spoke of forgiveness.
Former RAF engineer David Adams, 42, died when he was knocked off his cycle on his way home from a shopping trip.
Neighbour Martin Clarke, 31, has been charged with causing his death by careless driving.
Mr Adams's brother James said the family hold no animosity towards anyone over David's death.
He said: ‘Mr Clarke no faces his own ordeal, as does his wife and baby.’
Devoted dad David left a wife Cathy, 38, and four sons — Richard, nine, Stuart, five, Mark, two and eight-month-old Thomas.
The boys stayed away from yesterday's service at Oxford's crematorium.
They were cared for by friends at their home in nearby Witney.
Maxwell son must pay Pounds ½m
IAN Maxwell was ordered by the High Court yesterday to pay Pounds 500,000 damages to pension funds plundered by his late father Robert.
The interim award was won by Bishopsgate Investment Management, which ran the Mirror Group scheme and is seeking to recover the missing millions.
The judge ruled that Ian, 36, was in breach of his duties as a director of BIM when he signed stock transfer forms without checking the board had approved.
It was no defence to say the transfers had already been signed by his brother Kevin, said Mr Justice Chadwick.
Last July, the liquidators of BIM won summary judgment against 33-year-old Kevin for £406.5 million.
He later became Britain's biggest bankrupt.
Banking on baby boom
HIGH Street bank Barclays is booming with babies.
Sixteen out of 30 women at a branch in Andover, Hants, have given birth to 17 children in the last three years.
Another three are due in six weeks.
‘We've almost got enough for a playgroup,’ said mum Karen White.
£444 Cost of two weeks in Majorca for a family of four as holiday firms slash their prices for summer '93
David Jones
BRITAIN'S biggest tour operator yesterday slashed the prices of one million summer holidays.
Market leader Thomson wiped a total of £50 million off the cost of trips abroad.
Among the bargains are two weeks in Puerto Pollensa, Majorca, for just £444 for a family of four in a self-catering apartment — a saving of £400.
Parents can take children under 16 for 14 nights in the Mediterranean for just £29 and a fortnight in Florida for £89.
Thomson, whose companies include Horizon, Skytours, OSL, HCI and Wings, announced its new prices as it was revealed that bookings for 1993 are already 10 per cent down on last year.
Major rivals reacted immediately.
Enterprise launched a special ‘price buster’ deal, allowing two adults and two children to spend a week in any of its resorts — in unspecified accommodation — for under Pounds 350.
Falcon will send children to Florida free for the first time, Martyn announced savings of up to £105 on its Greece and Cyprus brochure and SunMed is offering seven nights in Corfu for just Pounds 99.
Airtours reduced the cost of a holiday in Florida by up to £100 from December 28.
It promised about 25,000 people who have already booked that they will get refunds of up to £70 each.
Last night the Association of British Travel Agents hailed the price cuts as ‘tremendous news’ for holidaymakers.
‘This will obviously bring a whole new category of people into the foreign holiday market,’ said a spokeswoman.
‘Many who had planned to stay at home will now go away, others will feel they can afford a second holiday.’
Thomson described its cut-price deals, which go on sale from Boxing Day, as a late Christmas present.
‘Christmas and the New Year is the peak booking season, so we are announcing this now to stimulate maximum interest,’ said a spokeswoman.
‘We don't like the term price war because that implies that these holidays are the type of bargain basement deal you pick up at the last minute.
‘They aren't — they are standard holidays at reduced cost.’
Owners Abroad, which runs Enterprise, Falcon, Martyn and SunMed, insisted that it was not following Thomson, and had been planning its own big reductions.
‘The idea is to give holidays to people who otherwise couldn't afford them,’ said a spokeswoman.
‘Our message is that there has never been a time like this to pick up a bargain,’ a spokeswoman said.
Airtours also denied that its decision to review tariffs had been prompted by Thomson.
‘We had already released the information to trade papers but we were going to wait until after Christmas to tell everyone else,’ said spokesman George Marcall.
Mr Marcall said the reductions had not been made because the holiday market was depressed.
‘I think it was going to become quite buoyant anyway,’ he said.
‘Holidays are now becoming essential purchases and in 1992 summer bookings were 12 per cent up on last year.
‘Even with the recession, the attitude is, where are we going this year, not how will we afford it?’
CHRISTMAS holiday plans were ruined for thousands of people last night when their tour operator went bust.
Novotour, of Borough Green, Kent, specialised in packages to Florida, Spain, Greece, Turkey and Bulgaria.
Customers will get refunds and other firms are helping to find alternative trips.
YOUR GUIDE TO THE BEST BARGAINS
DESTINATION OFFER TOTAL SAVING
Oro Playa Apts, Majorca 2 adults, 2 children £444 £400
Larson's Lodge, Florida 2 adults, 1 child £1,017 £100
Oliveiras Apts, Algarve 2 adults, 3 children £764 £275
Hotel Oro Negro, Tenerife 2 adults £652 £100
Mellieha Bay, Malta 2 adults, 1 child £1,158 £350
Hotel Conquistador, Tenerife 2 adults, 1 child £1,195 £200
Marhaba Palace, Tunisia 2 adults £770 £120
Holidays ar date restrictions.
It's a terrible shock this sort of thing could happen here
Helen Renshaw
THE village is pervaded by an air of decency, and seems the ideal place to retire after a life of honest graft.
Cottages of local stone are adorned with holly, as Lanchester, County Durham, puts on its festive finery.
But the heart of this community has been pierced with terror — there are no children playing, no young voices raised in glee.
Since Saturday's brutal rape of a 14-year-old papergirl, all Lanchester's young people stay behind closed doors.
Yesterday paper boys and girls were accompanied by their parents or big brothers and weren't allowed to start rounds until after it was light.
At least one girl delivered newspapers escorted by her mother and a policeman.
I retraced the footsteps of the young victim as she set about her ill-fated round that morning.
At Cadger Bank, the hill which leads to the remote alley where the attack took place, there is plenty of cover for a rapist to hide.
I walked the 30 paces down the narrow alley to the very spot where the paper girl first heard the running steps of her assailant before she was knocked senseless.
A high wall bars any chance of escape to the left and a frosty beech hedge borders the alley to the right.
It was through this hedge that the naive teenager was dragged unconscious, beaten some more, and brutally raped on the tidy lawn of a smart bungalow.
If she had made it just a few feet further she would have found safety in the homely atmosphere of the estate where she lives with her family.
It is almost inconceivable that such a thing could have happened at eight in the morning in such a place.
‘People here can't help but think it must have been a local person,’ said young mother Janeen Armstrong.
‘If you don't live here, you don't know the alleyway exists.’
In the Queens Head one drinker murmured about seeing a man in a green and black tracksuit, another had spied a red car they had never noticed before.
But the inescapable conclusion was that it was one of their own who must have been responsible.
‘It's such a close-knit community,’ said John Golightly.
‘The horrifying thing is the thought that it must have been one of us that did it.’
Find beast who raped my girl
Ian Key
THE father of a girl who was raped and beaten on her paper round yesterday pleaded for help in catching her attacker.
Trembling with anger he said: ‘Someone out there must know who has committed this terrible crime.
‘It may be a wife, a mother, a sister, a girlfriend or brother who knows.
‘I would plead with them to speak to the police as a matter of urgency because I would not like this to happen to anyone else or for any other family to go through the distress we are experiencing.
‘This has devastated my daughter, my family and the whole community.
‘We were all absolutely stunned by what happened.’
The man was speaking two days after his 14-year-old daughter was attacked in a garden 100 yards from her home in Lanchester, Co Durham.
She was punched repeatedly in the face, which left her with swollen eyes and cuts in her mouth.
Her father said she looked as if she had gone three rounds in the boxing ring.
‘She doesn't look very good at all,’ he said.
Police officers were at the girl's hospital bedside hoping she could give them more details of the attack.
‘She wakes for a few minutes and then is unconscious for several hours,’ said a police spokesman.
The girl has told officers her attacker was taller than her and wore a ski mask.
Bath scald baby dies
A BABY is thought to have been scalded to death in the bath when his brother turned on the hot tap.
Nine-month-old James Evans was left alone with Kyle, four, when their mother Julie dashed downstairs to find out why her third child was screaming.
When Julie, 32, returned, moments later, she found James lying in hot water.
‘It appears the child copied his mother and turned on the hot water tap,’ said police.
The baby died in hospital at Brecon, Powys.
Raider beats up widow aged 99
Simon Trump
A WIDOW of 99 was brutally beaten by an intruder as she lay sleeping in a nursing home.
Sarah Anne Burke was critically ill last night after being found lying in her bed covered in blood by a care assistant who went in to wake her for breakfast.
She had a broken jaw and cheekbone.
Detectives believe the pensioner, who is due to celebrate her 100th birthday next month, was repeatedly punched in the face by her attacker who probably escaped through the bedroom window.
The raider struck at The Green residential home in Redruth, Cornwall, in the early hours of Sunday morning.
Detective Chief Superintendent David Hodson said yesterday: ‘This was a horrible crime on a defenceless old lady.
‘She could not even stand by herself yet she has has been the victim of a most brutal assault in her own bed.
‘We have not ruled out the possibility she was struck in the face with a weapon.’
Forensic experts searched the council-run home to help detectives in the manhunt and extra officers have been drafted in.
‘My officers and I are determined to track down the offender before he does any more harm,’ said Mr Hodson.
Nothing was stolen from Mrs Burke's room at the home where she has lived since moving from Westleigh, Lancs, in February.
Staff at the 26-room home were shocked and warden Maureen Goudge was too upset to comment.
Cornwall deputy director of Social Services Alan Tredinnick said: ‘Mrs Burke is a lovely old lady.
‘There is tight security at our homes but we do not want to have to put bars over the windows.’
AA have a very ice man
AA patrolman Nimesh Patel went to help a woman get her car started in the damp — and fell headlong into her icy pool.
Nimesh had gone to the woman's house in Twickenham, west London, when she realised she was locked out.
‘Remembering her back door was unlocked she asked if he would climb her wall and let her in,’ a spokesman said.
‘He parked his van by the wall and climbed on to the roof.
It was his first call of the day and it was still very dark.
‘What he didn't know was there was a 13ft drop on the other side.
‘He lost his footing in the frost and plunged headlong into the woman's swimming pool.
‘She was most surprised to see him standing at her door, dripping wet and covered in leaves from the pool.’
Prince sets himself a new goal
PRINCE Edward is calling in top football teams to help set up a new-look Duke of Edinburgh award.
The prince, who wants to offer inner city youngsters training at clubs like Manchester United, will announce details on new breakfast station GMTV on January 8.
Network political correspondent Michael Hastings said: ‘The scheme has an image of middle class boys running up hills but Prince Edward is keen to make it more upbeat.’
1 in 4 pupils aged 7 cannot read this
Geraint Jones
ALMOST a quarter of seven-year-olds still cannot read, education tests showed yesterday — a year after the nation was shocked by similar figures.
The seven-plus immediately came under renewed fire after the results showed just a slight improvement in spelling, reading and maths and a 12 per cent drop in writing skills since the tests were first held last year.
One in three youngsters could not write two simple sentences with correct punctuation or add or subtract numbers under 10 in their heads.
Four per cent— 18,000 seven-year-olds -could not do sums at all .
Education Secretary John Patten ordered an investigation into huge differences in performance between local authorities.
But he insisted: ‘Taken together, the National Curriculum and testing are helping open schools to public scrutiny and improve standards.’
Harrow topped the league table with 89 per cent of its pupils reaching or bettering the required standard.
Cleveland was bottom of the 107 authorities with just 67 per cent of children making the grade.
Its education chairman Keith Legg said the tables were ‘a totally distorted picture of primary education standards in the country as a whole.
‘It is simply wrong for the Government to suggest that on the basis of these raw figures it's possible to make valid comparisons.’
The National Union of Teachers claimed the results had no real value as no allowances were made for factors such as the number of pupils with English as a second language.
Libel case MP wins £150,000
LABOUR MP George Galloway won £150,000 damages and costs yesterday for being branded a liar.
Mr Galloway, 38, member for Glasgow Hillhead, was libelled by the Daily Mirror and its Scottish stablemate, the Daily Record.
His lawyer, Tom Shields, told a High Court judge that last year, when the late Robert Maxwell owned the papers, Mr Galloway tabled a Commons motion about a book called The Samson Option.
This dealt with the alleged involvement of the Mirror's then foreign editor, Nick Davies, in arms dealing and betraying wanted Israeli Mordechair Vanunu to the Israeli authorities.
Next day, the Mirror and Record launched vitriolic attacks on Mr Galloway and Tory MP Rupert Allason.
Mirror Group Newspapers and its then editors acknowledged yesterday that the attacks were unfounded.
Mr Galloway accepted that Mirror staff did not betray Vanunu.
Mr Allason has already won an estimated £250,000 over the articles.
A captive audience
THE man who put Ronnie Barker's Porridge back on TV is to become head of the country's jails.
Derek Lewis, chairman of satellite television oldies channel UK Gold, becomes director general of prisons on January 6, Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke said yesterday.
As the first businessman to be given the job, his £125,000 salary could reach £167,000 with bonuses.
Bank raider is mugged
AN ARMED bank robber was mugged of his loot as he made his getaway.
Stuart Everton, 20, had £1,800 taken off him by two men after the raid in Barnet, north London.
At the Old Bailey yesterday Everton, of Edmonton, north London, admitted three robberies and related firearms charges and asked for two attempted robberies to be considered.
He was put on probation for two years.
Hey, thefto
TV MAGICIAN Wayne Dobson has had to buy the family Christmas presents all over again — because thieves made the first lot vanish.
The £1,000 worth of gifts were part of the loot taken in a raid on a courier depot at Leicester.
Street's Percy is Thai god
CORONATION Street busybody Percy Sugden has found real fan worship in Thailand where viewers think he's a god.
Actor Bill Waddington, who plays the grumpy pensioner, discovered his new-found status when a letter written in Thai arrived at Granada's studios in Manchester.
It contained an electricity bill with a note saying: ‘Dear Percy, will you please pay this for me.
Unless you do I cannot watch you.
You are a god here.’
Bill, 76, asked Street chiefs to investigate and they discovered that episodes of the popular show screened in Britain five years ago are now topping the ratings in Thailand and they have made Percy a national hero.
Startled Bill, 76, said: ‘At first I thought what a damned cheek sending me an electric bill.
Then the more we got to know about it the more I had to laugh.
‘It just shows how far and wide the fame of The Street has spread.
‘If I ever go to Thailand I shall look this chap up.’
Gas blast ruins flats
FAMILIES were evacuated after a gas blast ripped through a block of flats yesterday.
One tenant was taken to hospital with a broken leg after the explosion in Deptford, south-east London.
The three-storey building partly collapsed and surveyors were last night still trying to make it safe.
‘The top floor has been extensively damaged,’ said British Gas.
Well oil be
STUNNED staff turned up at a garage in Chicklade, Wilts, to find thieves had used a chainsaw to cut off and steal a petrol pump.
‘It's one of the strangest thefts we've dealt with,’ said police.
‘It's bizarre that anyone would want one in their living room.’
I'll be Bay City rolling in it again
BAY City Rollers singer Les McKeown, who was penniless at the start of the year, predicted yesterday that he would be a millionaire by 1996.
The former teenybop idol, now 37, has found fame in Japan after car giants Mitsubishi used a Bay City Roller tune for a TV ad.
Les's new band, the Legendary Bay City Rollers, are playing sell-out concerts in Japan and Germany.
‘A year ago I was skint, now things couldn't be better,’ he said.
Suicide gas timebomb
MORE than 20 people were evacuated from their homes yesterday after a suicidal man filled his flat with gas.
Police talked to the man for 90 minutes before breaking into the flat in Brighton and grabbing him after he threatened to light a match.
The man, who has not been named, was treated at hospital for gas inhalation then questioned.
‘The building could have gone up any minute,’ said police.
Tax raider escapes jail
A RETIRED taxman who robbed one bank to pay off debts at another escaped jail yesterday.
Passers-by seized arthritic Frederick Cowen, 68, as he hobbled from the Midland Bank with £1,500 he stole at the point of a fake gun made from a hosepipe.
Cowen, of Holloway, north London, was given three years' probation.
His lawyer said: ‘It was a pantomime robbery.’
Daughter's murder plea
THE daughter of a couple hacked to death with their disabled son yesterday offered £5,000 to catch the killer.
Harry Smith, 71, his wife Mary, 72, and wheelchair-bound Harold, 46, were stabbed in a frenzied attack at their Birmingham home three weeks ago.
Mother-of-three Cathy Musto said: ‘We are just an ordinary family.
This should never have happened.’
Computer games in price probe
Paul Wilenius and Dominic Midgeley
COMPUTER game giants Sega and Nintendo are under secret Government investigation.
The Office of Fair Trading is probing allegations that the companies are charging rip-off prices for their products, TODAY has learned.
The action follows complaints from parents and consumer groups and comes during a £600 million Christmas spending spree on games and hardware.
An OFT spokesman confirmed: ‘We are already looking to see if the high prices charged are justified.
This is a high priority.’
Sega and Nintendo have been accused of monopoly practices, and charging ‘excessive and extortionate’ prices.
Some game cartridges now cost as much as £65 and parents often end up shelling out as much as £160 for the cartridge and machine to play it on.
The OFT is also worried about aggressive TV advertising aimed at susceptible children.
Its inquiry could be followed by a full-scale Monopolies and Mergers Commission probe.
Labour's consumer affairs spokesman Nigel Griffiths said last night: ‘This is a matter of national concern as so much money is spent by parents and children on these games.’
Sega's Sonic the Hedgehog 2 is the most popular game in the UK following a high-pressure ad campaign, yet it costs 20 per cent more than Sonic 1 which came out just over a year ago.
The OFT will look at why a cartridge which trade sources say can be made for less than £10 can cost up to £65.
On this page TODAY tracks how much of this money goes to the distributor and the ‘third party publisher’— the independent company that designs the game.
These industry estimates of the price of a cheap cartridge and typical retail margins are the figures which the OFT will be investigating.
Retailers can expect a 35-38 per cent share of the selling price.
In the case of the £64.99 Streetfighter II, the shop will make up to £25 per sale.
This leaves a handsome £30 for the distributor and designer to share.
Nintendo and Sega can control prices by insisting all software companies buy their cartridges from them.
It aims to keep things that way by launching a High Court copyright action against British software designer Codemasters which is about to launch its games on the market.
They can be used on Sega hardware but are half the price.
Codemasters' director David Darling said: ‘The fact that Sega has chosen to wait to sue until just before our commercial launch shows this is a blatant attempt to keep us from the market they control.’
THE TERMINATOR
For Sega Game Gear, £27.99.
All action, based on Schwarzenegger film.
Cost of cartridge £7.00
Retailer's 35% cut £9.80
Distributor and software company income £11.19
PRINCE OF PERSIA
For Sega Game Gear, £27.99.
Battle to defeat evil Grand Vizier.
Cost of cartridge £7.00
Retailer's 35% cut £9.80
Distributor and software company income £11.19
SUPER MARIO LAND 2
For Nintendo Game Boy, £29.99.
Quest to defeat rival Wario
Cost of cartridge £7.00
Retailer's 35% cut £10.50
Distributor and software company income £12.49
ANOTHER WORLD
For Nintendo Super NES, £44.99.
Fast-paced action adventure with you at the centre of some staggering cinematic effects.
Cost of cartridge £7.00
Retailer's 35% cut £15.75
Distributor and software company income £22.24
PILOTWINGS
For the Nintendo Super NES, £39.99.
Breath-taking flight simulation puts you at the joystick from biplane to helicopter.
Cartridge price £7.00
Retailer's 35% cut £14.00
Distributor and software company income £18.99
STREETFIGHTER II
For Super NES, £64.99, left.
Detailed conversion from arcade hit game to console format.
Cost of cartridge £7.00
Retailer's 35% cut £22.75
Distributor and software company income £35.24
ALIEN 3
For Sega Game Gear, £27.99, right.
One player action game.
Cost of cartridge £7.00
Retailer's 35% cut £9.80
Distributor and software company income £11.19
LEMMINGS
For Sega Mega Drive, £39.99. try to save the suicidal lemmings.
Cost of cartridge £7.00
Retailer's 35% cut £14.00
Distributor and software company income £18.99
GOLF
For Nintendo Game Boy, £19.99.
Popular sport simulation.
Cost of cartridge £7.00
Retailer's 35% cut £7.00
Distributor and software company income £5.99
SONIC II
On the Game Gear, £27.99.
High-speed action adventure featuring daredevil hedgehog.
Cartridge price £7.00
Retailer's 35% cut £14.00
Distributor and software company income £18.99.
Diana's Christmas shock for her boys
Charles Rae
PRINCESS Diana's two young sons are to spend Christmas Day without their mother for the first time in their lives.
And it is her own choice.
The Queen and Prince Charles have insisted that Prince William, 10, and Harry, eight, must join in the traditional royal Christmas at Sandringham.
But Diana has refused a personal invitation from the Queen to the church service and Christmas lunch — a clear signal that she wants as little as possible to do with the rest of the royals.
Instead, she will hand over her sons to their nanny and detectives on Christmas Eve, for delivery, with their presents, to Sandringham.
The boys will probably rejoin her on Boxing Day at Althorp Manor, Northants, stately home of her brother, Earl Spencer.
A source close to the princess said last night that her refusal to attend the family get-together was her boldest show of defiance so far, to prove her independence once and for all.
‘This was a heartbreaking decision for the princess to make,’ said the source.
‘Now that her marriage has finally split, there are only two things that she cares about in life: her sons and her charity work.
‘It is a terrible wrench for any mother to give up seeing her sons on such an important and what should be a gloriously happy day.’
The source added: ‘There is a price for everything in this world, and the princess's is very high.’
The surprise holiday arrangement, announced yesterday from Buckingham Palace, will increase speculation that Diana and Charles are certain to divorce.
The rift between them is now so bitter, it is believed they will take the final step as soon as possible.
Announcing the Christmas plan, a palace spokesman said: ‘During the Christmas holiday, Prince William and Prince Harry will spend time with each of their parents individually.
‘They will spend Christmas at Sandringham with the prince and other members of the Royal Family.
‘The princess will spend Christmas and the holiday at Althorp House.’
The spokesman made it clear that Diana was welcome at Sandringham.
He confirmed that she had been invited for both the church service and the lunch.
‘The princess will continue to be invited to Sandringham and Balmoral and on other family occasions,’ he added.
Until yesterday, Diana had been expected to spend Christmas with the royals.
She had refused to stay in the vast Sandringham House itself but the Queen offered her nearby Wood Farm.
That offer, too, has been snubbed.
At least her show of independence may have avoided an intolerable sense of strain over lunch, in Sandringham's pale green dining room.
‘I hear things are so bad between the prince and princess, they can't even bear to be in the same room as one another,’ said an estate worker.
Another, hearing of the little princes' new holiday arrangements, commented: ‘I feel sorry for them, being moved around like a pair of poor little shuttlecocks.’
By contrast to her sister-in-law, the Duchess of York, who is not invited to the church service or the family lunch, will be at Sandringham for Christmas.
She and daughters Beatrice, four, and Eugenie, nearly three, will stay at Wood Farm, on the estate, with her sister, Jane Makim, and mother Susan Barrantes.
Fergie will take the girls to see their father, Prince Andrew when he arrives at Sandringham.
But she will be home at Wentworth, Surrey, on Sunday — with her daughters.
A happier pair, newlyweds Princess Anne and Commander Tim Laurence, will be joining all the festivities, with Anne's children, Peter and Zara Phillips.
The great conspirator
Russell Jenkins and David Jones
TRISTAN Garel-Jones will be remembered as one of the architects of Mrs Thatcher's downfall.
It was at his elegant home in Belgravia that influential Tory conspirators decided her position as Prime Minister was no longer tenable.
Once they had sealed their leader's fate, after her poor first ballot in the 1990 leadership contest, Mr Garel-Jones declared his support for Douglas Hurd.
Why he chose to throw his weight behind a man who stood such a slender chance remains unclear.
Nonetheless, after he became Premier, Major promoted the 51-year-old Welshman to Foreign Office Minister with the key job of looking after the Maastricht Treaty.
The stocky, pixie-faced minister realised he was unlikely to move beyond his middle-ranking position in the Tory hierarchy.
But his relatively modest job in the Foreign Office belies the true power of the man who became one of Major's most trusted mentors.
The son of a wealthy English language school owner, he was born in South Wales in 1941, and educated at The King's School, Canterbury, and in Madrid.
For 10 years he was the principal of the school in Spain, before becoming a merchant banker and financial consultant.
He entered politics as MP for Watford in 1979.
The normally outgoing Garel-Jones has been looking tired lately, say his friends, who believe he genuinely wants to bow out of the spotlight and spend more time with his family.
His marriage to a Spanish Roman Catholic, Catalina, has been long and happy.
They have four sons and a daughter.
Their palatial home near Madrid has been the chosen holiday retreat for the Majors in recent years — a graphic symbol of their friendship.
Tories in turmoil as Mr Europe quits
Paul Wilenius
PREMIER John Major's Government was rocked last night as his close friend Tristan Garel-Jones announced he is to quit as European Minister in the New Year.
The move took senior ministers and Tory MPs by surprise as Mr Garel-Jones has been the one of the lynchpins of Mr Major's administration.
He is the key wheeler-dealer and Mr Fix-It operating behind the scenes to push through controversial European policies and other measures.
The Foreign Office Minister said in a letter to Mr Major that he has had enough and wants to step down.
Mr Garel-Jones was at his home near Madrid last night, having flown out before the announcement from No 10.
He told Mr Major he will leave once the Maastricht Treaty is ratified by Parliament, adding that he wanted to spend more time with his family and pursue his interests in the art world.
Mr Garel-Jones, 51, was the architect of the Prime Minister's greatest triumph at Maastricht, which Mr Major himself described as ‘Game, set and match’.
He is a robust pro-European and was also the key player in securing a victory for the Prime Minister at the EC summit in Edinburgh.
As one of Mr Major's closest friends — he holidays with him every summer in Spain — Mr Garel-Jones was expected to get promotion to the Cabinet in the summer.
Friends insisted last night that reports of a bitter row over the Maastricht Treaty with senior ministers, or that the vicious attacks on him by the anti-European Tories had driven him out, were wrong.
But he may have also been told by Mr Major that it is unlikely he would be promoted much further, and has decided to seek his fortune elsewhere.
Former Treasury Minister and friend Francis Maude said last night: ‘I am not surprised.
‘He has told friends for months he wanted to spend more time with his family.’
Former health minister Edwina Currie said: ‘The Government has lost a very valuable member.
He has been a superb Foreign Office minister.’
There is no doubt his departure will be a big blow to Mr Major, and will undercut Mr Garel-Jones' authority as he battles to push the Maastricht Treaty through the Commons in the next few months.
The MP for Watford, said in his letter to the Prime Minister he first asked to return to the backbenches in the summer of 1991.
It said: ‘I hanker after a change.
I want to spend more time at home and in my constituency.’
Mr Major praised his work yesterday and, in a reply to Mr Garel-Jones, said: ‘It is characteristic of you to wish to see through the legislation you have been working on, and it is what your colleagues would have expected of you.
‘Your contribution at the Foreign Office, especially during the British Presidency (of the European Community), has been immense and played a considerable part in the outcome at Edinburgh last week.’
One of Mr Garel-Jones' key tormentors Tory Euro-sceptic Bill Cash said he was surprised by the resignation.
‘I don't think he is going to be stepping back from the front line,’ he said.
‘We are going to be seeing a great deal of him.’
Bush boost
PRESIDENT Bush is to spend New Year's Eve with US forces involved in the relief operation in Somalia.
Mr Bush ordered 28,000 troops into Somalia two weeks ago to enforce aide distribution.
This year, 350,000 have died of starvation as warring factions loot food convoys.
‘The president's visit will demonstrate United States concern for the people of Somalia,’ said spokesman Marlin Fitzwater.
Thousands flee IRA Tube bomb
THOUSANDS of commuters escaped death yesterday when a terrorist blast rocked a Tube station.
The small bomb exploded inside Hampstead station, north London, a few minutes before 5pm.
No one was hurt in the rush hour blast but a few people were taken to the Royal Free Hospital, Hampstead, suffering from shock.
Police said they received a warning, using an IRA code word, just 13 minutes before the blast.
The station had been cleared just minutes before.
Local shopkeepers said they were unable to hear any explosion.
One said: ‘All we saw was loads of smoke coming from the station and then the emergency vehicles arrived.’
One passenger on a train that arrived at the station seconds before the blast said: ‘It was a miracle no one was killed.’
London Underground said last night the station was in the process of being evacuated at the time of the blast.
One angry passenger claimed travellers were not told about the bomb warning.
But a London Underground spokesman said a public address announcement was made and staff assisted in the evacuation.
Archway station, also on the Northern Line, was disrupted after another phone call warned of a bomb.
Services were not stopping at either Hampstead or Archway stations late last night.
Greasy turkey
A DRIVER called out the AA to repair an oil leak after he hit a frozen turkey lying in the road.
The bird, which had fallen off the back of a lorry in Leeds, West Yorks, was so solid it tore a hole in the sump of his Fiat Panda.
‘We've had motorists hitting live pheasants and other birds and animals but never a frozen turkey,’ said an AA spokesman.
‘It must have been very hard to cause this damage.’
Sindy to have plastic surgery
SINDY is to undergo plastic surgery to prevent a High Court showdown with American rival Barbie.
Hasbro, the British makers of Sindy, agreed that its doll should have a facelift so she no longer looks like Barbie.
The battle started when Sindy began to grow up rather too quickly for the liking of Mattel, Barbie's maker.
She lost her puppy fat, her breasts swelled and her face was remodelled.
On the shop shelves, she looked remarkably like the established Barbie.
Mattel threatened legal action, and a multi-million pound battle was scheduled for the High Court next month.
The action could have resulted in Sindy dolls being taken off the shelves, as they were in France when a local court decided Sindy had violated copyright.
Now the row has been resolved.
‘Hasbro has remodelled the head of Sindy in a way which Mattel and Hasbro have agreed is acceptable,’ the two companies said in a joint statement.
‘As a result, Mattel has agreed to drop all outstanding lawsuits relating to Sindy and Barbie around the world.’
Ulrika pest hit by train
A SEX pest who stalked TV weathergirl Ulrika Jonsson died after throwing himself under an express train, it was revealed last night.
Loner Peter Casey, 40, was questioned by police after plaguing Ulrika, 25, with obscene letters, phone calls and nude photos of himself.
His body was found near Iver, Bucks.
Private eye bin bagged
A PRIVATE detective was yesterday fined £150 for stealing a national newspaper executive's rubbish.
John Reilly, 47, took three plastic sacks from the driveway of Sunday Times managing editor Roger Eglin's home in Teddington, west London, nearby Isleworth Crown Court was told during a two-day trial.
Freddie: we're just not in love any more
Neville Thurlbeck
FUNNYMAN Freddie Starr hugged his wife Sandie yesterday and said: ‘I'm afraid we're just not in love any more.’
With those words the TV comedian announced the end of an 18-year marriage which many regarded as the strongest in showbusiness.
Speaking frankly outside their £2 mil lion Berkshire mansion, the couple did their best to hide their sadness.
‘We've just grown apart,’ said Freddie, 49.
‘I am away for eight months a year and we hardly see each other.
‘Even the kids don't recognise me.
Everytime they see me they say, ‘Dad you look older’.
‘We have discussed our marriage many times over the last four or five years and then we just sat down and put everything into perspective.
‘We realise that we are great friends.
But we are no longer in love with each other.
‘There were no rows.
It was completely amicable.
It is just a decision that two grown up people have come to.’
The couple will spend Christmas together with children Donna, 17, Jodie, 11 and six-year-old Stacey, but will start their new lives apart in the New Year.
No one else was involved in their deci sion to split, said Freddie.
‘But at the end of the day, we both realise it is each other 's happiness which matters most.’
Putting his arm around his wife's shoulder, he added: ‘When I came down the drive to see you I couldn't think of a good reason to give you for splitting up.
‘I can't find any fault at all in Sandie.’
Sandie, who met Freddie when she was an 18-year-old dancer on his show, smiled broadly as he quipped: ‘The real reason I'm leaving my wife is she makes lousy coffee.’
Then, on a more serious note, she explained what life was like with Freddie.
‘We hardly see each other,’ she said.
‘When he comes home at night I'm asleep in bed.
‘Often we just see each other at weekends.
We just seem like passing ships.
It's sad because 20 years is a big chunk in your life.’
The split comes just days after Freddie was reunited with his ‘lost’ son Carl, 26, from his first marriage.
Freddie, who is still grieving the death of his mother Hilda three weeks ago, aged 82, is determined not to lose touch with his children this time.
‘They won't see any less of me and I'll always have a key to the house,’ he said.
He added: ‘We will sort this out together.
‘There will be no arguments over who gets which CDs and who gets which half of the dining table.
That only makes solicitors rich.
We will be telling them what we want.’
4 times usual pay is nice little festive earner
David Leigh and Ian Fletcher
THOUSANDS of workers will be stuffing their pockets with extra cash for giving up the turkey this Christmas.
The luckiest will scoop four times normal pay for working on December 25.
Those very nice men from the Automobile Association are among the top Yuletide earners — their average £30 a day will quadruple to £120.
‘We are certain stranded motorists will not begrudge them their extra payment,’ said a spokesman.
Workers at Yorkshire brewery Joshua Tetley will toast their triple pay, while British Nuclear fuels staff get double time plus a day off.
But many workers have no chance of earning extra.
Thousands of firms are closing down for Christmas, according to the survey by Income Data Services.
Householders could also be losers if they need to call repairmen.
Christmas plumbing problems could leave you with double the normal bill, though most contractors said they would not turn out at any price.
A TV repair company in Southampton, Hants, said its call-out prices will rise from £25 to £40 and any work carried out was likely to cost ‘a few quid extra for the inconvenience’.
Getting about could be pricey.
The London Taxi Drivers' Association says that from 8pm on Christmas Eve to Boxing Day morning there will a standard £2 extra on every cab fare.
A pet problem could also force you to fork out.
Some vet practices treble call-out charges.
A firm in Croydon, Surrey, said the charge, before treatment, would be £30-£40, compared with the normal £9.
Rivals wreck BA deal
THE biggest airline partnership in history broke up last night in the crossfire of a new trade war between Britain and the United States.
The £470 million agreement between British Airways and USAir was in ruins after fierce opposition from rival airlines and officials who blocked the deal 48 hours before its planned Christmas Eve signing.
It ends a deal that would have made BA the world's biggest airline, flying 80 million passengers to 340 cities in 71 countries.
Despite personal intervention from Premier John Major to president George Bush, Washington trade chiefs refused to withdraw demands for unlimited access to British airports while keeping theirs out of reach of foreign competition.
United Airlines chairman Stephen Wolf said last night: ‘The decision by BA marks a lost opportunity for all concerned.’
Stores win card probe
AN INQUIRY into the rates credit card companies charge shops is to be carried out by the Office of Fair Trading.
But director general Sir Bryan Carsberg ruled out referring the investigation to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission.
Supermarket chains Asda, Gateway, Safeway, Sainsbury and Tesco complained earlier this year that banks had doubled the charges to them to between 8p and 10p per transaction.
Deficit soars
BRITAIN'S trade deficit has soared to a seven-month high, partly due to the pound's devaluation.
Christmas spending on foreign camcorders, CD players and electronic games last month helped widen the gap to £1,190 million, with total imports 10.6 billion.
Exports also climbed, to a 20-year-high at £9.2 billion, and we made £200 million on ‘invisible’ earnings.
The lorries smashed into me.
I thought I'd had it
Ian Key
SALES rep Adam Nicholson was at the end of a huge traffic jam on the fog-bound M62 when he glanced in his rear-view mirror.
Hurtling towards him in the swirling fog was a huge lorry powerless to stop on the icy carriageway.
Adam would have faced almost certain death if it hadn't been for his quick thinking.
‘There was no way I could have got out of the car when I saw the lorry coming towards me,’ Adam, 26, said yesterday.
as he relived Monday's motorway pile-up which claimed the life of one driver.
‘I realised he wasn't going to be able to stop and all I could do was watch him come closer and closer to me.
‘I got my legs out of the way and curled up in a ball on the driver's seat.
‘I didn't look at what happened next.
All I heard was a crash as the lorry hit me.
‘Moments later another lorry hit the side of my car.
‘I pulled my head up, feeling confused but amazed that I was still alive because when I saw the lorry coming towards me I honestly thought I had had it.
‘It all seemed to go on for a long time, but it must have been just a few seconds.’
A picture in TODAY revealed how the first truck ran straight over Adam's Renault 25, crushing the roof like a cardboard box.
The second lorry ran into the car's side sandwiching him in the wreckage.
Unable to open the door, Adam managed to scramble through a window to get help.
‘Even now, 24 hours later, I can't believe how lucky I was,’ he said.
‘When I got out I looked at the car and the lorry and I just couldn't believe it.
‘There was no way I should have got out of that with just a scratch and a few bruises.
‘Thank goodness no one else was with me, otherwise they would have almost certainly been killed.’
Amazingly, Adam walked away from the crash with just a graze on his left shoulder.
He went home to his fiancee in Scarborough, North Yorks, after a hospital check-up.
Adam's Renault was among 60 cars and lorries that piled into each other on the M62 at Ainley Top, near Huddersfield, on Monday.
One person died in the carnage, which left a trail of twisted metal across the three lanes of the west-bound carriageway.
More than 70 firemen helped douse wreckage and cut 20 people from their wrecked vehicles.
Some people were still trapped two hours later.
Police blamed the crash on drivers going too fast and too close in freezing fog.
Adam had only picked the car up three days earlier from his boss at the Congleton, Cheshire, firm where he had just started work.
‘What a way to start a new job.
‘The car was so badly crushed that I thought about asking the boss if he wanted it posting back.’
Office staff snub drink-drive pleas
Simon Trump
A HARD core of drink-drivers are still ignoring the Christmas crackdown, police revealed yesterday.
And, far from being teenage tearaways, the typical offender is a middle-aged white-collar worker who probably drinks lager.
In the last three days, forces nationwide tested 17,528 motorists.
A total of 1,367 drivers, 7.8 per cent, were over the legal limit.
Last year, 8.33 per cent gave positive tests.
The figures were released by Wiltshire chief constable Walter Girven, chairman of the Association of Chief Police Officers' traffic committee.
Mr Girven urged children to warn their parents of the perils of drink-driving.
‘I'm rather saddened by these figures,’ he said.
‘This was one of the most hard-hitting campaigns we have seen.
‘The majority of the population supported that campaign wholeheartedly.
‘We are talking about a minority of drivers behaving very foolishly and we have hardly made any impact on those people.’
Police administered 13 per cent fewer breath tests than last year.
‘Yet the number of motorists testing positively remains almost eight per cent, the same as last year,’ Mr Girven said.
‘I would say to children, ‘Do you want your father to come home or do you want to go to a funeral as an orphan?’
And to women, for goodness sake, talk to the man in your life and say how important he is to you.
‘It is a time when we all want to be happy.
Drinking and driving is not the way to do it.’
A DRUNKEN driver who hit speeds of 100mph during a 35-mile police chase was yesterday jailed for five months.
Jerry Foley, 29, jumped at least seven red lights and veered on to the wrong side of the road before staggering out of the car when it ran out of petrol, Wood Green crown court heard.
Foley, of Finchley, north London, admitted driving recklessly while unfit through drink or drugs.
Banning him for a year, Judge Lyons said: ‘I find it hard to imagine a more serious case.’
ITN bosses wield axe on Julia's solo slot
Ivan Waterman, Showbusiness Editor
NEWSREADER Julia Somerville has been axed from her regular slot on News at Ten.
Julia, 45, will now deputise for anchorman Trevor McDonald, taking the helm only on Sunday evenings and holidays.
Bosses insisted she had not been shunted sideways, but insiders said management was making her ‘more and more agitated’.
‘We've all had a lot of aggravation of late.
We're getting sick of criticism, especially when it comes from our own offices,’ said a newsroom source.
‘People aren't allowing us to just get on with the job.
They want instant results and are asking the impossible.’
Julia, who had just returned to work after major brain surgery, was given the three-times-a-week slot Focus on Britain in the revamped News at Ten.
Trevor McDonald was made solo frontman.
When the programme's ratings dipped immediately after the November revamp, Focus came in for the heaviest criticism.
If it is kept, John Suchet, Nick Owen or Sonia Ruseler may take Julia's place.
An ITN spokesman said Julia had not been demoted.
He added: ‘She's pleased to be back doing straightforward presenting.’
News at Ten's viewing figures appeared back on track last night.
According to the Broadcasters' Audience Research Board, it had an average of 7.8 million viewers across the week.
Just after the revamp it sank to 7.1 million.
News chief Stewart Purvis said: ‘Talk of a ratings collapse is nonsense.’
Baby killer jailed for life
A MOTHER who beat her baby daughter to death was convicted of murder yesterday and jailed for life.
Kuldip Binning, 26, got in a rage over feeding problems with 10-week-old Kirynteeb, Leicester Crown Court was told.
Binning, of North Evington, Leics, claimed she accidentally dropped the baby.
Boys drown after falling through thin ice on lake
David Leigh
A TEENAGE boy died trying to save a pal drowning under the ice of a frozen lake yesterday.
Darren Osbourne, 15, struggled to keep 14-year-old Andrew Gaunt's head above water before the pair both slipped under.
Two firemen roped themselves together and stripped off their heavy clothing to plunge into the 20ft deep lake in a desperate attempt to rescue the lads.
The crewmen had to be pulled from the freezing water by colleagues in an inflatable boat.
Paul Burr, John Cooke and Phil Lester spent the night in hospital recovering from hypothermia.
They were said to be ‘OK but distressed and exhausted’.
Earlier, weeping parents had rushed to the popular beauty spot at Holme Hall, Chesterfield, Derbys, near where the boys lived.
They were last night being comforted by friends.
Witness Joanne Torr, 12, who saw the pals drown, said: ‘One of the boys fell in the water and banged his head and the other went in after him.
‘They both started screaming and then just sank.’
Her father Barry said: ‘She said the boys were skating on the ice, it cracked and one of them fell in.
His friend tried to pull him out but went in as well.
‘When the fire brigade arrived, they could see the boys under the ice but couldn't get to them.
‘It's a terrible thing to happen so close to Christmas.’
Fireman Chris Turner, in charge of the rescue operation, said: ‘We tried everything we possibly could but we just couldn't reach the lads.
‘It was heart-breaking.
They were about 45 metres away from us, right in the middle of the pond.
‘One of the boys was still visible when we arrived but he disappeared beneath the surface.’
Mr Turner, the county's assistant divisional fire officer, praised Darren's courage.
‘He was a very brave young man,’ he said.
The bodies of Darren and Andrew, who were both pupils at Newbold Community School, Chesterfield, were recovered by police frogmen.
The lake they had been playing on is a former open-cast mining site which has only recently been transformed into a countryside park.
It is known locally as a popular place for children to play.
Notices warning of the dangers of thin ice were put up in the last few days when the lake froze over.
But police said children had ignored them and even as rescue workers left the scene they had to warn two more boys who were about to go out on to the ice.
Worker wins rig disaster payout
A WORKER who saw friends and colleagues perish in the Piper Alpha disaster is entitled to damages for psychiatric injury, the High Court ruled yesterday.
Francis McFarlane, 44, has not worked since he witnessed the oil rig blaze which killed 164 workers in July 1988.
Mrs Justice Smith ruled that the father of five from Alloa, East Stirling, was a victim of the ‘horrifying calamity’ due to his closeness to it.
Occidental, owner of the Piper Alpha, owed Mr McFarlane, a painter aboard the doomed platform, a ‘duty of care’.
He had watched the drama unfold from a support vessel.
The judge was satisfied he told what he believed to be the truth about his fear for his own safety and his shock and horror at the suffering and death of many men, some of them friends.
In evidence Mr McFarlane said: ‘I can remember shaking, wanting to be sick, trying to retch.
I had no control.’
The amount of damages will be assessed later.
Shop raider makes spectacle of himself
A SHORT-SIGHTED burglar tried to break into an optician's but couldn't see the right way in.
Jobless Peter Urben, 43, clambered on to the roof of what he thought was the optician's and ended up in the carpet shop next door.
Police were called to the shop in Southampton after a passer-by spotted Urben lowering himself through the roof into the showroom.
Geoffrey Onoufriou, defending, said Urben, of Portswood, Southampton, was trying to steal a pair of glasses because he couldn't afford to buy them.
‘Perhaps it is saying something when I tell you he was aiming for the optician's and ended up in the carpet shop,’ he said.
‘He landed on a pile of carpets which broke his fall rather than his legs.’
Urben admitted breaking into the carpet shop and was fined £60 by the city's magistrates.
The law could not protect this man from thugs.
When he did it for himself, the law jailed him
Ian Key
THE vigilante businessman who was cleared last week of murdering a suspected car vandal was jailed for 18 months yesterday for an alternative charge of affray.
Company director Norman Waller, 34, admitted killing Terence Malone, 24, with a chisel and wounding two others.
Mr Justice Roch was handed a petition from neighbours at Low Fell, Tyne and Wear, urging mercy for the ‘highly respected’ father of three.
But the judge said: ‘This offence is so serious that only a custodial sentence can be justified.
‘The sentence must also make it clear to others that the law will not permit individuals of excellent character, such as yourself, to take the law into their own hands.’
For the normally mild-mannered businessman it was the ultimate irony.
The law had failed, time and again, to protect his property and that of his neighbours.
He had felt driven, as the judge said, to take that law into his own hands.
Now the forces of law and order that left vandals to do as they pleased were putting him behind bars.
Norman Waller and his neighbours at Low Fell suffered an endless plague of crime before the night he finally snapped.
Vandals struck six times at his car and his parents' car.
Only three of the 20 homes in his street had escaped the burglars and the wreckers.
Waller's double-glazing business was caught up in the plague when hooligans set his small factory on fire.
Burglars smashed in the steel shutters and even dug a tunnel under the building in an attempted raid.
A desperate Waller moved the business 20 miles away to Fencehouses, Co Durham, and struggled on.
But then, last February, on Valentine's Night, it happened.
Waller glanced out of the window at home and saw youths tampering with a neighbour's car.
He grabbed a chisel and, with the neighbour's student son, Peter Fay, 22, went on a vigilante mission.
There was a scuffle.
And Terence Malone fell dying, stabbed in the chest.
Fay, like Waller, was charged with murder and affray, but acquitted.
‘At that time, people on Tyneside were a people under siege,’ defence QC David Robson told Newcastle Crown Court yesterday.
‘They suffered from car crime, theft, burglary, vandalism, violence and riots, which have, sadly, not disappeared.
‘It was against this background that a man of impeccable character, a man of peace, felt such a degree of frustration and threat to the respectable little community in which he lived that he snapped.’
Waller did not blame the police for the crime wave, the QC said, adding: ‘He appreciates there was nothing they could do, given their resources.’
After the case, Waller's brother-in-law, Jimmy Babbidge, 47, protested:
‘It's disgraceful.
He should have been given a medal for trying to catch a car vandal.
Somebody has to stand up to these scum.’
Waller's wife, Susan, and their two small children have been moved by police to a secret address, away from Tyneside, for their own safety.
Waller, it is feared, may face ‘reprisals’ from fellow prisoners.
Making sure the victim remains a victim, all the way.
Widow's killer left clue
A FOOTPRINT in a pool of blood could provide the key to the brutal murder of a 99-year-old widow.
Sarah Burke died early yesterday morning, two days after being savagely beaten by an intruder.
Mrs Burke, who would have been 100 in three weeks, was found unconscious and bleeding heavily.
Her jaw and cheekbone were broken, and her room at The Green residential home in Redruth, Cornwall, was splattered with blood.
Police believe the footprint in blood could help trap the killer.
It will give them crucial details about his shoe size and probable height and weight.
Mrs Burke's daughter, Mrs Doreen Leverton, 63, said: ‘You always expect a parent to die sometime but not in this way.
‘It was an horrendous attack on a little old lady in her bed and whoever did it could strike again.
Someone out there must know something and I appeal to them to come forward.’
Superbrain quits school
A GIRL of 11 has been taken away from school because she is too brainy.
Samantha Newbery's IQ of 156 puts her among Britain's cleverest one per cent according to Mensa, the club for geniuses.
Samantha's parents Keith and Denise say the education system does not cater for pupils like her and now they are educating her at home on the Isle of Wight.
Mrs Newbery said: ‘She wasn't getting the stimulation she needed.
Bright children are dragged down to the lowest common denominator.’
Local education chief Kit Hartley said a new policy for gifted children was planned.
999 man's grim find
AMBULANCE man Terry Payne raced to a car crash and found his niece dead in the wreckage.
Mr Payne, 48, a Mid Glamorgan paramedic, made the grim discovery when he was called to a two-car smash at Deri, near Bargoed.
His brother Tony's daughter, Nicky, 25, lay dead beside injured boyfriend Greg Laurence.
Rampage destroys cancer lab
A RAVE party-goer high on Ecstasy wiped out years of vital cancer research when he went on a wrecking spree in a university laboratory.
Unemployed Les Williams, 22, caused ‘mayhem and destruction’ when he broke into Keele University, Staffs, after taking the drug.
He admitted burglary, handling stolen goods and allowing himself to be carried in a stolen car and was jailed for 21 months yesterday by Stoke-on-Trent Crown Court.
Much of the £25,000 of equipment taken in the raid was recovered from the stolen car.
But Assistant Recorder Robin Onions said the scientific damage Williams had caused was ‘incalculable’.
Samantha Forsythe, prosecuting, said Williams and two other men broke into Keele's biology department after driving from the North-West in a stolen car.
They scattered drugs and lab equipment, and opened a fridge door containing radioactive materials marked ‘dangerous’.
Miss Forsythe said: ‘Mayhem and destruction was caused in that department.
Someone went berserk in there.’
Party girl's pier plunge
A YOUNG woman plunged off a pier into the sea after a furious row with her boyfriend.
Susan Bate, 20, struggled in the icy waters of the Solent off Southsea, Hants, for 20 minutes.
Boyfriend Garry Curtis, of Bedhampton, Hants, dragged her to safety — and rescuers arrived to find the couple, who had fallen out at a party, kissing and hugging.
Susan, of Portsmouth, was treated for shock.
‘We're not sure if she jumped or fell,’ said a coastguard.
Speedy Ratner faces car ban
FORMER jewel-firm boss Gerald Ratner faces a New Year driving ban for speeding at 110mph-plus in his Mercedes.
Ratner, 43, trapped on the M40 near Oxford, pleaded guilty by letter yesterday.
But the magistrates at Thame, Oxfordshire, refused to deal with the case in his absence.
Ratner, of Hampton Lodge, Bray, Berks, was ordered to appear in person.
Chairman Ken Bailey said unless there were special reasons, a driver doing over 100mph was normally banned.
Three escape arson attack
TWO women and a baby escaped a burning flat after liquid was poured through the letter box and set alight.
Detectives, who are treating the attack as arson and attempted murder, are hunting the baby's father after his 31-year-old wife said he started the blaze.
The mother, her 18-month-old son, a woman friend aged 40, and two police officers, were recovering in hospital from the effects of smoke yesterday.
Scotland Yard refused to identify the victims of Monday night's blaze at Earlsfield, south London.
What a clanger
A DRIVER sparked a major alert when he refused to stop for police because he thought patrol cars still used bells.
The 77-year-old ignored flashing blue lights as he drove nine miles down the middle lane of the M5 at 40mph.
‘Last time I was stopped the car had a bell.
I was waiting for you to gong me,’ he told police.
Hi-de-yo-ho-ho
A RECORD 63,000 people have booked into Butlin's for Christmas.
The company has opened three holiday camps for four-day breaks costing up to £225 a head.
‘It's our most phenomenal Christmas ever,’ said Butlin's spokeswoman Michelle Andjel.
Row as ‘Queen's Speech’ is leaked
By Alan Watkins
A MAJOR row blew up last night after the Queen's Christmas Day speech was apparently leaked to a newspaper.
The recording, which is broadcast to the world, was made only yesterday morning at Sandringham.
According to The Sun — which published the leaked tape — the Queen says: ‘Like many other families we have lived through some difficult days this year.’
She does not mention the break-up of the marriages of Diana and Charles or Andrew and Fergie directly.
But the address underlines the anguish of Her Majesty's speech after the Windsor Castle fire when she referred to 1992 as her ‘annus horribilis’.
The Queen says: ‘The prayers, understanding and sympathy given to us by so many of you in good times and bad have lent us great support and encouragement.
‘It has touched me deeply that much of this has come from those of you who have troubles of your own.’
The Queen goes on: ‘It has indeed been a sombre year.
‘But Christmas is surely the right moment to try to put it behind us and to find a moment to pray for those, wherever they are, who are doing their best in all sorts of ways to make things better in 1993.’
The newspaper says that she ends her speech with the words: ‘There is no magic formula that will transform sorrow into happiness, intolerance into compassion, or war into peace.’
The BBC last night said they were ‘horrified’.
A spokesman added: ‘Any inquiry will centre on whether the tape was illegally copied.
If that is so it could constitute theft.
‘Fewer than a dozen people know the contents of the speech — some at the BBC and some at Buckingham Palace.’
Bomb hidden in chocs tin
TERRORISTS tried to murder a soldier last night by giving him a tin of chocolates containing a bomb.
The soldier stopped a motorist at a checkpoint in Cookstown, Co Tyrone, and was given the tin of Quality Street.
An Army expert defused a 1kg Semtex bomb buried in the chocolates.
‘In this season of goodwill it shows the evil which people will plumb to murder,’ said a policeman.
Court backs M E sufferer
A TEACHER made legal history yesterday by becoming the first person to win damages for so-called yuppie flu.
Former trainee priest Ronald Page, 50, has been unable to work since a car crash turned his mild condition into a chronic illness, the High Court heard.
His marriage had suffered, and his total exhaustion left the father-of-three unable to even cuddle his young children.
Announcing the award of £162,150, Mr Justice Otton said it was the first time such an action had been brought.
The illness, Myalgic Encephalomyelitis — also known as chronic fatigue syndrome — must cause Mr Page great anxiety, grievance and sadness, said the judge.
It was often not recognised as genuine but as ‘indolence, malingering and hysteria’.
One doctor even diagnosed Mr Page as a paranoid schizophrenic.
Mr Page, of Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, had suffered mildly from the illness since he was 23.
He suffered a relapse after the car crash in 1987.
Now his family wear clothes from jumble sales and grow their own food to save money.
The damages will be paid by the insurers of the other car driver.
The judge ordered £100,000 to be withheld pending an appeal.
Face of model in disco beating
A YOUNG model told last night how she was brutally beaten after a minor row in a nightclub.
Claire McLaren, 16, was punched and kicked senseless by a thug after she was accused of pushing past his girlfriend.
Her face was so disfigured her mother didn't recognise her when she arrived at the hospital.
Claire, who has starred in TV commercials, was followed to the toilets by the man and battered unconscious.
She had been enjoying the evening at the Ritzy club in Streatham, south-west London.
She said: ‘I brushed past a girl as I went to the toilet and she yelled I'd done it deliberately.
‘I was pushed by her and two other girls.’
The trouble was broken up by bouncers.
But as Claire walked away she was followed by the boyfriend.
‘He shoved me on to a toilet seat and punched me,’ Claire said.
‘Then he kicked me.
He even left his foot imprint in the middle of my head.’
Claire, of Gipsy Hill, south-east London, needed 10 stitches and was treated for black eyes and severe bruises at King's College Hospital.
Mother Stella, 41, said: ‘Her face was swollen black and blue — she bore no relation to my beautiful daughter.
‘It is beyond belief this could happen over such a petty row.
He was trying to scar her as much as possible.’
A relative has put up a £1,000 reward for information on the attacker.
Ecstasy raver's rampage wrecks cancer research
A RAVE party-goer high on Ecstasy wiped out years of vital cancer research when he went on a wrecking spree in a university laboratory.
Unemployed Les Williams, 22, caused ‘mayhem and destruction’ when he broke into Keele University, Staffs, after taking the drug.
He was jailed for 21 months at Stoke-on-Trent Crown Court yesterday after admitting burglary, handling stolen goods and allowing himself to be carried in a stolen car.
Assistant Recorder Robin Onions said the damage Williams had caused was ‘incalculable’.
‘Damage has been caused to years and years of university research,’ he said.
Samantha Forsythe, prosecuting, said Williams and two other men broke into Keele's biology department at about 7am on July 10 after driving from the North-West in a stolen car.
They scattered drugs and lab equipment over the floor, and opened a fridge door containing radioactive materials marked ‘dangerous’.
Miss Forsythe said: ‘Mayhem and destruction was caused in that department.
Someone went berserk in there.’
She said years of research had effectively been ‘poured down the drain’.
A cleaner disturbed Williams who by this time was wearing a researcher's white coat complete with name tag, the court heard.
He insisted he had permission to be there — a story he repeated to police.
More than £25,000 worth of scientific equipment was missing, most of which was recovered from the boot of the three men's stolen car.
Fiona Jordan, defending, said Williams could remember little of what happened because he had taken Ecstasy at a rave party.
Keele University's registrar Dr David Cohen said last night: ‘This incident undoubtedly set back research.
Any hold-up is potentially damaging to patients in the long run.’
Clamp driver in saw terror
A FURIOUS motorist held two people hostage with a hacksaw after his car was clamped.
John Davies screamed at police: ‘Get back or I will cut her,’ when he grabbed hold of terrified telephonist Alma Rodham, 50.
He had earlier held the blade to the throat of shopkeeper's nephew Gursawak Singh, 19, and snarled: ‘Tell the police I have got a hostage.’
Davies, 33, also cut through the shop's telephone wire and kicked a taxi driver in the groin.
He had flown into a rage when he found his car, left in a private car park in Hounslow, west London, was clamped, the Old Bailey heard yesterday.
The former soldier grew even angrier when he tried to cut through the metal with the hacksaw but failed.
He was finally restrained by police after he grabbed Mrs Rodham as she waited for a bus.
Davies, a security guard, of Feltham, north London, was jailed for 30 months after he admitted two charges of false imprisonment and causing actual bodily harm.
The court heard he was hooked on tranquillisers after splitting from his wife.
But instead of calming him down, they had exactly the opposite effect.
‘It was an explosion of anger,’ said his counsel Keith Handrill.
Judge Alan Rawley told Davies: ‘The rampage you went on terrified perfectly innocent people.’
Low pay award
EMPLOYMENT Secretary Gillian Shephard was today awarded the title ‘Scrooge of the Year’ because of the Government's plans to abolish wages councils.
The Low Pay Unit, which sets minimum rates of pay for 2.5 milion workers, announced that Mrs Shephard had condemned the poorest families to even lower wages.
The annual award is normally given to a boss providing the worst pay and conditions but because of unemployment no one is making nominations.
Tragedy that makes Diana the loneliest mother this Christmas
By Chris Hutchins
PRINCESS Diana will spend this Christmas wracked with heartache, separated from everyone she loves best in the world.
The anguish of being parted from her beloved sons William and Harry will be made even worse by the knowledge that she can no longer share her troubles with her father.
In past years, Diana knew that Earl Spencer would be a shoulder to cry on and a loving counsellor.
His death in March was a bitter blow to her — and spending Christmas at his ancestral home will only remind her of her loss.
As Prince Charles watches his sons open their presents at Sandringham, his wife will be 80 miles away at Althorp.
As she shares Christmas dinner with her brother Charles, Diana will experience for the first time the trauma she has dreaded since the cracks first showed in her marriage.
While royal pundits agreed that she appeared to have emerged victorious, getting all she wanted from this month's separation from Prince Charles, there was one bleak scenario that darkened her horizon.
This weekend that fear will be realised as she finds herself isolated from the boys who, as she has so often pointed out, mean everything to her.
It is Diana's own decision not to be with them.
The princes had no choice: William was required to be with the Queen at Christmas and neither woman would part him from his brother.
But presented with the royal ultimatum to spend the festive season in the bosom of a family with which she is at war, Diana made her heartbreak decision.
She cannot bear the prospect of another gloomy Christmas on the Norfolk estate which holds such awful memories.
It was there where, in a fit of depression, she hurled herself down the stairs in a cry for help.
The princess's decision to allow friends to go public with details of such bizarre goings-on created the yawning gulf with her in-laws.
Never before has a member of the Royal Family stepped so far out of line and the Queen is not the only one who blames her for many of the misfortunes which have befallen the House of Windsor this year.
‘Had Diana been within 10 miles of Windsor Castle on the day of the fire, they would have blamed her for starting it,’ admitted a senior royal source last night.
Therefore merely the thought of exchanging gifts with the people she holds in mutual contempt was more awful than the prospect of being without her sons on Christmas Day.
Just last month at the London Drug Prevention Conference the Princess made an impassioned plea for family unity.
She implored: ‘If the immediate family breaks up the problems created can still be resolved but only if the children have been brought up from the very start with the feeling that they are wanted, loved and valued.’
This is the woman who tucks her children into bed with the question: ‘Who loves you most?’
And never for a moment has their answer been in doubt.
Until this weekend mother and children had only been kept apart by official engagements.
The moments she calls quality time have always belonged to the boys.
It is what makes the tragedy of this lost weekend all the deeper for Diana, who must know that this could be the pattern of the future.
For increasingly William and Harry will be schooled by the Queen's courtiers into the public life that is destined to become their duty.
The hunting, fishing and shooting which Diana detests will be held up to them as badges of manhood.
As a mother herself, no one is more aware than the Queen of the terrible dilemma Diana wrestled with in reaching the momentous decision to be the loser in a parental battle all too familiar to divided families.
Ironically, the Duchess of York has chosen to do precisely the opposite.
In order to be with her children, Fergie has sacrificed her independence to pay royal homage, accepting the humiliation of being ‘quarantined’ in a lodge on the Sandringham estate.
Sadly, for both Her Majesty's daughters-in-law, this Christmas there is no room at the inn.
‘I felt guilty for not being there’
By Isla Whitcroft
NO ONE knows the pain Princess Diana will feel being separated from her children at Christmas better than Hester Finn.
Hester, of Chiswick, west London, left her 12-year-old son Thomas in California when she split up with her husband last year and she and her other child Katy, 18, spent a miserable first Christmas back in England.
‘My main emotion was one of terrible guilt,’ says Hester, a restaurant manager.
‘I wondered if I could have done something, anything to prevent being apart from my son.
‘I missed not being able to put the stocking on the end of his bed like I always did, and not seeing his face when he woke up.
‘Katy and I were living in a small flat and we were so low that we didn't even bother with a Christmas tree.
‘In the end we looked at each other and said ‘Let's cancel Christmas’.’
For Hester, the problem was compounded by the fact that she was thousands of miles away from Thomas.
‘Princess Diana is lucky in that respect,’ she says.
‘At least she will get to see her boys at some point over the holiday.
But I had to be content with a phone call.’
Hester is aware, too, that her absence made Thomas very unhappy on Christmas Day.
‘He was very sweet about it, he told me how much he liked the presents and what he and his dad were doing.
‘But he was pretty down in the dumps and I felt terrible because I couldn't be there to make his Christmas complete.
‘Not to be there for your children at special times is almost like failing as a mother.’
This year, Hester is spending Christmas with friends who have lots of young children: ‘That will help to fill the void,’ she says.
‘You have to make plans.
If Diana thinks she can just try to have a normal Christmas without the boys she is going to have a very miserable day.’
Back to court threat on pits
MINERS were threatening last night to drag Michael Heseltine back to court for not ordering 10 axed pits to be reopened.
Union lawyers may sue the President of the Board of Trade for failing to act on a judge's ruling that the shutdowns were illegal.
British Coal refused to let 150 miners go down the pit at Silverhill, Mansfield.
Instead, the men were each handed Christmas bonuses and a bottle of whisky.
At another Nottinghamshire colliery, Cotgrave, gravel was being dumped on the site ready to fill in the pit despite the court ruling.
Another lengthy court battle would be a severe embarrassment for Mr Heseltine and prolong the Government's agony over the mishandled pit closure programme.
The miners took their fight for survival to Downing Street yesterday with a 638,000-name petition opposing the closures.
Both the Government and union lawyers were poring over Lord Justice Iain Glidewell's ruling to see if he intended the 10 pits to be re-opened.
The unions say he did but, crucially, neither British Coal nor Mr Heseltine say there is anything in the document to lead to this interpretation.
Union solicitor Mark Stephens said: ‘Mr Heseltine has got to review his position very carefully, with a view to consideration of contempt of court.’
Costa Del Solitude
A FORMER hotel worker will spend Christmas alone in a tent after his retirement home was bulldozed by Spanish planners.
David Herrick, 60, returned to the Costa del Sol in October, after a holiday back home in Hull, to find a vacant lot where his house used to be.
‘It was incredible.
They had removed my house and everything in it,’ he said.
Mr Herrick is now fighting for compensation.
He is believed to be an innocent victim of a clean-up campaign which included the demolition of buildings.
Party pooper
THE office party is in danger of extinction as six out of 10 companies slash their Christmas spending.
Hard-up bosses are dropping gifts, bonuses and even cards to save money, says a survey by the London Chamber of Commerce.
Just 30 per cent give a gift to clients.
Only one in four entertain customers.
The findings reflect the impact of the recession.
Since last Christmas 64 per cent of London companies have had redundancies.
A Chamber spokesman said: ‘The best present anyone can get is a job.’
Girl raped in TV town
A TEENAGER was raped in the quiet town where BBC's Last Of The Summer Wine is filmed.
The rapist approached the 17-year-old waitress in a bus station at Holmfirth, West Yorks, and subjected her to an hour-long ordeal.
He told the terrified girl he had a knife, then made her walk down a river footpath, across a bridge and into an alley.
‘The attack went on for a long time and the victim is obviously very shocked,’ said police.
The attacker was aged between 15 and 20, and wore a light-coloured jacket and blue jeans.
Backpack pair hurt
TWO British backpackers are fighting for their lives after a car smash in Australia.
Mark Skinner and Paul Higham, both 23, were airlifted to Lismore Hospital with multiple injuries after their vehicle was hit head on by a runaway car in northern New South Wales.
The pair, from Whitefield, Greater Manchester, were travelling from Sydney to Brisbane.
Their friend, Peter Derbyshire, from Flixton, Greater Manchester, who was driving, suffered minor injuries.
Nightmare of Joanna suspect
Bob Graham
FITNESS fanatic Brian Cox spent a nightmare 36 hours as the prime suspect in the disappearance of aerobics teacher Joanna Grenside.
The police took his house apart looking for possible clues after she vanished from a leisure centre car park.
Even his clothes were taken away for testing.
He spent two sleepless nights worrying that he might end up on a murder charge.
Joanna, 25, whom Brian befriended during training sessions at the centre, later turned up and confessed that her disappearance was a hoax.
Brian, 27, talked exclusively to TODAY.
Cut game prices or face law
Paul Wilenius
COMPUTER games giants have been warned to slash prices or face legal action.
Labour consumer affairs spokesman Nigel Griffiths has given Sega and Nintendo a three-week deadline to act.
If they do not, he will force a Bill through parliament ‘to free up the market’.
His move follows exclusive revelations in TODAY about a secret Government inquiry into the high cost of the games.
The Japanese giants control half the £500 million a year market.
The Office of Fair Trading said: ‘We are studying the evidence.’
The Queen sacks BBC
Eben Black, Political Correspondent
THE BBC is to be stripped of responsibility for the Queen's annual Christmas TV broadcast, ending a tradition going back 60 years.
The move follows the publication of the Queen's Christmas message 48 hours before it was due to be broadcast to the nation and claims that a BBC employee leaked the speech to a newspaper.
The Queen was so upset that Palace officials asked the Government to step in.
As yet another royal storm burst, an angry Palace aide, referring to the Queen's year of troubles, asked: ‘What else can go wrong?’
The Palace was told that the only way to guarantee protection of her broadcast in future was to make it part of the Official Secrets Act and bring it under Government control.
Since the first royal radio message in 1932, which was followed by the first TV broadcast on Christmas Day 1957, the BBC has been in charge of security.
Producers checked with the Queen and Buckingham Palace and then distributed copies to other TV and radio companies round the world.
The system worked perfectly — until yesterday.
Now professional Government information officials will be charged with preparing the programme.
Unlike BBC employees or freelance technicians, they are covered by the Official Secrets Act — which imposes prison sentences for unofficial leaks.
Newspapers would become part of the agreement to keep the message secret until after the traditional 3pm TV broadcast.
The Palace was determined to hit back in a growing battle with the national Press, TV and radio.
Aides know only a TV or radio employee could have taken the tape.
And last night they declared war.
The row followed publication of what was said to be the Queen's full message in The Sun newspaper.
The Palace hit back immediately by withdrawing the newspaper's pass to take pictures of the family Christmas at Sandringham and warning other newspapers about upsetting the royals this Christmas.
‘They're paranoic here about secrecy,’ a Palace source said.
‘After the Diana and Charles tapes, now this.
‘They're getting in a right old frenzy.
It's a case of pull up the drawbridge and cut off the phones.’
BBC bosses were reeling last night over a claim by The Sun that one of its employees was responsible for the leak.
The BBC supplied part of the crew for the recording at Sandringham on Monday and copied it for distribution.
More than 120 copies were in the hands of various TV and broadcasting units by 4pm on Tuesday, the time The Sun says it got its copy.
A small outside broadcast team, led by head of the corporation's events unit Philip Gilbert, was in overall charge of making the programme.
Just three of the 16-strong team — which included four outside contractors — were allowed in the room when the Queen actually recorded her speech.
The Queen's broadcast has traditionally been a closely guarded secret — and it was seen as more sensitive than usual this year after what the Queen has termed her ‘annus horribilis’ or horrible year.
In fact, the message is seen as having little news value and is confined to wishes of a happier 1993.
‘It hardly contains any State secrets,’ a royal expert said.
‘Why is everyone getting so hot under the collar about it?
‘If the Palace officials weren't so obsessed with secrecy, it could have been issued to the Press in the normal way.
‘Most of them would have treated it as a nice little Christmas story about this powerful but sad woman with an unhappy family Now it's all been turned into major crisis.’
The BBC last night promised a full investigation.
But a spokesman claimed there was no proof it was guilty.
Spokesman Kevin Flynn added: ‘We regret that it has occured.
We hope it does not interfere with the enjoyment of viewers over Christmas Day.’
A Buckingham Palace spokesman said: ‘Once the BBC has conducted its inquiry we will need to consider any further action necessary, including the future distribution arrangements for the broadcast.’
Although the Palace refused to be drawn on what further action it might take, it is clear legal moves have not been ruled out.
Unrepentant Sun editor Kelvin MacKenzie went on BBC radio to declare he got the story ‘through our journalistic enterprise — and thanks to a BBC employee, I should add’.
Quizzed on the allegation by shocked interviewer Nick Clark, he said: ‘You work for the BBC.
I thought you might be interested.’
A spokesman for The Sun later confirmed: ‘We wish to make it absolutely clear that the tape of the Queen's message was obtained through a BBC employee.’
Peter Preston, editor of The Guardian newspaper and a member of the watchdog Press Complaints Commission, said he believed The Sun had not broken the speech embargo but had simply published a story ahead of time.
But furious Tory MPs demanded action last night over what they called another example of press intrusion into the affairs of the royals.
MP and broadcasting expert Roger Gale said: ‘I think it just a cheap journalists' trick on behalf of The Sun to try to score points over their rivals.’
Teresa Gorman, MP for Billericay, has called on Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke for a clampdown on any employees who leak information for profit.
‘People who do this sort of thing should not only lose their jobs but have any money they make from the deal confiscated,’ she said.
Princess of Wales's sons drive off to Sandringham
In not much of a festive mood, Princess Diana's sons drove off yesterday to Sandringham and the first-ever Christmas without their mother, who has rejected the Queen's invitation to join the family festivities.
Prince William, 10, chewed his lip anxiously while eight-year-old Harry stared wistfully ahead, dreaming of Christmases past.
The great getaway
Ian Fletcher and Matthew Benns
AIRPORTS, roads and trains were jam-packed with holidaymakers last night as the great Christmas getaway began.
While many children were hoping for a white Christmas more than 500,000 families were packing their suitcases and heading for the sun.
A spokeswoman for tour operator Thomson, which is taking 80,000 people away, said: ‘We are going to have people further afield this Christmas than ever before.
‘The popular long-haul spots this year are the Caribbean, the Indian Ocean resorts, Egypt and Kenya.’
Heathrow Airport expected to handle a total of 600,000 passengers in the five days leading up to Christmas Day — a six per cent increase on last year.
It was expecting a further 25,000 on Christmas Day.
Gatwick, the UK's busiest holiday airport, will handle 600,000 passengers over the Christmas and New Year period.
Police and motoring organisations urged drivers to keep their speed down and take extra care as freezing fog gripped the country.
Part of the M1 was closed for the second time in three days following a multiple pile-up in sub-zero temperatures.
One person died in the crash involving 30 vehicles on the southbound carriageway at junction 30, near Chesterfield, Derbyshire.
On Monday three people were killed and several seriously hurt in a multiple collision on the same section of the motorway in freezing fog.
Derbyshire Assistant Chief Constable Don Dovaston said: ‘People seem to have a total disregard for the safety of themselves and other road users.
‘These drivers are selfish and some of the driving we have witnessed was beyond belief.
Motorists are doing 70mph in dreadful conditions when you can barely see in front of your nose.’
A woman motorcyclist was killed when she collided with a car near Sprays Bridge, East Sussex.
An ambulance service spokesman blamed the icy driving conditions.
In another accident two people were taken to hospital after a three-car pile-up on the A350, near Chippenham, in Wilts.
Last night AA Roadwatch urged drivers to take care in the icy conditions and said it anticipated problems with heavy traffic during the holiday period.
‘Obviously a lot of people are travelling too fast,’ a spokesman said.
‘They should slow down.’
Police said ice was making roads dangerous in Avon, Somerset, Wiltshire and Gloucestershire.
There was a 40mph limit on the Severn Bridge, linking England and Wales, and on the Avon Bridge, near Bristol.
Visibility on the M3 in Hampshire was down to 100 yards in places, while heavy frost was making driving ‘tricky’ in Dorset.
London Weather Centre said the cold could continue through to next week, with temperatures as much as four degrees lower than the average 5-7C (41F-45).
Despite the cold snap, a white Christmas was an unlikely prospect for most people.
Those living in the Scottish mountains were most likely to see snow.
Freeze hits sport
HORSE racing will be the sport hardest hit by the cold snap.
Five of the eight courses with Boxing Day meetings — Wetherby, Sedgefield, Market Rasen, Huntingdon and Wolverhampton — are pessimistic about the chances of racing.
Kempton, Newton Abbot and Wincanton reported no problems.
Soccer's Coca Cola Cup fifth round tie between Scarborough and Arsenal fell victim to a frost-bound pitch last night.
Undersoil heating at other grounds meant the Premier League was confident of promoting a full Boxing Day programme on what is traditionally its best-attended day of the year.
Bomb alerts halt shopping centres
Liz Moore
CITIES across Britain were plunged into chaos as bomb hoaxes emptied busy shopping centres and brought transport systems to a halt.
A series of alerts all over the mainland came as the IRA yesterday declared a 72-hour Christmas truce for Northern Ireland.
Last-minute shoppers in London were again targeted.
Parts of Oxford Street and nearby Maddox Street were cordoned off and Charing Cross station cleared following warnings of bombs, one of them said to be in Oxford Street's Virgin Megastore.
In Manchester, police were forced to evacuate the areas surrounding bus stations at the Arndale Centre, Chorlton Street, Piccadilly and Stephenson Square for up to three hours while searches were carried out.
The centre of Milton Keynes was sealed off for several hours after a coded telephone message warned of a bomb in the town's main shopping centre.
A hoax in Newcastle shut down the main BR railway station, and in Tyne and Wear thousands of tube passengers were stranded when all 46 Metro stations were evacuated while 37 miles of track was searched.
In Ulster, the Provisional IRA issued a brief statement announcing a ‘ceasefire’ over the Christmas holiday.
But it made no mention of a halt to the mainland bombing campaign.
The statement, signed P. O'Neill, Dublin, said: ‘Volunteers of the IRA across the six counties will temporarily suspend hostile military operations for a period of 72 hours.’
It said the truce would begin at midnight last night and end at midnight on Boxing Day.
The Ulster ceasefire was not unexpected — there have been Christmas truces in previous years.
But security chiefs in the province intend to keep their men on full alert.
Bonus for Santa
STRANDED airline passengers were entertained to an impromptu carol concert by an airport's staff choir after fog closed the runways yesterday.
The Nightriders choir, including Santa, helped 1,000 passengers pass the time at Stansted, Essex, as they waited to be taken by bus to Luton or Gatwick where their flights had been diverted.
Thirteen outbound flights were cancelled.
Many of the passengers were on their way home to Dublin or off on holiday in Amsterdam, Paris or Jersey.
The fog brought some good.
The Nightriders collected cash for Children in Need from passengers who were said to be full of Christmas spirit.
Lamont on the mat over bill
THE chancellor will be reprimanded for hiding a £4,700 payment used to evict a prostitute from his former home.
The Comptroller and Auditor General Sir John Bourne, who compiled a report for the National Audit Office, is known to be deeply concerned that the payment from the public purse was hidden.
The payment was made from a little-used Treasury account, normally used for Minister's stationery and paper.
The reprimand will put more pressure on Morman Lamont, already under siege for his economic policy, his Access bill, and the gifts received to pay the Miss Whiplash bill.
Though Premier John Major has said he will not sack his chancellor before the Spring Budget its is very likely he will be forced to dismiss him soon after.
The report will be handed to the Public Accounts Committee in the New Year.
A committee member said last night: ‘As soon as we get it, it will be made public.
‘It is disgraceful the chancellor should get this money and that no one should be told about it.’
Wages hit new peak
WORKERS are earning more in their pay packets despite the recession, Government figures showed yesterday.
Total personal income leapt by six per cent during 1992 while inflation averaged around four per cent.
Most people are putting aside any extra cash.
Savings rose to 12.5 per cent of income between July and September, a one per cent rise on the last quarter.
BR: We'll try harder
PERFORMANCE targets are to be raised next year on five British Rail routes.
The lines — all on Network SouthEast — include the so-called Misery line from London to Tilbury and Southend.
The punctuality target will rise from 80 per cent to 85 per cent.
BR will have to pay season ticket-holders five per cent discounts under the Passengers' Charter, if it is not met.
Squidgy tape Gilbey is Di house guest
Caroline Sutton
DASHING James Gilbey is expected to join Princess Diana for a Christmas party at her family home.
Gilbey, 35, the man on the Squidgy tapes, has been invited to spend Boxing Day with Diana at Althorp House, Northants.
He will join a shoot in the grounds of the stately home with her brother Charles and later meet up with the princess and other guests for a party in the evening.
Gilbey's special friendship was revealed in the Diana tapes scandal.
The Lotus car executive was heard whispering ‘I love you’ and called Diana ‘Squidgy’during a taped conversation on his mobile phone.
In reply the princess told him he was ‘the nicest person in the whole world’.
He has been one of Diana's closest confidants during the difficult years of her rocky marriage.
She would regularly pour out her heart to the kind-hearted friend who she has known since her teenage days.
She has stood by him loyally, despite the controversy surrounding their friendship.
Colleagues of Gilbey have always maintained that his relationship with the princess is strictly platonic.
They say that the Squidgy tapes indicated his supporting nature.
But the scandal has cost Gilbey dearly.
He split up from his long-term girlfriend Lady Alethea Savile, 29, a fortnight ago, after she found the media pressure too much to handle.
Friends say she never recovered from hearing Gilbey, who she had been dating for two years, tell Diana he loved her — 53 times in the 23 minute call.
Handsome Gilbey has known Diana since she first moved to London as a teenager.
He is in her close circle of trusted friends and was named as a major source for Andrew Morton's book Diana: Her True Story.
He revealed details of the royal couple's unhappy marriage and told of Diana's bulimia.
He is also very close to Diana's brother, Earl Spencer, and has attended other shooting parties on the estate.
In the summer Earl Spencer and his wife Victoria went on holiday to the Italian Riviera with Gilbey and Lady Alethea.
Queeniegate
THE Queen's speech was leaked less than 24 hours after it was recorded.
Here is how events unfolded:
Monday 9pm: Finished tape is taken to BBC events unit at Kensington House, Shepherd's Bush, west London, where it is kept ‘under lock and key’, according to a BBC spokesman.
Tuesday 9am: Tape delivered under tight security personally to BBC TV Centre, then handed to duty presentation editor.
Seven copies were made.
10am: Three tapes sent to the BBC1, one to its international relations unit, one to the corporation's See Hear unit to be signed for the deaf, and one to World Service News.
Another tape is made for distribution to other broadcasters.
11am: A BBC worker personally hands tape to Thames TV for ITV network after travelling by taxi to the company in the capital's Euston Road.
Satellite channel BSkyB obtains its copy from Thames.
Radio recording hand-delivered to Independent Radio Network in London's Old Brompton Road, which represents more than 80 commercial radio stations.
3pm: IRN feeds broadcast ‘down the line’ to local radio stations as they record it for their own broadcasts.
BBC provides its 39 local radio stations with line-feed copies of the message, bringing the total to 126.
The message was also fed via satellite to the 50 countries in the Commonwealth.
4pm: The Sun receives copy from a mystery source.
Today the 15 ITV stations were set to receive back-up copies from Thames TV.
All tapes carry clear instructions about a strict embargo until broadcast on Christmas Day.
This year's address was filmed at Sandringham, Norfolk, where the Queen is spending Christmas.
An outside broadcast team led by producer Philip Gilbert, who is head of the BBC events unit, filmed it.
Only three of the 16-strong team were let in the room while the Queen recorded.
They were Mr Gilbert, sound recordist Peter Edwards and cameraman Philip Bonham-Carter, both of whom are independent film-makers and have worked on the broadcast before.
Nine of the crew were BBC staff and the rest were independent.
Editing was done on site to let the Queen see the final cut.
By 3pm on Tuesday there were 126 copies of the tape and the Queen's message had also been sent by satellite link to 50 countries.
By 4pm on Tuesday the Sun had obtained the full contents of the speech from a mystery informant.
‘It came from a BBC employee,’ a spokesman for the newspaper said.
No magic formula to turn sorrow into joy
Here are highlights of The Sun's transcription of the Queen's speech:
I first came here (Sandringham) for Christmas as a grandchild.
Nowadays my grandchildren come here for the same family festival.
To me, this continuity is a great source of comfort in a world of change, tension and violence.
The peace and tranquility of the Norfolk countryside make me realise how fortunate we are, and all the more conscious of the trials and sorrows that so many people are suffering both in this country and around the world.
Like many other families, we have lived through some difficult days this year.
The prayers, understanding and sympathy given to us by so many of you in good times and bad have lent us great support and encouragement.
It has touched me deeply, but much of this has come from those of you who have troubles of your own.
As some of you may have heard me observe, it has indeed been a sombre year.
But Christmas is surely the right moment to try to put it behind us and to find a moment to pray for those, wherever they are, who are doing their best in all sorts of ways to make things better in 1993.
Curiously enough, it was a sad event which did as much as anything in 1992 to help me put my own worries into perspective.
Just before he died, Leonard Cheshire came to see us with his fellow members of the Order of Merit.
What struck me more forcibly than his physical courage was the fact that he made no reference to his own illness but only to the trips and plans to make life better for others.
He embodied the message in those well-known lines: Kindness in another's trouble, courage in one's own'.
There is no magic formula that will transform sorrow into happiness, intolerance into compassion or war into peace.
But inspiration can change human behav iour.
Those who devote their lives to others have that inspiration.
And they know and we know where to look for help in finding it.
That help can be readily given if we only have the faith to ask.
I and my family, as we approach a New Year, will draw strength from this faith in our commitment to your service in the coming years.
Missing son's big day was the final straw for Mr Europe
Graham Brough
EURO minister Tristan Garel-Jones made his decision to quit after missing his son's engagement celebrations.
EC commitments kept John Major's Mr Europe hundreds of miles away when 26-year-old Julian asked sweetheart Anna to marry him.
‘I had to meet my son's future in-laws on my own the week before last,’ his wife Catalina revealed yesterday.
‘It's times like that when his work gets in the way most.’
Spanish-born Catalina, 50, insists she did not force her husband's hand in resigning as a Foreign Office Minister, though she admits her joy at his decision.
‘It will mean more time with me and with his family.
I am absolutely delighted about that, we all are,’ she said from her father's elegant Madrid penthouse.
‘He made the decision and I said, ‘Great’.
But I wouldn't dream of having an input in that type of thing.’
Last night Mr Garel-Jones was reunited with his wife and family at the apartment, preparing for a spot of Christmas shopping.
He agreed missing his son's engagement had been the last straw.
‘In the last two years I have missed nearly everything,’ he said.
‘It just sums up my recent life that on the day my son announced his engagement and wanted me to meet his new in-laws I was in Strasbourg.
‘It is good fun and it was a job worth doing but I don't want to die in the saddle.
‘Last night I went to an art exhibition in my sister-in-law's gallery and then went to dinner to celebrate my brother-in-law's birthday.
‘This afternoon I am going out to do some Christmas shopping and I am enjoying every minute.
‘I am not going to give up my constituency, I've always enjoyed the surgery.
‘I hope to be a strong and enthusiastic supporter of the Government and I am going to stay on as a MP.’
Mr Garel-Jones, 51, began building his family after meeting 18-year-old Catalina Garrigues when she was a pupil in his Madrid English class in 1961.
First came Julian, then Inigo, now 25, followed by Ivan, 23, and Sebastian, 22.
Youngest child Victoria was born after a break of 11 years.
‘I was pretty tired after the first lot,’ said Catalina.
She said the Edinburgh summit had been a tense time for the family when it seemed all Mr Garel-Jones' work on Maastricht could have come to nothing.
‘My husband has put a lot of work into Maastricht and the last six months have been awful for him,’ she said.
Catalina said her husband's resignation was first discussed with John Major while he and Norma were holidaying at their mountain home near Madrid.
‘The first time we talked about it was in summer 1991,’ she said.
‘John took it really well at that time.
He's a very good and understanding friend.
‘He said something like, ‘It's sad, but if that's what you want to do that's your choice’.’
£5bn cost of office thieves
CROOKED employees stole a record £5 billion from their bosses this year in a desperate bid to beat the slump.
Experts say the recession is to blame for the rise in office crime as workers try to top up their income.
The Federation of Small Businesses is now compiling a survival guide.
‘Shrinkage — or theft — is a very real problem for industry,’ said a spokeswoman.
‘People look for new ways to supplement their income and it is employers who feel the pinch.’
Snub for Harrods
A BRANCH of Harrods on an industrial estate was closed when locals objected to an invasion of the Knightsbridge set.
The shop, at the emporium's warehouse in Isleworth, west London, sold goods of ‘merchantable quality’ at a knockdown price.
It was soon packed every weekend.
After complaints, Hounslow Council ruled that the store needed planning permission then rejected Harrods' application.
‘It became a nightmare,’ said a local resident.
My grief, by widow left pile of ‘terrible secrets’
WIDOW Judith Pratley only learned of her husband's mountain of debts when a bailiff tried to repossess her home 24 hours after his suicide.
As Mrs Pratley, 42, tried to come to terms with her husband Brian's death, a court official phoned to tell her she was out on the streets.
She then discovered her engineer husband had run up thousands of pounds in debts and had tried to end his life a month before.
‘The very next evening a bailiff rang me up and, in a cool and calm way, he told me my home was about to be repossessed,’ said a tearful Mrs Pratley last night.
‘He actually told me I was on the streets and told me Brian owed all this money.
‘He said we were being served with notice to leave on the Tuesday and had to be out by Thursday.
He laughed when I told him our solicitor was trying to sort out Brian's will and said, ‘What has he got to leave?’
‘Then he asked, ‘How did he do it then?
Was it in the car like last time when he didn't manage it?’
‘I couldn't believe how cruel that was.
Brian loved me so much he couldn't face hurting me.
The shame of getting into such a financial mess was too much to admit.
It was worse than taking his own life.
‘If only he had confided in me earlier I might have been able to help.
I'd have stood by him.
Even in his suicide note he couldn't bear to tell me.
It said, ‘A few secrets will unfold, I enclose a letter which may help you, but please don't think too badly of me.
I love you’.’
Yesterday Oxford coroner Nicholas Gardiner recorded a verdict of suicide on Mr Pratley.
His wife, who has a 17-year-old son Matthew and two daughters from a previous marriage, has been allowed to stay in their semi-detached home in Brackley, Northants, while legal advisers sort out her husband's tangled financial affairs.
Five hundred unopened letters from banks and loan firms were found after his death.
‘I can't blame Brian.
I have no anger, only my love for him,’ said Mrs Pratley.
‘He had a terrible problem which he couldn't talk about but I want to sort it out for him.’
One wrestles his stocking off the line as the other keeps guard.
There's no paws for Santa Claws
When the kids are really young, it's no use expecting them to wait for Christmas Day — and two four-month-old Siberian tiger cubs at Howletts animal park, Canterbury, are no exception.
One craftily claws her stocking by the Big Cat flap.
Prime suspect
Bob Graham
NO ONE breathed a bigger sigh of relief than Brian Cox when missing aerobics teacher Joanna Grenside turned up safe.
The 27-year-old surveyor who had befriended Joanna at fitness training sessions had endured a two-day nightmare in which he was the police's prime suspect in her disappearance.
Whatever the pressures which drove bulimia sufferer Joanna to fake her own kidnap, it is Brian who feels he's the real victim.
The police turned up at his home after midnight on the night Joanna went missing and searched the house from top to bottom, even taking away his clothes for tests.
Talking for the first time about his ordeal, Brian says: ‘They left me in no doubt I was a leading suspect.
Even though you know in your heart you have done nothing, there is still the nagging doubt, the fear element which remains.’
For two sleepless nights, rugby player and fitness fanatic Brian lived with the fear that Joanna's lifeless body would be found and he would be charged with murder.
His personal nightmare began at 1.15am last Wednesday when he returned to his home in Bramingham Green, Luton.
It was only then that he found out something was wrong.
‘I'd had a call from the Leisure Centre,’ he says.
‘But I'd been out with friends for the evening and got home late.
I thought it was too late to call that night, I thought I'd leave it until the morning.
‘I was just going to bed when the police came.
‘It was the early hours and I feared the worst, that a family member or friend had been hurt.
I kept asking what was wrong.
‘They asked about Joanna, and because I didn't know what was going on I said she had been due at the Leisure Centre at 7pm to take her class.
‘The police seized on that immediately and said ‘Ah, so you know when she was due there’.
At that point I began to get seriously worried and wanted to call for help.’
At that stage Brian, a member of the Harper's Leisure Centre in Harpenden where Joanna is an aerobics teacher, did not know she had vanished, presumed kidnapped.
The police scoured every part of his house: ‘They searched my car, my garage, they took the clothes I was wearing.
They went into everything,’ says Brian.
‘They were only doing their job, and doing it properly, but when they eventually left me I was shaking with fear.’
The next morning Brian went to work — at Bovis Homes in Harpenden — to confess to his bosses that he was a suspect in Joanna's disappearance.
‘People at work were great,’ he says.
‘They just said not to worry.
But in my heart I was frantic.
I just wanted Jo to turn up.’
When he first struck up a friendship with Joanna, he could never have suspected it would one day put him firmly in the frame in a potential murder investigation.
‘Jo came to the club in May and I joined a little later,’ he says.
‘We became good friends because we were both keen on fitness.
‘After classes I would buy her a drink and have a little chat about things.
We were close but there was never anything between us because I knew Jo had a boyfriend.
In fact she bought a couple of tapes from my record club as Christmas presents for him.’
What has upset Brian is the knowledge that within hours of Joanna disappearing from the leisure centre car park eight days ago, he was being ‘fingered’ as someone who could have been responsible for kidnapping her.
He also feels bitter towards Joanna for putting him through so much: ‘In one respect I feel sorry for her.
She is ill and there is something wrong with her.
‘But I feel annoyed that she had not thought it all through.
Through her selfishness and lack of thought I was hassled by the police.
‘Yes, I'm angry.
I'm left with the fact that they knock me up in the middle of the night, turn my place over, give me a hard time, then just forget about it all.
I suppose that's justice for you.’
The worry and sleepless nights finally ended when last Thursday morning he heard the news he had hardly dared hope for — Joanna had returned to her family safe and well 36 hours after she had vanished.
‘The relief was incredible,’ Brian admitted.
‘It is impossible to explain what it felt like when that weight was lifted.’
As Joanna's family and friends celebrated her safe homecoming, the young man who knew her only from her gym classes said a silent prayer of thanks.
He too, could start to live a normal life again.
Agony aunt's secret
Matthew Benns
THE marriage of Britain's best known agony aunt, Marjorie Proops, was exposed as a sexless sham last night.
In her biography, Marje: The Guilt and the Gingerbread by Angela Patmore, she admits she had an affair with an office colleague.
The book, due on sale next month, was put on the shelves in some shops yesterday by mistake.
Large sections reveal the experiences which have helped her advise thousands.
In the book Marje writes that her 53-year marriage to husband Sidney had been devoid of sex.
‘I couldn't bear him to kiss me.
I lay in bed beside him quivering with horror.
In the end I told him, ‘I can't go on with this marriage.
I've got to leave you’.’
Instead they agreed to stay together but would not sleep with each other.
She turned to bachelor colleague Phillip Levy to fulfill her in the Sixties.
‘He gave me so much — quite apart from sexual fulfilment, which was part of it, and a very exciting and wonderful part because he taught me so much about sex.’
In the authorised biography she describes the Australian lawyer as ‘tall and distinguished looking’.
He died in 1987 and her husband died a year later.
£6,000 to find killer
A £6,000 reward was offered yesterday to find the killer of 99-year-old widow Sarah Burke.
The Community Action Trust put up £5,000 of the money.
The rest came from people outraged by Mrs Burke's murder, in a council nursing home at Redruth, Cornwall.
‘We are living in a very evil world,’ said Redruth council chairman Jean Palmer.
Mrs Burke, who would have been 100 next month, was found dying from head injuries in her bed on Monday.
Cut computer game prices now — or be forced by law
Paul Wilenius
COMPUTER game giants were last night given the ultimatum: Cut prices — or be forced by law.
Labour consumer affairs spokesman Nigel Griffiths warned Sega and Nintendo they had three weeks to act.
If they do not, he will force a Bill through Parliament to deal with alleged rip-off prices.
‘Prices of these games will have to come down,’ he said.
‘If they do not fall by the time the Commons returns on January 11, I will put forward legislation to free up this market.
‘This type of law works very successfully in the United States.
No one objects to companies making a profit, but not when they freeze out competition.’
The Labour consumer chief has the backing of Tory and Liberal Democrat MPs in wanting to force more competition into the market.
Following the exclusive revelations in TODAY, the Office of Fair Trading has confirmed the computer games industry is ‘under informal investigation’.
They said: ‘We're at a fact-finding stage.
We'll see if there's evidence of anti-competitive behaviour.’
TODAY's call for an inquiry was yesterday backed by Toy Retailers chairman Philip Goodall.
He said: ‘I share the concern of parents that prices are unjustifiably high.’
Japanese giants Sega and Nintendo dominate the £500 million-a-year industry, having captured almost half the market.
In the run-up to Christmas, their games are selling faster than ever.
Cartridges can cost up to £65, and a console to play them Pounds 160.
Mum's the word, Victoria
COMEDIENNE Victoria Wood looks the typical young mother as she takes daughter Grace on a last-minute Christmas shopping trip yesterday.
Victoria, 39, repeats the role in her Christmas special tomorrow when she plays a pram-pushing mother in a skit on daytime magazine programmes.
She was able to do plenty of research for Victoria Wood's All-Day Breakfast after having her son Henry last May.
‘You can become glued to the screen,’ she said.
‘It's frightening.
But there was a wealth of material for me to work on.’
MP tackles Sonic Boom
LABOUR'S Nigel Griffiths checked out claims of computer game rip-offs yesterday by going a few rounds with Sega's Sonic The Hedgehog.
Consumer affairs spokesman Mr Griffiths accused games firms of rigging the market — forcing shoppers to buy, rather than rent.
Sega did allow rentals, but charged a huge licensing fee, making them a bad deal, he said.
He wants people to be able to rent them, with shops free to buy and let them out like videos.
Sonic The Hedgehog was ‘incredibly fast-moving, but it's not my style,’ he said.
‘I prefer something more sedate, like chess.
They must be good for manual dexterity and keeping children occupied.’
But he added: ‘I won't be asking Santa for one.’
Boy! you've changed
A MAN has found his long lost sister after a 41-year search — only to discover she is now a he after a sex change.
British-born Ian Phillips, of Christchurch, New Zealand, discovered 53-year-old Ken now lives in England with his two stepdaughters and the son he gave birth to while a woman.
The pair were fostered to different families in 1951 in Australia.
‘It's the perfect Christmas present,’ said Ian, 52.
Fireman locked up for 11 arsons
Ian Key
FIREMAN Richard Pearson loved putting out fires so much that he started 11 of them himself, a court heard yesterday.
He set farm buildings ablaze, and then joined fire crews to put them out.
He caused at least £67,000 in damage, Martin Rudland, prosecuting, told York Crown Court.
Pearson, 19, a part-timer in the North Yorkshire Brigade, enjoyed the accolades that went with the job.
The fires also brought him money — £10.50 each time he was called out.
His fire-raising spree lasted three weeks until a farmer spotted his car near a blaze he had started.
Pearson, of Tadcaster, admitted three arson charges and asked for eight others to be considered.
He was sent to a young offenders' institution for three years.
He told police he had not expected the fires to spread so quickly, and blamed hot summer weather.
Judge Tom Cracknell told him: ‘You, as a fireman, knew full-well the dangers of the blazes which you started.’
Leslie Crowther sends big thank-you
TV presenter Leslie Crowther, above, sent a big thank-you yesterday to his fans.
He said the thousands of get-well messages had been helping him recover from 17 days in a coma after a car crash.
Surgeons at Bristol's Frenchay Hospital will decide today if Leslie, 59, can go home for Christmas.
Rugby boy dies on pitch
SCHOOLBOY Daniel Salvage, 13, died after scoring a try in a rugby game.
A heart muscle had collapsed — the same condition that killed Welsh soccer boss Terry Yorath's son, Daniel, 15, last May.
‘It appears it could have happened at any time, even running for a bus,’ said headmaster Harrison Huddart, at Hewart Grange School, Gateshead, Tyne and Wear.
Rude custom
A CUSTOMS chief may be fired after being convicted of hitting a fellow rail passenger.
Graham Hutchinson, 33, of Dover, Kent, lashed out when Edward Canning, 51, asked him to move his feet.
He was ordered at the Old Bailey to pay £300 compensation.
Pat's drink-drive hell
EASTENDER Pat Butcher faces a drink-drive nightmare after injuring a pedestrian.
The seasonal plot sees tough Pat, played by Pam St Clement, crying with guilt, facing the ruin of her cab firm and fighting with husband Frank.
Brother of murdered girl caged
THE brother of murdered teenager Julie Dart went off the rails after his sister's death, a court heard yesterday.
Paul Dart, 18, was sent to a young offenders' institution for four years when he admitted crimes including armed robbery.
He and a 12-year-old boy robbed a middle-aged man of £25 at gunpoint in a Leeds park.
They also robbed two schoolboys of their £250 mountain bikes.
Then they beat up a man of 76 in a failed robbery, Leeds Crown Court heard.
Dart, of Leeds, also shot a boy of 17 in the leg with an airgun dart and was in a stolen Cavalier SRi car which rammed a police van.
Ian Dobkin, defending, asked for a lenient sentence.
He added: ‘There has been a terrific amount of publicity about his sister.
This started the defendant to go off the rails.’
Judge Donald Herrod said: ‘These were serious offences.’
A man is awaiting trial over the murder of Julie, 18.
Her body was found near Grantham, Lincs.
Tragedy of stalled 999
A DISTRAUGHT father had to push-start an ambulance carrying his dying daughter.
Ambulancemen left their lights on as they rushed into Steve Andrews' house where 16-year-old Sara Jayne had a heart attack.
Mr Andrews, of Pyle, Mid-Glamorgan, said yesterday the flat battery meant his daughter arrived five minutes later at hospital.
She died 48 hour later.
The ambulance service denied any delay.
4 accused of burns death
FOUR people yesterday faced magistrates accused of murdering 16-year-old Suzanne Capper who died last week from burns.
All four are from Moston, Manchester, where Suzanne lived.
Glynn Powell, 28, Jeffrey Leigh, 26, Bernadette McNeilly, 23, and Jeanne Powell, 25, were remanded in custody until January 21.
An 18-year-old and a 16-year-old are due to appear in the same court to face a similar charge.
Convicts back behind bars
TWO escaped prisoners were back behind bars yesterday after police re-arrested them in an early morning swoop.
Armed robber Phillip Ayres, 25, and Stephen Mynott, 29, jailed for murder, escaped from Channings Wood Prison in Devon, six weeks ago.
Police moved on to a housing estate in St Mellons, Cardiff, after a five-day surveillance operation.
‘They came quietly, without fuss,’ said a detective.
Leslie Crowther goes home for Christmas
TV STAR Leslie Crowther went home for Christmas dinner yesterday two months after a road crash left him in a coma.
Leslie, 59, above, has made a remarkable recovery in Bristol's Frenchay Hospital since having two operations to remove blood clots.
At noon yesterday the game show host was stretchered into a private ambulance for the short trip home to Corston, near Bath.
Bart's girl in new appeal
THE girl who presented a petition to Premier John Major to save St Bartholomew's hospital had to spend Christmas there after a relapse.
Five-year-old cancer victim Belinda Giles was rushed in by her parents, Gill and Paul, when her temperature soared.
She celebrated with other sick children and made a special plea to Santa to keep the closure-threatened hospital open.
‘Bart's couldn't have tried harder to make this a wonderful day,’ said Paul.
Sarah Monelle killed by drink-driver
A DRINK-DRIVER mowed down and killed a young mother on her first night out since the birth of her son six months ago.
Sarah Monelle, 21, above, was waiting with a group of friends for a taxi after a Christmas party at her local rugby club.
A car came speeding out of the fog, mounted the pavement and smashed into them.
‘It was absolute carnage,’ said a witness.
Charles bans Diana from seeing Princes
Charles Rae
PRINCESS DIANA has been told she cannot see her sons until next Tuesday.
The ban is Prince Charles's revenge for her refusal to spend Christmas with the rest of the royals at Sandringham in Norfolk.
He told her: ‘You do what you want.
The boys will stay with me.’
After delivering 10-year-old William and eight-year-old Harry to Charles on Wednesday night, the princess chose to hide herself away from the world at her family home of Althorp, ready for her worst Christmas ever.
Diana, who had been expecting the two boys to join her at Althorp in Northamptonshire today, phoned them briefly yesterday morning.
The six-day separation from William and Harry over the traditional family holiday was the first time Diana had not seen her sons wake up to the excitement of Christmas Day.
On Tuesday, Charles will have William and Harry driven back to their mother at her base in Kensington Palace while he stays on at Sandringham.
As the Queen led her broken family into church at Sandringham yesterday, the two young princes smiled and waved at the crowd of 600 well-wishers.
They left sticking close to their father and chatting happily to the crowds.
While the royals had decided to staunchly put on a united front as best they could, 70 miles away Diana refused to attend one of the two public services in village churches near the estate.
It was an apparent attempt not to highlight the deep rift between herself and her estranged husband Charles on the one day of the year which is symbolic of happy families.
Instead she joined her immediate family for a service at the private chapel on the Althorp estate.
Then she remained in hiding, refusing to venture out all day.
With her was her brother Charles — who inherited the home and the title Earl Spencer when their father died in March — his wife Victoria and their daughters Kitty, two, and six-month-old twins Eliza and Katya.
As well as Diana, guests included her sister Lady Sarah McCorquodale, with her husband Neil and their children — seven-year-old George, eight-year-old Emily and two-year-old Celia.
An estate worker at the family seat said: ‘The princess had decided she will not move out of Althorp.
‘She knew if she had attended one of the public services she would have been the centre of attention and the last thing she wanted was to be photographed as the woman alone.
‘She felt that would have caused pain and anguish to William and Harry.’
Roof blaze hits church
PARISHIONERS arriving for early morning service yesterday found their church on fire.
They were turned away as eight fire engines brought firefighters to tackle the blaze at St Anselm and Cecilia church in Holborn, London.
The flames swept through the wooden roof from the organ loft, destroying the organ and 60 per cent of the roof.
No estimate has been put on the cost.
Father Hugh Mcaleese said: ‘We are devastated, but we intend to restore the church to its former glory.
It is a blessing that no one was in the church at the time.’
Pensioner is raped
A PENSIONER was raped early yesterday as she returned home from a church service.
The 67-year-old was attacked in Ludlow, Shropshire, by a man who had followed her through the town centre.
Police are connecting the rape with an incident 90 minutes earlier when a 25-year-old woman was attacked half a mile away at Burway on the edge of Ludlow.
The woman escaped and ran to a motorist after her assailant grabbed her and dragged her into private gardens.
The man was aged 25-30, wearing a leather bomber jacket.
Sombre, mean, violent…official view of 1992
THE Queen's speech to the nation at the end of her ‘annus horribilis’ failed to attract a larger audience than normal yesterday.
The unprecedented level of media attention on the Royal Family in recent months had been expected to boost the figure above last year when 21 million viewers tuned in.
But the National Grid reported ‘no discernible difference’ in the amount of power used after the 3pm broadcast of the speech on BBC1 and ITV.
Her Majesty barely touched on the problems afflicting her family this year, which included the separation of the Prince and Princess of Wales and the Duke and Duchess of York.
She told of the family's ‘sombre year’ in the five-minute address which had already appeared in The Sun after the newspaper obtained a copy allegedly from a BBC employee.
The sympathy and understanding of ordinary people had helped the family through the ‘difficult days’, she said.
In her first traditional Christmas speech recorded at Sandringham, she said the peace and tranquility of Norfolk brought a sense of continuity to her family life.
The Queen, in a red dress and pearl necklace, said it made her realise the trials and sorrows suffered by many people around the world through war, terrorism, famine, natural disaster and economic hardship.
‘But Christmas is surely the right moment to try to put it behind us and to find a moment to pray for those, wherever they are, who are doing their best in all sorts of ways to make things better in 1993,’ she said.
She said her own worries had been put into perspective by a visit shortly before his death of Lord Cheshire.
The tireless charity worker, who had been suffering from a long illness, had overcome his own difficulties to talk of his hopes and plans for others.
His life's work in setting up homes for people with disabilities was ‘a shining example’ of what a person could achieve, she said.
‘Such talents and indomitable spirit are not given to all of us.
But if we can sometimes lift our eyes from our own problems and focus on those of others, it will be at least a step in the right direction and Christmas is a good time to take it,’ she said.
The Queen added that 1993 would bring new challenges and called on people to resolve to meet them with fresh hope.
‘There is no magic formula that will transform sorrow into happiness, intolerance into compassion or war into peace, but inspiration can change human behaviour,’ she said.
The Archbishop of Canterbury yesterday warned of the dangers of materialism and of a new ‘meanness of spirit’ afflicting the country.
In his traditional Christmas sermon at Canterbury Cathedral, Dr George Carey said people were becoming too ready to knock established authority.
‘As a nation there are worrying signs that we are becoming a people ready to scoff, eager to knock authority whether it deserves it or not,’ he said.
‘Our British reputation for ribbing ourselves is in danger of degenerating into an uncharacteristic meanness of spirit.’
He warned the Church was in danger of being dominated by single issues, such as the ordination of women priests, and insisted the door must be kept open to all, whatever their views on the matter.
‘The ordination of women is important, but not as important as the mission to proclaim the love and mercy of God,’ he said.
Pope John Paul, in his Christmas Day message, condemned the violence in what was Yugoslavia.
In one of his strongest speeches, he told tens of thousands of people in St Peter's Square the Bosnian people were ‘hostages of programmed and inhuman violence’.
‘I am thinking of the children of Sarajevo, of Banja Luka, of the peoples of Bosnia,’ he said.
But the Pope did not mention Serbia, which has come under increasing international pressure for supporting the Bosnian Serbs in the civil war.
In his address, televised live to nearly 60 countries, he also expressed concern about the situation in the Middle East and Liberia and gave thanks that the starving Somalis were finally receiving aid.
The 72-year-old Pontiff, celebrating his 15th Christmas as leader of the world's 950 million Roman Catholics, urged leaders of nations to heed Christ's yearning for peace.
‘Listen to the voice of love, both sweet and powerful, especially you who brandish violent and murderous arms,’ he said.
The Pontiff ended his message with an appeal to God to grant peace throughout the world.
‘You come, O Lord, to heal the wounds opened in humanity's side,’ he said.
Army girl says yes on TV show
ARMY signalman Philip Cooper had a double Christmas Day surprise when he proposed to his girlfriend on television.
Philip, 20, was told he would be speaking to Caroline Cove, 26, on BBC1's Good Morning show through a live link with Sarajevo, where she is serving with the Army.
But when he popped the question she said: ‘I'll tell you when I see you.’
And moments later Caroline rushed into Philip's arms at the Pebble Mill studios in Birmingham.
She said yes.
Presenters Nick Owen and Anne Diamond had secretly flown Lance Corporal Caroline, of Chingford, Essex, back to Britain.
‘This is the best Christmas present ever,’ said Philip, of Gosport, Hants.
A British soldier was slightly injured in a mortar attack in Sarajevo.
Merrily on high
SIX holidaymakers aimed high for Christmas yesterday when they climbed 3,500ft up a mountain.
The three men and three women spent the day in sub-zero temperatures on Snowdon, in Wales, after camping 2,000ft up the night before.
Instead of tucking into turkey and all the trimmings, they ate freeze-dried chilli — washed down with whisky and port.
But they rounded off the day with a huge feast at their mountain lodge in the Snowdonia mountain range.
‘A climb on Snowdon is the perfect way to build up an appetite for Christmas dinner,’ said organiser Mandy Whitehead.
Why Bart's must still be around NEXT Christmas
Olga Craig
HER hands clasped and her eyes closed tightly, cancer victim Belinda Giles makes a special Christmas wish to Santa.
This picture shows just why London's St Bartholomew's Hospital must not shut.
‘Please, Father Christmas, don't let my hospital close,’ she prays.
‘I only wish I could wave a wand and grant her wish,’ said Santa.
‘But I do know this — Bart's has got to stay.
The children need it.
Britain needs it.’
Belinda, five, hadn't expected to see Santa yesterday — but then her mother and father, Gill and Paul, had not expected to be celebrating at the hospital.
They were settling down to a family Christmas at home when Belinda suddenly got very tired and her temperature soared.
‘We got on the phone to the hospital straight away,’ said Paul, of Harlow, Essex.
‘They were really apologetic but said she had to come in.’
Christmas Day in Bart's Kenton ward was a children's delight as staff pulled out all the stops to ensure patients had a magical day.
The world-famous hospital is facing closure, but doctors and nurses are working very hard to make sure it stays open.
The 800-year-old hospital cares for the ill from all over Britain.
Yet, in spite of its expertise, the Tomlinson Report into health care in the capital says it is too expensive.
If it were to close, around 2,500 jobs would go in a recommended merger with the Royal London Hospital.
Eight days ago Belinda, who has cancer of the nervous system, handed in a hospital petition, with 29 other child cancer patients, to Premier John Major at 10 Downing Street.
Belinda, who has had chemotherapy which made her blonde hair fall out, had just one thing on her mind yesterday — her present.
‘Bart's couldn't have tried harder to make this a wonderful day,’ said Paul.
The 12 children in Lucas and Kenton wards opened their stockings before Santa arrived with other gifts yesterday.
Even though Christmas in hospital was a fun-filled day, no one could have had better news than Sarah Collyer.
Her four-year-old son Sam, who suffers from leukaemia, was allowed home for the day.
But for those who spent Christmas in Bart's, staff could not have done more.
‘We're happy to be rushed off our feet — but we're sick about the closure plans,’ said ward sister Ali Kimber.
Face of the chocolate tin bomber
Neville Thurlbeck
THIS is the face of one the IRA's most ruthless and cynical assassins.
The brunette gift wrapped a bomb and handed it to grateful squaddies on point duty in Northern Ireland.
The plot failed when one soldier peeped inside the box of Quality Street chocolates two days later and discovered 2lbs of semtex explosive.
Security chiefs said there would have been widespread bloodshed if the bomb had gone off inside the soldiers' quarters in Cookstown on Tuesday.
The booby-trapped tin was handed over at a nearby checkpoint after the woman, dressed all in black, smiled and wished the soldiers a happy Christmas.
She was last seen being driven off in the passenger seat of a red hatchback.
Efforts to trace the woman have failed and police hope the artist's impression will provide a new lead.
‘This woman is totally ruthless,’ said a police spokesman.
‘She used the Christmas season of goodwill to try and murder these men.
It was a despicable act.’
The head of the Catholic church in Ireland, Cardinal Cahal Daly, has urged the IRA to call a permanent ceasefire.
He implored the terrorists to extend their 72-hour truce, due to end at midnight.
Speaking at Midnight Mass at St Patrick's Cathedral in Armagh City, Cardinal Daly said a small group of men had the power to call a truce and ensure it was fully observed.
‘As the people with ultimate authority for saying when the campaign ends and when it resumes, this small group carry the supreme load of guilt for all the grief and tears and heartbreak which their campaign has caused.
‘When will any of them have the courage to say: ‘Enough.
I will not be responsible for this any longer’.’
Apart from one gun attack involving the Irish National Liberation Army the RUC has reported no terrorist incident since the IRA ceasefire started on Christmas Eve.
Security throughout the province has eased dramatically.
Roadblocks set up in every town and particularly in and around Belfast to thwart IRA bomb attacks have been lifted.
Security chiefs fear however that the offensive will resume after Christmas.
Love blasts back
AN IRA victim is back in the arms of the woman he loves — because he was injured in a bomb blast.
Warehouse worker Neil Tattersall was facing a miserable Yuletide after he split up with his girlfriend, who was also expecting his baby.
Then he suffered serious back injuries in the IRA's Christmas bombing campaign in Manchester.
But the ordeal has rekindled his relationship with 24-year-old Sue Nixon.
Neil, who was the most seriously hurt of 67 injured in the blast earlier this month, plans to marry Sue in the New Year.
Blonde Sue was one of the first people at his hospital bedside in Manchester Royal Infirmary.
Romance blossomed once again as she realised how close Neil had come to being killed.
Sue, of Baguley, of Greater Manchester, said: ‘Our engagement was called off eight weeks before the blast.
Then we decided during one of my hospital visits that we should try again.
We have a flat now and our baby is on the way.’
Neil, 23, of Wythenshawe in Manchester, is still recovering from shock, but Sue was determined they would have a Christmas to remember.
Mowed down the first time she left her new baby son
Simon Trump
FOR six months Sarah Monelle had stayed at home with her cherished baby son.
She turned down all invites to parties, determined to spend every waking minute with her tiny bundle of love.
But she finally relented and went out with her friends.
It was the first time she had left little Bradley, the first time she had been out to celebrate his birth — and it was the last time he would ever see his mother again.
As she stood waiting for a taxi a speeding car appeared out of the freezing fog.
It mounted the kerb and ploughed into Sarah, 21, and her pals, killing her instantly.
Three of the friends, including Bradley's godmother Nicola Crew, 20, were last night fighting for their lives, and six others were seriously injured.
The driver, who was unhurt, was pulled from the wreckage of his car by other party-goers and pinned down until police arrived.
Officers refused to confirm reports that he had to be wrestled free by police.
Sarah and her friends had left the party at their local rugby club in Keynsham, Avon, when a speeding Ford Fiesta suddenly appeared out of the fog on the A4.
Before they had time to react, the car mounted the kerb and smashed into them.
Some were thrown 75ft through the air by the force of the impact.
Single mum Sarah was killed instantly in a scene which bore a chilling resemblance to this year's hard hitting Christmas drink-drive campaign.
Caroline Lindegaard, 24, was standing next to Sarah when the car ploughed into them.
Caroline, of Brislington, Bristol, who was treated for cuts to her face, said: ‘There was a load of us queuing for a taxi after the party.
‘I vaguely remember speaking to Sarah as we were stood next to each other.
‘We were all still in high spirits from the party and everyone was chatting.
Then all of a sudden this car came hurtling round the corner with no lights on.
‘All I remember was a huge bang and it careering into us.
I was lucky, I managed to dive out of the way.
‘When I looked up I was covered in blood.
My face was cut with showers of glass from the car's windscreen.
‘It was horrific.
There were bodies everywhere and everyone seemed to be screaming and crying.
I tried to help some of those that were hurt but some of them had dreadful injuries.
‘The next thing I remember was being taken off to hospital.
‘It was something that I will live with for the rest of my life.
Every Christmas I will be reminded.’
Sarah's parents, Sally Monelle, 45, and husband Royston, 58, spent Christmas Day being comforted by relatives.
Mrs Monelle wept as she told how Sarah, who shared a flat with her sister in at Keynsham, had lived for her son.
‘We are all in total shock,’ she said.
‘It's so awful.
‘Sarah was such a beautiful girl and a warm and caring mother.
She hadn't been out because she wanted to stay in and look after Bradley.
We were really looking forward to Christmas together as a family but now everything is ruined.
‘We will all be haunted by this tragedy every Christmas time from now on.
‘Words just can't express how I feel about the man who did this — especially as he had been drinking.
‘They should have longer prison sentences for drink drivers.
They destroy lives and should be made to pay for it.
‘I am just glad that Bradley is too young to understand what has happened.
I'll have to give up work to stay at home and look after him.’
Friends and relatives left floral tributes at the scene of the crash yesterday.
One simple message read: ‘God be with you Sarah.’
Sarah's best friend, Nicola, from Warmley, near Bristol, and Michael Bradley, 24, from Saltford, were both taken to Bristol Royal Infirmary.
Another 24-year-old man from Keynsham was taken to a specialist head injuries unit at Frenchay hospital, Bristol.
He was treated by the same experts who saved the life of TV star Leslie Crowther.
All three were said to be in a critical condition last night.
A 22-year-old man, from Bath, who suffered serious head injuries, a 16-year-old girl, from Keynsham, a man, aged 24, from Saltford, and a woman from Brislington, Bristol, were also in the city's Royal Infirmary.
A 21-year-old man, from Keynsham, who had serious head and arm injuries, and another man with minor injuries were taken to Bath's Royal United hospital.
Horrified taxi driver Brian Fox, 61, witnessed the accident.
‘I saw this Fiesta shoot past me sideways, bounce off the wall and pile into this group of kids,’ he said.
‘They all went down like skittles.
Some were thrown high into the air.
‘It was absolute carnage.
There were bodies strewn all over the road.
‘I got on the radio to my controller and told him to call the police quick.’
Emergency service crews, who arrived within minutes of the crash, described the scene as a ‘battlefield’.
Avon ambulance chief Barry Richardson, one of the first on the scene, said: ‘It was carnage.
‘It looked like something out of a war zone.
There were bodies scattered all over the road, people lying on the pavement and propped against walls.
‘I've been in the ambulance service for 23 years and this is the worst job I have ever had to deal with over Christmas.
‘Our paramedics are trained to deal with situations like this, but all of them were very disturbed and upset by what they saw.
‘It was such a tragic end to what was probably a very enjoyable and fun evening out.’
A member of staff at the Royal United Hospital said staff were reduced to tears by the tragedy.
‘Some of the staff here, even seasoned nurses, were quietly crying,’ he said.
‘These youngsters were doing what everyone told them to do and that was not to drink and drive.
‘They were just waiting for a taxi.’
A police spokesman said: ‘It was a horrific crash, a terrible tragedy especially at this time of year.’
A 24-year-old man, who was arrested at the scene, was last night being questioned about the incident.
It is understood he gave a positive breath test.
Soldier in head-on motorway smash
A SOLDIER was critically injured yesterday after driving the wrong way down a fogbound motorway.
Lance Corporal Robert Furness, 22, ran headlong into another vehicle minutes after he joined the M1 at Chesterfield, Derbys.
Five terrified drivers alerted police on mobile phones as Mr Furness's car shot past them heading south down the northbound lanes.
But the crash happened before they could stop him.
Mr Furness, who is based in Germany but home on leave, was taken to Chesterfield Royal Hospital.
The other driver, Manuel de Sousa, of Thornton Heath, Surrey, is ‘very poorly but stable’ with multiple injuries.
In a separate incident, a driver escaped drowning when his fuel tanker plunged into a canal.
Henry Collier, 65, lost contol of the tanker as it travelled through Kintbury, Berkshire, after delivering fuel oil.
The lorry smashed through a brick wall and plunged into the fast-flowing canal, landing on its side.
Only the size of the vehicle saved Mr Collier, who was able to cling to the steering wheel to prevent the water submerging him.
He eventually scrambled through the door and onto the top of the sinking tanker.
It took police, firemen and a crane more than 12 hours to haul the vehicle from the canal and re-open the road.
Pollution experts from the National Rivers Authority were called in to assess the danger of fuel leaking into the canal.
Mr Collier was last night recovering at his home in Reading, Berks.
Drunken yobs smash up shops
GANGS of youths went on the rampage early yesterday, turning Christmas celebrations into chaos.
In the worst incident, 300 yobs showered police with broken bottles and bricks then looted shops in the centre of Coventry.
The violence began outside a chip shop when rival gangs clashed.
West Midlands police inspector Vince Dean said: ‘It took 20 officers an hour to bring the situation under control.
All the pubs and clubs empty out at the same time.
Something sparked them off.
We don't know what, but drink played a large part.’
Thousands of pounds worth of damage was caused to several shops in the area.
One onlooker said: ‘It is a scene of devastation down here.
There is a tailor's dummy in the road and glass everywhere.’
Police at Eastleigh, Hants, had to call in re-inforcements when more than 30 youths staged running battles with officers.
They used snooker balls to smash shop and restaurant windows.
Three people were arrested.
In Portsmouth, Hants, a pub where Charles Dickens was born was wrecked by a gang of drunks after they were refused a drink.
In Holywell, Clwyd, a rotarian dressed as Santa suffered a gashed mouth after hooligans attacked his float with stones.
Pensioner dies in fire
A PENSIONER was killed when fire ripped through her bungalow.
The woman, in her eighties, died as paramedics battled to save her after firemen carried her unconscious from the house.
Neighbours were evacuated as smoke billowed from the semi-detached bungalow in Didcot, Oxon, late on Christmas eve.
Fire crews took more than two hours to bring the blaze under control.
The cause of the fire is being investigated.
It is not thought to be suspicious.
Police are withholding the woman's name until relatives are informed.
A spokesman said: ‘Our hearts go out to her family.’
Cuddle ends in tragedy
A PAIR of teenage sweethearts suffocated as they cuddled in a car inside a garage.
Barry Skinner, 19 and Debbie Conroy, 17, were poisoned by carbon monoxide after they turned on the engine to keep warm.
Earlier, Barry, a panel beater and Debbie, a fitness instructor, had enjoyed a Christmas drink in a local pub.
They were found by Barry's father, Bert, 51, on Wednesday in Glenrothes, Fife.
The news was withheld until relatives were told.
Man dies in home inferno
A MAN died and a girl was badly injured when fire ripped through a house yesterday.
The girl, who had been clinging to a third-floor window ledge, fell just as firemen were about to grab her.
Four other people were taken to hospital, including a man in his 60s who jumped from an upstairs window and a 56-year-old woman suffering from shock and the effects of smoke.
There were nine people in the house in Caernarfon, Gwynned, where owners George and Mair Williams took in foster children.
‘The fire spread very quickly,’ said a neighbour.
Police were waiting to inform relatives last night before naming the 20-year-old man who died.
Teenager's gift of life
A TEENAGER has saved five people after dying in a road accident.
Dominic Martindale, 17, was killed as he walked to his home at High Wycombe, Bucks, last month.
Doctors gave his liver to a 15-year-old boy, his kidneys to a 43-year-old mother of two and a man of 60, his heart to a woman of 45, and both lungs to a woman of 47.
‘It was a hard decision.
But Dominic carried a donor card so we knew it was what he wanted,’ said his mother Janice.
Ter-race
RACING fan William Davis has turned his home into a shrine to jockey Lester Piggott.
The front of the terraced house in Portsmouth, Hants, looks like a stable and there are stained glass windows in his hero's racing colours.
Leslie's fit enough to tackle a turkey
TV HOST Leslie Crowther was allowed out of hospital yesterday to spend Christmas with his family.
He was stretchered into an ambulance for the short trip from Bristol's Frenchay Hospital to his home at Corston, near Bath.
It was another milestone in his amazing recovery since an horrific motorway smash two months ago.
The 59-year-old star needed two life-saving operation to remove blood clots and was left in a deep coma after brain surgery.
Doctors gave him only a 50-50 chance of survival.
Yesterday Leslie showed he was full of life again, sporting a blue baseball cap and obviously looking forward to spending the day with his five children and 61-year-old wife Jean.
Then it was back to hospital where he still faces months of physiotherapy and speech therapy.
£93 return to America
Ellis Plaice
TYCOON Richard Branson launched sky wars yesterday as he slashed the cost of return trips to America to just £93.
Passengers will be able to travel the 3,440 miles from London to New York on Virgin flights for less than a 40-minute business-class trip across the Channel.
The deal will provide unrestricted walk-on fares in each direction, without the usual special offer snags like Saturday stop-overs and peak-flight restrictions.
‘Once again we have set down a marker for trans-Atlantic travel with a £93 for '93 offer which is the most competitive fare available,’ said Branson, yesterday.
The current cheapest airline fare is the £249 Apex special which must be booked in advance.
Most airlines charge £2,000 for a business-class return to New York, and £3,800 for first-class travel.
Branson's recession-hit rivals will be waiting to see if the response justifies lowering their own prices in the leanest booking period of the year.
The flights must be booked between today and midnight on New Year's Day and tickets remain valid until the end of March.
As a scheduled operator, Virgin must fly its 400-seat jumbos even if there are only a handful of passengers on board.
It will offer more than 200 economy seats in each of three jumbos a day to New York and Boston, from Gatwick and Heathrow.
No airline could afford to carry passengers for long at such giveaway prices.
At £93, each passenger is travelling about 37 miles for every £1.
Travelling that far by car would cost £16.
Travelling 215 miles to Paris, business-class, costs £158 and a 217-mile trip to Brussels is £152.
Passengers travelling 230 miles to Amsterdam fork out £136.
House of horror up for sale
THE mansion where an oil tycoon battered his wife to death before killing himself is up for sale.
Bywater House, at Middleton-on-Sea, West Sussex, is on the market for £225,000.
Barrister Jane Elton, 43, was found dead in the kitchen of the four-bedroom seafront home by her two children in August.
She had been bludgeoned to death with a champagne bottle by her husband David, 48, who then killed himself.
Estate agents Fox and Sons say the grim history has not deterred a string of inquiries.
‘There has been quite a lot of interest,’ said a spokeswoman.
It is believed proceeds from any sale would go into a trust fund for the children.
Mr Elton attacked his wife after she had asked for a divorce.
He was already depressed about losing his £200,000-a-year job and had written a suicide note to his wife five days before the tragedy.
Crackdown on Virtual Reality porn dealers
Eben Black, Political Correspondent
CENSORS are planning a massive offensive against a flood of high-tech computer porn and violence.
The sex and violence ‘games’ using the Virtual Reality system are already big business in the United States.
Ministers are determined to avoid a re-run of the video explosion in the early 1980s, when so-called nasties poured into Britain until the industry was brought under control.
‘We will not allow that to happen again.
We want to get in first,’ said a senior Government source.
‘That was entirely unregulated and provided a field day for the sex and violence merchants.’
With the new technology, the player wears a headset and becomes part of the 3D action.
Special gloves and even whole body suits mean the game can be felt as well.
The power of the new technology first came home to audiences in the Lawnmower Man, promoted as the first VR film and starring Pierce Brosnan.
Now even the BBC is planning a Virtual Reality gameshow for next year.
Scientists from the NEC corporation in Japan have developed a Virtual Reality ski slope that is so realistic users experience exactly the same stress as if they were really hurtling down a mountain.
But the Government fears the new technology — which could be in the shops by Christmas next year — will lead to an explosion of explicit porn and violence.
A special Home Office committee is already looking at the problem with orders to report back to Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke within the next few months.
The massive popularity of the latest generation of computer games has indicated the huge market available for high-tech entertainment.
But with the VR system, images are so realistic explicit sex and graphic violence will be just like the real thing, scientists say.
Government censors want strict controls on its availability to children.
Tough limits on the VR programmes will also be imposed before they are put on the market for adults.
Dead man sent ambulance bill
A MAN killed in a road crash was sent a £20 hospital bill for the use of an ambulance.
Bungling bosses at the NHS-run Forest Healthcare Trust, which controls seven north London hospitals, charged him after he was taken to Whipps Cross Hospital.
The man, from Walthamstow, was transferred to St Bart's where he died.
‘We did not pick up the fact he had died.
The bill should not have been sent and it is extremely regrettable,’ said a trust spokesman.
Toffs' hangover cure sells out at £1 a shot
A SHOP'S vintage hangover cure is proving so popular that regular users are walking in off the streets to take it at £1 a shot.
A growing queue of upper-crust drinkers have been seeking the heady relief at the ‘gentlemen's pharmacy’, D R Harris & Co, of St James's in London — chemist to the Queen Mother.
The bitter brew, more than 140 years old and known to regulars as Pink Guinness, is a secret mix of tinctures and extracts topped with an effervescent tablet.
The historic hair of the dog was invented by a member of the Harris family in the 1850s.
The famous pharmacy reports a Yuletide boom for the elixir.
A company spokeswoman said: ‘We have been selling 100 bottles a day.
Our regulars come in, nod, put down a pound and are given a tumbler of the fizzing pick-me-up with no words being spoken.
Often they are not in a state to talk.
There is one chap who comes in three times a day for his fix.’
She said the effect of the hangover cure, which has a strong alcohol content, could be quite dramatic.
‘If your were teetotal it would go straight to your head and you would feel very high.’
The company says the concoction is available by mail order but it has no plans to mass produce it.
Church's SOS to save youngster
A CHURCH is launching a medical mission to save a teenage member of the congregation.
The Rev Richard Griffiths, of St Pancras in Chichester, West Sussex, wants to find a bone marrow donor for leukaemia victim James Crook, 17.
Doctors will be at the church on January 6 to take blood samples from potential donors aged 18 and 40.
‘The Anthony Nolan Bone Marrow Trust told me how we could set up a clinic to register as many people as possible,’ said Mr Griffiths.
Hero pet rescues pensioner
A YORKSHIRE terrier saved a dying pensioner after police tracker dogs had been searching all night.
Four-year-old Oscar went racing into the darkness as his owners helped make hot drinks for mountain rescue teams.
He found Bill Jones, 88, dressed in just his pyjamas, trapped in a bramble bush.
Rescuers combed the hillsides around Pontypool, Gwent, for five hours after Mr Jones went missing from an old people's home.
‘No one was sure where to look but Oscar showed them the way,’ said owner Celia Curtis.
‘He must have heard something or picked up a scent but he led the rescuers to a bramble bush and the elderly man was found trapped inside.
‘Oscar knows the countryside around here like the back of his paw.’
When Oscar found him, Mr Jones was on the verge of dying from hypothermia.
‘He would not have survived for much longer in the Arctic conditions,’ said a spokesman for Gwent Police.
‘We had found nothing until Oscar showed us the way.’
Mr Jones was recovering in hospital last night, as Oscar got his reward — a Christmas dinner of turkey and sausages.
Raiders blind dog
CALLOUS raiders blinded a dog as he tried to protect his owner's farm shop.
The three-year-old collie, Bob, was stabbed in the right eye and hit across the head with an iron pipe.
He had been on duty in a trailer outside the shop in Ilminster, Essex.
The raiders smashed their way into the trailer to silence Bob's barking before forcing the shop door.
He was unconscious when farmer Stuart Jeanes found him.
Vets were unable to save the damaged eye.
Mr Jeanes's wife, Margaret, said: ‘It's especially upsetting because Bob was blinded protecting us.
We leave him outside as a deterrent.
‘It's a sad world when people will go to those lengths for greed.
‘If they do that to a dumb animal you wonder what they would do to us if we'd disturbed them.’
The raiders got away with goods worth more than £600.
Tiger's back
THE Jones family were celebrating last night after their pet terrier, Tiger, returned to their home at Welshpool, Powys, after going missing three years ago.
‘It was the best Christmas present ever,’ they said.
Widow killing charge
A MAN will appear in court today charged with the murder of a 99-year-old widow.
The 21-year-old from Redruth, Cornwall, was arrested on Christmas Eve after a tip-off to police.
He will appear before Penwith magistrates in Penzance today.
Sarah Anne Burke was found severely beaten in her her bed at a council run residential home in Redruth early last Sunday, just three weeks before her centenary.
She died the next morning in hospital without regaining consciousness.
A post mortem revealed she had died from shock.
She also suffered a broken jaw and cheekbone in the attack in her room at the home where she was the eldest resident.
It is thought she may have been punched or stamped on.
Shoulder to cry on
TWO young women were dumped on the hard shoulder of the M4 with their suitcases yesterday after a boyfriend ordered them out of his car.
PC Julian Weal found the pair near Reading, Berks.
They said they had been abandoned during a row en route to London.
‘It's the season of goodwill to all mankind but its looks like this man had had enough of womankind,’ added PC Weal who ordered them a taxi.
Crazy paving
THIEVES are finding out that northern streets are paved with gold — by stealing them.
The trendy York paving has disappeared from streets in Manchester and turned up in conservation areas in the South where it is in short supply.
Canal rescue
FOUR policemen plunged into freezing water to rescue a man from drowning yesterday.
Patrick Anwati, 39, of Blackburn, Lancs, was spotted in Bridgewater canal, Manchester.
He is in the town's royal infirmiry.
Steve shows true brotherly love
A BOY who has won the first national Kids Who Care award is to use his prize money to buy a guide dog for his brother.
Steven Horsfield, 13, has helped his 19-year-old brother, Paul, ever since he began to lose his sight six years ago.
He reads a newspaper to him every day, takes him on trains and buses and to the shops.
They also play football using a ball with a bell inside to help Paul's co-ordination.
Steven, of Borehamwood, Herts, beat hundreds of children to win the award, launched by the Patients Aid Association to mark the Queen's 40th anniversary.
John Cousens, secretary of Patients Aid, said: ‘Steven wins two prizes, £1,000 for his favourite charity and £250 for himself.’
Harley Street rapist escapes new action
THE Attorney General has refused to refer the case of an evil Harley Street rapist to the Court of Appeal.
Dr Tom Courtney was sentenced to just seven years for drugging and assaulting four young women at the London premises where he practised as a gynaecologist.
Attorney General Sir Nicholas Lyell took up TODAY's call to examine the case but has decided against further action.
After Courtney was sentenced, police revealed he had probably assaulted 100 women.
TODAY, which believes the sentence was too lenient, has also told the stories of two other victims.
The 28 days for Courtney's case to be referred to the Court of Appeal runs out on Monday.
Take it easy to lose fat
TRYING to get fit quickly after the Christmas binge is bad for your health, experts warn today.
Frenzied attempts to work off the festive flab can lead to muscle and tendon injuries as people try to do too much too quickly.
To avoid danger you must start off sensibly and warm up slowly, says consumer magazine Which?
Way To Health.
The key lesson is that the exercise you pick should stretch and push you, but not hurt.
‘You take a risk if you do too much too quickly,’ said magazine editor David Dickinson.
‘It is rather like tackling a marathon without training or throwing yourself into a game of squash when you are out of condition.
‘Activities like these could be dodgy for your heart.
However, it is much more likely that you will injure joints or muscles or end up stiff or sore.’
Health campaigners point out that nearly everybody will benefit from a small amount of exercise.
Three 20-minute sessions a week which make you breathe a bit harder can improve circulation, help fight stress and improve the efficiency of your heart and lungs.
Sacking is the pits
COAL bosses were branded Scrooges last night after sacking 40 miners on Christmas Eve.
The men called to pick up their holiday pay and were told not to return in the New Year.
They were sacked after Allied Anthracite Mining, which runs two pits in the Swansea valley, West Glamorgan, ordered the men to work on Christmas Eve.
They refused, claiming the day was regarded as a bank holiday in the mining industry.
One miner said: ‘We were not given enough notice.’
The men say they will picket the pits at Ystalyfera and Cwmllinfell.
30 saved from fire
MORE than 30 people spent Christmas huddled together in a youth centre after fire broke out in a block of flats early yesterday.
The third-floor blaze in Brighton, East Sussex, started just after 2am when flames were seen at a window.
Five people were rescued from their burning flat and 30 others were led to safety after thick smoke spread through the building.
A police spokesman said: ‘It was a rather dramatic start to Christmas Day.’
Arresting sentiment
A SHOPLIFTER gave the two police officers who arrested her a shock when she sent them a Christmas card.
The woman sent her surprise to PCs Rob Barrett and Phil Hogan at Brighton police station a week after they arrested her for stealing shoes.
She wrote in the card: ‘Thanks for treating me like a human being.
May the Force be with you.’
PC Barrett said: ‘It's a nice change from the people we usually deal with.’
In a choir of his own
ONE voice stands out every time the choir begins to sing in a village church.
For grandfather David Nicol, 61, is the only member of Britain's smallest choir.
Tenor David stood alone in the choir stalls yesterday to sing with vicar Bill Rigby and the congregation at St John Lee church at Acomb, Northumberland.
‘I've been in the choir here for 53 yers.
It's in my blood, my father was a chorister for 60 years.
Suddenly, 12 years ago I ended up the only one left,’ said David.
The vicar is planning a recruitment drive in the New Year.
Husband clobbered with Christmas tree
Neville Thurlbeck
A TIPSY husband ended up in hospital when his wife hit him over the head with their Christmas tree.
Richard Baines felt a complete turkey after being crowned when he came home late from a Christmas Eve celebration drink.
Mr Baines needed stitches and was kept in for observation after needles from the artificial conifer, wielded by wife Lorraine, became embedded in his scalp.
‘He hit me with the Christmas tree, so I picked it up and hit him back,’ Lorraine told bemused police in Newport, Gwent, yesterday.
‘I hurt him so bad he's gone to hospital.’
Officers interviewed the couple, in their early 30s, but say it is unlikely either will press charges following the 2am bust-up.
‘He hit her with the tree so she took her turn and hit him back with it,’ said Inspector Roger Foster, of Gwent Police.
‘He came off the worst but I don't know what happened to the fairy on top.
‘It appears the husband had been socialising rather strongly and there was a typical Christmas domestic dispute.
‘It's the first time we have dealt with anyone assaulted with a Christmas tree.
I hope the couple patch it up and live happily ever after.’
A second police spokesman said the drama was simply a domestic incident which had got out of control.
‘Mr Baines received minor injuries having been hit by his wife with an artificial tree,’ he said.
‘He was taken to hospital because he had to have pine needles removed from his head.’
As the season of goodwill got into full swing he was discharged from the Royal Gwent Hospital in Newport yesterday.
Hospital staff sent him home to try to patch things up with his hot-tempered wife.
A hospital spokesman said: ‘A man was admitted to casualty with head injuries caused by steel wire from an artificial tree.
‘His condition was FIR this morning, so we sent him home.’
Shoppers launch pie wars
ANGRY customers ran riot in a High Street store after it ran out of mince pies.
A shop assistant was punched in the face at Tesco in Witham, Essex, when he said there were only vegetarian pies left.
Staff in Sainsbury stores were also warned to look out for ‘trolley lifters’ as shoppers took goods from each other 's baskets after shelves were cleared of food.
‘People were prowling round and taking food from each other when their backs were turned,’ said a spokesman.
‘There was no loss to the stores but it could have caused a few problems.’
Battered and left to drown in a grim icy grave
THIS little girl was battered, sexually assaulted and left to drown in an icy gravel pit.
The semi-naked body of 14-year-old Johanna Young was discovered by police after a four-day hunt.
She disappeared after mysteriously taking down her Christmas cards from her bedroom wall and going out to meet friends.
‘She was such a friendly, happy girl,’ said her father, Robert, last night.
‘I just can't understand why anybody would do this to her.’
Girl in 3-hour ordeal
A YOUNG woman was subjected to a ‘horrific’ three-hour ordeal yesterday by two masked men.
The 26-year-old victim was tied up, gagged and sexually assaulted in her home after being ambushed by the pair, who were hiding behind dustbins.
She was returning to her house in Blackheath, south-east London, after finishing work as a West End nightclub receptionist.
The woman managed to free herself after the men ransacked the house and made off with £90 cash and her car and house keys.
A Scotland Yard spokeswoman said: ‘The two men tied her up with masking tape.’
The men had Irish accents and were wearing combat jackets, she said.
One had dark hair, a thin face and was tall.
The other was shorter, with blond hair and a broader face.
Firms forecast a gloomy 1993
ONE in four firms expects to announce fresh redundancies within the first three months of the New Year.
And no region of Britain can expect an overall increase in employment during 1993, says a poll of 2,000 companies by the Manpower job agency.
‘The overall results are slightly worse than for the first three months of 1992, with definite signs of the recessionary effect becoming widespread nationally,’ said Manpower spokeswoman Lilian Bennett.
The results were announced as Labour predicted the ‘wasted generation’ of jobless people under 25 would approach the one million mark next year.
Heath blasts pits closures
SIR Edward Heath finally turned against John Major yesterday.
The former Prime Minister has until now been a firm supporter of the Premier, backing his stand over Europe.
He has also welcomed Mr Major's decision to ditch many of the policies he inherited from Lady Thatcher.
But yesterday he singled out the pit closures fiasco as an example of how the Government has messed up.
He said ministers were guilty of ‘an attitude of mind’ which meant they think they did not have to bother about the public.
‘They took decisions without realising the full impact on public opinion,’ he said.
Branson scents victory
AIRLINE boss Richard Branson is on the verge of victory against British Airways rival Lord King after claiming a ‘dirty tricks’ campaign had been waged against Virgin Atlantic.
Lawyers, prepared for a long High Court battle, are now working on a settlement which could bring an abject apology from BA.
Branson had prepared a dossier of allegations which he says were ‘more suitable for an episode of Dick Tracy than for the airline industry’.
He claimed in an open letter to BA directors that executives had set up a secret ‘anti-Virgin Atlantic unit’ to discredit him and his company.
British Airways denied the claims and began a counter-claim for libel and defamation.
Industry insiders believe that Lord King would have fought the case to the death.
But the more pragmatic chief executive Sir Colin Marshall, who takes over from Lord King next year, is thought to have cautioned against pouring millions of pounds into a legal fight with no guarantee of victory.
There seems no likelihood of a settlement without the full apology Branson has always demanded and on January 11 he will be in court to savour what he expects to be the greatest victory against his rival.
Cheap trips take off
FAMILIES are snapping up cut-price holidays as travel giants slash the cost of trips to the sun.
Top holiday firms today launched their brochures full of almost Pounds 60 million worth of reductions in a battle to beat the recession.
Discounts are the biggest attraction with two out of three holidaymakers likely to book early, says a survey by the Association of British Travel Agents.
More than a third said they would take advantage of free insurance while one in four opted for free child places.
‘Travel firms are right on target when they launch a huge range of discounts,’ said an Abta spokesman.
‘Price reductions come out top of the list of incentives for people to book in advance.’
Fare deal
VIRGIN is offering return tickets to New York and Boston from Heathrow and Gatwick for £186, not £93 as stated in TODAY on Boxing Day.
The single fare is £93.
Staff have reported a massive response to the ‘January sale’, but exact numbers are being kept secret.
Stabbed WPC is fighting for her life
By Graham Brough and John Jones
A YOUNG policewoman was fighting for life early today after being stabbed three times as she tried to break up an argument.
Lesley Harrison, 29, was knifed by a taxi passenger as she stepped between him and the driver during a row over the fare.
The woman police constable, who has been in the force for five years, had to be given emergency blood transfusions at the scene after being wounded in the stomach and arms.
Three other officers were slightly hurt during the incident at Wavertree, Liverpool.
She received more blood in the ambulance which was given a police escort to the Royal Liverpool Hospital.
Lesley, who is single, was taken straight to the operating theatre where she underwent immediate surgery on severe injuries to her stomach.
Police said her condition was ‘very serious’ and her relatives had been called to her bedside.
A police spokesman said: ‘The woman and a colleague, recently joined and under instruction, were answering a call to a burglary when they came across the incident involving a taxi driver and his fare.
‘When the woman driver got out of the car she went to intervene between the two men.
The man who had been a passenger in the taxi then produced a long-bladed knife and attacked her.
‘She received a very serious wound to the stomach and two slashes to her arm, apparently inflicted as she staggered away after the first attack.
‘She acted extremely courageously,’ added the spokesman.
‘We are all hoping she will pull through.’
Paramedics were at the scene in four minutes of the emergency call and took over from officers who had been trying to stem the flow of blood.
Ambulance paramedic duty manager Mike Jackson said: ‘She was in a bad way when we arrived.
‘She had lost a lot of blood and was in a state of shock lying on the footpath at the end of an alleyway.
‘Her colleagues had done the best they could to administer first aid using dressings.
We gave her two 500 ml infusions of blood substitute at the scene and in the ambulance on the way to hospital.
‘She was taken straight into the theatre where surgeons started operating almost immediately.’
A man was arrested and taken to hospital with a head injury.
He is under police guard.
Bolan shrine is vandalised
VANDALS have tried to cut down the tree which has become a shrine to rock star Marc Bolan.
The beech on London's Barnes Common has been attacked with a chain saw and is in danger of toppling over.
Workmen have lopped off more branches in an effort to save the tree, visited by thousands of fans each year on the anniversary of Bolan's death.
The T-Rex singer was 29 when his car smashed into the tree 15 years ago.
A spokesman for the fan club said: ‘His followers will be very upset by the attempted destruction of the tree.
But we will continue to go there every year.’
Riot wrecks model prison
YOUNG thugs have wrecked moves to create a ‘model prison regime’ by staging a three-hour riot.
More than 150 officers battled to end the violence at a remand centre in Reading, Berks.
The rioters — aged from 16 to 21 — caused hundreds of thousands of pounds in damage.
They ‘hot-wired’ a prison van and repeatedly rammed it into a security gate.
More than 20 officers needed hospital treatment.
Rioters attacked one man with pool cues, breaking his fingers and smashing his cheekbone.
Police and the prison authorities have started separate inquiries to find the cause.
Super forces plans
By Eben Black
POLICE forces face the biggest shake-up in their 150-year history in a huge overhaul of the fight against crime.
Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke wants a drastic reduction in the number of forces in England and Wales.
The present 43 will be nearly halved to 25, with much larger ‘super forces’ covering greater areas taking their place.
There are moves to have the chief constables of the new forces appointed directly by the Home Secretary instead of local police authorities.
Only London's Metropolitan Police currently falls under direct control from Whitehall.
A LAW allowing courts to lock up child criminals as young as 12 has been given the go-ahead by Mr Clarke.
It will go to MPs in the New Year.
Beat crime, set up a super force
By Eben Black
POLICE forces face the biggest shake-up in their 150-year history in a huge overhaul of the fight against crime.
Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke wants a drastic reduction in the number of individual forces in England and Wales.
The present 43 forces will be nearly halved, with much larger ‘super forces’ covering greater areas taking their place.
There are moves to have the chief constables of the new forces appointed directly by the Home Secretary instead of local police authorities.
Only London's Metropolitan Police currently falls under direct control from Whitehall.
A shift of power curbing the influence of town halls would spark a storm of protest around the country.
Government officials are working out details of the plan, with the result of an in-depth overview expected around Easter.
It will point to the success of existing ‘super forces’ like Thames Valley west of London and Dyfed Powys in Wales.
Supporters of the move say rationalising forces will bring greater efficiency and save money.
Forces currently use different equipment with separate computer systems and communications networks.
This makes cross-border co-operation more difficult than it need be.
A Home Office insider said: ‘Kenneth Clarke is determined to do something about this.
‘There is a lack of co-operation between existing forces.
They all buy equipment which is not interchangeable.’
Forces considered ripe for amalgamation include Norfolk and Suffolk, Cambridgeshire and Bedfordshire, North and South Yorkshire and Nottinghamshire and Leicestershire.
The number of forces could be cut to about 25 with regional crime squads — teams of detectives covering areas which cross police boundaries — a possible blueprint for reorganisation.
Festive brawls sweep country
AT least one man has been killed and dozens seriously injured as a wave of holiday violence swept the country.
Revellers watched in horror as James Savva, 43, was knifed to death during an argument at his Metrople Hotel at Ventnor, Isle of Wight.
In Eastleigh, Hants, two policeman were injured as rival gangs battled.
In the North, Huddersfield car salesman Mohammed Sadiq is seriously ill after being set on fire in abrutal attack.
And four men burst into the Mayflower club, Bradford, and shot Mark Butters, 32, and 28-year-old Gavin Campbell.
Drunken brawls have also caused thousands of pounds worth of damage.
Couple die in crash
A COUPLE who died in a seafront car smash yesterday could have been racing seconds before the accident.
John Phipps, 26, and his 29-year-old girlfriend Joanne Johnson were in an MG Metro which hit a Toyota estate head-on after going out of control in Westcliff-on-Sea, Essex.
Mr Phipps, who lived with Ms Johnson in Southend, was thrown out of his car.
The Toyota driver and his girl passenger were seriously hurt.
The male driver of a Ford Escort XR3i and his female passenger were being questioned by police.
A spokesman said they could have been trying to race the MG.
He added: ‘This road is notorious because of boy racers.’
Two men, aged 25 and 21, died and four people were injured when two cars collided near Knutsford, Cheshire, late on Saturday.
Pilot saves climber
AN injured climber was rescued yesterday after an SOS was picked up an aircraft flying overhead.
The emergency call was relayed by the crew of an Aer Lingus jet on a scheduled flight from London to Dublin.
Joseph Hiram, 35, of Ross on Wye, Herefordshire, suffered hip and leg injuries after falling 100ft on the Zig Zag track on Snowdonia.
The airliner passed the information to controllers at West Drayton and an RAF rescue Wessex helicopter was sent to Snowdon.
Mr Hiram was flown to hospital at Bangor.
The SOS was made on a Personal Locator Beacon, a small radio transmitter which broadcasts on an emergency channel used by ships and aircraft.
‘This is the first time a beacon has been used in a mountain rescue in the UK,’ said a rescuer.
Chef's special care for wife who irked Diana
By Emma Campbell and Chris Hutchins
CELEBRITY chef Marco Pierre White leapt to the aid of his estranged wife Lisa Butcher yesterday.
Just hours after Lisa's mother confirmed the 21-year-old model was seeing Princess Diana's friend James Gilbey, fiery Marco wrapped a protective arm around her shoulder and escorted her back to her family home in Fulham, west London.
Deirdre Butcher had earlier admitted her daughter had been out with bachelor Gilbey — named as the man on the infamous Squidgy tapes.
‘She has been seeing James recently but she still loves Marco,’ said Mrs Butcher.
‘She would like to make a go of it but there is nothing there — it is so sad.’
Lisa split up from Marco after just 15 weeks of marriage.
It was the second marriage for the chef who runs Harveys restaurant on Wandsworth Common and The Canteen at Chelsea Harbour in partnership with actor Michael Caine.
The couple's apparent reconciliation will have done little to lessen Princess Diana's anger at the knowledge that the man who once told her he loved her has fallen for a beautiful woman, 10 years younger than herself.
Gilbey, who has been her greatest emotional support since the collapse of her marriage to Prince Charles, broke the news himself in a telephone call to Kensington Palace.
It was the final straw in what has been the worst Christmas of her life.
Isolated from her sons, Diana had been expecting a visit from Gilbey at Althorp House where she had been staying with her brother, Charles.
A servant told her that Gilbey had visited the family estate two weeks earlier — with Lisa on his arm.
By now Diana will realise that Lisa is everything she aspired to be.
Young and beautiful, Lisa was Model of the Year in 1987 and went on to become the Face of the Nineties.
Yet Diana's own attempt to become a cover girl for Vogue by hiring top photographer Patrick Demarchelier was regarded by fashion insiders as disastrous.
Lisa is also incredibly popular at a time when the tide of affection for Diana is turning.
She is an accomplished horsewoman, a skill which ranks highly in aristocratic circles but one in which Diana is lacking.
Diana, who is from a broken home, will find no comfort in the fact that Lisa is from a stable and loving family who have given her every support since her separation from Marco.
Lisa was apparently introduced to James Gilbey by her agent's assistant, Catrina Skepper who invited her to a weekend party in North Yorkshire.
Her agent Lorraine Ashton told TODAY: ‘Lisa is divine and sweet and on her way to the top.
Everything is special about her from her neck to her fingertips.
‘She is ravishing.’
Diana has always regarded Gilbey's shoulder as exclusively hers.
She has always demanded — and got — unswerving loyalty.
But Lisa's high society wedding to Marco last August, attended by Michael and Shakira Caine, Keith Floyd and Albert Roux, thrust her from being a successful model into full membership of Diana's prized circle.
Now as Diana is free to return to the social world of her former friends she will realise that Lisa is rapidly becoming its new darling.
Princes William and Harry continued their Christmas break at Sandringham without their mother yesterday when they attended a carol service with the rest of the Royal Family at a nearby church.
PRINCESS Margaret's son, Viscount Linley, is to marry wealthy Irish aristocrat's daughter Serena Stanhope in the New Year, friends said last night.
The couple spent Christmas together at his mother's home on the Caribbean island of Mustique.
David Linley, 31, and 22-year-old Serena, who is the grand-daughter of wealthy Lord Harrington, have been dating for more than a year.
Serena's father, Lord Petersham, is said to be worth £200 million.
He owns large parts of fashionable south Kensington.
It is understood that the Queen approves of her nephew's romance.
Small bid by sailor Tom
A LONE sailor set off yesterday in his bid to cross the Atlantic Ocean in the smallest boat.
Tom McNally, 49, of Liverpool, left Sagres in southern Portugal in his 5ft 5in vessel hoping to retrace the 4,500-mile journey of Christopher Columbus.
Ken stays course
ENDURING Coronation Street character Ken Barlow was first written into the soap as a make-weight who could easily be ditched.
Scriptwriter Tony Warren never expected his creation, played by William Roache, to last for more than a few years.
Now, 32 years later, Ken is at the centre of a love tangle with girlfriend Maggie, her son Mark, and arch-enemy Mike Baldwin.
‘Ken Barlow is one character I did not expect to survive for any great length of time,’ said the Street's creator Warren, 55.
He told the Street's fan magazine that the soap was envisaged as lasting only 13 episodes — of which Warren wrote 12 — and with quite a different name.
‘It was changed from the original Florizel Street because Agnes the tea lady thought it sounded like disinfectant,’ said Warren.
The stuff of bad dreams
STORE boss Roger Price was fuming after a paper printed a Christmas ad telling his customers: ‘Stuff your kids.’
Roger paid £110 for the front-page advert for his photographic shop, which should have read: ‘Stuff the turkey and shoot the kids — with a camera of course.’
But a printing mistake left it reading: ‘This Christmas, Roger Price suggests you stuff the kids and shoot the turkey.’
Roger, 52, who designed the ad himself, was forced to put a sign in his shop window explaining the error.
He said: ‘It came out looking as though I was telling them to stuff the season of goodwill, not buy the children any presents and put a bullet in the turkey.
‘People were coming into the shop saying they couldn't understand why I had taken such an attitude.’
He has now demanded his money back from the Newport Advertiser in Shropshire, which has apologised.
Para shot by sentry
A YOUNG paratrooper was critically ill in hospital last night after being shot by a fellow sentry.
The two were apparently on guard duty at the Lille Barracks, Farnham, Surrey, when 19-year-old Robert Smith was blasted at point-blank range.
An Army spokesman said: ‘We believe the shooting was a tragic accident.’
She took down her Christmas cards and went out.
We never saw Johanna again
By Adrian Lee
A SEX monster battered a 14-year-old girl before dumping her in a freezing gravel pit and leaving her to drown.
Johanna Young's semi-naked body was found floating in the icy water after a four-day search.
She had been sexually assaulted.
The dark-haired schoolgirl, who split with her boyfriend two days before disappearing, left home last Wednesday evening to meet friends.
She was last seen alive outside a chip shop in the High Street of the quiet market town of Watton, Norfolk, about an hour later.
Her parents Robert and Carol joined in the hunt, which ended on Boxing Day when a man walking his dog in a nearby lovers' lane found Johanna's black trainers in a hedge.
Shortly afterwards, a police dog handler spotted her body.
Her underwear and tights, which had been ripped off, were found a few yards away.
Police said she had suffered a terrible blow to the back of her head but was still alive when she was tossed into the water.
Last night, Johanna's father broke down as he revealed his daughter had mysteriously taken down her 50 Christmas cards from her bedroom wall only hours before disappearing.
‘I don't know what happened,’ said Robert, 40, a self-employed TV repairer and electrician.
‘The last time I saw her she was bubbly and full of life.
She had no cares.
‘I had no reason to think there might have been anything wrong.
‘We thought she was going to visit her former boyfriend, but obviously she did not.
‘She was such a friendly, happy girl.
The last days have been hell.
‘We are all trying to cope in our own way.
I just can't understand why anybody would do this to her.
‘I thought she was friends with everybody.
You can imagine what sort of a Christmas we had.’
Last night his daughter's presents lay unopened in her bedroom inside the family's £120,000 detached home as a string of callers delivered sympathy cards.
‘She was very happy at home — there had been no arguments or rows and she was her usual happy self when she went out,’ said Robert.
‘We first began to get worried about her on Thursday morning when she did not turn up to do her paper round.
‘If anybody knows anything about what might have happened to her I would beg them to contact the police and tell them anything that might help.’
Robert and Carol, who also have a son, Daniel, and another daughter Emma, had warned Johanna of the dangers of going off with strangers.
They are convinced she would not have gone with anyone willingly.
‘She would have run a mile,’ said Robert.
Hugging her husband, Carol said Johanna's ex-boyfriend, Ryan Firman, 17, was very upset.
‘We didn't even know they had split up.
Johanna didn't seem upset or crying or anything like that.
‘But then teenagers often don't talk to their parents about that sort of thing.
‘I think I would have known if she was very upset about them splitting up.’
Detective Superintendent Michael Cole, leading the hunt for the killer, said: ‘Whoever put her in the pit must have assumed she would be dead very quickly.
‘The water was freezing cold.
We are looking for a brutal, unfeeling killer.’
There was no sign of a struggle and detectives believe 5ft 4in Johanna, a fourth-year pupil at Wayland High School, may have known her attacker.
They think she was killed on the night she disappeared.
When found, she was still wearing her plum-coloured anorak, but her blue jeans are missing.
Johanna's trainers had been placed neatly together in a hedgerow, 400 yards from the pit.
A series of car tracks was found in the mud.
Detectives do not know if she was attacked somewhere else and driven to her death, or met her fate in the lovers' lane.
Mr Cole said Johanna seemed to have got over the break-up with her boyfriend, who joined the search for her.
‘It was not unusual for her to go out on her own and meet up with friends,’ he said.
‘She was a normal, sensible girl who had not gone off before and when she was reported missing we always feared this could be the outcome.’
Yesterday afternoon, detectives spoke to Ryan, who last saw Johanna when they split up.
They had been together for six months but fell out when he told her he wanted to see more of his friends.
Last night Ryan said he felt partly to blame for her death after deciding to cool things.
Ryan believes Johanna was abducted as she made her way to his house to try to patch things up.
‘She was seen walking this way,’ he said.
‘It was a really horrible, foggy night — and no one saw her again.
‘If only I hadn't called it off she might still be here.’
Ryan had gone to visit an old girlfriend that night, but left at 9pm.
The next morning Johanna's sister, Emma, asked if he had seen her.
‘I couldn't believe she'd gone,’ he said.
‘I just wanted to find her, I felt so bad that she may have gone missing because of me.’
He added: ‘She was a cheerful girl and we were very close, but she was very possessive.
‘She was very sensitive and if she thought people did not like her or she thought her friends were ignoring her she became paranoid.’
Johanna's home is less than a mile from the spot where her body was found.
‘It is possible the killer may have had local knowledge,’ said Det Supt Cole.
‘That lane is popular with couples.
It could be somebody who knew her.’
Schoolfriend Justin Pike, 15, was one of the last people to see Johanna alive.
‘I saw her at about 8.30pm when she was going past the chippie,’ he said.
‘I shouted to her but she ignored me.
It was as though she was in an off-mood and was being a bit funny.’
Johanna was so popular that it took police a day to talk to all her friends after she was reported missing.
The savage murder has shocked local residents.
Many sacrificed some of their Christmas holiday to join the hunt for her.
Last night prayers were said for her at Watton Methodist Church where her aunt is a member of the congregation.
‘We all feared this might happen and now it has come to the worst,’ said one church-goer arriving for the service.
‘Everybody is very shocked, Watton is a typical Norfolk town.
‘It's a place where there's hardly any violence.
You get the odd burglary, but you don't worry about walking around at night.
‘Our thoughts are with her family.’
Child thugs to face jail
A LAW allowing the courts to lock up child criminals as young as 12 has been given the go-ahead by Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke.
The new law will be put to the Commons in the New Year.
Mr Clarke believes the crackdown will deal with a hardcore of persistent offenders who can clock up scores of crimes before they reach their teens.
Echo of 16 years ago
THE murder of Johanna Young has chilling similarities to the killing of another 14-year-old girl in the same area 16 years ago.
The partly-clothed body of Heidi Reddin was found in a water-filled ditch near her home in Downham Market, six weeks after she went missing on December 15, 1976.
The town is just 20 miles from the spot where Johanna's body was found.
Dustman Peter Hunter was later jailed for life after being found guilty of raping and murdering the teenage daughter of an army warrant officer.
Hunter, then 27, picked up Heidi as she hitch-hiked along the A10 to visit her boyfriend, who she had rowed with the day before.
Johanna had also had a tiff with her boyfriend.
Hunter carved a hideous noughts and crosses pattern on Heidi's naked bottom after strangling her with a belt.
Then he dumped her in a ditch beside the Denver to West Dereham road, just two miles from her home.
Her body was discovered by two schoolboys out playing.
Police have never solved the disappearance of three other youngsters who vanished without trace on bank holidays within a 50-mile radius of the same area in North Norfolk.
April Fabb, 13, disappeared on a cycle trip at Easter in 1969.
Steven Newing, 11, vanished in September of the same year.
Student Pamela Exall, 21, disappeared on a camping holiday in August 1974.
At the time of Heidi's murder police were investigating any links between the incidents.
How good is your photographic memory?
A An El Al jumbo ploughed into two ten-storey blocks of flats in Amsterdam, killing 200 people.
What was the plane's cargo?
B Major was hit by an egg in election year.
How long has his party been in power?
C Linford Christie clinched Olympic gold.
But which UK runner was sent home?
D Director Woody Allen stunned fans by admitting to an affair with Soon-Yi, 19, the adopted daughter of actress wife Mia Farrow.
Who is the girl's adoptive father?
E Nigel Mansell finally becomes the Formula One world champion in Hungary.
After a championship victory earlier in the year, at which circuit did his British fans risk their safety to mob him on the track?
F Whose football strip did David Mellor put on for Antonia de Sancha?
G John Smith made his debut speech as the Labour leader in Blackpool.
Who is the woman kissing him?
H Pictures of a topless Duchess of York kissing a man by a pool caused a sensation.
Who was giving her financial advice?
I 3,000 US soldiers set foot in Somalia.
Who met them on the beaches?
J ‘Sex’ hit the bookshops.
Which supermodel is featured in the book having her toe sucked by Madonna?
K Thousands of coal miners marched through central London to protest at the Government's bungled pit closures.
Which Minister is the pits with the miners whose livelihoods now hang in the balance?
L In November Bill Clinton won the US Presidential race, supported by wife Hillary and despite claims of draft dodging and womanising.
What is the name of the woman who claims she had a 12-year affair with him?
M Athlete Sally Gunnell won gold in the 400-metre hurdles for Britain.
How many golds did we win overall?
N In August TV crews found Nazi-like detention camps in Yugoslavia.
Which former Yugoslav state has seen most of the fighting?
O Camilla Parker Bowles's son enjoys a special relationship to Prince Charles.
What is it?
P On Sept 16 the Pounds crashed and Lamont pulled us out of the ERM.
Which bank did he blame?
Q Fire ripped through Windsor Castle.
Which member of the Royal Family helped emergency workers?
R At the Guildhall the Queen described her horrible year.
What language did she use?
S Which Frank Sinatra song did Nick Faldo sing after winning this year's Open?
T The Queen's only daughter married for the second time in a low-key ceremony held on the Balmoral estate this month.
What is the naval rank held by her new husband, Tim Laurence?
Waitress served up £300,000
A teenage waitress has been left a £300,000 tip by a man who used to dine at her restaurant.
Seventeen-year-old Cara Wood befriended lonely Bill Cruxton, 82, after his wife died.
But Bill's only living relative is challenging the gift to schoolgirl Cara, who works part-time at the restaurant at Chagrin Falls, Ohio.
A lawyer acting for his 86-year-old sister, Cora Bruck, said last night: ‘It doesn't represent his true intentions.
‘He was a very down-to-earth and conservative guy.’
Restaurant staff said that Cara was ‘just a good kid’ who took time to help Bill.
He became a regular for lunch and dinner after his wife died of cancer three years ago.
Cara is delighted.
But she said: ‘I still get an allowance from my Mom.’
IRA target sells house
IRA assassination target Sir Peter Terry is selling the home where he nearly died in a hail of bullets.
The former Air Chief Marshall and Governor General of Gibraltar was gunned down two years ago while in the drawing room of his mock-Tudor house in the village of Milford, Staffs.
Sir Peter, 66, was hit by nine bullets fired from an automatic weapon through the French windows.
Two of the bullets lodged near his brain.
He and his wife, Betty, who was hit in the eye by flying fragments, have not lived in the house since, according to neighbours.
When Sir Peter came out of hospital, they went into hiding at a secret address.
Thousands turn to renting and save £2,000 every year
By Ian Fletcher, Consumer Correspondent
RENTING instead of buying can save people setting up a home more than £2,000 a year, it was claimed yesterday.
As house prices plummet, the new breed of renters escape the danger of falling into debt traps and save their spare cash for the future.
Housing analysts estimate that up to 500,000 young people have steered clear of becoming home owners since the property slump of the late Eighties.
By renting accommodation they can enjoy a short-term lease contract while saving for a deposit to be laid down on a property when the market's future becomes clearer.
Economists with the Council of Mortgage Lenders have compared the cost of buying a £55,000 house with renting.
When they took into account prices falling by 2 per cent a year the annual advantage of renting added up to £2,288 over buying.
The lack of people prepared to plunge into the housing market has forced the Government into another policy U-turn.
The Thatcher ideal of home ownership for all has been abandoned, and ministers are searching for ways to boost the supply of private rented property.
Housing Minister Sir George Young is drawing up plans to encourage banks, building societies and pension funds to invest in rental properties.
In Britain today, 69 per cent of homes are owner-occupied, with local councils renting out 20 per cent, and housing associations three per cent .
Just eight per cent of homes are rented from private landlords — compared with 45 per cent in West Germany and around 33 per cent in the US.
In 1989, then Environment Secretary Nicholas Ridley aimed to free up the rental market by abolishing rent controls.
But with the growing homeless problem, ministers admit that the attempt has failed.
The Government also hopes to give the property market a temporary boost.
Instead of discounts on their council houses, would-be buyers could be given grants of up to £25,000 to buy on the open market.
Builders may be offered help when they start new developments, and derelict inner-city sites could be sold off cheaply for housing.
My 40 years of torture
A FORMER nurse put the Queen's ‘annus horribilis’ in perspective yesterday when she said: ‘My whole life has been horribilis’.
Olive Cookhorn, 57, has had 70 operations in 40 years.
Her appendix, womb and a kidney were removed along with in-growing toenails and haemorrhoids.
Spiralling leg fractures, cysts, ventricle failure also saw her whisked into the operating theatre.
And she has suffered a heart attack, stroke and three miscarriages.
‘If the Queen thinks she has had a bad year, look at me — my whole life has been pretty horribilis,’ said Olive, from Birmingham.
Labour blast homes U-turn
By Eben Black, Political Correspondent
LABOUR last night accused the Conservatives of having to do an embarrassing U-turn over home ownership.
Shadow housing spokesman John Battle said: ‘They have been forced into it, but at least now they realise they have to do something.
‘It is moving away from everything they have said in the past.
‘But their only way out now is to increase the sheer percentage of housing to rent.’
He added: ‘Home ownership at 69 per cent is unsustainable.
‘So society needs more housing for rent to be made available.’
But the proposed Government move to persuade young people to rent homes instead of buying received a mixed reception yesterday.
The National Association of Estate Agents reacted with dismay.
Past president David Ware, said: ‘It seems crazy to me.
‘The whole of the economy of Britain is based on the fact that an Englishman's home is his castle.
‘Young people can't fail to realise that house prices are cheaper in real terms than at any time since 1970 and interest rates are ridiculously low.
‘The only spectre hanging over the property market is unemployment at the moment.
‘We obviously want to continue to encourage young people to buy a home of their own and feel it makes a lot of sense.’
How to survive porridge
YOUNG prisoners are to be taught how to survive inside with a real-life version of the hit television comedy series, Porridge.
Experienced inmates — like Fletcher in the Seventies BBC shows — will be paired with newcomers, like his cellmate, Godber.
The older figures will be selected by prison staff and sent on six-week Samaritans' training courses under a Home Office scheme, called Listening Prisoners.
Prison official David Seary, who is hoping to introduce the scheme next year at Birmingham's Winson Green Jail, said: ‘Young inmates can become depressed, even to the point of taking their own lives.
It may be easier for them to talk to a fellow inmate.’
A BBC spokesman said: ‘Fletcher would approve of this.
Porridge was repeated this year and still has a big following inside.’
999 saves couple's love trip
By Ian Key
POLICE raced to save a young couple's dream honeymoon after they left their passports at home.
Two police forces and an airline took part in the 350-mile dash to make sure newlyweds Mark and Jan Hemmingway jetted off for a fortnight in the Seychelles.
The couple had turned up at Gatwick airport to discover that Mark, who is blind, had packed their bank books instead of passports.
They called police near their home at Willington, County Durham, for help — and the race against time began.
The passports were rushed to Newcastle airport, flown on a British Airways flight to Heathrow, picked up by the Metropolitan Police and taken to Gatwick.
They arrived just 30 minutes before the holiday flight took off.
‘It's not in our normal line of duty but we were glad to help,’ said a police spokesman.
Mark, 34, said: ‘Thanks to them, we're having a honeymoon after all.’
Burned by gas blast
AN explosion ripped through a man's living room yesterday as he watched a TV film in which Michael Caine blew up a safe.
Dental worker Keith Dunkin, 42, from Horsell, near Woking in Surrey, had just lit a gas fire before settling down to watch The Italian Job.
He suffered burns to his face and hands.
His brother Pete said: ‘It's a miracle he wasn't killed.’
or seriously injured.’
Flying to an early grave
AIRLINE pilots can expect to die sooner than the rest of the population, researchers said yesterday.
More than 35 per cent of pilots die between the ages of 55 and 59 compared with an average 18 per cent, said the British Airline Pilots' Association.
The survey of seven airlines found the average age of pilots when they died was 61.
The average age at death of men generally was 63.
I can't come to work, granny has died again
BEREAVEMENT is the most popular excuse for shirking off work, a survey has found.
But one forgetful employee told his boss a grandmother had died four times in one month.
Among the more imaginative excuses were ‘I couldn't do it because the dog was pining,’‘the file fell in the bin and the cleaners came’ and ‘my wife wanted to make love’, finanacial recruitment consultants Accountemps found.
People in mundane jobs came up with more fanciful excuses.
‘Perhaps they should put the effort involved in devising wild excuses into their normal work routine,’ said a spokesman.
Fundraiser flees after prize scam
POLICE are hunting a charity raffle promoter who vanished without handing out any prizes.
Laurence Smith had offered to raise thousands of pounds for the Birmingham Institute of Conductive Education, which helps cerebral palsy sufferers and has Princess Diana as patron.
The prizes, including a holiday at Seaworld in Florida, were supposed to be drawn on December 14.
Nothing happened and Mr Smith has since vanished from his Wolverhampton home.
‘We all feel badly let down,’ said Margaret Basterfield, of the Friends Of The Institute which raises funds for the charity.
‘There will be no prizewinners.’
VW girl Paula's short cut back to modelling
By Graham Brough
MODEL Paula Hamilton has relaunched her career after overcoming her battle against drink.
Paula, known to millions as the girl in the VW car ad, turned to Fergie's hairdresser, Nicky Clark, for a new look.
The stylist helped the 29-year-old make a symbolic break from her troubled past by cutting her blonde locks into a short, ‘slick, groomed style’.
Now, after a year of therapy and medical treatment in Florida, Paula has a flurry of new assignments.
‘I decided the only way to come back was with a fresh new look,’ she said.
‘I missed London desperately but I needed my clients here to sit up and and take notice of me and prove to them that I am fit, healthy and looking good again.
‘The first thing I decided was that my hair had to come off.’
Paula's life turned sour during the Eighties — wrecked by alcohol.
Her marriage to camera technician Paul Mindel failed.
A string of personal disasters culminated in a costly court appearance for wrecking a taxi after a night out.
At the age of 19, Paula was a successful model based in Japan and having ‘hilarious fun’.
‘We were making loads of money and people were throwing champagne at us,’ she said in an interview with the People newspaper.
‘We were so debauched and yet we thought we were hilarious.
I was drinking masses.
You name it, I drank it.’
The ‘fun’— including drunken binges with actor Jack Nicholson in New York — ended her three-year marriage to Mindel.
But a few months later she made the famous VW advert.
She said: ‘The irony is that people used to think I was terribly strong — particularly after that commercial — but I had never managed to cope with life at all.
‘I am so privileged to be back.
I avoid so many of the things that used to cause me stress before.
‘I go to a lot of fellowship meetings and I see a counsellor once a week which gives me the tools to handle life on a day-to-day basis.’
Two wise men and a woman
ONE of the three kings in a nativity play was given a sex change in a Christmas message of sexual equality.
The three wise men became three wise people in the school play — one of them a woman.
And Jesus was visited in his manger by shepherdesses as well as shepherds.
Many parents were unhappy with the ‘distortion of history’.
‘It's barmy,’ said one father with children at the unnamed school in Wirral, Merseyside.
‘Afterwards some of the children were talking about the Three Wise Queens.’
A spokesman for the local council's education committee said: ‘We have issued guidelines to schools on equal opportunities with regard to their legal obligations.
‘Other than that it is a matter for the board of governors at each school.’
Conservative councillor Kate Wood called the play ‘way-out nonsense’.
‘They have re-written nursery rhymes because of this type of dotty left-wing and militant feminist thinking,’ she said.
‘Now they want to re-write the Bible.
‘It sets a dangerous precedent.
They are going to give the children the idea that it is all right to change the facts to suit your way of thinking.
‘Then there is going to be confusion and conflict between the instruction they receive at home and this.
It should be stopped.’
Leave the boys alone
MALE students at Durham University say they are sexually harassed, suffering everything from being eyed up to rape.
A pioneering survey at the university reports men complaining of being brushed up against in crowds, touched or grabbed and being the object of sexual remarks.
A number admitted they were forced to have sexual intercourse — sometimes when unable to protest due to alcohol or drugs.
The survey did not establish whether the sexual aggressors were women or other men.
None of the respondents reported their experiences to police.
Arabs pray to McMecca
SKIERS from the Middle East are praying to a new Mecca, the holy shrine of — Inverness.
Moslems visiting the Highland resort of Cairngorm get out their prayer mats three times a day, hoping to worship their traditional religious home.
But, apparently confused by the mountains, they point north towards Inverness when the target of the prayers lies 3,500 miles away — to the south-east.
The deputy general manager of the Cairngorm Chairlift Company, Tim Whittome, said last night: ‘Their heads and feet are the wrong way round, but it would be impertinent to point it out to them.’
How to lose £1.3bn in just three years
By Ian Fletcher
FOR the first time the Duke of Westminster is broke — on paper.
His property business, Grosvenor Estate Holdings, plunged £20.9 million into the red last year.
The duke, who owns large chunks of Mayfair, lost £1.265 billion in three years, largely due to the collapse in the property market, according to BusinessAge magazine.
In the previous year the company returned an after-tax profit of Pounds 4.3 million.
The 6th duke, Gerald Grosvenor, is still the fourth richest man in the country, with a personal fortune of £643 million.
However, he does not even figure in the top 10 of 500 ‘paper millionaires’— whose wealth is in stocks and shares — listed in the January issue of BusinessAge.
The four richest on paper are revealed as two press barons and two grocers.
Top of the list is David Sainsbury of the supermarket chain, with shares worth £1.89 billion.
Second is Conrad Black (Daily Telegraph) at £385 million, third is Lord Sainsbury, also of the supermarket chain, at £262 million and fourth Lord Rothermere (Daily Mail and General Trust) at £249 million.
During the boom years of the 1980s the Duke of Westminter's company embarked on a building spree, especially in Mayfair.
He was also involved in the development of shopping centres, offices and other building project throughout the country.
He had to borrow heavily to finance it all — borrowings went up from around £120million to £225million — but he was cautious enough to keep the amount he owed within the limits of his assets and income.
And he avoided borrowing at penal rates of interest.
As a result his losses have been minor compared with some other big property companies.
His Grosvenor International Holdings company in Canada, the United States and Australia, earned a useful £3.7million after tax last year although well down on the £8.1million of 1990.
But it is not clear from the duke's company accounts exactly how much of Mayfair he owns.
At one stage the Grosvenor family owned about 300 acres of central London — including most of Pimlico — after the duke's ancestor, Sir Thomas Grosvenor, married Mary Davies, the young heiress to the lands of Ebury Manor in 1677.
The marriage restored the fortunes of the Grosvenor family, which had lost most of its enormous estates scattered across Britain, by siding with the King during the Civil War.
By the reign of Queen Victoria the 3rd Marquess was the richest man in England and the Queen made him a duke.
But his heir, the present duke, no longer holds pole position.
Gerald Grosvenor has to take fourth place behind Paul Raymond's property and sex magazine publishing empire.
BusinessAge says that although the paper millionaires may be incredibly wealthy one day, their wealth fluctuates with the vagaries of the stock market and share dealings from day to day.
The paper millionaires differ from another recently-published BusinessAge list of the wealthy which put Mr Raymond at the top with a personal fortune of £1.5 billion.
That list was based on assets such as property, art works and income on royalties.
According to the magazine, 29 of the top 50 paper millionaires in 1988 have since lost money on paper.
TOP 10 WEALTHY MEN
1
David Sainsbury, of the supermarket chain, shares worth £1.89 billion.
2
Conrad Black, Daily Telegraph £385m
3
Lord Sainsbury, also of the supermarket chain £262m
4
Lord Rothermere, Daily Mail and General Trust £249m
5
Stephen Rubin, Pentland £243.7m
6
Kevin Leech, ML Laboratories £179.7m
7
Paul Hamlyn, Reed International £155.5m
8
David Wilson, Wilson Bowden £154.2m
9
Kenneth Morrison, Morrison Supermarkets £151.7m
10
A A Luksic, Antofagasta Holdings £142.2m
South to get cash aid
THE recession-hit South-East is in line for Government hand-outs to ease the effects of the slump, it was revealed yesterday.
It could be given assisted-area status because some parts are poorer than the North.
Unemployment in the South-East is 10.1 per cent compared with 9.7 per cent in Scotland.
The Government is believed to be looking at a switch of aid funding from the North and Scotland to give the South a boost.
Backbencher Peter Mandelson, Labour MP for Hartlepool, said last night: ‘There will be a furious outcry if this financial gerrymandering to help flagging Tory support in the South goes ahead.’
Burglar drops a clanger
A BUNGLING burglar left behind a vital clue when he raided a pensioner's home — a photograph of himself.
He had carefully wiped his handprints off the window as he broke in while the 76-year-old woman watched television.
But he dropped a key ring containing a picture of himself and his girlfriend as he crept upstairs to steal the woman's jewellery.
Attached to the ring was the piece of wire he used to pick locks.
The slim, ‘Spanish-looking’ raider then broke into the home of the next-door neighbour, on the estate in Goodmayes, Essex.
He was confronted by the 70-year-old owner who found him as he crouched on the stairs.
The pensioner tackled him but was overpowered when the raider threatened him with a 6in kitchen knife, before escaping.
Police are hoping the blunder will lead to the arrest of the 25-year-old man.
‘The picture shows a man who we believe to be the double burglar cuddling his girlfriend,’ said a spokesman.
‘On the other side of the keyring is another picture of the girl, aged between 13 and 20, on her own.
‘It was a strange mistake to make seeing as he was so careful to wipe any marks he had left behind.
‘I think when he was eventually attacked by the brave pensioner he was more scared than his victims.’
Stolen van nick-nicked
A STOLEN van found by police was nicked again from under their noses.
Carpenter Gordon Brettell was told the van had been discovered with tools worth £2,500 intact.
Five hours later officers admitted the £9,000 Bedford Astra had gone missing before they had checked it for fingerprints.
After it was found a second time — minus the tools — Mr Brettel, 48, of Ash, Hants, said: ‘I thought they were winding me up.
It has been a real pain.’
A police spokesman said: ‘With hindsight it was less than perfect service on our part.’
Doctors in fits row
CHILDREN suffering fainting attacks are being wrongly diagnosed as epileptics, a child psychiatrist said yesterday.
Dr Michael Prendergast said that family physicians needed refresher courses to avoid ruining the lives of some young patients.
Dr Prendergast, of Birmingham Children's Hospital, said: ‘Once the epileptic label sticks it often doesn't get reviewed and leads to people not being able to do certain jobs or drive.
I have found 44 per cent of these cases are not epileptic.’
He said most wrongly diagnosed children were only suffering fainting attacks caused by breath-holding and tantrums.
Channel funnel of hate
PEOPLE become more anti-French the older they get, according to a survey today.
As many as one in 12 Britons dislike our cross-Channel neighbours with the Welsh topping the league.
Londoners, Scots and the under-24s are among the pro-French lobby, says the survey from holiday company Crystal Holidays France.
Of French attractions East Midlanders liked the cafe life, the Scots liked the beaches and the Riviera appealed most to the Welsh.
Cindy Crawford was the person men would most like to meet in France, while women plumped for screen hunk Richard Gere.
Raiders ransack Gascoigne's villa
By Lisa Reynolds
THIEVES have ransacked soccer ace Paul Gascoigne's Italian home while he was in Britain.
The raiders helped themselves to salami and Christmas cake and fed the guard dog to keep it quiet.
They even stayed overnight before making off with their haul.
Detectives say they have no idea what was stolen because the million-pound villa in a suburb of Rome was turned upside down in the Boxing Day burglary.
The raiders, who were searching for cash and jewellery, left valuable fur coats, stereos, a photo of Gazza with the Queen, and an England shirt, according to police.
Gazza, 25, was celebrating Christmas at his family home in Gateshead, Tyne and Wear, at the time.
He was only told of the burglary last night as he visited his sister, Anne Marie, in Hoddesdon, Herts.
The news did not seem to bother him unduly.
‘That's life I suppose,’ he said.
Gazza, wearing a striped blue and yellow shirt and jeans, said he would have to wait until he flew back to Rome to discover the full extent of the damage.
His brother Carl, who also lives in Italy, said: ‘We are all shocked and upset but we just hope nothing precious has been stolen.
‘We don't know what has been taken yet.
Paul will find out when he gets back.’
The Lazio player's England caps and medals are safe because they are kept at his parents' home, said Carl.
But it is feared mementoes from his first few months in Italy, together with treasured personal belongings may have been snatched.
Gazza moved out to the villa in July to acclimatise before the football season kicked off.
Determined to make it a home from home, he moved brother Carl and best pal Jimmy ‘Five Bellies’ Gardner out with him.
The former Spurs player installed high-security alarms when he moved into the villa with girlfriend and mother-of-two Sheryl Kyle.
Neighbours say he has kept a low profile since moving in, prefering to stay by the pool than go out on the town.
Sergeant Guido Faggiani, of Rome police, said they believe at least two thieves were involved in the break-in.
A passer-by alerted detectives after he noticed a window had been forced.
‘They obviously knew Mr Gascoigne was away and planned the raid like professionals,’ he said.
‘They were very relaxed about it, even preparing a meal for themselves and the dog and calmly leaving after an overnight stay.
‘They left furs, stereos and other valuables but made a terrible mess looking for cash and jewels, especially in the bedrooms.
‘But we won't know what was taken until Mr Gascoigne returns.’
Gazza's soccer colleague Thomas Doll, who lives nearby, was also raided two weeks ago.
Police say they are not linking the two incidents.
A hole new look at old stockings
THRIFTY women are giving a whole new meaning to being tight with their money by recycling their old leggings.
Far from hurling a newly laddered pair into the nearest rubbish bin in a rage, three-quarters of women give their stockings a second chance.
Some skip the tight fantastic by using them as a jumping rope, others wear them as a scarf or string them up in the garden as a washing line.
Nine out of 10 British women buy their own tights and stockings so are loathe to see them wasted, according to a survey.
Fishnet varieties, worn by twice as many Scots as the national average, become plant ties in the garden, abstract wall hangings and — yes — fishing nets.
Even the £25 pairs favoured by northern women often end up in the kitchen as chip fat or paint strainers, handy onion storers or to plug leaking pipes.
The tightest tight shoppers are in Wales, where nine out of 10 women would only spend £5 on a pair, even for a special event such as a wedding.
The notion that only young, long-legged beauties choose sexy legwear is shattered by the survey, commissioned by manufacturer Aristoc.
More than half of women who buy stockings and suspenders and special tights are over 65.
And if they are from Yorkshire, they are five times less likely than most women to wear knickers underneath.
The survey did not specify what later use those tights are put to.
Michaela finds she is no fool
TV presenter Michaela Strachan thought she was an early April Fool victim when she made her debut on The Really Wild Show.
Co-host Terry Nutkins thought up an assignment for Michaela shortly after she started working on the BBC1 nature programme.
Michaela, 26, said: ‘They got me looking for wallabies and scorpions living wild in Britain.
I found out they do.
‘I got my own back on Terry.
I sent him to the north of Scotland on the nearest thing you can get to a wild goose chase — to try to see our country's most elusive bird, the capercaillie.’
The show starts a new series on January 8.
We're flush
A PLUMBER tapped into a hoard of cash when he went to repair a leak.
Father-of-two Ian Cadwaller found £800 tucked into a toilet cistern.
He gave the cash to the astonished owners of the house at Crosby, Merseyside.
‘You've got to be honest,’ he said.
Cardew the cad dies in hospital
VETERAN comedian Cardew ‘The Cad’ Robinson died in hospital yesterday after a short illness.
Cardew was admitted to Queen Mary's, in Roehampton, south London, earlier this month, suffering from a bowel infection.
It was the first time in his 75 years that he had ever been a hospital patient.
Cardew was best known for his portrayal of the comic character Cardew the Cad, a tall overgrown schoolboy who wore short trousers, cap and scarf and recalled school pranks while on stage.
His break into showbusiness came in the 1930s when he joined a novelty act called Joe Boganni and the Crazy College Boys.
One of his last public appearances was in October for a show at the Imperial War Museum in London to mark the publication of Stars in Battledress, a book about services entitlement during the war.
His friend, actor Bill Pertwee, said: ‘He was a card who had a lot of witty charm.’
Top view on state
FALLEN property tycoon Michael Kelly is having his £307,000 mortgage paid by the DSS.
Mr Kelly, 59, signed on the dole in June after his company Kelly House Development went bust.
He gets £680 a week for the flat he shares with his wife in London's Barbican, which boasts breathtaking views of the City.
Tory MP Geoffrey Dickens, who wants to review the system, said: ‘Parliament should not fund a millionaire lifestyle.’
Detective over limit
A DRINK-DRIVE police officer faces losing his job after a passer-by saw him hit another vehicle.
Detective Sergeant Bob Bruce arrived back at his station in Rochester, Kent, in the unmarked police car to find colleagues waiting to breathalyse him.
A spokesman said: ‘He was tested positive after a report of a minor accident.
He has been suspended on full pay.
‘The Crown Prosecution Service will decide what action we take next.’
‘I heard Monroe being killed’
A HOLLYWOOD press agent has claimed he heard tapes of Marilyn Monroe being murdered.
Roy Strait said he heard at least two men as they administered sleeping pills to the film star — then smothered her to death.
‘It was horrible,’ Strait said.
‘You could hear the two men talking to each other, saying ‘Give her another one…don't give it to her too quickly…now help her along’, then awful smothering sounds.’
Strait, agent to the late Jayne Mansfield, said the gruesome last moments of Monroe were secretly recorded for the Mafia.
He told chat show host Joan Rivers he hid the tapes for his friend, electronics expert Fred Otash, who was paid by the crime syndicate to bug Monroe's home.
‘After hearing those tapes, there's no doubt in my mind that Marilyn was murdered,’ he said.
Otash demanded the tapes back 10 years after Marilyn's death in August 1962.
Strait kept silent until Otash died recently.
Girl, 12 mugged
A TERRIFIED 12-year-old girl was attacked and robbed of a £5 Christmas present.
The attacker grabbed the child after she she got off a bus alone and told her: ‘I'm going to kill you.’
The girl was dragged behind a wall and forced to hand over the cash.
But she struggled free and the attacker fled.
Despite shock and scratches, she walked to a phone box to call help.
Police said last night: ‘She was very brave.’
Cop torn off strip
A POLICEMAN who walked into a hen party in a pub had to fight to keep his clothes on after being mistaken for a stripper.
The all-women party was in full swing when the PC called at the Compass Inn at Cheltenham, Glos, where a strip-o-gram was expected.
‘He had a job persuading them he was a real bobby,’ said Inspector Brian Farmer.
‘He assures us that he maintained his dignity despite a lot of verbal encouragement to bare all.’
Drug test to save animals
THOUSANDS of animals may be saved from agonising drug tests by scientists at Glasgow University who are studying ways to freeze liver cells which can be used instead.
Balloon escape
SIX day-trippers escaped unhurt yesterday when their hot air balloon hit power lines and crashed into a canal.
The friends, on a pleasure flight from a hotel, were taken to hospital for checks.
They were found to be wet through but well.
Police alerted electricity staff, who cut off the deadly high-voltage supply following the accident at the Lancaster Canal, five miles north of Preston, Lancs.
‘There is no doubt the people involved are lucky to be alive,’ said a police spokesman.
‘They were taken to hospital for examination but none suffered any real injury.
They all just got a little bit wet.’
The day-trippers were recovering back at their hotel last night.
Dear diary, I will quit
PROPER planning is the key to success for the thousands of smokers hoping to kick the habit in the New Year, according to an expert.
People wanting to quit should keep a diary of every time they have a cigarette before they actually quit, says psychologist Dr Allan Norris.
‘They will soon see a pattern emerge and this will help them identify situations when they habitually smoke,’ he said.
‘This information can then be used to help them avoid those situations once they have given up.’
The diary should also be used to identify how diet and exercise need to be improved.
The advice could be very welcome for young people.
Nearly half of 16-24-year-old smokers questioned in a survey said they were going to quit the habit in the New Year.
Dr Norris said the physical act of stopping is a relatively minor part of the process.
The mental and physical preparation beforehand can make all the difference.
Clinical trials have shown nicotine replacement therapy is the only treatment which can effectively treat tobacco dependence.
Nicotine gum or a nicotine skin patch can, in fact, double long-term chances of success.
New dad's baby talk
A HUSBAND was given a crash course in how to deliver a baby by a midwife on the phone.
Colin Pennington's wife Joanne went into labour three weeks early in the bathroom of their home in Runcorn, Cheshire.
With no time to wait for an ambulance, Colin, 27, rang the midwife who issued instructions as he dashed up and down the stairs between the phone and the bathroom.
Daughter Laura weighed in at a healthy 61b 4oz.
‘It was all over in 45 minutes but it seemed an eternity,’ said Colin.
‘Laura is our first child and I hadn't got a clue what to do.’
Love tangle Lisa rides into mystery
MODEL Lisa Butcher got away from it all yesterday with a mystery man.
Her catwalk looks and figure were swathed in motorcycle overalls as she whizzed away from speculation about her relationship with Princess Diana's friend James Gilbey.
Society darling Lisa, 21, is also being wooed by her estranged husband Marco Pierre White.
She and her mystery man were spotted outside her parents' home in Fulham, west London.
She fled there after splitting from celebrity chef Marco, 30, just 15 weeks after their marriage.
Fiery Marco has not abandoned hope of patching things up but Gilbey, 36, is eager to see more of Lisa after taking her Christmas shopping.
Raid gang rampage at transplant boy's home
By John Perfect
VANDALS have wrecked the home and medical supplies of a three-year-old boy who needs a life-saving transplant operation.
They smashed vital equipment used to intravenously feed toddler Stuart Masters, slashed his cot mattress, wrecked his toys and tipped his special diet food over the floor.
His mother Shelley faces a huge repair bill after the raiders also turned on taps and flooded the house in Shoeburyness, Essex.
The home is not covered by insurance.
Stuart, who needs the same liver and bowel transplant as Laura Davies of Manchester, had been out with Shelley and her boyfriend John Moore for just two hours on Boxing Day when the vandals struck.
Shelley, 24, managed to salvage some supplies and get his food machine working again so Stuart could have his dripfeed.
‘Just how anyone can do this is beyond belief,’ she said.
‘We have lost everything and will have to start again.’
An appeal to raise £380,000 to send Stuart to Pittsburgh, America, for surgery is just £25,000 short of the target.
But the van-dals even slashed a toy polar bear which was due to be raffled for the appeal.
Shelley, who split up from her husband Peter, 32, last summer, has taken Stuart and daughter Natalie, six, to stay with friends.
Police believe the family was deliberately targeted.
‘The whole house has been vandalised,’ said a spokesman.
‘Somebody has animosity towards the family.
Whether it's got anything to do with the appeal we just don't know.’
Detectives staked out
RADIO hams are thwarting undercover detectives by passing secret information to the underworld.
They are tailing unmarked police cars to stake outs and listening in on secret frequencies.
‘It's a big game.
We hear all sorts of things,’ said a rogue radio amateur.
The eavesdroppers are proving a serious problem for police in Sheffield, South Yorkshire.
A spokesman said: ‘They have gone to great lengths to gather information useful to criminals.’
Killer strolls off to freedom
A CONVICTED killer allowed out for a stroll in the grounds of a mental hospital just kept walking — and was still missing yesterday, 24 hours later.
Bearded schizophrenic Tony Strong, 34,— described as ‘dangerously sick’— had been detained indefinitely for treatment.
He was let out for a walk in the grounds of the medium-security Runwell hospital, near Wickford, Essex.
He was due back in his ward by 5pm, but did not return.
A hospital spokesman said yesterday Strong was allowed into the 100-acre wooded grounds for several months, as part of his rehabilitation.
And there was nothing to stop him just walking off.
‘His mental state has been very stable since he has been in hospital and there is no indication that it has deteriorated recently,’ the spokesman added.
‘However, due to the seriousness of the original offence, we must say he is potentially dangerous.
He needs regular medication.
‘We do not think his mental state will deteriorate immediately without medication, but we would obviously be anxious to have him back.’
Strong was sent to the hospital last year after he admitted the manslaughter of his landlord, retired broker Ronald Baker, 70, at Benfleet, Essex.
Judge Peter Greenwood told him at Chelmsford Crown Court: ‘You are a dangerously sick man.’
Strong is white, 5ft 7ins tall and was last seen wearing a beige anorak, green sweatshirt, mauve tracksuit bottoms and Doctor Marten shoes.
Delta Romeo Three Two…
I am being stabbed.
Am in pursuit
Andrew Russell
BRITAIN'S bravest policewoman was critically ill last night after she was repeatedly stabbed in a dramatic chase.
Lesley Harrison continued to pursue her attacker despite one blow from a screwdriver that punctured her heart.
As blood poured from her wounds, she radioed to colleagues: ‘Delta Romeo Three Two, am being stabbed, in pursuit.’
They listened in horror as Lesley (right), her radio still open, collapsed screaming in agony.
It was the fourth time she had been badly hurt on duty.
The desperate man then attempted to hijack a taxi.
Blonde Lesley, 29, had been called to a house break-in in the Wavertree area of Liverpool.
Backed by just one woman trainee officer she confronted the suspect in alley off Lawrence Road, the scene of an attack in December 1991 that left her with a smashed up face.
The moment she tackled him, he began his frenzied stabbings with a knife and a screwdriver.
Two blows penetrated her arm.
A third was made with such force it went through her stomach and up to her heart.
Reeling from her wounds, she still managed to give her car's call sign — Delta Romeo Three Two — and told listening colleagues she was going after the man.
She kept up a running commentary as she chased him 50 yards across Lawrence Road before collapsing in a pool of blood.
One of the radio control room operators heard her screaming in uncontrollable agony over the airwaves.
Lesley lost two pints of blood as she chased the knifeman.
Last night an ambulanceman told how her colleagues may have saved her life by staunching the flow.
Medic Mike Jackson said: ‘When we arrived there was total chaos but officers had administered emergency first aid and did a good job stemming the blood and calming the girl.’
Paramedics had to give Lesley a litre of plasma in an emergency transfusion and put her on a drip before she was taken to hospital.
The suspect hijacked the taxi in Cretan Road, abandoned it in a cul de sac after injuring two more police officers in a frenzied attack and then was arrested in nearby Bishopsgate Street.
The taxi driver, who asked only to be known as Terry, became the next victim of the knifeman.
He said last night: ‘I did not know that a policewoman had been stabbed but something serious had obviously happened.
‘I put my headlights on to see if that would help the policemen who were obviously looking for someone.
‘My passenger door was near to an alleyway and suddenly it opened.
The man jumped in and shouted at me to drive but I refused.
‘He put his arm through the partition and I saw something glinting in the darkness.
‘He tried to stab me and and I felt something in my back between my shoulder blades.
It dented my thick leather jacket.
‘He came round the front and dragged me out and jumped into the driver's seat.
‘Two policemen came running up and tried to grab him but he was stabbing furiously at them.
They were very brave.
It was like a scene out of Psycho.
I rolled out like a ball but sneaked back in on the back seat.
He managed to get the cab in gear and then he was away, really fast.
I was in the back without him knowing.
It was only a few seconds before he hit a cul de sac and jumped out.
I ran after him, keeping a distance.
‘He was outside a pub when a police transit came by.
‘I flagged it down and shouted ‘There he is’.
Last night, as Lesley fought for her life in the intensive care unit at the Royal Liverpool hospital, a 28-year-old man was being questioned by police.
Lesley's family, colleagues and friends were praying she would make it through the first critical hours.
Her parents Colin and Lillian from Eccles in Manchester were at her bedside.
The assistant chief constable of Merseyside Paul Acres said last night: ‘All our thoughts are with her family.’
Mr Acres appealed for any witnesses to the Sunday night attack to ring police on a special hotline on 051 777 3574.
Lesley's elder brother Dave, 34, said last night: ‘She had always wanted to be in uniform and had been in the Wrens.
‘That didn't work out so she became a police woman.
She loves the force, the job and working with people.’
Her other brother, Brian, 27, added: ‘All I am thinking about is my sister.
She is not too well at the moment and is heavily sedated.’
Lesley lives with her boyfriend Barry, a former policeman who is now a private eye, in a terraced house in Warrington, Cheshire.
In her short career keep-fit fanatic Lesley has had to spend nearly nine months off duty recovering from her injuries.
She said after her last injuries in December 1991: ‘I guess I must be the unluckiest policewoman.
Other officers go through their careers without being injured but this was my third set of injuries in three years.
‘I was brought up to respect the police but there does not seem to be the respect any more.
But I love my job and there is no question of me quitting.’
A super-human effort
Cheryl Stonehouse
LESLEY Harrison's pursuit of her attacker, despite being stabbed in the heart, shows how humans can summon their strength for a final all-out effort.
Faced with extreme danger or death, we are programmed to shrug off the most appalling injuries for one last burst of energy, said a medical expert.
‘It is a capacity which has obviously helped us survive as a species over thousands of years, and medical staff see evidence of it even today time after time,’ said intensive care specialist Sally Ford.
‘Even with an injury to the heart, especially if the wound is in one of the right-hand chambers which do not have to work quite so hard, people can summon reserves of strength which seem incredible to us when they arrive in casualty and we see the extent of their injuries.’
The right-hand chambers of the heart pump ‘used’ blood to the lungs so that it can absorb oxygen.
The left-hand chambers have to pump much harder to force the re-oxygenated blood around the whole of the body.
A wound on that side can kill within minutes, because blood is lost so quickly and the body's supply of oxygen suddenly falls.
Sally also said the fact that Lesley was prepared for danger may have helped her.
‘As soon as she had the call to go to the scene, adrenalin would have started pouring into her bloodstream increasing her heart rate and alertness,’ she said.
‘Her biological machinery was in full swing.’
Major's worries
WORRIED John Major called in an election expert over fears for his majority, it was revealed last night.
Mr Major's Huntingdon constituency is the largest in England and faces a break-up under Boundary Commission changes.
The Premier also has the largest majority of any MP, 36,230 votes ahead of his Labour rival.
That could fall next time because Huntingdon — with 93,000 voters way over the 69,281 limit — is likely to be split in two.
Former Tory MP Rob Hayward, who did a study for the Premier, says his lead could drop to 20,000.
‘With that sort of majority he hasn't got too much to concern him,’ he said.
Bosses targeted
LABOUR is to launch an attack in the traditional Tory heartland of Britain's boardrooms.
MPs want to persuade bosses that Labour is the party of the future after almost 14 years of Tory rule have resulted in the worst recession since the war.
In the assault led by shadow trade and industry secretary Robin Cook, they want boardroom chiefs to help fund trade union cash cuts.
Mr Cook will present new plans committing Labour to partnership with business if it comes to power.
‘We are interested in what is best for jobs and that means encouraging enterprise and expansion,’ said a party spokesman.
Guns and poses
Emma Campbell
Palace invites in the BBC to show what a hard life the royals have.
THE royals turned out in force yesterday…just for the cameras.
But they were not doing it to supply the world's newspapers and magazines with better pictures.
The presence of Prince Charles, Prince Andrew, Prince Philip, Princess Anne, her new husband Tim Laurence and her son Peter was all to help a BBC Panorama team film how hard done by the royals are during their holidays.
Prince Charles's spokesman even turned chauffeur for the three-strong crew shooting the January TV special on the royals and privacy.
The prince's personal press secretary Dickie Arbiter ferried them round the Queen's estate at Sandringham, Norfolk, so they could film the photographers snapping the royal shooting party from a public road.
He even helped the BBC team load their gear into his Escort Cabriolet XR3i car.
But when the paparazzi responded by taking pictures of Buckingham Palace-based Mr Arbiter, he angrily demanded their names.
And what did the photographers have to say about it all?
‘It was a set-up,’ they claimed.
‘The Palace wants to portray us in the worst possible light.
‘They never offer us the help they gave to TV.’
However, TODAY was grateful for Mr Arbiter's help.
He allowed photographers to take these pictures without any hindrance at all.
Later Mr Arbiter — a former radio reporter — said: ‘The BBC crew wanted to do some filming so I was taking them round.
Unlike the paparazzi who are up here all the time, they don't know their way around.
‘I don't do things like this unless they have the full knowledge and approval of the Royal Family.’
The Queen, Queen Mother and Princes William, 10, and Harry, eight, also turned up in time for lunch in the royal shooting lodge.
The two boys then spent the rest of the day helping beaters send up birds for the guns.
Diana is smiles ahead of the rest
THE Princess of Wales still has the most dazzling smile of all despite her troubles.
It has won favour with both young and old who voted it tops in a poll of 1,051 people.
And it not only makes her look better — it makes her happy, say experts.
‘While a smile brightens up everyone's looks, scientists also tell us it is good for our health because chemicals are produced which actually cheer us up,’ said toothbrush makers Oral B, which organised the survey.
Diana topped a similar poll two years ago when the Queen Mother came third.
But this time the only other royal to win votes was the Queen, outside the top 10.
Runner-up was film star Michelle Pfeiffer, with Hollywood heart-throb Tom Cruise in third place.
Actress Felicity Kendall took fourth place, ahead of supermodel Cindy Crawford.
Thin-lipped Premier John Major was placed joint seventh with pouting sex siren Kim Basinger while actors Mel Gibson and Patrick Swayze came ninth and 10th.
If it's on a shelf, they want to buy it
Ian Fletcher and Liz Moore
SHOPPERS went sales crazy yesterday, spending £1.5 billion as they snapped up everything in sight.
‘If it's on the shelf customers want to buy it,’ said one store manager besieged by bargain hunters.
After seeing thousands pour through his doors, Tony Dyer, of Debenhams in Bristol, said: ‘It's chaos and it started the moment we opened.
Everything seems to be selling right across the board.’
Motorways and high streets around the country ground to a halt as shoppers headed for the stores.
Ten-mile tailbacks blocked roads as bargain hunters sprang into action after three days at home.
The frenzy was hailed by ecstatic managers as the best start to the winter sales in years.
‘It's almost as if the recession dam has broken.
People are flooding in to get the exceptional bargains on offer,’ said a House of Fraser spokesman.
Before Christmas many of the shops had to open on Sundays for the first time just to try to make up for the terrible year.
Police and motoring organisations issued urgent appeals to try to stem the flow and one city even urged: ‘Stay away — we're full.’
All approaches to the Lakeside shopping centre at Thurrock, Essex, were at a standstill with six-mile jams on the M25.
There were also six-mile queues in both directions on the M1 near Sheffield and five-mile tailbacks north on the A1 to Gateshead.
By midday the AA was warning shoppers to leave cars at home and use public transport or risk being trapped in city centres.
The most determined shoppers beat the rush by arriving at shops before the doors opened and some had waited for days to get what they wanted.
In London's Oxford Street a queue of early-bird shoppers snaked round Debenhams eager to get their hands on half-price bargains.
‘It was as if they had all been locked up for three days the way they rushed in,’ said a security man who saw the 8.30am rush.
Up the road at Selfridges 500 people were waiting for the doors to open.
The store sold 1,500 men's suits.
Southampton was hit by sales fever the moment the shop doors opened.
At Dixons queues stretched around the store from the early hours.
A spokesman at the store, which had knocked £70 off £220 cameras and up to £8 off computer games, said: ‘We have been overloaded with people.
It's been almost impossible to move all day.
‘Sales are up on last year.
Everybody wants a bargain.
We've had half of Southampton in here.’
At Europe's largest indoor shopping centre, the MetroCentre, Gateshead, Tyne and Wear, more than 50,000 passed through the doors in the first hour, the first of 130,000 during the day.
One store boss said: ‘The place is buzzing.
People are snapping up bargains all over the place.’
Trade was just as brisk in Newcastle and Sunderland.
Alan Parker, manager of Joplings in Sunderland, said: ‘We've been chock-a-block.
The place is as busy as I've ever seen it.’
In Fenwick at Newcastle women swamped the fashion department in the search for cut-price French outfits.
A spokesman said: ‘It has been mayhem and our main sale hasn't even begun yet.’
Shoppers brought traffic chaos to Bristol, Avon, with car parks full by 9am and traffic blocking the city.
Inspector Derek Turner said: ‘The roads are murder.’
Delighted bosses at Liberty, which opened 19 of its 21 stores, estimated they had taken 10 per cent more than the first day of last year's winter sales.
‘It looks like it's going to be a record,’ said group MD Tony Salem.
Long queues were waiting for opening time at the Regent Street store in London, with the company's Brighton, Exeter and Cheltenham stores also doing a roaring trade.
Mr Salem said there was an enormous increase in French, Dutch and Spanish shoppers cashing in on favourable exchange rates.
At the packed Army & Navy store in Guildford, Surrey, queues were so long at the tills that staff used the public address system to apologise and appeal for patience.
Managers of the 87 Debenhams stores said business was ‘phenomenal’ with all of them busier than last year.
At Southend, Essex, jobless Arthur Snow, 29, got a £560 Oriental rug for £10 after waiting outside Keddies since Christmas Day.
The store's Anna Keddie said: ‘He was determined to get the silly price bargain rug for his girlfriend.
‘By the time the store opened its doors there were 300 people queuing.
We are delighted at such a splendid start to our sale.’
The Vicars family from Portsmouth, Hants, got their hands on a Pounds 50 three-piece suite after waiting outside Allders since Christmas Eve and eating their Christmas dinner on the pavement.
Marina Vickers, 58, said: ‘It was cold, but we didn't mind.
It was lovely to have Christmas dinner in the fresh air and it's better than being stuck in front of the telly.’
It was a similar story in Belfast where shoppers camped outside S&R Electrics for TVs at £7, videos for £9, £150 off camcorders and £120 off washing machines.
John Hunt, manager of Marks & Spencer, said: ‘There are wall-to-wall customers.
You wonder where all the money is coming from, they are spending like mad.’
Tailbacks affected all roads into Leeds and there was a two-mile queue on the M1.
At the Bond Street centre in the city there were nearly 10,000 visitors an hour.
Store chiefs at the Meadowhall Centre in Sheffield saw a record 150,000 people turn up, 12,000 more than on the same day last year and in Hull police had to appeal to drivers not to take cars into the city because it was full by midday.
Dingle's department store in Plymouth, Devon, was ‘absolutely heaving’ from the moment the doors opened, said manager Peter Fairweather during his busiest day for two years.
Some shoppers were buying half price items for next Christmas.
By midday yesterday the city's Co-Op had sold out of Christmas cards and wrapping paper.
Saved in a flash
A BOY of seven saved a family of hikers lost in the Scottish Highlands — with his camera.
Alistair Sussock, of Dowanhill, Glasgow, was with his father, aunt and cousin when their group got into difficulties.
Searchers were called out to look for the overdue hikers, and spotting their torches in the distance Alistair used his camera flash to attract their attention.
The family was found near the snow line on the 2,820ft Beinn Mhic Chasgaig and airlifted to safety by RAF helicopter.
Costa check-up
TOUR operator Airtours has set up a hit-squad of inspectors to seek out and axe shoddy Continental hotels.
The company, who have already dropped 20 properties, claim they will weed out smelly plumbing, rude waiters, inedible food and murky pools.
Sales manager George Marcall said: ‘Last year we carried 1.6 million people and cut complaints from five to 2.5 per cent.
We'll improve on that.’
I wish I'd asked my Jo where she was going
Adrian Lee
MURDER victim Johanna Young's mother wept yesterday as she begged parents to always keep an eye on their children.
‘For God's sake make sure you know where they are going,’ said Carol Young.
‘I wish to hell I had done that.’
Johanna, 14, was battered, sexually assaulted and left to drown in a freezing gravel pit less than a mile from her home in Watton, Norfolk.
Her semi-naked body was found by police after a four-day hunt.
Carol, 36, recalled her daughter's last words as she left to meet friends.
‘Jo asked if she could go out and I just told her not to be late,’ she said.
Johanna was allowed to go into town because there was little else for her and other youngsters to do, said her father, Robert, 40.
‘You think in a little place like Watton nothing like this will ever happen,’ he said.
‘But I want to stress to all parents: Don't be complacent.’
He said he was still mystified why Johanna had taken down all her Christmas cards from her bedroom wall just before going out.
Her parents are convinced the killer is a local man and begged him to give himself up.
‘We drummed it in to all three of our children not to go off with strangers and Johanna was sensible enough to listen,’ said Robert.
The couple, who also have a daughter Emma, 16, and son Daniel, eight, are still trying to come to terms with the murder.
‘We are trying to pull things together but certain things trigger it all off again,’ said Robert.
Yesterday Johanna's ex-boyfriend Ryan Firman, 17, visited the isolated lovers' lane where her body was found on Boxing Day.
He wore a gold ring, engraved with the letter R — his Christmas present from Johanna.
Ryan, a meat factory butcher, opened it on Christmas Day, when she was still missing.
The couple had split just two days before she disappeared.
‘I had a very close relationship with Johanna and she was good fun to be with,’ he said.
‘It was a decent relationship where nothing illegal happened.
I can't believe someone has done this and I won't ever see her again.
‘I know there was three years difference in our ages, and what some people are saying, but none of it is true.
We were just girlfriend and boyfriend and I would never have done anything to harm her.
We had split up because I wanted to spend more time with my mates.’
Ryan, who gave Johanna a pair of satin pyjamas for Christmas, said they often went to the seaside at Great Yarmouth together and he got on well with her parents.
He discovered she was missing on Christmas Eve when her sister went round to his house.
Johanna's best friend Beverley Morley, 14, said she was also convinced the killer was a local.
‘Perhaps it's someone we both knew, and that's worrying.’
Give a dog a home
CHRISTMAS was no fun for hundreds of unwanted puppies.
The playful little animals were abandoned on the same day they were thoughtlessly handed over as presents.
Many are now in the caring hands of staff at the Battersea Dogs Home in London, but they still have to find a permanent home.
Manager Josephine Henderson said: ‘It's the same sad story every year.
No matter how often we tell people that a dog is for life, not just for Christmas, some are always abandoned within hours of being given as a present.’
Britain's best known dogs home opened its doors to the public yesterday after a four-day break.
And although scores of people turned up looking for a pet, new waifs were being brought in almost as quickly.
‘We will make sure they go to families who are capable of giving them a good home,’ said Mrs Henderson.
Britain's a success
Eben Black, Political Correspondent
CHANCELLOR Norman Lamont broke his silence on the economy yesterday with the stunning claim that despite the recession all is really well.
He left economy-watchers scratching their heads when he said the slump had ‘hidden’ the real upward trends in the country's prosperity.
He was immediately branded ‘unfit to be Chancellor’ in the wake of a welter of statistics painting gloomy prospects for 1993.
Mr Lamont's amazing boasts amid the worst recession since the Second World War sparked scorn and laughter from Labour and business bosses last night.
The Confederation of British Industry attacked Mr Lamont's optimism, complaining that manufacturing firms were short of investment.
Shadow chancellor Gordon Brown accused him of being ‘complacent, arrogant and deaf to pleas from industry for action’.
Mr Lamont claimed, in an optimistic message to the nation, that the ‘self-denigrating myths’ of Britain's decline as an industrial nation were not borne out by the truth.
The man who said he saw the ‘green shoots’ of recovery nearly two years ago claimed that under Tory rule the country had done better than many of its competitors.
The claims will also leave the country stunned today as millions count the cost of Christmas and the chances of losing their job in the New Year.
Mr Lamont said: ‘Some people are much too quick to run Britain down.
Our performance in manufacturing should be a source of confidence and pride.
‘Arguments about the British economy abound with self-denigrating myths.
One of the most significant of them is that British manufacturing is in decline.
‘It is true that there was a decline in British manufacturing up until the early 1980s.
But since that time British manufacturing has been on a strengthening long-term trend.’
Mr Lamont's defence of his abilities in running the economy came in a Tory party survey of British manufacturing.
It says that output grew by 30 per cent between 1982 and 1990, with the number of companies up from 144,000 in 1980 to 171,000 in 1991.
Exports have increased by 66 per cent since 1981, better than any of our six main competitors, it points out.
The document, written by Tory researchers, says that Britain has won 40 per cent of outside investment in EC economies — three times more than France and six times more than Germany.
It says that productivity rose by 5.9 per cent in the year to October.
But that is measured by the number of workers — which has declined sharply.
Labour's shadow chancellor accused Mr Lamont of ‘congratulating himself’.
‘The Chancellor is ending the year as he began it — complacent, arrogant and deaf to pleas from industry for action,’ said Mr Brown.
The CBI's director of public affairs, John Dunkley, said Britain's manufacturing firms were short of investment.
‘Manufacturing has been allowed to decline.
We need to revitalise and rebuild and enlarge it.
It is the basis of all wealth ceation,’ he said.
HERE'S GRIM REALITY, NORMAN
Unemployment at a record 2.9 million in November
175,000 redundancies since the General Election in April
One in four firms expecting to shed more jobs by March
Britain facing a public sector debt of £44 billion
Government's Chief Medical Officer blames rise in male suicides on fear of unemployment
Output down sharply in the third quarter of 1992, with September registering a 0.4 per cent fall
Home repossessions at a record 99,592 by the end of September
35,500 families and 180,000 single people registered homeless, with 8,000 on the streets at Christmas.
Dicky's bare faced cheek
DIRECTOR Sir Richard Attenborough ‘tricked’ a young actress into baring her bottom in the hit film Chaplin.
Teenager Milla Jovovich revealed that Sir Richard promised her backside would not be shown in a bedroom scene.
‘I thought that was okay but I was tricked.
It was a big scam.
‘I was told: ‘Poppy, it will only be to the bottom of your back.
Don't worry about anything’.
‘It's Tricky Dicky.
But what can I do about it now everything's over,’ Milla told Paula Yates on Channel 4's The Big Breakfast.
Milla, 17, plays one of Chaplin's young lovers in the film starring Robert Downey Jnr as Chaplin.
The saucy bedroom scene was watched by the Queen and other celebrities at a world premiere last week.
Milla also said she steered away from romance with actors and models ‘because they try to be prettier than me’.
Surgery boy home raided
VANDALS have wrecked the home and medical equipment of a three-year-old boy who needs a life-saving transplant operation.
Stuart Masters and his mother Shelley, 24, returned from an outing to find their uninsured home in Shoeburyness, Essex, flooded.
His mattress had been slashed and a machine used to feed him intravenously was broken.
Even a toy bear due to be raffled for a Pounds 380,000 appeal to send Stuart to America for a liver-bowel swap was ruined.
Police save man twice
A SUICIDAL man was saved twice by two railway policemen yesterday.
Constables Colin Abbott and Granville Sellars spotted the 23-year-old Northampton man about to leap from a parapet at Leeds, West Yorkshire.
After coaxing him for 20 minutes, one officer grabbed the man — only to discover he had been bleeding heavily from deep cuts to his wrist and arms.
They used ties as tourniquets until an ambulance arrived.
‘He very nearly died,’ said a spokesman.
Thieves wreck racecourse
STAFF at a vandal-hit racecourse gave up their bank holiday yesterday to clear up the damage in time for the next meeting.
Raiders broke into Newton Abbot racecourse on Boxing Day night and caused £25,000 of damage.
An army of workmen and volunteers worked all day to clear up after the raiders flooded the main stand.
Chairman Colin Willcocks said: ‘The thieves probably did not realise all the takings were removed.
But we shall be ready for the next meeting.’
Niall is on cloud nine
A HIGH-flying romantic proposed to his girlfriend in a private plane, 2,000ft in the air.
Niall Taylor, 33, of Billingham, Cleveland, persuaded Carol Kennedy to go flying after saying he had won the trip on the four-seater Cessna in a raffle.
As they circled over Durham Cathedral, love-struck Niall popped the question to Carol, who was celebrating her 38th birthday.
‘It's the best Christmas and birthday present I could have wished for,’ said Carol.
Thief returns call…and stolen car
Simon Trump
A SMART sales rep persuaded a thief to return her stolen car by calling him on her mobile phone.
Janet Smith dialled the number of the K-reg Ford Sierra and the thief coolly answered: ‘Can I help you?’
‘I don't know who was more surprised, him or me,’ said Janet.
‘I told him, ‘You cheeky swine, you've got my car’.’
The thief had leapt into the Sierra after Janet had left it with the engine running.
She had gone to give pregnant niece Dawn Morgan a lift to hospital — and Dawn had just gone into labour.
‘I told him what a predicament he'd caused,’ said Janet, 52.
‘He said he would leave the car in Churchdown, just outside Gloucester, and would put the keys under the mat.
I must have been chatting to him for about 20 minutes and he told me he'd needed an urgent lift.
He said he'd had a hard life.
I told him stealing a car wouldn't solve anything and he agreed to park the car.
‘Just before he rang off he even wished me a Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year.’
Janet was called round to her niece's home in Hereford after Dawn's husband Rupert, 28, could not start his own car.
Two minutes after Janet dashed inside, the company Sierra had disappeared.
She rang her boss, who told her to call the thief.
Meanwhile, Rupert had managed to get his car going and later Dawn gave birth to 8lb 13oz Declan.
Dawn, 26, said: ‘I can't wait to tell the baby all about it when he grows up.’
Marines' war on poachers
MARINE commandos have been called in to stop a band of poachers preying on England's last wild herd of red deer.
The poachers are operating in Somerset's Quantock Hills, shooting stags and hacking off their heads and antlers to display as trophies.
Carcasses are left to rot, while deer wounded by poor marksmen suffer lingering deaths.
The Taunton-based commandos, who use the hills for battle exercises, will now protect the deer and stalk the poachers using their sophisticated electronic surveillance equipment.
‘We are glad to help out and it will be good training,’ said an officer.
Courage beyond the call of duty
Andrew Russell
After 3 attacks brave Lesley said: I must be the unluckiest policewoman.
SHE had tried being in the Navy, being a secretary, being a casino croupier.
Then blonde Lesley Harrison found the life she really wanted to lead…as a policewoman.
Her worried parents were against it.
But nothing, absolutely nothing, could put her off.
And so five years ago Lesley, one of the seven children of Colin and Lillian Harrison, joined the Merseyside force.
Once in, it seemed nothing, absolutely nothing, could make her give up the job she loved.
When she was hit over the head with a brick and put off work for four months, she came back for more.
When she dislocated a shoulder while chasing a burglar, and was out of action for another four months, she couldn't wait to get back on the beat again.
And when, within five weeks of returning from that injury, she was beaten up by a yob, she still didn't dream of quitting.
‘Three injuries in three years — I must be the unluckiest policewoman,’ she said.
At the time, she was only joking.
On Sunday night, near an alley in the Wavertree district of Liverpool, for WPC 8158 Harrison, the joking stopped — cut short by the vicious flash of a burglary suspect's knife.
Lesley, out with a 30-year-old probationer policewoman, had answered a call to a burglary.
She spotted the suspect in an alley between Egerton Road and Portman Road and, with typical courage, tackled him as he fled, taking no account of the fact that he was armed with a screwdriver and a knife.
He turned and lunged at her, stabbing her three times, the last thrust piercing her heart.
Yet still Lesley still did not give up, keeping after her attacker and sending a radio SOS to police control with her call sign, Delta Romeo Three Two.
It was a pursuit which, with savage irony, took her across Lawrence Road, scene of her last attack in December 1991 when a youth punched her hard in the face.
When Lesley finally collapsed her attacker hijacked a taxi then dumped it and fled to a pub.
Last night, the brave policewoman's parents and boyfriend sat at her bedside in the Royal Liverpool Hospital hoping, praying but privately fearing the worst.
‘This was the moment we have always dreaded,’ said 61-year-old Mrs Harrison, of Eccles, Greater Manchester.
‘Her father and I never wanted her to join the police.
‘All parents are worried about whatever job their child does.
But being in the police is something different.
‘It's just that you know your daughter is in the front line.
But she was so happy in the force and absolutely loved the job.
‘So what can you do?
There is nothing we can do now except wait.
‘She's in the hands of the doctors and we have to accept that.
‘I would like to do something to help like bringing her home but I know she is in the best place.’
Lesley's niece, Beverley Spencer, 18, said: ‘She is on a life support unit but you can talk to her and she can flicker her eyes in response but that is about it.
‘She is surrounded by tubes and just looks as though she is asleep.
She is a very brave girl, who is always first on the scene.
She does love her job, but the family are hoping that she might give up, at last— we've had enough worry.
I've visited her in hospital and she is in a bad state.
‘I'm sure we will be trying to persuade her to give up, after this.’
Last night, senior officers of the Merseyside force showered praise on the unbeatable courage of their young policewoman.
Assistant Chief Constable Paul Acres said: ‘This incident is a sad and stark reminder of the dangers which officers face everyday on the streets of Britain.
‘Lesley was seriously assaulted facing those dangers in December 1991 but this did not deter her from bravely facing them again and we are very proud of her for that.
‘The next 12 hours will be particularly anxious ones for her family and colleagues.’
Detective Superintendent Mike Semple said: ‘This was a vicious attack on a very brave young policewoman.
She was stabbed three times, but pursued the man for 50 yards, calling for help on her radio, before she collapsed.
‘Her actions in this incident can only be commended.
‘She is a very brave girl, who disregarded her own safety and received serious injuries.’
Police Federation branch chairman George Creighton said: ‘We are all praying for her to pull through.
This was a horrific and very disturbing attack.
‘We can only hope that the courts will deal very seriously with attacks on police officers.’
Lesley, who lives with her private investigator boyfriend Barry Pitt, 36, in a terrace house at Warrington, Cheshire, is a keep-fit fanatic.
She loves gym workouts, swimming and playing netball — she is a leading light in a local women's team.
One of two sisters and five brothers she was always an all-action girl.
At Eccles Church of England High School, near her parents' home at Peel Green, she shone on the sports field.
Her talent for netball and swimming earned her places in the school teams.
At 16, after getting several O-levels, Lesley got a job as secretary in a Manchester city-centre office.
But she longed for a little more excitement, and fell for the glitter of work as a croupier in one of the city's casinos.
The glitter soon wore off.
Besides, she had always hankered for a job in uniform.
So she joined the Women's Royal Naval Service.
That, too, palled, and in time, she left the service.
‘It just didn't work out,’ says her 34-year-old brother, Dave.
‘But she had always wanted to be in uniform, so eventually became a policewoman.
‘She loves the force, the job and working with people.
She had been hurt before, but that didn't bother her.
She just loved that job.
‘And it was a job she was being paid to do — that's the way she looked at it.
‘Whether she quits or not is a decision for her.
Only she can take it.’
Another brother, Brian, 27, added: ‘She took it as part and parcel of the job.
I just have no thoughts for the person who did this.’
Lesley was a devoted family girl, but at 22 she moved off to live at Warrington, 15 miles away.
Five years ago, she became an enthusiastic trainee in the Merseyside police training college, near Warrington.
She met her boyfriend Barry in a pub two years ago.
Though she set up house with him, she still went home to Eccles every Sunday for a traditional roast lunch with the family.
Now her parents and boyfriend, waiting in the hospital, sadly remember how, after the 1991 assault, Lesley talked of going into the Community Service section.
‘I've decided to opt for a quiet role,’ she had said.
‘I'll still be out on patrol, but I will not be dealing with quite so many front-line incidents.
‘I have been so unlucky, I think I have earned a rest.’
Lesley got her transfer to Community Service policing.
But she found there was no escaping the front line…
Diana escapes with boys
Alan Watkins
PRINCESS Diana and her two boys will jet off for a sunshine holiday in the Caribbean, it was revealed last night.
In her first trip away since the collapse of her marriage, the princess will board a flight at Gatwick this morning bound for Antigua.
Nine first class seats have been booked for the Royal party.
After arriving in the late afternoon, she is expected to board a local Liat airline flight for one of the Caribbean islands, with St Kitts emerging as a possible holiday venue.
‘Diana is desperate to get away,’ a close friend said last night.
‘She just wants to be alone with her boys to try to forget the separation traumas.
‘Prince Charles had the boys for Christmas.
Now Diana wants to give them the sort of holiday she believes young boys should have…not shut up in old castles.’
Princess Diana's personal bodyguard Inspector Ken Wharfe flew out from London on Monday and discussed arrangements with Ian Marsh, a British Government official based in Antigua, yesterday.
Mr Wharfe and another Scotland Yard colleague boarded a Liat flight for a journey which lasted about an hour, the same time it takes to get to St Kitts.
An airline spokesman said: ‘We cannot say where they went to.
We have been asked not to say anything for security reasons.
‘We do fly to St Kitts from Antigua but we serve many small islands and I am not going to say which one is involved.’
Diana and Princes William and Harry will travel under false names in a party likely to include Mrs Frances Shand-Kydd, Diana's mother.
The cost of the return tickets for Diana and her sons is more than £7,000.
The princess has been a regular holidaymaker in the Caribbean.
On two previous occasions she stayed at the home of Virgin tycoon Richard Branson on Necker Island.
According to security sources, she is likely to return to London around January 6, well before her sons are due to return to their boarding school at Ludgrove, Berks.
A spokesman for Liat airlines said they had been told to expect a ‘prominent personality’ to arrive in Antigua today.
Diana was reunited with her sons at Kensington Palace yesterday after spending Christmas apart.
Princes William, 10, and Harry, eight, last saw her six days ago before travelling to Sandringham, Norfolk, to spend Christmas with the Queen, Prince Charles, and the rest of the Royal Family.
Diana spent her first Christmas away from the boys at her family home in Althorp, Northants.
Fish oil cancer cure hope
Rob Perkins
A CRUCIAL breakthrough in the use of fish oil to treat cancer brought fresh hope to millions of sufferers last night.
Scientists have spotted a unique protein produced by all cancerous cells.
The protein eats normal cells, leading to the drastic weight loss which weakens patients and prevents them fighting the disease.
But a highly purified oil found in salmon, sardines and mackerel can shrink solid tumours and stop the weight loss.
Clinical trials will begin within a year and patients with lung, stomach and pancreas cancer should be receiving the treatment by 1995.
‘We're quite excited,’ said research leader Michael Tisdale.
‘We've been asked by the Cancer Research Campaign to press on as fast as possible.’
More than 100,000 Britons a year die from these cancers, the biggest killer after heart disease.
Professor Tisdale, 47, began the project at Aston University, Birmingham, after noticing that some cancers stopped sufferers from absorbing food.
‘Nobody had looked at it in great detail,’ he said.
‘Now we can attack this protein and the tumour without destroying other cells.
‘We may also be able to use the discovery for cancer prevention as we can spot the signals earlier.’
The Cancer Research Campaign, which has given the seven-strong team a £150,000 grant, is delighted.
Scientific director Gordon McVie said: ‘We have been looking for a link between diet and cancer for 20 years now and this could be it.
‘This discovery brings all the pieces together.
‘There has been a lot of evidence that people who eat a lot of fish have less instances of cancer.
‘Finding the structure of the protein and how the tumour cells work will help us devise an antibody.
‘It is rather like a human Scud missile.’
Baton could have saved Leslie
HOME Secretary Kenneth Clarke was criticised by police officers yesterday for shelving plans to arm them with a truncheon they say could have protected injured policewoman Leslie Harrison from attack.
Mr Clarke halted trials of the American-style side handled baton saying: ‘It could fundamentally alter for the worse the style of policing in this country.
‘It would give our police a more aggressive appearance as it has to be worn outside the uniform.’
However, the chairman of the Merseyside Police Federation, George Crichton, said Mr Clarke's explanation was not good enough.
He would press the Home Office to reconsider its decision.
Mr Crichton said if Leslie had been armed with such a baton — which is standard issue for officers in the United States — she might have been able to protect herself.
He said: ‘In the right hands, the baton is an excellent defensive instrument.
It would have given WPC Harrison a fighting chance.
If police officers have more protection they are going to be more helpful to the public who will, in turn, be more confident.’
A Home Office spokesman said: ‘The decision has only recently been made.
‘The Home Secretary wasn't persuaded then and there hasn't been a particularly long period of time since, so it is not likely that there will be any review.’
Put me back on beat, says stab hero PC
Andrew Russell
HERO policewoman Leslie Harrison, fighting back from the brink of death after being stabbed with a screwdriver, vowed from her hospital bed yesterday: ‘I love the job.
I want to go back.’
The whispered words were the first brave Leslie, 29, spoke after regaining consciousness and being taken off a life support machine.
Boyfriend Barry Pitt, himself an ex-policeman and the man she plans to marry, was at her bedside when she woke after an emergency six-hour operation.
‘The job and getting back to it was her first thought,’ said Barry, 38.
He said she held his hand and told him: ‘Don't worry, I'll be all right.
I love you — and I love being a policewoman.’
He added: ‘She is going to make it but there is a long way to go and she is still seriously ill.
But she is breathing unaided now and the doctors say she will be okay.’
Leslie lost two pints of blood after being stabbed through the heart while trying to arrest a suspected burglar.
It was the fourth time in five years she had been injured in the line of duty.
And it may have been her devotion to fitness that saved her life.
‘That sort of injury would have killed most women,’ said Barry.
‘She works out in the gym for two hours every day.
If she had not been so fit as she is then I am convinced that she would have died.
‘She was fighting from the very first minute and she is still fighting.’
A scan yesterday at the Royal Liverpool Hospital ended fears that Leslie might suffer permanent brain damage.
‘There was a risk the brain might have been starved of oxygen.
But doctors have told us it won't be the case,’ said Barry.
Leslie was hurt after racing to back up male colleagues trying to catch the suspect in Wavertree, Liverpool.
Barry, who was with Merseyside police for 15 years, is now a private investigator.
‘I know what violence on the streets is all about,’ he said.
‘She will never come closer to death than she did on Sunday.’
It does not surprise Barry that strong-willed Leslie wants to return to the force.
‘She is not everyone's idea of the typical policewoman.
Leslie is loving, soft and very feminine away from the job but in her uniform she is a real professional.’
Her parents now want her to quit.
Her father Colin Harrison, 61, said: ‘The last time she was hurt I told her she may not be so lucky in future.’
Merseyside police were yesterday waiting to question a 28-year-old Liverpool man.
Cut Trident, Major urged
A SUPERPOWER nuclear disarmament deal thrashed out yesterday put enormous pressure on Britain's Trident programme.
President Bush and Russian counterpart Boris Yeltsin will hold a New Year summit in Europe to confirm the agreement in Geneva to slash 14,000 warheads.
Labour is calling on John Major to follow it up with cuts of his own.
Lamont's tax blow
CHANCELLOR Norman Lamont is considering raising national insurance payments in the spring Budget, despite John Major's election promise that taxes will fall ‘year on year’.
The revenue from 25 million people paying an extra £3 a week is needed to ease the Government's public borrowing crisis, caused by extra benefits payments.
Gooch's secret plan to leave wife
Christian Gysin
ENGLAND cricket captain Graham Gooch has been planning secretly to split from his wife for months, friends claimed last night.
He said he and wife Brenda had been growing apart for at least a year.
She wants the marriage to survive, tearfully telling friends: ‘Yes, we have a problem but hopefully we can come through it.’
On his return from the England tour of India in three months time Gooch had planned to separate from the mother of his three daughters and his wife of 16 years.
Even as glowing profiles of the 39-year-old cricketer were published and broadcast saying how close he was to his family, he knew he would be moving out.
He went about the difficult pre-tour planning with the England management team without saying a word although he had confided in friends that he and his wife planned to quietly separate when the tour finished.
But his plans became known in cricketing circles and Gooch told senior England tour party officials about the break-up at a Sussex hotel before his team flew to India on Monday from Gatwick Airport.
Last night a highly placed source said the last 12 months had spelt the end of the marriage.
The friend of the England skipper told TODAY: ‘Graham originally planned to finish the tour and then quietly move out of the family home when he returned.’
The source added: ‘In the past year Brenda and Graham simply grew apart.
The role of England captain had a lot to do with the split.
During the past 12 months they have spent more and more time apart.’
One sign that the marriage was in trouble was the time he spent giving after-dinner speeches recently.
He used to spend all his available free time with his family.
News of the break-up yesterday shook the cricketing world.
‘I'm staggered.
I have great difficulty believing this,’ was the immediate reaction of Essex secretary Peter Edwards, who has known the Gooches longer than most.
‘I would have believed any other person you care to name — but not Graham.’
Family life has always been at the top of Gooch's list of personal priorities.
But in the past Brenda Gooch has told how she hated being a ‘cricket widow’.
She was often forced to spend months apart from her husband as he embarked on long tours.
In an exclusive interview last March, she told TODAY that when Gooch was away, their children — Hannah, nine, and six-year-old twins Megan and Sally — kept asking ‘When is Daddy coming home?
Is it today, Mummy?’
She went on: ‘Three months is too long for them to understand when he'll be back.
‘It's even worse during the build-up to a tour, I dread it.
You find yourself hanging on to every last minute together.’
In 1988, Brenda admitted to the worry that her husband might be tempted to stray while on tour.
‘You just have to hope they are going to behave in a fairly civilised way,’ she said then.
‘Most women think they know their husbands, but I don't believe you know anybody that well.’
In fact, Gooch is known as a man who would never stray.
More recently, the couple made a brave effort to live a normal life for the children.
Eight weeks ago Gooch took his family to Portugal for a week.
Two weeks later, Brenda was at his side when he unveiled a statue of himself.
Recently he went to his children's school nativity play.
And Gooch had agreed to tour India this winter only after long discussions at home.
‘After a lot of soul-searching, I have told the selectors I am available,’ he said in July.
‘But this is definitely my last trip.
I don't look forward to being away from the girls for such a long time.
I don't want to miss them growing up.’
But friends believe that his decision to lead England in India, only months after returning from World Cup duty and a gruelling Test season against Pakistan, may have contributed to the break-up.
Yesterday he was offered the chance to pull out of part of it and go home because of his domestic troubles.
During a Test career which began in 1975 the Essex and England opening batsman always stressed the importance of a stable family.
The Gooches married in October 1975 in Chadwell Heath, Essex.
At 23, Graham, from Leytonstone, east London, had just started in cricket and did not consider it his job.
He said he was a toolmaker.
Brenda, 21, was a bookkeeper.
A friend who visited Brenda at the couple's £325,000 mansion at Shenfield, Essex, said: ‘We all have the impression that she wants the marriage to survive.
At the moment she feels lonely and vulnerable.’
Cricket widow who survived
Karen Mellor
WINTER tours and a hectic summer schedule mean long absences for many cricketers.
Cathy Taylor, wife of wicketkeeper Bob, believes they actually helped her marriage.
Bob was often away for months and was once on tour for six months during his career in the Seventies.
‘I think it keeps the marriage alive,’ said Cathy last night.
‘It means there's no boredom or routine.
If you're determined to make the marriage work from the start, it will endure anyway.
‘Even when they're in England you get used to them not being there because of the matches they play for their county.’
Cathy, 50, found the jollity and celebrations of New Year's Eve the most difficult to cope with when Derbyshire and England star Bob was away.
‘We kept in touch regularly by long-distance phone call, and wrote lots of letters.
You try to make sure that your children don't miss out.
But it is quite difficult, especially at the school concert when your son says: ‘Why isn't Daddy here to see me?’’
The problems of bringing up young children on your own will be one of the big questions on Brenda Gooch's mind, according to single mum Mary Lowe.
Mary, 45, was left like Brenda to look after a set of six-year-old twins on her own after splitting with her husband.
Brenda, however, is used to bringing up her three daughters alone for months at a time.
‘You have to make every effort to ensure they have a rounded life and don't miss out on things just because there is only one parent there for them,’ said Mary.
‘Twins are quite a strain to bring up.
You concentrate so much on bringing up your children correctly, that suddenly you don't have a life of your own.’
Captains…but losers in love
Christian Gysin
GRAHAM Gooch will have plenty of shoulders to lean on during the tour of India.
One of his few good friends is player John Emburey and he is also close to England manager Keith Fletcher.
Two other men will be able to advise him on how to deal with being captain of England AND handle a difficult personal relationship.
They are David Gower and Mike Gatting.
Both were England captains when their private lives were thrown into turmoil.
Stylish left-hander Gower, 34, who is covering the Indian tour for a newspaper, was first appointed England captain six years ago.
He gave up the job, but was reappointed in 1989.
It proved a difficult time.
Gower was sacked after a disastrous Test series against Australia and axed from the winter tour to the West Indies.
The following January he announced he was splitting up with girlfriend Vicky Stewart, 29, after 12 years together.
A friend said at the time: ‘The break up was due to the pressures of a bad season.
It had been David's most miserable year on the field and it had a devastating effect on his private life.’
Mike Gatting's marriage came under public scrutiny while he was captaining England against the West Indies in 1988.
He had shared a drink with barmaid Louise Shipman, who then claimed they also had sex at a Leicester hotel.
Gatting, now 35, vehemently denied the allegation, but lost his captaincy over the incident, which came just months after his much-publicised row with a Pakistani umpire.
His wife Elaine stood by him throughout the controversy.
Sleeping tot knifed twice in the back
A BABY was stabbed twice in the back with a carving knife as he slept yesterday.
The 15-month-old boy's screams woke his mother in the early hours.
She found him lying in a pool of blood in his cot.
One of the knife blows had punctured a lung.
The distraught mother, a nurse, did her best to stem the bleeding until an ambulance arrived at their home in Milton Keynes, Bucks.
Her boy, who needed a blood transfusion, was last night in a critical but stable condition in intensive care at Milton Keynes hospital.
‘His life is not in danger,’ said a spokesman.
The boy's 30-year-old father is accused of attempted murder and will appear in court today.
Tube good to be true
A PROUD mother was celebrating a miracle yesterday — a baby who grew outside the womb.
Lorna Ross was born two weeks early, on Christmas Eve, after mother Allison, 26, was rushed to hospital from home at Hartcliffe, Bristol, for surgery.
Doctors found the baby had grown in her Fallopian tube.
‘It is very unusual for a baby to develop fully outside the womb,’ said consultant Peter Niven.
Mayhem in mid-air
A DRUNK who rowed with other passengers during a flight was arrested when his plane touched down.
Police boarded the Aberdeen to Newcastle plane after the pilot radioed for help.
Kevin Blackburn, 25, of South Shields, Tyne and Wear, has been charged with endangering safety.
Song of hope
POP singer Tom Robinson is re-releasing his 1983 hit single War Baby.
All the profits will go towards Oxfam's winter work in war zones.
Today we had to identify our baby's body but this is how we will always remember her
IT was Carol Young's birthday yesterday.
But no day for celebration.
Just bitter tears.
Because Carol and husband Robert spent her 37th birthday going to view the body of their murdered 14-year-old daughter, Johanna.
‘It will be the first time we have seen her since it happened,’ said Mr Young, a TV repair man, before they left home at Watton, Norfolk, for the visit to the mortuary.
‘I don't think all this will sink in properly until we've seen her for ourselves.’
After the grim birthday outing, they could try to find solace in pictures of their little girl as they want to remember her.
Not as a still, cold murder victim.
But as the wistful cherub of 18 months, photographed at her play group.
As a proud fancy-dress winner of seven or so.
Or as a bonny nine-year-old, celebrating her first Christmas at Watton…with only five years of life left to her.
Pictures to help obliterate the hideous truth: that suddenly, one night before another Christmas, in 1992, their child was savagely beaten, then dumped, half-naked, in a water-filled gravel pit, a mile from her home.
When the body was found, on Boxing Day, Johanna's jeans were missing.
Detectives believe they may hold a vital clue to the killer.
Yesterday they issued a new appeal for information from anyone who has seen the garment.
‘We think someone may have picked up the jeans innocently, and maybe now thinks it's too late to come forward,’ a Norfolk police spokesman said.
The rest of Johanna's clothes, including her underwear, tights and black trainers, were still being examined yesterday at a Home Office laboratory in Huntingdon, Cambs.
A gravel pit search by divers was put off yesterday as experts continued checking the area.
Detectives feared vital clues might be destroyed.
Johanna's boyfriend, slaughterman Ryan Firman, 17, who broke up with her two days before she vanished, last Wednesday night, was at work yesterday.
He had been questioned by police, then released.
And as the hunt went on, Johanna's parents, her big sister Emma, 16, and little brother Daniel, eight, battled against the tears.
With just that handful of pictures for comfort.
Mystery of vanishing boy golfer
A GOLF-MAD schoolboy who vanished from outside a nightclub was being sought by police yesterday.
Keith Lockyer, 16, who dreamed of being a professional golfer, was last seen outside Ritzy's club at Kingston upon Thames, south London, four days before Christmas.
He was filmed on the security video as he was turned away after his friends had got in.
‘He would never have just gone off,’ said Keith's father, driving instructor Graham Lockyer, 45, of Stoneleigh, near Epsom, Surrey.
‘He's a happy-go-lucky youngster.
He had a golf handicap of eight, and won through to the knockout final of his junior club tournament.
‘That was on Sunday.
He wouldn't have missed it for the world.’
Royal wedding joy for Queen
TWO royal servants have cheered up the Queen's ‘annus horribilis‘by getting married.
Buckingham Palace chef Richard Blunden, 33, wed 28-year-old Julie Puttock, a maid at Windsor Castle.
They hit the headlines last year when Richard left his first wife, Caroline, a housemaid with Princess Diana.
A palace insider said last night: ‘Richard and Julie make a perfect couple.’
Vauxhall hits record target
VAUXHALL defied the recession this year by breaking production records.
Output was up by more than 15 per cent on 1991 with a total of 302,000 cars and vans built in Britain.
Sales figures due out next week are expected to show Vauxhall achieved its best-ever share of the UK market in 1992.
But chairman William Ebbert warned that the industry faced its greatest challenge in 1993.
Golf boy loses ball…but finds a baby
Ian Key
YOUNG brothers learning to play golf went looking for a lost ball — and found an abandoned baby.
Paul Keywood, 13, and his 11-year-old brother Nathan saved the little boy's life after discovering him in freezing conditions wrapped in only a towel.
Paul said: ‘We just didn't know want to do.
I was frightened to pick it up so we ran home to get our dad.
‘At first he didn't believe us but when he realised we really had found a baby and came back with us to have a look.’
The boys' father Ben said: ‘The lads took me straight to the baby and it was freezing.
‘It had been left with a blue towel wrapped around its waist and legs but was otherwise uncovered.
‘The umbilical cord was still attached.
As a father-of-six I do know a little about babies and this one had a healthy cry.
‘The baby felt extremely cold.
If it wasn't for the boys practising with my golf club, I'm sure it would have died.
‘It was freezing cold outside and the boy wouldn't have survived the night.’
Ben, 58, took the baby to two nurses who lived near the course at Worksop, Notts, and they called an ambulance.
Staff at tne nearby Bassetlaw General Hospital were alerted and they prepared an incubator.
Last night the little boy, thought to be only 24 hours old, was out of danger after being treated for exposure.
He is expected to make a full recovery.
Nurses at the hospital's baby unit have called him Christopher.
Detective Sergeant Peter Toft, who is leading the search for the mother, praised the quick thinking of the two brothers.
‘Fortunately they lost a ball and were looking for it when they spotted the baby wrapped in a towel,’ he said.
‘To their credit they ran straight to the nearby housing estate where they live and alerted their father.’
Yesterday officers were drafted in to make door-to-door calls in the area in the bid to trace the mother.
A spokesman said: ‘The baby was clearly self delivered.
‘We are appealing for the mum to come forward because she could need urgent medical attention.
‘We are concerned she may be a young girl who became pregnant and has not told her parents, or is a young girl in care who ran off and had the baby over the Christmas weekend.
‘She obviously panicked and abandoned the child but she has nothing to fear.
We are only worried about her safety.’
Have you lost your millions?
MORE than £2.5 billion is sitting unclaimed in bank accounts, share dividends and Premium Bond prizes, it was revealed yesterday.
Some is there because owners did not pass on new addresses when they moved.
Thousands of others died each year without telling relatives of their savings, according to some of Britain's leading financial institutions and businesses.
Buggy boy in 100ft plunge
A SCHOOLBOY had to be lifted from a ravine after plunging 100 ft on a four-wheeled motor buggy and breaking his leg.
Julian Lewis, from Caerphilly, Mid Glamorgan, was on a trail at Rhydyfelin when he toppled over the edge.
Superglue yobs blind milkman
TWO thugs blinded a milkman by squirting superglue into his eyes.
Adrian Stayte, 27, was attacked on his early-morning round by the robbers, who fled empty handed.
Yesterday he was at home in Cheltenham, Glos, after specialists decided to wait before unsticking his eyes.
They hope to save his sight.
‘It was despicable,’ said a police spokesman.
Schools fail the test
Emma Campbell
THE most important revolution in education for decades was branded a flop by school inspectors yesterday.
They say the introduction of the new national curriculum has made little or no difference.
There has been no ‘discernible general rise in standards’, according to a survey by Government inspectors.
The curriculum laid down for the first time what pupils should learn in 10 subjects.
But the inspectors found that in its second year, up to the summer of 1991, the only significant improvements were in primary science and ‘some aspects of English.’
Elsewhere, standards stayed static or even fell.
The report praised maths work by five-year-olds but said at ages six, seven and 12 ‘the proportion of unsatisfactory work gives cause for concern.’
A noticeable drop in interest in reading after the age of five also worried inspectors.
They said: ‘Most schools continued to achieve satisfactory or better standards in reading at the age of five.
‘But enthusiasm for reading among less able pupils began to decline after that.’
Technology classes were ‘acceptable’ for the first three years in primary school.
But among 11-year-olds the quality of work gave ‘considerable cause for concern.’
The inspectors also said teaching of religion in non-church primary schools was generally poor, and ‘usually lacked rigour, clear purpose and explicit religious content.’
They found primary school teachers were starting to get grips with the process of assessing pupils and many were more accurate than in the curriculum's first year.
But ‘there were few signs as yet that standards of work were benefiting as a result.’
The national curriculum's ‘full benefits will be felt over the next few years, into the next century,’ a Department of Education spokeswoman said.
‘What schools need now is a period of consolidation, to get used to the curriculum, so it works smoothly.’
Suicide of tycoon hit by slump
Ian Key
A MILLIONAIRE businessman facing a financial crisis killed himself outside his girlfriend's home.
Divorced father-of-three Terry Liffen was found dead in his car with a hose pipe leading from the exhaust.
As well as business problems Mr Liffen, 47, who made a fortune importing Italian electrical goods in the Seventies, also had domestic troubles, police said.
He drove 40 miles from his house at Gosforth, Newcastle upon Tyne, to die near girlfriend Jean Manners' home at Forcett, near Richmond, North Yorks.
Last night, a shocked Jean would say only that she was ‘distressed and deeply hurt’.
Her family said their relationship had ended, but Mr LIffen wanted it to restart.
Jean's brother-in-law, farmer John Tallantire, said: ‘That was a lot of the problem.’
A neighbour of the dead man said everyone knew he had money troubles.
‘A year ago, he was driving a new BMW 5-series car, but I last saw him in an E-registered Ford Fiesta.’
Dash to beat rail fare hike
THOUSANDS of commuters yesterday rushed to beat New Year train fare rises.
Savings of up to £260 can be made on annual season tickets bought before Sunday, when British Rail's new inflation-busting fares come into force.
Network South East expects to renew up to 150,000 tickets before the fare increases, which will average 7.5 per cent.
An annual season ticket in the region currently costs about £800.
‘People are having to tighten their belts,’ said a BR spokesman.
Fly away to beat blues
NINE in 10 people will blow away the recession blues with at least one holiday next year.
A third would spend more than last year, the same figure as those planning to book early, according to a Hoseasons survey.
Gameboys tap into a fortune
TWO computer game-crazy brothers are on course to make a fortune after becoming Britain's youngest national magazine editors.
After just two monthly issues, Adrian Lisle, 13, and 11-year-old Alex are selling 73,000 copies of Game Mania in High Street shops.
The boys, who pay themselves £100 a month, are already planning a glossy revamp for the magazine.
Yesterday, as they worked on their latest issue at an office near their home in Ramsgate, Kent, Adrian said: ‘Other magazines were too complicated.
We write most of it and mum puts it into a computer.
‘We will have to get other people to write for us because it's going to be more than 100 pages.’
Father Robert, 56, who helped launch the magazine, now plans to produce video and travel publications.
Drink-driver's 14th arrest
BRITAIN'S worst motorist appeared in court yesterday charged with drink-driving — for the 14th time.
Jeremy Smith, 29, will spend New Year behind bars after being arrested just 38 days after his release from a six-month prison sentence for a similar offence.
This time, a breath-test showed he was almost twice over the legal limit, Leicester magistrates heard.
Barbara Graham, prosecuting, said: ‘He has an absolutely horrendous record.
He is already banned from driving for 30 years.
He is positively dangerous.’
Smith of Beaumont Leys, Leicester, was remanded in custody for social reports.
The long road home
Susan Glass
IT WAS all the proof his family needed that the old Leslie Crowther they knew and loved had come home for Christmas.
The mischief still shone through in those crinkly eyes and the warm smile that had greeted thousands of nervous guests on his TV game show The Price Is Right.
And if any of his fans still needed convincing, they had only to look into the happy, laughing face of his adoring wife Jean, at his side as she has been since his horrific car accident nearly three months ago.
Before the veteran entertainer went home for the emotional Christmas Day reunion with his family, Leslie and Jean had together given thanks for his recovery at a short Communion service in the hospital chapel.
Then they left for the 13-mile drive to their luxurious home at Corston, near Bath.
It was a Christmas doctors at Frenchay Hospital near Bristol feared he might not live to see.
Leslie, 59, underwent two emergency operations to remove blood clots from his brain after his Silver Shadow Rolls-Royce spun off a motorway on that fateful day on October 3.
This time it was Jean herself who took the wheel as she took her husband home to spend a cosy few hours by his own fireside.
Christmas cards from hundreds of friends — and even more from complete strangers praying for his recovery — covered the walls.
A tree decorated with white candles sparkled behind him.
The family said his homecoming was ‘an intensely personal moment, and a significant mark in Leslie's long rehabilitation process’.
The nurse sent to accompany Leslie tried hard to melt into the background as the overjoyed family spent several hours opening presents under the tree.
They chatted quietly about old times — and daring for the first time to talk about the future.
The Christmas Day morale booster was only the game show host's second trip outside hospital since his near-fatal crash.
His first, 11 weeks after the crash took place on December 20 when he was gently transferred from hospital by ambulance, strapped to a stretcher.
Five days later he was strong enough for hospital doctors to allow him home again — this time by car.
The Christmas visits are seen as part of the long recovery process after the accident.
Despite the wheelchair and his legs covered by a tartan rug, there was no look of the invalid about brave Leslie as he relaxed with the latest Lord's Taverners magazine Long Room.
Practically the only sign of his close encounter with death was a deep indentation on the left side of his head, where doctors operated to remove a life-threatening blood clot.
Leslie's life hung in the balance for more than two weeks as he lay in a coma in the intensive care unit at the hospital, which has a specialist head injuries unit.
But the father-of-five fought back to come off his life support machine and improve enough to be moved into a general ward.
As his devoted family maintained a constant vigil at his bedside, they were rewarded by gradual signs of improvement.
First he squeezed 60-year-old Jean's hand as she sat by his bed.
Then he opened his eyes, spoke a few words and eventually tried a few tentative steps round his hospital room.
Every new achievment was hailed by his surgeons as ‘remarkable’.
Family friends are more blunt.
‘It is nothing short of a miracle,’ said one.
The popular TV star, who first shot to fame with the children's favourite Crackerjack, has even been swapping jokes with his doctors.
His family said yesterday: ‘He now undertakes a full programme of speech and occupational therapy.
‘He can walk 20 yards on the parallel bars, although it is too early yet for quick singles.
His wheelchair steering is improving.’
The family are looking forward to 1993 ‘with their hopes high for his eventual recovery’, the statement added.
Leslie's nephew, Dan McAlister, took the first authorised photographs since the accident, released with the family's permission and reproduced here.
And grateful Jean, their son Nicholas and four daughters passed on ‘heart-felt thanks to the surgeons and staff at Cheltenham and Frenchay hospitals, the police, ambulance and fire services, their friends and the countless well-wishers who have been such a sustaining source of strength’.
Jean also gave her thanks for generous donations to Leslie's favourite charity, the Lord's Taverners.
Cricket-loving Leslie hands over its presidency to Prince Edward on New Year's Day.
As he gains in strength and ability, doctors are expected to build more frequent and longer home visits into his rehabilitation programme.
The world fell in for the hard-working TV star and his family as he drove home alone after an engagement opening a carpet store in the Midlands.
For reasons that no-one can yet explain, teetotal Leslie's Rolls-Royce careered off the M5 motorway, mounted an embankment and flipped onto its roof.
Rescuers took 19 minutes to cut him free from the mangled wreckage.
Amazingly, he appeared only slightly injured.
He was conscious the whole time and talked and joked with ambulancemen and medical staff at a local hospital in Cheltenham.
But fears for his life grew as he lapsed into unconsciousness and was rushed to the Frenchay Hospital — the largest hospital in the South West which has specialist neurosurgical facilities for road accident victims.
‘The family and surgeon were not expecting him to live,’ said family friend Patrick Shervington.
‘Now he really is getting better — and that's the best Christmas present of the lot.’
Caught in the sights of sale bargain hunters
Lucy Broadbent
SALES shoppers are a different breed.
Head down, they race to departments, charge at the shelves and scarcely look at the price before stampeding to the cash tills.
I faced this onslaught yesterday as I became an assistant in Selfridges on the second day of their sale.
I had just taken up my position behind the till of the kitchen gadget department and the store had been open only a matter of minutes when my first customer literally ran into view.
He scarcely even looked at the price of his Magimix before grabbing it and racing to the cash tills.
This gentleman could have taken his time, but as Adele Appassany, another assistant who witnessed the scenes the day before explained:
‘They can get aggressive if roused.
I've seen two women fighting over a saucepan.
Just keep smiling.’
By 11am the great British public had now arrived in force.
They filled every aisle and till queue.
They took everything out of their boxes; they returned their Christmas goods — yes, even today, and they wanted to know if the Kenwood would work in America.
But above all — they wanted to know where the toilets were.
‘Would you just mind taking my money then I can go,’ bellowed one woman in the now lengthening queue.
There were three people in front and two of us packing as fast as we could.
I smiled some more and took the flak as the lady was forced to wait.
An old man muttered expletives too rude to repeat at me.
His request?
A hand blender that was sold out.
The smile was beginning to wane.
The till was now 20 deep with impatient customers clutching their coffee pots and blenders — and then I discovered the real bane of the shop assistant's life: The Haggler.
There was a long queue and the price was already slashed but this smartly dressed lady wanted more off.
‘Isn't there a discount for cash?’ she argued.
My colleague was not prepared to haggle.
The price was as marked and the woman left without buying.
By lunchtime the department was manic and the pace relentless but it still did not stop the old man who brought back a kettle complaining it did not work.
‘But I only bought it last year,’ he insisted, holding up the ancient object.
‘Can't you get it fixed for me?’
In fact it was a kettle which had gone out of production eight years ago.
Supervisor Roland argued the point and finally agreed to send it back.
Right through to 8pm I packed and wrapped.
‘Is that cash or credit card?’
I asked again and again.
‘It's under the arch and through the saucepans,’ I told a million shoppers who wanted the ladies — or at least I think that's where it was.
Looters target wreck
LOOTERS are risking their lives scrambling down cliffs to strip a wrecked ship.
Police even stopped one souvenir hunter cycling off with the ship's compass tucked under his arm.
The 10,000-ton Demetrius foundered on rocks near East Pawle, Devon, in a storm before Christmas.
A coastguard said: ‘People are trying to nick everything they can lay their hands on.’
Police sealed off the road to the cliff top when it became jammed with traffic and ordered a helicopter to circle the wreck to deter looters.
A spokesman said: ‘The ship itself is the property of the Receiver of Wreck and it is theft to take anything from it.
‘I suppose it is part of the old wrecking tradition of brandy for the parson and baccy for the clerk but of course it is not legal.’
Princess of Wales at Christmas
I'M glad Princess Diana disappeared over Christmas.
The Royals managed to get enough publicity without her help — and most of it was positive, which made a nice change.
Gilbey warned: Don't mess with my wife
By Geraint Jones
TOP chef Marco Pierre White last night warned Princess Diana's friend James Gilbey to stay away from his wife.
‘He can play around with other people but not my wife,’ he said.
‘I don't like what he's been saying.’
His outburst followed reports linking Gilbey and model Lisa Butcher after she and White split last month.
White told Gilbey: ‘You are taking advantage and I don't like what you are doing.
Lisa and I are getting back together.’
Lisa, 21, was linked with Gilbey after she split with 30-year-old White 15 weeks after they were married.
She spent four days with her husband over Christmas and vowed to make a go of their marriage, denying she was involved with Gilbey, 36.
Lisa said: ‘Nothing happened between me and James Gilbey.
I made it very clear from the start that I was married but having problems.
We were friends but it is a pity he did not make that clear.’
Gilbey's two-year romance with Lady Alethea Savile, 29, ended last month following publicity surrounding the ‘Squidgy’ tape featuring an intimate conversation between him and the princess.
Hurd threat to up stakes in Yugo war
BRITAIN last night issued its toughest warning yet to Serbia of possible military action to end the ‘bloodyminded cruelty’ in the Yugoslav civil war.
Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd said the atrocities committed by the Serbs in Bosnia had raised the stakes.
‘I have always distrusted the idea of military intervention by the West to force a settlement in Yugoslavia,’ he said.
‘I still do.
But the Serbs should note a change.
‘They have brought even those of us who hold that view to the point where we can imagine armed action against them to prevent a general Balkan war.’
His comments demonstrated a definite shift from the previous stance.
In the past the prospect of military involvement by the West has been viewed with caution and reluctance.
Premier John Major has, more than once, rejected the idea of British troops getting involved in the conflict.
Mr Hurd, meanwhile, said that a way must be found to enforce the no-fly zone in Bosnia without endangering the humanitarian effort.
‘There are illegal helicopter flights by the Serbs, probably carrying troops and supplies, and a lesser number of fixed wing flights by Croats.’
he said.
‘These violations are not militarily of huge importance, but they should be dealt with.’
Charities feel the pinch as gifts plummet
TOP charities are fighting for survival after a dramatic slump in donations.
Famous names such as Barnardo's, the Imperial Cancer Research Fund and The Spastics Society were hit by the full force of the recession last year.
Barnardo's had to draw £1.7 million from its reserves to meet costs.
Next year this is expected to hit £5 million.
Appeals director Charles Holden said the planned pit closures will reduce the charity's income by £175,000 through lost donations from miners.
‘Staff and volunteers are exercising considerable ingenuity to minimise the impact,’ he said.
Also hit was the BBC Television's Children in Need Appeal.
Donations slumped by £11 million.
ChildLine is launching a campaign to raise £500,000 for its free helpline service.
Britain's fourth largest charity, the Imperial Cancer Research Fund, announced 43 redundancies as part of a £7.5 million cuts and the Spastics Society imposed a pay freeze and cutbacks.
Growing unemployment, council spending cuts, shrinking government grants and smaller corporate donations are expected to make the situation worse next year.
A Charities Aid Foundation spokesman said: ‘Things look very bleak.’
House sales are go
By Ian Fletcher, Consumer Correspondent
HOPES of a surge in house-buying rose yesterday as estate agents reported their busiest month for three years.
The long-awaited appearance of people looking to move is a sure sign the housing slump is at an end, say the agents.
The report by the National Association of Estate Agents follows the annual review by the Halifax Building Society, which predicts a 15 per cent increase in sales in 1993 and a rise in prices during the second half of the year.
But optimistic estate agents claim things will be even better.
‘The UK housing market looks set for a sustained and significant recovery in 1993,’ says the report.
‘Houses are now as affordable as they were 10 years ago.’
The association says the new surge of interest comes from people wanting to buy early in the New Year to take advantage of lower interest rates, bargain prices and the wide selection of property on offer.
President Michael Jones said: ‘At last it looks as though home owners and estate agents have something to be cheerful about.
‘Even agents in London and the South-East, which was particularly hard-hit during the recession, have reported a busy December.
Once the New Year festivities are out of the way, we expect that sales will pick up significantly and continue to improve as we come into the traditional pre-spring buying season.’
A new call for lower interest rates to help the housing market blossom in 1993 was also made yesterday.
Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors spokesman Peter Miller called for a further one per cent reduction on the stroke of midnight on New Year's Eve.
‘It would provide the critical psychological boost that general economic recovery needs,’ he said.
‘A rate cut will encourage the large number of people teetering on the edge of a decision to enter the market.’
Depardieu son in prison fight
GREEN Card actor Gerard Depardieu's eldest son, Guillaume, 22, has been roughed up in jail while awaiting trial on drug charges, it was claimed yesterday.
‘He was shoved around by a few other prisoners,’ said a guard at the Bois d'Arcy prison, outside Paris.
‘It was nothing serious.’
Police say Depardieu Junior was caught selling heroin to an addict
He and four friends — also awaiting trial — are alleged to be organisers of a drug-running network.
Wrecking crew loot ghost ship
LONG ago, on dark nights when storms lashed the treacherous coastline, wreckers knew they were in for a busy time.
It was their job to lure foundering ships onto the rocks before plundering the cargo.
But things have changed in the West country.
Now shipwreck looters brave a police helicopter circling overhead as they carry their spoils away by bicycle.
Souvenir hunters revived the centuries-old tradition after a huge tanker washed up on the rocks below East Prawle, Devon.
Thousands of tourists from as far away as Essex have flooded to the area to strip the wreck of the 10,000-ton ship Demetrius.
A coastguard said: ‘People are trying to nick everything they can lay their hands on.’
Police sealed off a road leading to the coast and mounted patrols on the cliffs to stop the looting.
Officers even stopped one man cycling towards Plymouth carrying the ship's compass tucked under his arm.
The 500ft Demetrius was driven ashore and broke its back on the rocks in a Force 11 gale as it was being towed to port the week before Christmas.
The tiny village of East Prawle has enjoyed a tourist boom as visitors turned up to view the wreck — and take home a memento.
Coastguards fear it is only a matter of time before a sightseer is injured in the hazardous scramble down rocks onto the ship's deck.
A single-track road down to the rocks was closed when it became completely jammed with traffic and an enterprising farmer is now charging visitors £1 each to park in her field.
Sergeant Les Ley, of Kingsbridge Police, said: ‘It has been absolutely chaotic down there.
It is hardly possible to drive through the village and people have been climbing all over the wreck.
‘When you get something like this you always get souvenir hunters but the ship itself is the property of the Receiver of Wreck and it is theft to take anything from it.
‘Although we have not actually arrested anyone we have steered quite a few people and their souvenirs in the direction of the coastguard who have been retrieving bits and pieces.
‘I suppose it is part of the old wrecking tradition of brandy for the parson and baccy for the clerk but of course it is not legal.
‘We are very worried someone is going to fall down the cliff or slip off the ship and break something.
‘We have even had the force helicopter out flying over the ship and broadcasting the message to get off.’
A spokesman for Brixham coastguard said: ‘It is very dangerous because people have to scramble down the cliffs and then onto the boat and then they have to get off carrying whatever they have nicked.
‘Police have been waiting at the top to take the things off them.’
Secret disease kills  keepfit dad
SUPERFIT Huw O'Brien died from a heart disease he knew nothing about, a post mortem revealed yesterday.
Father of two Huw, 43, from Bristol, collapsed on a tough orienteering course at Cheltenham, Glos, on 19 December.
His widow, Sarah, said: ‘He was always in the fast lane.
‘He was very fit, and this is why so many people are stunned.’
Male pig Paul pays the price
WASHING up is women's work, said Paul Blacker, 31, after a turkey feast.
So his friends stripped him, marched him out, tied him to a lamp-post, painted his bottom half bright green and left him.
‘I won't wash up next time,’ said a defiant Paul, of Cleckheaton, West Yorks.
‘He won't be invited,’ said Adele Keech, 29.
Marje's lover kept secret woman
Graham Brough
THE lover of Britain's famous agony aunt, Marje Proops, was secretly cheating on her by living with another woman.
Marje, who has advised millions of people over 50 years about their personal problems, had no idea about her lover's double life.
But throughout their 30-year affair, lawyer Phillip Levy was deeply in love with wealthy intellectual Meli Meitner.
It was Marje's decision to confess to her secret relationship with the dashing newspaper lawyer.
Until then, colleagues and readers thought she had been happily married to the man she always referred affectionately to as Proopsie.
This week she finally confessed to carrying on behind her husband's back.
Now a TODAY investigation shows that Phillip Levy was doing exactly the same.
Marje says in the book that her life was split between her husband and Levy, both now dead, each of whom she claims were entirely faithful to her.
Yet TODAY has discovered evidence which will shatter her life-long illusion.
Despite an affair with Marje spanning three decades while she was married to Sidney Proops, distinguished Levy also had a deep and long-lasting relationship with Meli, a wealthy Austrian Jewess.
Marje says in her biography The Guilt And The Gingerbread, by Angela Patmore, that Levy lived a bachelor existence in a London hotel before retiring to Brighton in 1970.
Yet his real home for part of the time he was Marje's lover was with Meli Meitner in her Kensington apartment.
And it was Meli who went with him to Brighton.
In the book, Marje admits she used to flirt with other men in the hope of inflaming Levy.
She added: ‘He was really very honourable.
He was loyal to me, of that I am sure.
In the same way I am sure Proops was.
I really don't deserve the loyalty that these two men gave me.
Because I cheated on them both.’
But Levy was not so loyal after all.
Some of his old friends claim he also flirted with other women and Meli and Marje were not the only ladies in his life.
But certainly Meli was his great love.
Last night Marje refused to comment on TODAY's revelations.
‘I would rather not talk about it,’ she said.
Arise Sir Hannibal the Cannibal
Lisa Reynolds
OSCAR-winning actor Anthony Hopkins celebrates a knighthood along with his 55th birthday today.
The man whose portrayal of Hannibal Lecter in Silence Of The Lambs thrilled movie-goers, heads a host of stars in the New Year honours list which includes courageous entertainers Roy Castle and Leslie Crowther.
Roy, who has been treated for cancer, receives an OBE while Leslie, who is battling back to health after a horrific car crash, becomes a CBE.
There is also a knighthood for David Frost.
The only new peer is former SDP president and Labour minister Shirley Williams, 62.
Education minister Baroness Emily Blatch is promoted to the Privy Counsel.
She is likely to join the Cabinet in the summer.
Annette Penhaligon, widow of former Liberal MP David Penhaligon, becomes a dame ‘for political and public service’.
She has been a tireless worker for the party since the Truro MPs death in a road crash in 1986.
Two of Britain's gold medal heroes at the Barcelona Olympics — cyclist Chris Boardman and hurdler Sally Gunnell — become MBEs.
Former Commonwealth gold medallist swimmer Sharon Davies, who made a comeback at the Games, is also made an MBE.
BBC sports commentator David Coleman becomes an OBE as does the station's Kate Adie, famed for her reports from the world's trouble spots.
ITN newsreader Carole Barnes' cameraman husband Nigel Thomson, wounded by a mortar bomb while filming in Sarajevo last August, gets an OBE.
Radio favourite Jimmy Young, already an OBE, becomes a CBE as does television's Oxford educated detective Inspector Morse, alias John Thaw.
Best-selling novelist Catherine Cookson, the queen of romantic fiction, becomes a dame.
Deaf percussionist Evelyn Glennie receives an OBE and there is a knighthood for Oscar-winning composer Malcolm Arnold.
New political knights include Cranley Onslow, former chairman of the powerful 1922 Tory backbench committee.
Tory MPs Roger Moate, Jerry Wiggin and Terence Higgins are knighted along with former MP Michael Latham.
Senior Conservatives Sir Peter Hordern, Sir Peter Emery and Sir John Wheeler are appointed to the Privy Counsel.
Margaret Thatcher's former adviser on foreign policy Sir Percy Cradock is honoured.
Health service chief executive Duncan Nichol is knighted along with Robert Balchin, chairman of the Grant Maintained Schools Foundation.
Headteacher Anne Snelling of Stratford Grant Maintained School in East London, wrongly accused of racism, is awarded an OBE.
HOPES for an end to the ‘jobs for the boy’ honours were dealt a crushing blow yesterday.
Downing Street said changes in the system of dishing out automatic awards to civil servants, diplomats and councillors would be ‘very modest’ when this summer's Birthday Honours are published.
Fresh Start to safer world in '93
Paul Wilenius, Political Editor
JOHN Major is poised to do his bit to make the world a safer place in 1993.
Senior ministers and officials are urgently considering cutting back on the number of nuclear warheads carried by Britain's powerful submarines.
Currently, the Royal Navy is expected to carry 512 nuclear warheads on its Trident fleet.
But the huge cuts in the US and Russian nuclear stockpiles mean Britain will be hard pressed to justify such a hugh array of nuclear missiles.
The current Polaris nuclear submarine fleet carries 192 nuclear missiles, aimed at the heart of the former Soviet Union.
But Russia and the US have just agreed to cut back their nuclear arsenals by two-thirds, reducing the number of warheads from 20,000 to between 6,000 and 7,000.
Now Mr Major is expected to announce that the Trident submarines will carry far fewer than the expected 512 warheads.
President Bush and his Russian counterpart Boris Yeltsin will sign the Start2 treaty in the Black Sea resort of Sochi on Sunday.
President Bush described the treaty as ‘good for all mankind’.
It is Mr Bush's foreign policy crowning glory less than four weeks before he hands over the White House to President-elect Bill Clinton.
The deal will eliminate heavy intercontinental missiles and multiple-warhead missiles, the most devastating weapons mankind has ever devised.
They will be scrapped by 2003, or the end of the year 2000 if America finances Russia's de-commissioning programme.
The number of nuclear firepower in Russia will return to the level of the Seventies and the US will be reduced to the level of 25 years ago.
Start2 builds on a long history of arms accords and summits between Moscow and Washington.
Ironically, the deal is a victory for Mr Bush's attention to foreign policy, an issue on which he campaigned during his re-election battle.
But Mr Clinton will not be able to immediately bask in the outgoing President's glory.
The treaty cannot take effect until the original Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty, Start1, begins.
That cannot happen until it is also ratified by three newly-independent, former Soviet republics which have long-range nuclear weapons stationed on their soil.
Ukraine has failed to do so and seems to be stalling, despite a carrot of £120 million in US economic aid.
Its parliament has put off debate until next year.
Revellers warned to stay away
Lisa Reynolds
NEW Year revellers have been warned to stay away from Trafalgar Square by police fearing a terrorist attack.
Deputy Assistant Commissioner Tony Speed stressed: ‘Do not come to central London if you can think of another way of celebrating New Year.’
Traditionally up to 100,000 people cram into Trafalgar Square as midnight approaches.
Those who do travel to London have been urged to be extra vigilant.
More than 1,500 officers have been put on standby in the capital tonight to deal with any alert.
Drivers have been urged not to head for the area where there will be road closures and diversions from 8pm.
London Transport will provide free travel on all night buses and tubes after midnight.
Thousands of people are flying out of Britain to celebrate the New Year in the sun and snow.
Despite the recession they have packed their bags to get away from it all with the sun of the Canaries, and snowy French Alps the top destinations.
Tour operator Thomson said bookings are up five per cent on last year, with more than 80,000 people travelling in the last week of the year.
‘People like to do something different for New Year and this year is no different,’ said a spokesman.
New year of promise
A TENTATIVE start to economic recovery was forecast by a top boss yesterday.
Richard Brown, director of policy at the British Chambers of Commerce, warned conditions were still far from rosy but said 1993 looked like being a healthier year.
‘While the visible signs of recession remain, there must be cause for hope that at last a framework for recovery is falling into place with the worst of the recession behind us,’ he said.
Castle opens
WINDSOR Castle's burned-out state rooms will be opened to the public next month in an effort to win backing for the troubled royals and help boost the town's ailing tourist trade.
Princess economy
Clive Nelson, Correspondent
THE passenger in economy class seat 26 K looked uncomfortable, as if it wasn't her usual mode of travelling.
Although she was in the front row and next to the window, leg room was cramped and there was no champagne on ice on the eight-hour flight.
Her misery was made complete because she was separated from her two sons who were flying first class.
For Princess Diana the holiday to get to her sons after being away from them over Christmas had backfired before takeoff for the Caribbean.
As William and Harry boarded the 10.30am BA255 flight, excitement was written all over their faces.
The party arrived at Gatwick in a grey transit van instead of chauffeur-driven cars and quietly skipped customs regulations.
The princes wore green rugby shirts and jeans while Diana wore black ski pants, a lambswool sweater over a T-shirt, black shoes and gold hoop earrings.
During the flight, Diana paid frequent trips from her seat near the toilets to her boys at the front of the British Airways 747.
One aide said: ‘It is ironic.
She wanted to spend as much time as possible with them and ended up at the other end of the plane.’
During the trip she leafed through the BA Highlife magazine which featured pictures of her husband skiing at Klosters.
She also toyed with a book she had been given as a Christmas present, In Tune With The Infinite by Ralph Waldo Trine.
Sitting nearby in seats costing £1,021 return were a female friend and two detectives.
The children's favourite nanny, Olga Powell, sat with them and another detective in £3,000 seats.
The princess picked at the regulation airline meal.
She drank iced water and nibbled a prawn apple and celery salad followed by grilled chicken with orange and rosemary.
Her dessert of blueberry gateaux was untouched.
Later she sipped black coffee.
William, 10, and eight-year-old Harry were given airline packs of colouring books and puzzles but chose to concentrate on a new computer game.
The highlight of the trip for the boys was when they were taken into the 747 cockpit halfway through the flight.
One first class passenger heard Harry exclaim: ‘It's great.
Really exciting.’
It is thought the decision to fly separately provoked a security nightmare for the protection officers.
Well-placed sources said: ‘It would be much better if they could all travel together.
The officers would not have had to split up.
‘They are about as keen to fly economy as Diana is.’
After touching down at Antigua's V C Bird airport, the party boarded a Carib Air airplane to the nearby island of Nevis, where the party will stay at the ‘spartan’ 16-room Montpelier Plantation Inn.
Obscure book is the key to happy life
Cheryl Stonehouse
DIANA'S holiday reading is a piece of early psychology based strongly on the Christian tradition.
It was written almost 100 years ago by a little-known American.
In Tune with the Infinite, subtitled Fullness of Peace, Power and Plenty, would not be out of place on any committed New Ager's bookshelf if it weren't for the frequent references to God and the Holy Spirit.
Despite drawing often on the New Testament, Ralph Waldo Trine says there is a ‘golden thread’ running through all the great religions.
The same principle can be drawn from all of them and help the troubled find meaning and purpose in their lives.
The princess will have read this advice in the chapter The Secret, Power And Effects Of Love to help her deal with her failed marriage.
‘If you meet hatred with hatred you simply intensify it.
Nothing is to be gained by it and everything is to be lost.
‘By sending love for hatred you will so neutralise it that it will not only have no effect upon you, but will not be able even to reach you.’
And the woman respected for her concern for the sick and deprived is told: ‘Not to love is not to live, or it is to live a living death.
‘The life that goes out in love to all is the life that is full and rich and continually expanding in beauty and power.’
She may even one day be able to form a real friendship with her estranged husband.
‘More than this, you will sooner or later be able to literally transmute the enemy into the friend,’ says Trine.
He loved Meli so much his ashes were scattered all over her grave
Graham Brough
AGONY Aunt Marje Proops, who confessed to an adulterous 30-year affair with a bachelor lawyer, may be in for more agony still.
In her biography, elderly Marje says her life was split between two men.
One was her husband, Sidney — she called him Proopsie, and refused him sex through much of their 53-year marriage.
The other was her secret lover, smooth, Australian-born lawyer Phillip Levy, who worked for the same newspaper.
And both, she insists, were faithful to her.
Today we reveal evidence that will shatter that long-held delusion — the identity of another woman in Phillip's life.
A woman he knew well before he began his affair with Marje.
A woman he loved so much that when he wrote a legal textbook, he dedicated it to her.
Loved so much that when he died, his ashes, on his special instruction, were sprinkled over a rose bush he had planted in her memory at a crematorium.
That other woman was a rich, clever Austrian Jewess called Meli Meitner.
Though Marje believed that Phillip was living a bachelor life at a London hotel between trysts with her, he spent some of the time, at least, with Meli in her apartment over a hairdresser's shop and a prostitute's flat in London's Kensington.
It is clear Marje never knew how her ‘faithful’ lover felt about Meli, or whether she even knew this rival existed.
Certainly, in all the pages of her book, The Guilt And The Gingerbread, there is no mention of Meli Meitner.
When Phillip retired and went to live in Brighton, in the 1970s, it was Meli, not Marje, who moved there with him.
When she died, a couple of years later, he was so heartbroken that he made sure he would share her final resting place at the Downs Crematorium in Bear Road when he, too, was laid to rest.
Phillip and Meli are believed to have met through his brother Arthur at the beginning of World War Two.
Arthur had helped get her out of occupied Austria as the war broke out.
During the war, Phillip worked for the government, helping with labour supply for munitions factories.
After the fighting stopped, he is thought to have travelled throughout Europe.
In those years, he visited Vienna and met one of Meli's relatives, Lotti Meitner-Graf — who became a firm friend of the couple.
‘Meli was from a well-to-do family,’ Phillip's nephew, Bruce Lebransky, said yesterday at home in Sydney.
‘She and Phillip had been good friends since the 40s.
‘I met Meli twice, when I came to London while he was living with her.
She was obviously a very well-educated woman.
‘She had been everywhere, and lived in New York for a while, working in art galleries.
‘Knowing Phillip and Arthur, they would never have tolerated fools gladly and Meli was certainly up to scratch intellectually — although towards the end, she was very frail.’
Phillip's niece, Priscilla Pescott, said at her home in Victoria: ‘It's not right to think of Uncle Phillip as just somebody waiting in the wings for Marje Proops.
‘He had his own complex emotional life, of which Marje was just one component.
I got the impression that Uncle Phil lived with Meli for quite a few years in in Brighton for a couple of years before she died.
‘Uncle Phil didn't mention her when he was here.
She was just a fact of life.
‘I think one reason why they never married was that Uncle Phil wouldn't have asked her.
‘He was a bachelor, with his own independent identity and a certain control over his life…and loves.’
Another niece, Dorothy Trezise, who also lives in Victoria, said: ‘Phil was heartbroken when Meli died.
Very sad indeed.
He was living with her in London for some years — he said they shared a flat.
‘And I know they moved to Brighton together.
‘I don't know if Marje knew about any of this.
Uncle Phil was very discreet.
We rarely even had his private address.
‘He was a very private man.
But a very active bachelor.
When he died, there were several women he left money to, in his will.
Women he had been close to.’
For the last two years or so of Phillip's life, Marje never visited him at home, according to friends.
Only when he went into the Victoria Nursing Home did she make the trip to Brighton — just a fortnight before he died.
‘She brought a large bowl of flowers and fruit,’ said his last housekeeper, Mrs Jean Henderson.
‘By that time, he wasn't very interested.
In the last five or six weeks of his life, he lost interest in everything.’
She added: ‘I went round to his house every day for the last two years.
As far as I am aware, Marje never went there.
‘She used to phone him nearly every day, though, and he was quite happy after her calls.
Before that, he used to go up to London and try to visit her.’
Phillip never talked in detail about the depth of his relationship with Marje.
But, Jean said, it was clear to anyone who knew him how important she had been.
‘It was quite obvious that they had been much more to each other than just friends,’ she said.
‘But it wasn't right to ask questions.’
Whatever the strength of Phillip's affection for Marje, he was open about the void that Meli had left in his life.
‘He used to say he missed Meli,’ Mrs Henderson said.
‘He would say she had never even let him buy a sock, before.
‘That's how dependent he had been on her.’
With no Meli, no Marje, Phillip came to depend on his housekeeper and neighbour Cyril Osborne, a close friend, to fill the void.
When the famous Marje Proops' secret lover finally passed away, in his late eighties, he was virtually alone.
The only people at his side were Cyril Osborne and his wife, Nina.
According to Mr Osborne, there was never any doubt that Phillip lived with Meli as a couple, although he also enjoyed other relationships.
Including the fling with Marje.
‘Phillip was a wonderful, kind, generous, intelligent, interesting gentleman,’ Mr Usborne said.
‘He was also very interested in women.
When he was well into his eighties, one of his housekeepers complained he had tried to get her onto the bed — at his age!’
Mr Usborne recalled, too, what another of Phillip's friends said, at his funeral.
‘He was always chasing women, you know,’ the man said.
‘He was a ram.’
Order in the Bath for JY
Liz Moore
BROADCASTER Jimmy Young was in the bath when he learned he was to get a CBE.
It took girlfriend Alicia Plaistow several minutes to persuade him to climb out of the tub at his Florida holiday home to take a call from the Prime Minister's office.
Jimmy, 62, said yesterday: ‘I suppose it was rather strange being told I was being awarded the CBE while standing there in the altogether.
‘Alicia kept banging on the door saying it was John Major's office but, of course, I didn't believe her.
‘I thought someone was trying to have a joke at my expense and wasn't convinced even after I'd put the phone down.
‘After all, I was on holiday at the time.’
Radio Two star Jimmy — known to his legions of listeners as JY — celebrated 25 years in the business last month.
He is one of Britain's most respected broadcasters and has interviewed a string of famous people from senior politicians to royalty.
Jimmy last met the Queen in 1979 when she presented him with the OBE.
‘It's a great honour and I'm very much looking forward to meeting the Queen again,’ he said.
‘It acknowledges the success of the JY team in opening up the world of current affairs for ordinary people.
‘It's been a wonderful 25 years for me.’
Sir Cannibal feasts on Fish 'n' Chips
Emma Campbell and Christian Gysin
ACTOR Anthony Hopkins celebrated his knighthood in today's New Year Honours List with a fish and chip takeaway.
The star, who is 55 today, joked that he would treat wife Jenni to the slap-up meal.
‘The award is very nice and I am pleased,’ he said.
‘It was a great surprise, I didn't expect it.’
He mockingly referred to himself as Sir Tone and said: ‘My wife is much more thrilled about it than I am.
She is very, very pleased.’
Welsh-born Sir Anthony, best known for his Oscar-winning role as cannibal Hannibal Lecter in The Silence Of The Lambs added: ‘I am quite low-key.
I suppose it hasn't really sunk in yet.
I don't want to make too much of a fuss.
‘I'll still be Tony to most people.
But I shall expect film directors to call me Sir Anthony.
‘If they're not respectful enough I shall say ‘Down on your knees’.’
As from today it's hello, good evening and welcome to Sir David Frost after he was awarded a knighthood.
Yesterday, as he prepared for a new TV series starting on Sunday, Sir David said he was ‘truly blessed’ with an honour.
‘It really is the most wonderful surprise I have ever had,’ he said.
‘When I received the OBE in 1970 I thought that was more than enough, so that is what makes this such a bonus.’
Sir David, who first emerged as a television personality 30 years ago in the radical That Was The Week That Was, added: ‘It really is a great honour, something I never expected,’ he added.
Inspector Morse star John Thaw made it a family double, receiving his CBE 15 years after actress wife Sheila Hancock got hers.
‘We'll keep them in a safe place together,’ he said.
‘I'm delighted and I guess we'll have a few drinks to celebrate.’
Thaw, 50, admitted it was probably the huge success of the opera-loving sleuth Morse that clinched the award.
But he added: ‘I've been around for 30-odd years so I'd like to it was down to all my TV work.
‘I always thought awards were something other people got.
It was quite a shock but I was thrilled.’
Author Catherine Cookson's reaction to being made a dame was ‘I feel just like Cinderella.’
The award recognises that Dame Catherine — with an estimated fortune of £24 million — has donated millions of pounds to charity.
She was awarded an OBE six years ago by Prince Charles as he visited the North East because she was too ill to travel to London.
Yesterday the 86-year-old writer of more than 80 books said from her home in Jesmond, Newcastle: ‘I am amazed and humbled that the Queen has seen fit to give me a second honour.’
Entertainer Roy Castle's OBE, awarded for his tireless charity work, says it is a perfect end to the most eventful year of his life.
‘This honour is a marvellous way to finish off 1992,’ said Roy, 60, who was struck down with cancer in March and given a one-in-10 chance of survival.
‘I shall celebrate with my family around me and I shall break the record for the widest smile,’ he said.
Courageous comedy star Leslie Crowther, 59, battling to recover from his horrific road crash, was celebrating a CBE for his charity work.
His wife Jean said from their home in Corston, near Bath, last night: ‘We are absolutely delighted at the honour.’
There were OBEs to ITN war correspondent Paul Davies and cameraman Nigel Thomson, husband of newsreader Carol Barnes.
Reporter Davies, 40, said: ‘The press is currently taking a lot of criticism but these awards show it is also being recognised that a difficult job is being done.’
BBC reporter Kate Adie had more important things on her mind yesterday than mere honours.
She was not available to comment on her OBE.
I ain't nothing like a dame
Paul Wilenius
WIDOW Annette Penhaligon said yesterday her elevation to being a dame was an honour for her Liberal MP husband, killed in a road smash six years ago.
David, member for Truro, Cornwall, was visiting hospitals shortly before Christmas when he died.
‘This honour has made me more determined to continue with my work,’ said Annette, 46.
‘Since David died politics has been even more important to me.
It's for him that I am accepting this honour.
Although it's very difficult not to accept it I feel it was because of David I got it.’
Within a few months of her husband's tragic death Annette knew she had to do something which would still involve her in politics.
So the mother of two won a seat as a Liberal Democratic on Carrick Council, Cornwall, in 1987.
She was later to become the council's vice-chairman.
After the election she said: ‘I felt I was too young just to be David's widow within the local party.
‘I needed my own role especially as the new MP would come along and put his own stamp on the constituency.’
Slim Annette, who weighs just eight and a half stones, said she did not fulfil everyone's idea of a dame.
‘A reporter told me the only dames he knew weighed 16 stones at least,’ she said.
‘I plainly don't suit the image of many people's perception of a dame.’
We nearly lost stab PC Leslie
A SURGEON told yesterday how stabbed policewoman Leslie Harrison came close to death as his team battled to save her.
Leslie, 29, was given 13 pints of blood, said Nick Davies of the Royal Liverpool Hospital.
She is expected to make a full recovery but will remain in hospital for at least two weeks.
Leslie's father Colin, 61, said she could clearly recall the attack which nearly cost her life.
‘Twenty minutes from coming off the ventilator she could remember everything,’ said Mr Harrison of Eccles, Greater Manchester.
‘There was no way we could see her coming out of it but she has done remarkably well.’
Leslie's mother Lillian, also 61, said: ‘She loves her job.
We don't want her to go back but it's her decision.
‘She seems all right but we will have to wait because it has been very traumatic.’
Stephen Doyle, 28, unemployed, of Everton, Liverpool, appeared in court yesterday, accused of attempting to murder Leslie on Sunday night at Wavertree, Liverpool.
He was remanded in custody.
Spinster, 75 dies of cold
AN ELDERLY spinster froze to death on Christmas Day, an inquest heard yesterday.
Emily Williams, 75, was found slumped on her bedroom floor at Rumney, Cardiff, by a neighbour.
The neighbour, Sandra Maher, told the Cardiff hearing that Miss Williams had seemed confused on Christmas Eve, but refused to see a doctor.
She had lost weight and taken to wearing just her underwear and a nightie.
Verdict: Natural causes aggravated by self-neglect.
Turbo cops
POLICE are being given a 140 mph supercar to help fight auto crime.
The first £25,000 turbo charged Escort Cosworth joins the Northumbria force next month.
Floyd on feud
SITTING in the bar sipping a breakfast-time brandy and coffee, TV chef Keith Floyd yesterday sadly declared his third marriage was over.
After a massive public row which began when he thought his wife had forgotten his 49th birthday, the forlorn star said: ‘I have made up my mind, the marriage is over.’
But, in their own pub just 300 yards away, Shaunagh, his bride of 15 months, was mystified by talk of a permanent rift.
‘I love him and will welcome him back with open arms,’ she said.
‘We have not split up.
We had an argument.’
Back at the Waterman's Arms pub in the south Devon village of Tuckenhay, Floyd was adamant.
‘I don't think I am going to talk to Shaunagh again,’ he said.
‘She is a good Devon maid.
What she needs is a hard working man who can let her blossom as a person.’
Pouring out his heart, along with a mid-morning scotch, the distressed celebrity added: ‘She comes from Dartmouth.
All Dartmouth women are like Vikings.
They could make up the England rugby pack.’
Like a true professional, Floyd was determined the show would go on for New Year's Eve at his pub, the Maltsters Arms.
But he was worried about facing his wife after Monday's bust-up.
‘I am frightened to go back.
I have nothing to say to Shaunagh,’ he said.
‘I have run out of patience with her and myself.
I am fed up with always being the bad guy.
I don't know what will happen now, I suppose she will get a lawyer and I will be shafted.’
However, legal action was far from 26-year-old Shaunagh's mind yesterday as she sipped a lager and kept the Maltsters Arms running smoothly.
‘I don't know what he is talking about.
The row was like an earthquake but I did not think it was the end for us,’ she said.
‘Keith is a lovable character and I knew about his work, lifestyle and temper when I married him.’
Her normally flamboyant husband, well-known for enjoying a tipple while filming his popular shows, admitted drink had played a part in him storming out.
‘I am not an alcoholic but I was very drunk,’ he said.
‘Part of the problem is that I cannot come to terms with my image.
‘Everywhere I go people expect me to be the happy person they see on TV.
No one can be like that all the time.’
Floyd, who has just finished filming in the Far East and has his autobiography and a cookery book in the pipeline, plus a new TV series, dreams of getting away from it all.
‘Floyd the private person wants to be up to my waist in water with a fishing rod,’ he said.
As Shaunagh continued to insist ‘it was just a tiff’, he refused to contemplate a reconciliation.
‘I am too old and stubborn to be making up,’ he said.
Copycat attack on paper girl
Ian Key
ANOTHER schoolgirl has been sexually attacked on her paper round, five days after a 14-year-old was raped.
The Christmas Eve assault has only just come to light because the 13-year-old victim was too terrified to report it earlier.
She was dragged into a garden and indecently assaulted — but saved when her attacker panicked after hearing voices from nearby shops.
Detectives investigating the attack in Newcastle have contacted colleagues in Lanchester, Durham, 20 miles away, where the 14-year-old was assaulted on December 19.
As she walk home she was dragged into a garden, beaten and raped.
‘We don't think the same man was involved in each case, but it could be a copycat attack,’ said detective inspector Trevor Ord, of Northumbria Police.
Police have given safety advice to a dozen other paper boys and girls at the same newsagent's in Heaton, Newcastle.
‘We told them to be careful and do their rounds accompanied by an adult,’ said Mr Ord.
Puppy locks out her driver
MOTORIST Nicky Lockyer left her dog in her car while she scraped ice off the windscreen and found herself out in the cold for two hours.
Playful springer spaniel Hanna pushed down the lock with her paws — with Nicky's keys inside.
When the RAC finally prised open the Vauxhall Cavalier, exhausted Hanna was fast asleep.
Nicky, 28, of Worle, Avon, said: ‘The engine was running and the heater fan blowing full blast but I was frozen.’
Handy toe
A FURNITURE maker who lost his thumb in an accident has had it replaced with his big toe by surgeons.
Peter Morris, 38, of Bridgnorth, Shropshire, said: ‘It's magic.’
Duty free-for-all
Ian Fletcher
CHANNEL ferry firms are bracing themselves for Britain's biggest duty-free drink and cigarettes bonanza tomorrow.
That is when all limits are lifted from the amount of alcohol and tobacco that can be brought into the country from Europe for personal use.
Customs have set new guidelines and anyone bringing in more will be asked to confirm that their goods are not for reselling.
Millions of families are expected to make special cross-Channel shopping trips.
Ferry lines expect a huge rush of passengers taking advantage of the new freedom.
The battle for passengers has started a ferry price war, as rival firms cut fares to entice cross-Channel shoppers.
Coach bookings, too, have soared.
One firm is even arranging for convoys of lorries to travel with the coaches to France and bring back the booty.
Kingsferry Coaches boss Peter O'Neill, who is based in Gillingham, Kent, said: ‘I think this is a brilliant idea.
‘All we do is go in convoy with a lorry or two.
‘We will use those to bring back all the heavy bottles and cans so people are not loaded down.’
Your allowance
The new recommended maximum allowances per person are as follows:
90 litres of wine (120 bottles)
110 litres of beer (194 pints)
10 litres of spirits
30 litres of fortified wine
800 cigarettes and 200 cigars
How much three people could bring in, as supplied by Richmond Wine Warehouse.
Supermarkets slash food bills by 50%
Ian Fletcher
SUPERMARKET giants have launched a New Year price war slashing up to 50 per cent off many groceries.
The opening shots were fired yesterday when Sainsbury's announced it would cut prices on hundreds of popular brands by at least 25 per cent from Sunday — with many at half price.
Rivals Tesco, Asda and Safeway immediately said they would match the reductions.
Sainsbury's cuts begin in its 140 larger stores and eight Savacentres on Sunday and will spread to all 327 supermarkets from Monday.
Marketing director Robin Whitbread said: ‘We expect this will be significant with more than eight million shoppers taking advantage of over 750 lines.
‘Reductions will span all types of food and groceries.
‘The consumer is searching for bargains in every type of expenditure.
Food is no exception.’
Tesco — the second largest supermarket chain after Sainsbury's — will cut prices on more than 1,000 items from Monday.
More than 100 items will be slashed by at least one-third with many at half price.
Tesco will offer its highest number of multi-save items along the lines of ‘buy two, get one free’.
Asda said it had cut prices by up to 50 per cent on more than 1,500 lines.
Corporate affairs director Paul Dowling said: ‘At our recent interim results we announced our determination to remain Britain's lowest priced national superstore operator.’
Safeway's New Year sale starts on Monday with bacon, eggs, packet spaghetti and tinned tomatoes all carrying 50 per cent savings.
The company already has nearly 1,000 special offers in its 334 stores.
Sainsbury's move was a repeat of last year's price promotion.
One leading retail analyst said: ‘The reductions will be mainly on own-label goods.’
Bank's £7m cash rush
SHOPPERS withdrew £7 million in one hour from Barclays Bank cash machines in a last minute rush to buy festive gifts.
In the seven days before Christmas, customers collected £271 million from hole-in-the-wall machines, 11 per cent up on last year.
One machine in northern England paid out a record £300,000 during that week.
Rape victim speakes out to aid hunt
A WIDOW raped on Christmas Day as she returned home from midnight mass yesterday appealed for help in finding her attacker.
Former magistrate Muriel Harvey, 67, agreed to be named in the hope it would aid the police hunt.
Mrs Harvey, a churchwarden who runs a firm of outfitters in Ludlow, Shropshire, said: ‘It is all over for me now.
‘I feel very strongly for our community as a whole more than I feel resentment for this man.
‘I hope he is caught quickly.
I feel he is a loner and a sad creature.
I feel like flogging him but want him treated as well.
‘I am willing to be identified in the hope that more people who may have information will contact the police.’
Mrs Harvey tried not to let the attack spoil her family Christmas.
She said: ‘We had our Christmas Day on Boxing Day and I had the best ever Christmas with my children and grandchildren.’
Shortly before Mrs Harvey was raped, the man attacked a 25-year-old woman half-a-mile away but she escaped.
Lamont plans tame Budget
THE spring Budget will be neutral, neither choking off economic recovery nor helping revival, senior Tories believe.
Chancellor Norman Lamont has bowed to pressure and will impose only a small rise on drinkers and smokers.
He has also been warned not to increase VAT or extend it to include children's clothes, domestic fuel, books and newspapers.
The ton-up tot
YOUNGSTER Oliver Oakes, of Lowestoft, Suffolk, has become the fastest four-year-old in the country after winning a sponsorship deal to drive a 100 mph go-kart.
Gooch will cope, says dad
ENGLAND cricket captain Graham Gooch will be able to put his and wife Brenda's marriage problems behind him on the team's tour of India, his father claimed last night.
Retired carpenter Alf Gooch said: ‘Graham will cope, Brenda will cope.
It's for them to sort out.
The family has decided not to get involved.
Graham's never had anything like this to deal with when he's been away before.
He will get on with the job.’
Mr Gooch, 77, of Gidea Park, east London, refused to discuss the reasons for the split.
‘Only we know the reason and that's how it will stay,’ he said.
Boy, 16, divorces his bullying mum
Ian Key
A TEENAGE schoolboy has won a court divorce from the bullying mother who made his life a misery.
The 16-year-old boy complained that his mother, who remarried and had three younger sons by her second husband, kept picking on him and ridiculing him.
He was not allowed to eat with his half-brothers, a judge was told.
Instead, he had meals in his bedroom — or even on the stairs.
Despite the mental cruelty, he was too frightened to run away from his home at Mansfield, Notts.
But eventually, he plucked up courage to see a solicitor.
And at Nottingham County Court, Judge Elisabeth checkedFisher granted an order under the 1989 Children Act letting him live with his own father's parents.
‘When the boy came to see me, he was very shaky,’ said legal executive Mary Jolly, who acted for the boy.
‘But he was also very determined.
He knew there was a way out, and wanted to take it.
It was felt he needed to be protected from a very damaging relationship.
There was no physical abuse, purely mental.’
The boy's parents divorced 14 years ago, when he was two.
The mother was given custody.
Then she married again, had three more sons — and began picking on her oldest.
Last year, a welfare officer warned the boy's grandparents his mental health was in danger.
Six months later, the warning was repeated.
The boy tried to move in with the grandparents.
But his mother went to the police and tried to have the old custody order enforced.
She even tried to snatch him back from school to keep him at home.
Under the court order, she is allowed no contact with him.
‘It is essential that the boy remains anonymous,’ Mrs Jolly said.
‘We have been afraid of an attempt to snatch him back.
‘But he is gaining in confidence, making a new life for himself and doing well at school.
‘It is a happy ending to a rather sad story.’
House that's 23 inches too wide
David Leigh
BULLDOZERS are set to demolish a family's dream home…because it is 23 inches too wide.
Businessman John Foy and his wife Sally have been told the Pounds 250,000 house must go because it flouts planning regulations.
Pleas that the couple and their two young children will be homeless and facing financial ruin have fallen on deaf ears.
The family drew up plans for the four-bedroom house after their previous home on the same site in the village of Meopham, Kent, was destroyed by fire.
They thought months of living in a cramped caravan was all worthwhile when the new house was finished and they finally moved in.
But Gravesham Council planning officers arrived with their tape measures after a complaint from a neighbour.
They confirmed it was 32 per cent bigger all the way around than the plans allowed for — and now councillors have ordered the Foys to pull down the house, claiming it was built too big deliberately.
Heartbroken Mrs Foy said yesterday: ‘I can't believe it.
After all we have been through with the fire and living in a caravan, now they want us to destroy our lovely new home.
‘It's ridiculous because the new house is far more in keeping with the countryside than the old one.’
She said it was ‘just 23 inches’ too big because a JCB had dug the wrong side of foundation lines.
Councillor Michael Snelling said planners had already been generous allowing the couple to build a bigger home on the site.
He added: ‘It is a Green Belt area.
If we ignored it others would simply follow suit.’
The Foys have one last hope of saving their home — they plan to appeal.
Kids fight to save fireball dad
TWO screaming children threw cups of water over their burning father after he set himself on fire.
The youngsters, aged 12 and six, were unable to douse the flames and Paul Griffiths died in hospital.
Police officers also tried to smother the flames with their jackets as Mr Griffiths lay next to his car.
The 37-year-old man turned himself into a human fireball in front of estranged wife Brenda, 35.
They parted two weeks ago but Mr Griffiths was still living near his family in Northallerton, North Yorks.
Police had been called to a domestic row at the house earlier.
A spokesman said ‘The children tried to put out the fire but to no avail.
It's tragic.’
Crash girl back from the dead
A FATHER yesterday held the hand of the daughter he thought had been killed in a plane crash.
Christopher Gunner, of Falmouth, Cornwall, comforted 32-year-old Nicola, who is unconscious with 60 per cent burns in a Rotterdam hospital.
She was believed to have died with her mother, Barbara, and sister, Sarah.
They were named among the 54 killed when a Dutch DC-10 crashed at Faro, Portugal, on December 21.
‘All the bodies were taken to Holland.
It was assumed Nicola was among the dead,’ a Foreign Office spokesman said last night.
Lost golfer's sister sacked
THE sister of missing golf fan Keith Lockyer has been sacked after taking time off to search for him.
Joanne Lockyer has hunted day and night since 16-year-old Keith vanished four days before Christmas from outside a south London nightclub.
She was fired from Apollo Video Film Hire for being ‘unreliable’.
‘I told them my brother could be lying dead somewhere and they said they didn't care and that I was mucking them about,’ said 18-year-old Joanne, of Stoneleigh, Surrey, yesterday.
Christine Morris, owner of the shop in nearby Ewell, said Joanne had not fully explained the situation.
Cold hearted take the heat
A FURIOUS housewife took three workmen hostage after being told her heating must be turned off until the New Year.
Angry Kath Patient locked the council team in her flat and refused to let them out until they replaced a leaking boiler.
She was furious that the work could not be done during the festive season.
The alarm was raised by a colleague who had gone out to their van.
But the men stayed locked up for two hours until their boss agreed they would repair the faulty central heating immediately — on overtime.
Mrs Patient of Bracknell, Berks, said: ‘I couldn't believe that it took four of them to stand there and say they couldn't do the work until after the New Year.
‘I'm just glad it worked.
When they came out they were a bit sheepish.’
Bracknell Forest Borough Council's Vic Thomas said: ‘She went a bit wild and acted anything but patiently.
Thankfully it was all sorted out.’
Man killed in police car escape bid
A PRISONER in a police car died when he fell under its wheels while trying to escape.
The man went berserk, smashed a side window and climbed onto the roof of the moving vehicle, police said.
He lost his grip and fell into the car's path.
The 31-year-old man, suspected of causing criminal damage, had been arrested at Sheerness, Kent.
Police have opened an inquiry into the death.
Mud clue to Jo's killer
THE detective leading the hunt for the killer of schoolgirl Johanna Young appealed last night to anyone shielding the mud-stained murderer.
Detective Superintendent Michael Cole said: ‘If anyfamily has doubts about anyone close to them, inform us immediately.’
The body of Johanna, 14, from Watton, Norfolk, was found in a gravel pit on Boxing Day.
She had been beaten and sexually assaulted.
Driver sees red over fine for tow
A DRIVER whose car was towed through a red light was amazed to receive a £40 fine.
Automatic cameras snapped a picture of Nichola Grabauskas's Metro number plate and the back of the breakdown truck but failed to spot the tow rope.
Police withdrew the fine and three penalty points when Nichola, 37, explained no-one was behind the wheel of her car at the time.
The driver, from Honiton, Devon, said: ‘I can see the funny side now but I initially thought I was going mad.’
Ringing in the New Euro-year
THE cost of telephoning Europe will be slashed by almost a quarter throughout January.
A four-minute call during cheap rate times will cost just 99p, down nearly 25 per cent, says British Telecom.
The bargain prices, available from 8pm to 8am on weekdays and all day on New Year's Day and at weekends, are to mark Britain's entry into the single European market.
Horse kills woman rider
A BRILLIANT young woman lecturer was crushed to death when her horse collapsed and died on top of her.
Caroline Bell, 25, who taught psychology at Stafford University, was riding her gelding, Beadle, near her parents' home at Milford, Surrey.
‘For some reason, the horse fell, and Caroline was thrown,’ father, Frank Bell, 52, said.
‘It appears she was rolled on.’
Fore!
It's a pocket in one
GOLFER Mark Williams ducked to avoid a stray ball and got a hole in one — in his jacket pocket.
‘I heard someone shouting, ‘Fore’.
I covered up my head and waited for it to strike,’ he explained yesterday.
‘Then I realised it had gone in my pocket.’
Mark, 30, from Cardiff, said: ‘I couldn't believe it.
The chances against it happening must be a million to one.’
Mark dropped the ball — which had travelled several hundred yards along the fairway at Caerphilly, Mid-Glamorgan — where he was standing in an adaptation of the game's rules.
A club official said: ‘I've never heard of anything like it before.’
Phone clue to dumped baby
AN anonymous phone call to police could lead them to the mother of the newborn baby boy abandoned on a golf course.
The baby was found on Monday at Worksop, Notts, by two boy golfers.
Yesterday, inquiries homed in on the village of Carlton in Lindrick, four miles north of Worksop.
Police said: ‘A man who appeared to know the baby's mother made an anonymous call just after midnight from a kiosk in the village.’
It is thought the mother may need urgent medical help.
The baby is recovering in a Worksop hospital, which has been flooded with gifts for him.
Shopkeeper critical after gas blast
A SHOPKEEPER was fighting for his life in hospital last night after a gas blast hurled him from his bed into the street.
Idris Belaisa, 29, was found in rubble outside his demolished shop and flat in Liverpool with 60 per cent burns.
The blast damaged houses and a caused a fire which lasted for four hours.
More than 200 residents were evacuated to a nearby police station.
One fireman said: ‘It was just like the Blitz.’
Thatcher son in Swiss MP probe
By David Jones
A TOP-LEVEL investigation into Mark Thatcher's alleged arms deals with Iraq is to be launched by Swiss government officials in the New Year.
The authorities may insist on interviewing the former premier's son personally.
If the claims are proved, his resident's permit could be revoked.
The probe follows a question tabled in the Swiss parliament about a documentary screened on Britain's Channel 4 earlier this year.
Socialist MP Jean Zeigler said in parliament that Mr Thatcher was implicated in an ‘extensive traffic’ of arms to Iraq in deals allegedly conducted from Switzerland.
A spokesman for the country's justice department confirmed yesterday a full investigation would be carried out.
‘If we find that it is true that he made these deals he could lose his permit,’ he said.
‘Either it will be revoked immediately or not renewed when it runs out in June.’
The new probe is the latest in a string of setbacks to Mark Thatcher's hopes of staying in Switzerland, where he rents a lakeside penthouse.
Officials are already concerned he does not spend enough time there to qualify for the 12 per cent tax laws.
And this week it was reported his job as consultant with a Swiss finance company was being terminated.
Last night the Swiss apartment was deserted and no one was available for comment at his Dallas offices.
Farmers ambush British trucker
FRENCH farmers dragged a British lorry driver from his cab and left him stranded after cutting the brake pipes.
The driver, who is stuck with a truckload of oranges, called his company to tell of his ordeal.
His boss Peter Davis, of Davex Transport, based in Louth, Lincs, is demanding the French Government order their farmers to behave responsibly.
‘I have had enough of this,’ he said.
‘These people are beyond belief.
I am thinking of going out there myself to try to sort this out.’
It is the second time this year one of his drivers has been hijacked in protests at British exports and the Gatt world trade deal.
‘My drivers are sick and tired of it,’ he said.
‘They face attacks every time they try to drive through France.’
Garry Turvey, of the Freight Transport Association, said: ‘French farmers must be stopped from taking the law into their own hands.’
Lawyer fell to her death
A BARRISTER with multiple sclerosis lost her balance before falling to her death through a High Court window, an inquest heard yesterday.
Jane Bristow, 48, had her sense of balance destroyed by the illness.
Mrs Bristow, of central London, who worked as a court reporter, fell from the third-floor as she tried to open a sash window in the press room at the court.
Staff who went to help her thought she had fallen down steps before first-aiders saw her multiple injuries.
A police officer said the window could not be opened without first leaning over a radiator and a curtained window box.
Mrs Bristow's husband Dennis Nash told the inquest at Poplar, east London: ‘There was no suggestion she was contemplating taking her life.’
Verdict: Accident
Pay-as-you-drive
BRITISH motorists face higher road taxes under an EC plan to make them pay according to the number of miles they drive.
Electronic devices are being developed to monitor the mileages of vehicles.
‘If we don't act traffic congestion will get worse,’ warned EC Commissioner Karel van Miert as he presented an EC White Paper in Brussels yesterday.
Brother apes alleged killer
A MURDER victim's brother showed a court yesterday how his alleged attacker, who is disabled, could get around with out his wheelchair.
Anthony Smith demonstrated how spina bifida sufferer Mo Langton, 20, puts his hands on his knees to lever himself up.
‘He walks on all fours like a monkey,’ said Mr Smith.
‘He can go a good way like this.’
Langton could also play snooker despite his disability, and negotiated 35 steps to play at one club, Preston Crown Court heard.
Walter Smith, 19, of Blackpool, was found dying in a field.
‘His teeth had been literally knocked down his throat,’ said prosecutor Michael Maguire.
Langton and Joseph Lee, 24, both of Marton, Lancs, deny murder.
Walter Smith's wife, Sharon, denies perverting the course of justice.
The trial continues.
Father's suicide after massacre
DETECTIVES hunting a man whose wife and two sons were murdered on the Bergerac island of Jersey discovered his body on wasteland yesterday.
They went looking for former hotel porter Joao Gomes, 40, after his wife Maria, 39, was stabbed to death on Tuesday at her flat on the Elysee Estate in St Helier.
The couple's children, Simon, 12, and Christopher, 8, were found dead in Gomes's Volvo car parked near the same housing estate five hours later.
The couple, who were from the Portuguese community in Jersey, separated earlier this year.
Police said they were not looking for anyone else in connection with the deaths.
Post mortem examinations were being carried out, but no details have yet been released.
Gran's kisses foil robbers
A BRAVE grandmother smothered a knife-wielding robber with kisses and begged him not to kill her or her three-year-old grand-daughter.
Helen Kaumi was threatened when she came face-to-face with two thugs after being woken by noises at her home.
The men, armed with a knife and a meat cleaver, shrugged her off and ransacked the house in Saltley, Birmingham.
As they searched for money, Helen, 63, ran out of the house and screamed for help.
The robbers fled with just £10.
Last night, Helen, a Greek-Cypriot, said: ‘I was very scared.
I just went up to him and kept on kissing him and begged: ‘No kill, no kill.’
‘When they were distracted I rushed into the street.’
Toddler Helena, her mother Kate and her father Magdi slept through the ordeal.
‘I am very proud of her,’ said Kate.
A police spokeswoman said: ‘It is an unusual way to confront robbers.
She was very brave.’
Postal workers face the sack
THOUSANDS of Post Office workers face the sack, union officials claimed last night.
Changes at sorting and post offices would affect postmen, sorters, engineers, drivers and managers, they said.
Claims that up to 30,000 jobs could disappear were rejected by a Post Office spokesman.
‘That is not a figure that we recognise,’ he said.
Sex convict on the run
A PRISONER was on the run last night after giving his guards the slip while he was visiting his dying mother in hospital.
Police immediately launched a frantic hunt for Kenneth Lewis, 31, who is serving seven years for indecent assault and threats to kill.
He was granted compassionate leave to visit his mother in London's East Dulwich Hospital yesterday.
He escaped minutes after arriving at 3pm.
A Home Office spokesman said: ‘He went with two prison officers to see a relative and just made a run for it.’
Lewis is described as black, 5ft 7in tall, with long dreadlocks.
He was wearing a green jumper and green trousers.
A Scotland Yard spokesman said: ‘He is believed to have connections in south London.
The public should not approach this man but contact police.’
An inquiry has been launched at Blundeston Prison, Lowestoft, Suffolk, where Lewis was jailed.
Livers-in-sin face higher mortgages
Geraint Jones
YOUNG couples who live together face paying more for their mortgage under a plan revealed by a building society yesterday.
The Bristol and West has discovered that people who ‘live in sin’ are 50 per cent more likely to fall into arrears than married couples.
Its new scheme will assess the credit risk of new borrowers according to their age, marital status and number of children.
There could be a four per cent difference in the mortgage rate between the various categories.
Existing borrowers who have been with the society for five years or more may get a reduction in their interest rate if they have never been in arrears.
Young, unmarried couples are a higher risk and less bothered about having their home repossessed, the Bristol and West says.
‘It is an economic policy, although it sounds moralistic,’ chief executive Tony FitzSimons said.
‘You have to consider people's lifestyles.
Regrettably, those not bonded by marriage have a higher propensity to break up and not pay the mortgage.’
The society's bad debt charge for the first six months of this year was £29.7 million compared with £7.2 million for the same period in 1991.
It has found that couples are also more likely to get into financial trouble after they have children because of increased outgoings.
Mr FitzSimons stressed that even though people living together as friends were also a high risk, there would be no questions about sexual habits.
‘It might be financially desirable, but it is a step too far,’ he added.
As borrowers got older and demonstrated their ability to pay, interest charges would be lowered.
There would also be no increase for divorced couples if they kept up repayments.
The Bristol and West will become the first building society in Britain to use customer profiles to determine interest rates when the scheme is introduced in the middle of next year.
£140,000 Steph ransom is found
Rob Perkins
A SPECIAL task force yesterday unearthed the last £140,000 of the ransom money handed over after estate agent Stephanie Slater was kidnapped.
A former SAS officer, a geologist and several police officers spent months pinpointing locations most likely to have been used to store the cash.
They targeted a field near the East coast main line railway station in Easton, Lincs, only 800 yards from where the body of murdered Leeds teenager Julie Dart was found.
The team struck lucky yesterday using seismic engineering equipment and a system which has proved effective in unearthing arms caches in Northern Ireland.
Wrapped in a polythene bag measuring nine by 18 inches, the money was lying four inches below the surface.
The team spent 90 minutes in atrocious conditions digging for the cash.
The West Yorkshire team, based at Millgarth police station, Leeds, had selected 64 possible sites and began searching the area around Easton on Tuesday afternoon following advice from a former SAS officer.
A team of seismic engineers was bought in with equipment normally used in oil exploration to identify unusual objects buried underground.
Peter Simpkins, who made the find, said: ‘It showed up on a screen and all we had to do was dig it up.’
The package was last night being examined by forensic experts.
Estate agent Stephanie, 25, was kidnapped in January as she showed a prospective buyer around a house in Great Barr, Birmingham.
Within hours the kid napper demanded a ransom of £175,000 from estate agents Shipways.
Eight days later her boss, Kevin Watts, acted as a courier to drop off the money near Barnsley, South Yorks, and Stephanie was released unharmed.
More than £21,000 has already been recovered.
Michael Sams, 50, from Sutton on Trent, Notts, has been sent for trial in the New Year, accused of kidnapping Stephanie and murdering Julie.
Baby swop nightmare
Simon Trump and Nick Craven
TWO heartbroken families may be bringing up the wrong babies.
The parents face a nightmare week-long wait before blood tests show if there has been a hospital blunder.
One family is so upset they can no longer bear to look after the girl they were given.
She is in hospital care until the baby-swop is sorted out.
Hospital consultant John Miller said: ‘There are children in that family who were becoming fond of the baby.
The parents decided it was better for the child to be taken away.’
The other child is still being looked after by the parents who took her home.
Both were born on Tuesday, November 24, at the Princess Anne Maternity hospital in Southampton.
The alarm was not raised until last Friday when one arrived home with the wrong surname on an identity bracelet.
As soon as the parents of the first baby contacted health service bosses the parents of the second were told.
Blood samples were taken from the mothers and babies.
If tests confirm there was a mix-up, the parents will have to live with the fact they have been loving someone else's child.
Midwifery manager Ann Wilson said: ‘One set of parents were very understanding but the others were more angry about it, although they are calmer now.’
A hospital nurse added: ‘Babies are usually tagged on one leg and one arm.
‘But with tiny babies it is possible for the tags to slip off.
It must be an awful strain for the parents not knowing if they have the right baby.’
The confusion occurred after the girls were placed with 10 other babies in a separate nursery from their mothers.
This common practice allows the exhausted mothers to get some sleep after giving birth.
A spokesman at the Princess Anne hospital said: ‘Everyone here is extremely upset by the possibility of an error.
We have given our sincere apologies to both families for the distress and anxiety which we have caused them.’
Mr Miller confirmed there would be full inquiry into the mistake.
He added: ‘It will be carried out by an independent group of midwives from outside the area.’
Last night it emerged that the same hospital was involved in another baby mix-up.
Proud dad Derek Corkindale, 25, was holding newborn Daniel two days after his birth last December when he realised a name tag on Daniel's leg bore the name of another baby in the ward.
He told nurses at the Princess Anne, and the other baby was found to have Daniel's tag.
Luckily the second tags on the babies' arms were correct and van driver Derek, who had been present at the birth, was positive Daniel was his baby.
He said: ‘When I told the nurses, they didn't seem too surprised and it was as if such a mix-up was not uncommon.
I was therefore surprised when I heard the hospital on the radio today saying that this case was a very isolated incident.’
Derek's girlfriend and Daniel's mother Carmen Lodge said that her baby's leg tag may have slipped off.
‘It was never very tight,’ she said.
‘I didn't notice anything until Derek saw Daniel had the wrong tag.
The other woman at the far end of the ward had been given Daniel's tag.
‘The nurses panicked and made me and the other mother sign forms saying that we definitely had our own babies.’
Now 11 months, Daniel was last night unaware of either mix-up and sleeping happily in his mother's arms at their home in Bitterne, Southampton.
Carmen, 22, a part-time waitress, added: ‘I'm relieved we didn't have to go through the anguish that these other parents must be enduring.
My heart goes out to them.’
Mummy isn't coming back
Heartbroken Tim Godwin weeps as he tells how he had to tell his 23-month-old daughter Sophie: ‘Mummy isn't coming back’.
Julie Godwin, pictured above with Sophie at a few months old, was raped and killed with her holiday pal Elizabeth Over as the pair sunbathed on a beach in South Africa.
Coffee at No 11 stirs up trouble
Eben Black, Political Correspondent
EMBATTLED Chancellor Norman Lamont was in hot water over money again last night after his official residence was used for a Tory fund-raising drive.
Labour accused him of mis-using a public building when it was revealed 300 Conservative women attended a coffee morning at 11 Downing Street, organised by his wife Rosemary.
They were asked to bring along prizes for the Tories' Winter Ball, with the value of gifts reaching £5,000.
Labour deputy leader Margaret Beckett said: ‘This raises serious concerns about the uses of Government buildings, staff and resources for party political purposes.’
She has demanded an explanation from Mr Lamont who was ‘too busy’ to attend the function.
But a Tory spokeswoman last night claimed public buildings can be used for Party events if costs like catering are paid for.
The protest follows the row about the Chancellor's £4,700 legal bill paid by the taxpayer, and overspending on his credit card.
£160,000 council tax blunder
A PENSIONER was stunned to find his two-bed home over-valued by £160,000 for the new council tax.
‘It sounds like I'm in millionaires' row.
It's grossly unfair,’ said Robert Shackell, 73, of Islington, north London.
Fury over hostage Britons
FOREIGN Secretary Douglas Hurd last night demanded the immediate release of three British UN officers kidnapped by Khmer Rouge in Cambodia.
Captain Richard Williams, Welsh Guards, Lieutenant Colonel Mark Walton, Royal Artillery, and Royal Navy Lieutenant Scott Verney were seized by a local terrorist commander.
They are being held hostage with three other peacekeeping officials after being accused of spying for the Phnom Penh Government.
As pressure intensified, Mr Hurd contacted UN Secretary General Boutros Boutros Ghali, demanding to see the Cambodian representative to the UN.
In London, a spokesman said: ‘We strongly condemn this latest act by the Khmer Rouge.’
Observers sent to look for the men came under heavy fire, seriously injuring a French officer.
Now a chief liaison officer is to go to the area to negotiate.
The Khmer Rouge has been at war with the official Government since 1979.
Man swept to death
A MAN was killed yesterday as winds up to 90mph and torrential rain left a trail of devastation across Britain.
Darren Sadler, 25, from Cleveleys Lancs was killed when he was swept over the sea wall in Blackpool.
In South Wales 11 major rivers were at danger levels with many homes and businesses hit for the second time in a week.
Alex Carlile, Liberal Democrat spokesman for Wales said: ‘I hope the Government will take the same view of damage by flood to Welsh homes that it took to damage to Her Majesty's home.’
Sussex, Hampshire and Dorset police reported numerous accidents and ferries had to ride out the high seas until winds dropped to safe levels.
Taxman's £65 gifts
FAMILIES are in line for a Christmas cash boost from the taxman, the Inland Revenue said last night.
Hundreds of thousands of workers can expect up to £65 each after many firms failed to bring in the new 20p tax rate introduced in last April's Budget.
Our action girl lit now the world is up everything she touched, a darker place without her
Bob Graham
MURDERED traveller Elizabeth Over lived for adventure and a challenge.
She crammed more living into her 30 years than most people experience in two lifetimes, according to her heartbroken parents Ken and Diana.
The memory of how beautiful advertising executive Elizabeth never backed down from danger still manages to bring a sad, proud smile to her parents' faces.
Mrs Over said: ‘Elizabeth lived the danger element in everything she did.’
As she talked at her home in St Albans, Herts, of her ‘very special daughter’ the full horrifying details of how Elizabeth and her best friend Julie Godwin, also 30, of Spratton, Northants, were brutally raped then murdered was being pieced together in South Africa.
One theory police are working on is that the women fell victim to bandits from Mozambique which, until recently, had been torn apart by civil war.
The killers stole money and equipment from the four-wheel drive vehicle the women used to drive to the beach 200 miles south of Durban.
A post mortem to be carried out today will give the first indication exactly how the women died.
‘I do not want to know the details.
It is enough that she is dead,’ said Mrs Over.
‘It is best if they just tell me she was drowned.’
The pair put up a brave struggle with their attackers — blood was found in their pickup truck and on nearby bushes.
Police said yesterday the terrible injuries on their bodies, washed up on a beach, could be deceptive.
Both bodies were thrown into the shark-infested sea and many wounds could have been caused following the women's deaths.
For Elizabeth — who had flown micro-light aircraft, climbed rock faces, dived in treacherous underwater currents and travelled the world alone — the visit to the remote camp near Sondwana was one adventure too far for which she paid the ultimate price.
But yesterday Ken and Diana Over's dignity and pride at how much Elizabeth had achieved in life shone through like a beacon.
‘She was was bright, humorous, witty, a lovely person,’ said Mrs Over.
‘She didn't have an enemy in the world.
‘Everyone who came into contact with her felt better for knowing her.
You just felt better for being in her company.
‘The world is now a much darker place without Elizabeth and Julie.’
Mr Over, a retired electricity executive, held his head in his hands.
The shock of his daughter's death has left him virtually speechless.
Mrs Over held a last letter from Elizabeth which arrived on Monday — the day police believe the murders occurred.
‘She wrote at the end, her last words to us, ‘You are always in my thoughts, I always think of you’,’ said Mrs Over.
Elizabeth had recently spent three weeks rafting down the Zambesi River with her South African fiance Cuan Cronje.
Last night Mr Cronje was making his way to the spot where Elizabeth and Julie were murdered.
There he will have the agonising job of sifting through the bloodied possessions.
In a desperate attempt to break the news gently to the Overs, Mr Cronje asked police not to visit their home.
He asked parish priest Rev Peter Rich to tell the family.
‘It was lovely that Cuan was thinking of us at that time,’ said Mrs Over.
Just a few days ago the couple posted a Christmas present to their daughter which will arrive in South Africa in the next week.
‘We often spoke to her on the telephone,’ said Mrs Over.
‘We told her her present was on the way.
It was just a little something to hang on her Christmas tree this year, a pair of silver earrings.
‘We worried about her but Elizabeth wrote back that she was more worried about us back here going into London with IRA bombs going off.’
Elizabeth went to Francis Bacon Comprehensive then St Albans College of Further Education, passing 10 O-levels and three A-levels before being accepted at Bath Teacher Training College.
‘After two years she left the course.
She decided teaching wasn't for her,’ said Mrs Over.
Instead Elizabeth spent a year at business college in St Albans before joining the bright lights of London's magazine world.
In between college courses and jobs as an ad executive, Elizabeth always took time out to return to her first love — travelling.
When she was 18, Elizabeth and school pal Claire Earnshaw flew to America and bought a car then spent the summer touring America and Canada.
In 1985 they went to Australia, New Zealand and the Far East.
It was in New Zealand that Elizabeth first met Mr Cronje.
Claire's father Robert said: ‘We are all too upset to talk.
Claire cannot even bring herself to think about what has happened.
‘They were just so close.
When they were in Australia we went out to visit them.
‘They both lived for travelling.
They knew the risks and dangers, but I think they knew how to cope with them.’
After returning to Britain in 1988, Elizabeth got a job with the exclusive magazine London Portrait as an advertising and promotions manager.
Mrs Over said: ‘In November last year she was working extremely hard and decided she needed a three-week holiday.
‘She had heard from Cuan and decided to take up his offer to see South Africa.’
In those three weeks the couple fell in love and became engaged.
When Elizabeth returned to England she talked of how she planned to go to South Africa to see if her future was there with Mr Cronje.
Last Christmas he travelled to St Albans to meet Elizabeth's family and in February she went to South Africa.
‘In her last letter she said she was not sure if she could settle,’ said Mrs Over.
The Overs hoped college friend Julie might persuade Elizabeth to return home.
‘They were very close, more like sisters.’
said Mrs Over.
‘Elizabeth was not sure of what her long-term future would be.
She found it hard making friends there.
‘But then Elizabeth wanted a challenge, it's what she lived for.’
I had to say mummy wasn't coming back
Rob Perkins
THE husband of Julie Godwin told last night how he kissed her goodbye as she set off on her fateful holiday to South Africa.
Tim Godwin now faces bringing up their baby daughter Sophie without the woman he has shared the last 11 years.
Tim, 32, said: ‘She always got upset when we were apart and cried as usual as she went through into the departure lounge.
That was the last time I saw her.’
He first heard the news on Tuesday evening as he was feeding Sophie.
He was forced to tell her the heartbreaking news that: ‘Mummy isn't coming back.’
‘She has no idea what has happened there is no way she could understand, she is too young,’ he said.
‘She cried all last night and I did not get much sleep either.
It was pretty ghastly.
‘I was in such shock that I wanted to phone round Julie's friends but she had taken her contacts book with her and I was in a panic.
I did not know much of what had gone on.
‘I kept getting the drip-drip-drip of more disastrous news.’
Julie's high-achieving life seemed as if it would continue on its upward curve with her two companies both doing well in a time of recession.
After teaching high category prisoners in some of Britain's maximum security prisons, Julie started her own market research business called Ranzau based in Milton Keynes.
Within a few months she expanded the business and took over a computer firm from Hertfordshire employing about 120 people.
‘Julie was a high achiever, who made a tremendous impact on all those she met and had a lot of friends,’ said Tim.
‘After she had Sophie two years ago she continued to work as well as be a great mother.
‘Both Julie and Lizzie were experienced travellers and neither of them was foolhardy.
I was going out later and Sophie and I were going to spend some time on the beach with the two girls.
‘What angers me is that they were on a government controlled game reserve and planned it carefully.
‘In the brochure it looks like a picture of Disneyland in the bush with mud huts with all mod cons.
‘They were not just going off on their own into the bush they were in tourist locations.
They were not doing anything dangerous.’
The 25 workers at Julie's company Ranzau were in mourning at the office in Milton Keynes yesterday.
Spokesman Graham Menzies said: ‘Julie was very much loved by all of us.’
Tim broke the news to him late on Tuesday afternoon in a phone call from the Godwins' Northamptonshire home.
‘Julie was simply looking forward to an exciting holiday in Africa and seeing a good friend again,’ said Graham.
Shipyard to shut after 160 years
THE Cammell Laird shipyard is to close next July marking the end of a proud chapter in British history.
The remaining 900 employees — out of a workforce once totalling 40,000 — were given the grim news yesterday at a meeting with managers and union representatives.
For 160 years, son followed father into the yard at Birkenhead, Merseyside, where some of Britain's most illustrious ships were built.
Now that has all been sunk without trace.
Owners VSEL, which have has run the yard since it was privatised in 1985, said they were unable to find a buyer for the site.
They had warned in October 1990 that Cammell Laird would have to be sold or close because of defence cuts.
Chief executive Noel Davies said: ‘We very much regret this sad decision and are fully aware of the impact it will have.’
But Birkenhead Labour MP Frank Field pledged to fight the closure.
‘We are not going to roll over just because VSEL have told us to,’ he said.
‘The four local MPs are urging them to sell the yard to the Merseyside Development Corporation.
‘We are dead if we stay with VSEL, the whole town will go down the plughole.’
Mr Field is hoping to meet President of the Board of Trade Michael Heseltine and Prime Minister John Major to discuss the issue.
Ships first began thundering down the yard's slipway into the Mersey in 1828.
Many of the Royal Navy's most famous ships, including the Ark Royal aircraft carriers and battleships Rodney and Prince of Wales were built there.
The Polaris submarines Renown and Revenge, and HMS Conqueror, which sank the Belgrano during the Falklands conflict, also came from Cammell.
During the Second World War, the yard became a vital part of Britain's military machine.
But it was slowly sinking, dragged down by the end of the Cold War and Far East competition.
It was nationalised in 1977 by Jim Callaghan's Labour government along with other shipyards, then privatised by Margaret Thatcher in 1985.
Then, barely 1,200 employees worked at the yard and the employee-led VSEL buy-out team built it back up to 2,500.
The final Cammell Laird-built vessel, the Navy submarine HMS Unicorn, slipped into the Mersey in April this year.
Jaguar slashes 200 more jobs
JAGUAR is to axe another 200 jobs days after launching a £2 million TV ad campaign.
The luxury car maker has already shed more than 1,000 jobs this year.
The latest move is aimed at saving about £2.5 million a year.
Company spokesman David Boole said the 200 jobs at Radford, Coventry, would go in the second quarter of 1993.
Grilling for greedy bankers
Paul Wilenius, Political Editor
GREEDY banks are to get a roasting from the Treasury for failing to pass on interest cuts fast enough to customers.
The dressing-down comes as a 60 per cent rise in complaints against banks was revealed yesterday.
Chancellor Norman Lamont wants to know why high street banks have not passed on the recent three per cent base rate cut and will demand action.
MPs yesterday accused NatWest chief Lord Alexander of behaving like a loan shark by charging penal rates.
Astonishingly he defended his policy of imposing sky high 36.3 per cent rates, saying it had cut unauthorised loans by almost a third in a year.
But the Commons Treasury Select Committee, investigating banks, said it had also closed tens of thousands of businesses.
Lord Alexander is against the Government's policy of a spending-led recovery and accused overdrawn customers of behaving like thieves.
Bank Ombudsman Laurence Shurman revealed complaints had rocketed to 10,000 in 1991-92.
Almost one in five involved charges and interest rates.
The Consumers' Assocation said: ‘People are fed up with the banks' incompetence, compounded by arrogance.’
Royal seat
PRINCE Charles put the royal blues behind him yesterday when he did a spell of hard time.
He told inmates at Pentonville Prison, London: ‘I have never sat on such a hard chair in my life.’
Scapegoat pilot suicide
Ellis Plaice, Aviation Correspondent
A BRITISH Airways pilot killed himself after being blamed for nearly flying a packed Boeing 747 into a hotel.
Glenn Stewart, 55, the first airline pilot to be hauled before a criminal court and convicted of negligence, was found dead in a fume-filled car.
The court last year heard he almost put down on the A4 at rush-hour, skimmed the Penta Hotel, and missed a telephone exchange by 12 feet as he approached Heathrow.
But Mr Stewart maintained the fault was with the plane and wrong signals had been sent to the flightdeck.
Colleagues backed his claims that he was a scapegoat in a secret political row between BA and Government safety chiefs.
Last weekend, after two years of fighting to clear his name, Mr Stewart left his wife Sam, a former air hostess, and their children Sophie, 23, and 19-year-old Hamish, at home in Wokingham, Berks.
He hired a car and drove to his hometown of Cupar in Fife, Scotland.
His body was discovered on Monday in the car park at a windswept beach, alongside the St Andrews championship golf course.
And last night his colleagues and family had no doubt that a decision to prosecute drove Mr Stewart to his death.
Fighting back tears, his 50-year-old widow Sam said: ‘He gave his life to British Airways and could have expected some support from them.
But when he needed help they just turned away.’
Air Commodore Freddie Yetman, of the British Airline Pilots Association, added: ‘Flying the world in command of a Boeing 747 gives a man great prestige and confidence.
‘Then suddenly he is thrown to the wolves with the stigma of being incompetent, no good — even a fool.
It was a dreadful end to a distinguished career.
‘The Civil Aviation Authority should never have brought the prosecution.
It was a terrible injustice — as though they were seeking a scapegoat to put down a marker to keep other pilots on their toes.
‘But a criminal court is not the place to establish air safety.’
Faced with disciplinary proceedings by British Airways following the incident in 1989, Mr Stewart resigned.
Other members of the crew were prepared to admit some blame and accept temporary demotion or early retirement.
But Mr Stewart was determined not to let anyone else suffer.
Despite his resignation, the Civil Aviation Authority decided to prosecute and in May 1991 he was found guilty by a jury and fined Pounds 2,000 plus £1,600 costs.
The airline had already being criticised by some CAA officials, and pilots believe Mr Stewart became a pawn in a trial of strength.
Before Mr Stewart was charged, there was a tacit agreement that pilots could admit flying problems in private so that others could be warned in time to avoid disaster.
But Stewart said that even before he was convicted, vital information from other pilots about near-misses was already drying up because of fears of reprisals.
The CAA has always denied a vendetta.
One official said: ‘Pilots are often seen as above reproach.
But we cannot have a professional elite which is beyond criticism.’
Though he admitted he had become ‘the least employable pilot in the land’, Mr Stewart fought vainly to re-establish himself.
Applications to fly executive jets were rejected and an attempt to become a government air accident investigator failed.
Sally Lyle, who lives next door to the Stewarts' luxury historic townhouse, said: ‘No one ever spoke about the case because it upset Glenn so much.
He seemed to have come to terms with the end of his career but the fact he never spoke about his feelings was always a worry.’
Chris Roberts, landlord of the pub at Wokingham where Mr Stewart was a regular, said: ‘Everyone here is absolutely devastated.
‘He used to be such a cheerful, happy and friendly man.
He was a gentleman's gentleman and everybody loved him.
‘After his career ended he changed completely.
You would hardly know it was him.
‘He joined the RAF when he was 17 and had been flying 35 years.
It was his life and he loved every minute of it.
‘I understand that some of the passengers on the jet, which was flying from Bahrain, got together and helped pay his fine.
‘If the plane had crashed everyone would have called Glenn a tragic hero for his efforts.
‘Simply because he managed to avert such a disaster he was there for everyone to have a go at.
It is a tragedy.’
A spokesman for BA said last night: ‘British Airways and former colleagues have received the news of Captain Stewart's death with considerable sadness.
‘Our condolences and sympathy have been sent to Captain Stewart's family.’
Juror sacked for expenses whinge
A JUROR miffed that his £1.20 travelling expenses were not being paid was sacked from an Old Bailey case yesterday.
The man wrote a note to Judge Brian Capstick saying he couldn't concentrate because he was bored and was more concerned with his expenses.
Injection hope in skin cancer battle
A JAB which could defeat skin cancer will begin its human trial soon.
A team at London's Institute of Cancer are to try out a vaccine developed by gene technology against melanoma, which kills 2,000 people in Britain each year.
Roy Barraclough
ACTOR Roy Barraclough has taken on a role that's right up his street — as Sherlock Holmes' bumbling sidekick Watson.
Roy, above, who for six years played inept landlord Alec Gilroy in Coronation Street, will star with actor Robert Powell in the musical at the Bristol Old Vic.
‘I never lost my love of theatre,’ said Roy, 57, yesterday.
Mum-to-be murder: man is quizzed
Richard Creasy
A MAN was being questioned by police last night after a pregnant woman was stabbed to death in her home.
Steven Clark gave himself up just hours after five-months' pregnant Kelly Hitchcock died.
Her mother Jenny Hitchcock, 44, who is believed to be Clark's lover, and PC Gary Jones, 30, were also stabbed.
Clark was named by police as they launched a manhunt following the bloodbath in the market town of Melksham, Wilts.
Kelly, who was in her early 20s, was airlifted to hospital with multiple stab wounds but was dead on arrival.
Mrs Hitchcock's other daughter Stella watched in horror as her mother was slashed on the arms and face as she tried to protect Kelly from the attack.
PC Jones was knifed in the thigh as he answered a 999 call for help.
The knifeman then fled the scene.
‘I heard screaming and saw Kelly being dragged along the road by a man,’ said neighbour Tracey Curd.
‘I saw the policeman arguing with the man and then I saw him being stabbed.
‘I was terrified — I saw a whole army of police arrive but he had run off.’
Hard-core discs
SEX pests who send pornographic messages to computer terminals used by female work colleagues are to be targeted in a new union crackdown.
The Manufacturing, Science and Finance Union has issued guidelines to their 600,000 members telling them how to tackle the problem.
A spokeswoman said: ‘It's just another way of getting at female employees.’
Hospitals peril
MORE than 100,000 people are left seriously disabled each year because accident centres are understaffed and ill-equipped.
An alarming report from the British Orthopaedic Association criticises the shortage of orthopaedic surgeons and lack of operating theatres.
It calls for an urgent shake-up in hospital accident centres and trauma services.
Drug docs guilty
A DOCTOR who killed a remand prisoner by prescribing a deadly mixture of drugs was last night fighting for his own life after a suspected heart attack in court.
Dhirendra Saha and another police doctor, Chulam Salim, both from Grimsby, were found guilty at Nottingham crown court of the manslaughter of heroin addict Graham Rawlinson, 23.
Sentencing was adjourned.
Lady in loft strangled
A MOTHER found dead in a loft had been strangled, an inquest heard yesterday.
The body of Mrs Campbell, 46, of Swindon, Wilts, was found in a suitcase in a guesthouse.
Swindon coroner John Elgar said she had died from asphyxiation.
The inquest was adjourned.
Private eye wanted me under covers
PRIVATE detectives were more interested in getting between the sheets than working undercover, an industrial tribunal heard yesterday.
Secretary Karen Haywood said she was relentlessly pursued by her boss Stephen Pointer.
He would try to grope her breasts and put his hand up her skirt.
‘He said what I needed was throwing on the floor and to be given a good seeing to,’ she told the Norwich hearing.
The mother-of-two became so distressed her hair fell out.
Office affairs were rife, she alleged.
One director arrived naked at a secretary's home, another was found in a compromising position in his car.
Miss Haywood, 32, claims she was sacked from her £9,000-a-year job in January for rejecting Mr Pointer.
Askari Security Services of Norwich said it was for poor work rate.
The case continues.
Britt stars in Archers
SEX goddess Britt Ekland is to appear in the radio soap opera The Archers.
The 50-year-old Swede, who has starred in more than 30 movies, will play herself during a week-long guest appearance over Christmas.
‘I was thrilled to bits when I was approached to take a part in the show,’ she said yesterday.
‘I've always been a great Archers fan but I've been sworn to secrecy over what I will be doing.’
The plot revolves around Eddie Grundy winning tickets to meet Britt after her appearance in a pantomime.
‘To start with he's gob-smacked but after a couple of glasses of champagne he…well that would be giving the story away,’ said producer Kerry Davies.
A BBC spokesman said: ‘She's still one of the world's most beautiful women and is bound to create a great deal of interest.’
In real life Britt is starring in her first pantomime role as the Genie in Aladdin at the Birmingham Hippodrome.
What do we need a speedboat for, we live in Walsall
CONTESTANTS on TV's Bullseye are so thick they don't have IQs they have Low Qs.
Who says so?
The man who should know — show host Jim Bowen.
He told students: ‘In the auditions I ask them who came second in the last war and they say ‘Ask the other fella’.
‘But the comments we hear from wives advising their husbands what to do are great.
‘Things like, ‘What do we need a speedboat for?
We live in Walsall’.
‘People ask us what happens on the programme and how we get the contestants.
‘People come on to the show with IQs which can't reach room temperature.
‘Sixty-four thousand people applied to get on the last series and most of the letters were written in crayon because they're not allowed to use sharp instruments.
‘I'm asked how I feel when they get the questions wrong and lose everything and I say I try not to laugh.’
The 55-year-old comedian was speaking to more than 1,000 students in an end-of-term debate at Oxford University.
Jim, whose catchphrase on the ITV darts quiz is ‘smashing, great, super’, defended his comments last night.
The former schoolteacher said: ‘I don't take the mickey out of the contestants any more than I take it out of myself.
‘If I was to insult the contestants I would be shooting myself in the foot.
The last thing I would want to do is be unkind to people who have given me an extremely successful show.
‘I'm convinced the contestants take any ribbing the right way.’
What's on, Doc?
A TV CHANNEL will be lauched to beat doctor's waiting room blues.
Cartoon characters and keep-fit tips will be included in the GPTV service in London which starts in the New Year.
GPTV director David Hahn said: ‘The average waiting time in GPs' surgeries is 30 minutes.
GPTV will inject a blend of fun and advice.’
Driving dunces
MOTORISTS forget everything they have learned about road safety as soon as they pass their driving test.
One in two would fail a second test two years later, a transport laboratory survey shows.
The 47 per cent failure rate was caused by driving too fast, inadequate use of mirrors, and poor observation and steering.
Cheap way to cure a hangover
Ian Fletcher, Consumer Correspondent
TWO headache tablets and lots of water will relieve a hangover as effectively as expensive over-the-counter remedies, says a survey out today.
The ‘cure’ for over-indulging at the office Christmas party is also much cheaper, according to the Consumers' Association Which? magazine.
Five well-known products were assessed by a panel of experts for treating a combined headache and upset stomach on the basis of their ingredients.
Alka-Seltzer, Andrews Answer, Beecham Resolve, Boots Headache and Indegestion Relief and Superdrug Paracetamol Seltzer were all found to ease a person's suffering until the body gets back to normal.
But be warned — there is no actual cure for feeling like death warmed up.
‘The remedies we examined were all equally good and should relieve the classic symptoms of a hangover,’ said Sue Leggate, editor of Which?.
‘But plenty of liquid and two paracetamol will do the job for much less cash.’
Products which contained paracetamol were preferred by the experts.
But hangover sufferers should be careful not to take too many painkillers at one go.
Avoid taking paracetamol tablets as well as a remedy containing the drug, the magazine warns.
Despite medical advice about sensible drinking, many people still over-indulge, particularly in the run-up to Christmas and the New Year.
But tipplers should forget the traditional hair-of-the-dog remedy of having another alcoholic drink the next morning.
‘It's the worst thing for a hangover and could put you on the slippery slope to alcoholism,’ warns the magazine.
‘Sack monkey scandal boss’
BRITAIN'S biggest supplier of monkeys for experiments was yesterday ordered by the Government to sack its head of animal welfare and retrain staff.
It followed an expose by an anti-vivisection campaigner who posed as a technician at Shamrock Farms in Small Dole, near Brighton, Sussex.
He filmed one incident where workers made more than 200 attempts to take blood samples from the legs of a monkey.
The animals' cages were smaller than Government guidelines and contained no bedding or playthings.
Steve McIvor, of the British Union for the Abolition of Vivisection, said the Home Office response was ‘wholly inadequate’.
‘If they don't meet the standards which the Government set they shouldn't have a licence,’ he said.
Rowan Atkinson
ROWAN Atkinson has hinted at a return to TV for the villainous Blackadder in a fifth series of misadventures.
The comic, left, said: ‘If we did it, it would be set in World War Two.
‘There was a time when you couldn't make jokes about Germans, but I think perhaps it's becoming fashionable again.’
Russ Abbot stands in for Leslie Crowther
COMEDIAN Russ Abbot will stand in for crash victim Leslie Crowther to present an edition of talent show Stars In Their Eyes, devoted to Elvis impersonators.
Crowther, 59, hopes to be back for the new series next year, but won't be well enough for the show on January 2.
Russ, left, said: ‘It is an honour.’
Love caller is off hook
A JILTED woman who rang her ex-boyfriend up to 36 times a day has been cleared of phone pest charges because she was in love.
Former model Carol Lawson, 42, from Park Gate, Hants, refused to hang up on her relationship with neighbour Michael Hughes after he dumped her for another woman.
‘I was devastated, I wanted him back,’ Carol said after the hearing at Fareham.
‘I tried to tell him that, but he kept hanging up.’
Model Kate's short cut to the top
EVERY model knows she is well on the way to the top when Terry O'Neill takes her picture.
And it has just happened to Kate Moss at the tender age of 18.
Terry captures the fresh, close-cropped looks that could blight the careers of a generation of older, taller and more exotic models.
An Italian talent scout said: ‘She looks so ordinary.
Girls can identify with her in a way they never could with, say, Linda Evangelista.’
Kate, at 5ft 7in a whole head shorter than some of the top models, made her debut on the Milan catwalks two months ago.
She is to follow her landmark O'Neill picture by appearing on the cover of the New Year Harper's Bazaar.
The former south London schoolgirl doesn't look a day older than when she was spotted by a talent scout in an airport lounge at the age of 14.
Armed police chase shadow
Neil Hyde
A PATIENT who disappeared from her hospital bed sparked a massive police siege last night.
The woman was mistaken for another patient from the same hosptial who earlier held up a mini-bus driver with a toy gun.
A security guard spotted the woman's shadow in an office at Heatherwood Hospital, Ascot, Berks — locked the door and called police.
Detectives believed the armed man must have run inside the hospital and holed himself up in the office.
However, after two hours of negotiation, they finally realised the ‘suspect’ was the woman.
Chief Inspector John Reeve, of Thames Valley police, said: ‘We could not take any chances.
‘A trained police negotiator was called in and the person was coaxed out.
It was only then that we realised it was a woman.’
Police are still hunting the gunman, who escaped with a portable telephone.
Sex tangle killer jailed
A GIRL was yesterday jailed for five years for stabbing her teenage love rival to death.
Kerri-Lisa McCammont, 17, of Crawley, West Sussex, was convicted of manslaughter after Hove Crown Court heard she stabbed Joanne Thorns, 18, three times when they argued over Scottish romeo Paul McKeown, 24.
Passing sentence, Mr Justice Latham said: ‘Adolescent emotions boiled over in a way that older people would have been able to cope with.’
Drug party student in death fall
Olga Craig
AN Oxford student has plunged to his death after a late-night drink and drugs party.
Henry Skelton had told friends he ‘thought he could fly’, minutes before falling from the window.
He was found lying on the pavement outside the university's New College and died from massive head injuries en route to the city's John Radcliffe Hospital.
Henry's friends were yesterday being interviewed about the use of drugs at the party, held at the three-storey house he shared with 11 others.
One 19-year-old said an all-night tequila party was being held.
‘I wasn't there but I understand there was a heavy all-night session,’ he said.
‘None of us can understand how he fell — the window is only 2ft square.’
Henry, 21, was just one of three students studying Fine Arts at the college.
Warden Harvey McGregor said he was a ‘well-liked, very good student’.
College dean Dr Elizabeth Frazer refused to confirm whether a party had been held.
‘If students wish to have a meeting or party which includes more than 10 people they must have my permission,’ she said.
‘I have no reason to think a party, which includes music and dancing, was taking place.’
Henry's parents, who live apart, yesterday travelled to Oxford from their homes in Faringdon, Oxon, to identify his body.
Oxford has a tragic history of student parties.
In 1987, Olivia Channon, 21, the daughter of former Transport Secretary Paul Channon, died after a drink and drugs party to celebrate the end of exam finals at Christchurch College.
In February, A-level student Georgina Meinertzhagen, the 16-year-old great-niece of industrialist Lord Hanson, died after drinking 17 shots of tequila.
And last month an 18-year-old student at Lady Margaret Hall college broke a leg and injured her spine when she fell out of a window after a pub crawl.
Duke gold winner is found dead
A CAMBRIDGE student has been found electrocuted in his room, just days before he was to receive his Duke of Edinburgh Gold Award.
Sam Butterell, 20, who was in his second year reading philosophy at Queens' College, was being counselled for depression.
He was due to be presented with his royal award by Prince Philip at St James's Palace next Tuesday.
Sam had worked with disabled people to gain his award, and helped youngsters in the Combined Cadet Force.
His mother Melita, of County Durham, said: ‘Sam was a generous person, liked by everyone.’
Rival fans win £¼m on pools
AN EVERTON fan and a Liverpool fan put aside their soccer rivalry when they scooped £250,000 on Littlewoods pools.
The win was particularly timely for Ford assembly line workers John Hobson, 52, and Kenny Berwick, 49, as they are on short-time.
They have worked at the Halewood plant on Merseyside for 20 years.
‘We are only getting basic money which is rubbish.
At least this win has eased that,’ said John.
IRA will not turn capital into fortress
Christian Gysin
THE battle against terrorism will not see London turned into a fortress, the capital's new police chief vowed yesterday.
As crowds headed back into the West End after a 1,000lb IRA bomb was defused, the Met's Commissioner-in-waiting Paul Condon said normal daily life must go on.
‘I think there has to be a realism about what can be achieved without turning London into a fortress,’ he said.
‘In many ways it would be playing into the hands of the terrorists if you make daily life unbearable in the capital.’
Mr Condon, 45, currently Chief Constable of Kent who takes over as the Met's youngest-ever Commissioner in February, added that bombs still went off in Northern Ireland despite having the army on the streets.
‘You cannot look for quick fixes from me on terrorism.
‘It is a long-term war of attrition,’ he said.
London has so far had luck on its side with three massive IRA bombs failing to detonate.
The latest on Tuesday night would have ripped the West End apart.
Police believe the IRA intended it as a sinister threat to the royals.
The 1,000lb device was hidden in a Ford Transit van parked yards from the Dominion Theatre where the Prince and Princess of Wales will watch this year's Royal Variety Performance on Monday.
It was the scene of a failed assassination attempt on the royal couple at a charity concert nine years ago.
The bomber turned informer and tipped off police.
In a coded telephone warning on Tuesday, Scotland Yard were told four bombs had been planted in the area and given just 30 minutes to find them.
Streets over a square-mile area were evacuated but after no bombs went off police blasted a window off the van and discovered the deadly cargo.
It failed to explode only because of a faulty detonator.
After a series of controlled explosions, the van was removed from the scene early yesterday.
Two weeks ago, a one-ton bomb at Canary Wharf failed to detonate although experts have failed to find out why.
A lorry-load of explosives intended for the Lord Mayor's Parade was also discovered.
One 200-strong theatre audience who found themselves trapped in the chaos on Tuesday were given an impromptu hour-long concert by Tom Jones.
He was appearing in Channel 4's recording of comic Jack Dee's Christmas show when police said they could not leave.
BT freezes cost of calls but puts up rental
Ian Fletcher
THE phoney war between BT and Mercury erupted in tit-for-tat exchanges yesterday.
Just hours after Mercury cut phone bills for domestic and small business customers, BT declared a freeze on the cost of all UK and international direct-dialled calls for a year.
BT also unveiled schemes to encourage customers to make more use of their phones and promised more special offers.
But millions of customers will be hit by BT's hike in rental charges — up by £1.26 to £22.96 per quarter for residential users and by £2.05 to £37.19 for business customers.
BT hopes its new initiatives will give it the upper hand in the bitter battle with Mercury, which it accuses of ‘cherry picking’ business customers while ignoring the less profitable residential market.
The BT price move means residential customers will receive a five per cent discount on all calls over 1,785 units per quarter, the equivalent of a £75 bill.
The discount will rise to eight per cent once the bill reaches £250.
Philip Cullum of the Consumers' Association said the average customer would be no better off.
‘The main people who are gaining are those whose total bill is more than £100, and the vast majority of BT customers do not fit into this category.’
Girl, 11, rape charge
A BOY aged 16 was last night charged with the rape of an 11-year-old girl who was attacked on her way to school.
The girl was grabbed from behind and dragged into bushes as she walked through an estate in Milton Keynes, Bucks.
The teenager was arrested yesterday.
He is due before the town's magistrates today.
Jerry Lee rolls into Britain
WILD man of rock Jerry Lee Lewis flew in to Britain yesterday only hours before his first of three shows with Little Richard.
The singer, best known for the classic Great Balls Of Fire, was expected two days ago but was said to be furious at taking second billing in the Giants of Rock 'n' Roll concerts.
A spokesman said the 56-year-old singer pianist had flu.
Former teen idol Bobby Vee, guitar star Duane Eddy and Little Eva are also performing at the shows, which began last night in Manchester.
Whole rugby team quizzed on bloodbath
David Jones
A RUGBY match that turned into a bloodbath could be investigated by police.
University student Steve Rankin needed 21 stitches to a gruesome wound above his ear.
Others in the university side were kicked, punched, bitten and gouged.
Their opponents, an experienced club side, are all being reported for violent conduct.
Brunel University claim their dressing room looked like a casualty unit after the clash with Hayes.
Former chairman Andy Baker said: ‘I'm disgusted.
It was just thuggery.’
They plan to use a ‘video nasty’ of the second-round Middlesex Cup match to back an official complaint and possible legal action.
Fourth-year engineering student Steve, 21, is alleged to have been booted as he lay helpless on the ground.
He was led from the field with blood covering his jersey.
A team-mate claimed: ‘He looked like he'd been hit with a meat cleaver.’
Another of the Brunel side was allegedly kicked so hard his back was cracked.
The university's list of injuries also includes a suspected broken wrist.
Coach Nigel Botherway said Hayes, which had one player sent off and won the tie 14-11, tried desperately to make peace.
He said: ‘Their players came in saying: ‘You won't report us, will you?’’
Hayes police confirmed action is being considered.
Hayes secretary Reg Hall said: ‘It was played in bad spirit.
The injuries aren't pretty but they weren't on purpose.’
£8m red river clean-up
AN £8 MILLION grant will be used to clean up a disused tin mine which turned an estuary red with pollution.
Water from the Wheal Jane mine caused the Carnon River in Cornwall to flow red in January.
The flow of metal-contaminated water is now four million gallons a day, of which 3.3 million gallons are treated.
Mugger gave be a baby
A WOMAN who was told she could never have children due to a rare disease has just given birth to a daughter.
And it was all thanks to a mugging.
Pauline Paul was confined to a wheelchair as calcium drained from her bones.
She was too weak to go through pregnancy.
Her specialist consulted experts worldwide without finding a cure.
Then he was called to treat a fellow doctor after a mugging.
He turned out to be a bone expert who suggested a new drug for Pauline, 36.
Within months, her condition improved and she is now the proud mother of Alexandra.
Pauline from Cotleigh, near Honiton, Devon, said: ‘That mugger doesn't realise the favour he did us.’
Wife cleared of murder
A MOTHER who killed her husband to stop him attacking her son was cleared of murder yesterday.
Beverly Grzybkowski, 36, stabbed her husband Andrew six times as he was about to attack 15-year-old Michael with a 2ft-long club.
Michael told the Old Bailey he had tried to defend his brother Lee, 13, before his father turned on him.
The Crown then withdrew its case and the judge ordered the jury to acquit Mrs Grzybkowski, of Kingston-upon-Thames, Surrey.
Later she said: ‘I'm just relieved.’
Big Mac boss jailed for bomb hoax on rivals
A McDONALD'S manageress was led weeping to jail yesterday for using a bomb hoax to empty a rival restaurant.
Patima Herron's ploy at the height of a mainland IRA campaign meant the Burger King near her own city centre restaurant had to be evacuated and searched.
She was jailed for six months yesterday after a judge told her she had caused chaos and fear to boost her restaurant's profits.
Herron, 25, threatened 20-year-old waitress Helen Calderwood with the sack unless she made the hoax call last December.
Arch-rival Burger King in Newcastle's bustling Northumberland Street was packed with Christmas shoppers and lost more than £1,000 in takings on one of its busiest days of the year.
More than 300 customers and 50 staff had to be evacuated as police searched for a bomb.
Judge Helen Paling at Durham Crown Court told Herron: ‘You are a very determined woman.
‘There is no doubt that it was you in charge when the hoax call was made.
‘The public were placed in fear when they were expecting to be shopping peacefully.
‘People on the receiving end of a hoax bomb call never know if it is the real thing.’
Herron of Gosforth, Newcastle, was convicted of communicating false information after a trial at Newcastle Crown Court in October.
She claimed at the time that colleagues had lied in a bid to get her fired because she was unpopular.
She and assistant manager Lance Green had been instructed to improve profits at the expense of Burger King.
Herron was sacked by McDonald's, which denied pressurising her to win business from Burger King.
Christopher Knox, defending, said yesterday Herron had lost a promising career.
Her respectable family was devastated.
‘Her motive is difficult to define,’ he added.
‘The restaurant had already achieved record takings and there was no question of her being put under pressure.
‘She has suffered considerable personal distress since being identified as the one responsible for the bomb hoax and will be very upset by a custodial sentence.’
Waitress Calderwood, from Gosforth, was ordered to carry out 120 hours community service by Newcastle magistrates after she admitted making the hoax call.
She has also been sacked.
Assistant manager Mr Green, 20, was cleared of the charge.
Carjack killers held
THREE men have admitted the carjack execution of two pals who were stripped and shot in the head.
Alf Catholic, 21, was charged with the two murders and one attempted murder following the weekend shootings in Kissimmee, Florida.
Jermaine Foster, 19, and Leondre Henderson, 17, will face the same charges.
A police spokesman said: ‘We have confessions from all three.’
Detectives are now hunting a fourth man who will also be charged with murder.
They do not expect to make any other arrests.
Three white men and a black woman were travelling home from a nightclub when their Nissan Pathfinder was rammed by a gang driving a pickup truck.
The gang forced the four to go with them to remote farmland calling the woman ‘a black whore’ who was ‘fooling about with white trash.’
The men were ordered to strip and lay down on the grass.
They cried for mercy but their pleas were met with abuse and laughter.
One of the killers allegedly said: ‘If you guys ain't got no money I'm in the mood to kill tonight.’
The men were shot in the head.
Two died instantly but Michael Rentas survived by feigning death after a bullet missed his skull by a millimetre.
The woman was not harmed.
The Pathfinder was later found abandoned in a lake.
Animals lose home to lego
DANISH toy maker Lego plans to open a £60 million Legoland park in 1996 at Windsor Safari Park in Berkshire.
Liquidators of the park, which closed in October, have until 1994 to find new homes for the 600 animals housed there.
Rape jail appeal
CROWN prosecutors are to appeal against a lenient sentence imposed on a rapist whose victim died after the attack.
Raymond Oxborough, 30, of Headingley, Leeds, was jailed for seven years in September for the rape and manslaughter of Kathleen Lillyman, 61, in March last year.
She had a massive stroke.
Vigilantes in murder trial
A COMPANY boss's vigilante-style expedition against car vandals ended in murder, a court heard yesterday.
Window firm director Norman Waller, 34, was just going to bed when he saw youths damaging a Vauxhall Cavalier belong to neighbour Bob Fay, Newcastle Crown Court was told.
He and Mr Fay's son, Peter, 22, confronted a group of youths in the street at Low Fell, Tyne and Wear.
Waller, armed with a wood-cutting chisel, grabbed one 16-year-old and threatened to cut his ear if the youth did not say who had damaged the car.
A fight started and Waller wounded three of the youths, said Stephen Williamson QC, prosecuting.
One, Terrence Malone, 24, also of Low Fell, died from his injuries five days later.
Waller was said to have told the police that his own car and his factory in Fencehouses, Co.
Durham, had been vandalised.
‘I'm sick of this,’ he allegedly said.
‘I've had enough.
I was boiling.
I just snapped.
They had it coming to them.
‘It was just like mob rule.
No-one was safe from them.
They were just wandering about as if they owned the place.’
Waller added that he had not intended to stab anyone, the jury heard.
Waller and Fay deny murder, affray and wounding.
The trial continues.
Shock cure for drivers replaces jail
Eben Black
DRINK drivers may have their driving bans reduced in return for attending rehabilitation courses.
‘This will not be a soft option,’ said Roads Minister Kenneth Carlisle yesterday.
Convicted drivers still face fines and a ban and also have to pay up to £200 for the 30-hour course.
‘Offenders will have to satisfy the courts they have successfully completed a course before their period of disqualification is reduced,’ he said.
The AA last night applauded the scheme.
‘Drunk drivers are often second or third time offenders,’ said a spokesman.
£7,000 haul of glue mob
A MOTORIST was robbed of his £7,000 life-savings by two masked thugs who glued his hands to the steering wheel.
They struck as the man, 54, went to a bank in Stoke Newington, north London.
One held a knife to his throat while forcing him to drive to nearby Hackney.
Police said: ‘The raiders struck lucky to find so much cash.’
Queen visits Oxfam
THE Queen astonished British Rail passengers yesterday by catching an ordinary train for a goodwill visit to Oxfam.
But even without using her special royal train, it was not quite the everyday battle to get there.
The Queen was escorted on to Platform One at London's Paddington station and boarded a reserved carriage of the 10.20am train to Oxford without the formality of getting a ticket.
Britain's newest taxpayer took her economy drive even further by visiting the Oxford Oxfam shop.
A Palace spokesman said: ‘It is not unheard-of for the Queen to use an ordinary train.
‘She has travelled by ordinary train on a number of occasions.’
20,000 more on the dole
JOHN Major was accused yesterday of refusing to treat the ‘cancer of unemployment’.
The attack came from Labour leader John Smith as more than 17,000 jobs cuts were announced by the Post Office and the Royal Ordnance, while Ford unions claimed 3,000 workers are to go.
Mr Smith asked: ‘Don't you accept the reality of modern Britain?
There are 52 unemployed people seeking every job in the West Midlands and 72 in London.
What are you going to do about it?’
In a fiery Commons exchange, Mr Major replied: ‘When will you start talking this country up and stop talking it down?
‘The only way to create jobs is to create the right policies for long-term sustainable growth.’
The instant terror ripped through Manchester
Two terrified passers-by, caught in the middle of the second blast at Cateaton Street, try desperately to shield themselves from the force of the explosion as they are engulfed by billowing smoke.
Her head buried in her lap, one distressed victim is given a reassuring hug from a concerned friend.
In tears, fighting back the pain, two injured pedestrians are cared for while a distraught woman is comforted
Police seal off Deansgate, decorated with Christmas lights.
A policeman carries a girl to safety in his arms.
An injured motorcyclist is led away as a stunned woman lies in the road.
Home loans spy outrage
A BUILDING society yesterday revealed plans to quiz would-be homebuyers on their private lives to assess what mortgage rate to charge.
The Bristol and West claims that unmarried couples, friends buying a home together and couples who have a large family are ‘high risk’ groups.
Because they are more likely to default on repayments, they would have to pay higher rates of interest than older married couples with small families.
The society's questionnaire would disclose whether the applicant was single or living with someone, what type of relationship they were in, and how many children they planned.
It refused to rule out the inclusion of other factors for determining whether a borrower was likely to default or not — like disability or homosexuality.
Last night the Consumers' Association Which? promised to investigate.
And rival societies were quick to assure homebuyers that they had no intention of following suit.
A Woolwich spokesman said: ‘We are in the business of lending to people, not categorising them.
Judging clients by the way they live is unrealistic.
We are not interested in their sexual preferences.’
Major holds back troops
TOUGHER military action by British troops in Bosnia was ruled out by Premier John Major yesterday.
‘It's all too easy to be heroic with the lives of other people,’ he told MPs.
Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd feels victory would come swiftly if more troops were put in.
But Defence Secretary Malcolm Rifkind said it would take 100,000 troops years to defeat the Serbs.
IRA time bomb attack for maximum carnage
Andrew Russell
IT was just another routine morning as office staff hurried their way to work yesterday, their numbers swelled by Christmas shoppers out early to miss the crowds.
At the height of the rush hour, when the streets were at their very busiest, two terrorist bombs exploded bringing the city of Manchester to a standstill and injuring 64 innocent people.
The terrifying escalation of violence in the IRA mainland bombing campaign was timed to cause as much carnage as possible.
It was only by a miracle no-one was killed.
Terrified commuters were already reeling from the first explosion which went off in a flower bed at at 8.39am when the second, larger Semtex blast came 90 minutes later.
In another vicious new twist, deliberately misleading telephone warnings resulted in crowds being shepherded straight into the path of the second device.
The latest double-bomb outrage brought renewed calls for a national agency to co-ordinate the campaign against terrorism.
Professor Paul Wilkinson, of St Andrews University, said: ‘We need a national unit which would combine the very best of police explosives experts, intelligence people and forensic scientists in one national agency, instead of all the different police forces presently doing the job.’
Scotland Yard's anti-terrorism squad headed by Commander David Tucker did not have the powers or resources to fight terrorism on a national basis, he said.
Police fear that IRA bombers based in Britain are training their sights on other major cities after being foiled in three recent attempts to bomb London.
Manchester's Assistant Chief Constable Jim Paterson, said: ‘It is typical of the terrorists who are operating in this country that they should act with a complete and utter disregard for the civilian community.
‘I feel nothing but disgust that these bombs should be planted at a time and in places where ordinary people are going to work.’
The centre of Manchester was sealed off as police shepherded thousands of workers away from their city offices.
A terrorist on a motor bike is believed to have planted the bombs.
The first explosion badly damaged the offices of the Inland Revenue and Department of Employment.
The second blast hit Cateaton Street, and the massive Arndale Centre shopping complex, dangerously near where hundreds of people had been shepherded to safety in Manchester cathedral.
A warning was telephoned to the Samaritans and the BBC seven minutes after the first explosion.
The caller, speaking in a soft Irish accent and using a recognised codeword, said devices had been planted in Parsonage Street, Cathedral Street, Market Street and High Street.
Volunteer Eileen said: ‘For half a second I thought it was a hoax but as he began to name the four streets I took him seriously.’
As the bomber hung up Eileen had already reached for another phone to warn the police.
Hospitals throughout the area were put on full alert as fleets of ambulances carried the injured, most of them hit by flying glass, to casualty departments.
Victim Martin Baxendale, 19, a sales manager, was walking away from the scene of the first explosion when the second device went off.
‘The streets were full of people moving to a safe area,’ he said.
‘We'd been warned there could be more bombs.
Suddenly I heard a huge bang about 50ft away.
‘I hit the deck and could feel glass flying into me.’
Shop assistant Neil Tattersall, 23, the most seriously injured victim, was hit in the back by a piece of flying shrapnel after being evacuated from his store.
His father Roy, 58, said: ‘All the lads were joking and laughing about something — then bang.’
Security guard Stan Murray was at an office car park entrance when the first bomb went off.
‘It blew the clock off the wall and hit me on the head.’
Walter Eaton, a Department of Employment training officer, was already at his desk.
He said: ‘There was a massive bang and the windows came flying in.’
Computer worker Fred Prassaler escaped death by seconds.
‘I had ordered sandwiches by phone two minutes earlier and was about to leave the building to pick them up.
If the bomb had gone off a minute later I would have been right next to it.’
Solicitor David Gamble was arriving for work when the first bomb exploded.
‘I had got to the front door when it exploded on top of me.
It was like seeing a very strong gust of wind coming straight at me.
‘Then the door fell on top of me and my face was cut by broken glass.’
A clergyman who was in Manchester Cathedral when the second device went off said: ‘I had only been there for a matter of seconds when I heard an almighty crump.
‘I raced there to see white smoke coming from the patch of bushes and part of a wall demolished.
‘It crossed my mind that if people wanted to plant a bomb, they might do it somewhere like that to catch people milling around.’
Some survivors complained they were being herded towards the site of the second bomb and were only 50ft away when it exploded.
Assistant Chief Constable Paterson denied any police bungles.
‘We received warnings that mentioned four specific streets and the second bomb went off in a street which was not named in those warnings,’ he said.
‘I am desperately sorry that people were injured.
Thankfully none of them was seriously hurt.’
Police said last night they had found no more devices and were reopening the city centre.
The bomb disrupted filming of Coronation Street at the Granada studios less than a mile away.
A number of the cast including Julie Goodyear were delayed in traffic jams.
A spokesman said: ‘Many rang in on car phones saying they would be late.’
Changing tactics give police little chance
THE latest attacks highlight the constantly-changing tactics of the IRA.
They also prove the frightening fact that its mainland-based active service units have no shortage of munitions or ideas to wrong-foot the authorities.
The recent campaign in London has seen fertiliser-based devices placed in litter bins, under cars and in vans.
Yesterday's bombs are thought to have been Semtex and it is the first time outside the capital that devices have been casually placed by the road side.
The Manchester outrage is a considerable escalation from the terrorists' last attempt to place bombs in the city almost a year ago to the day.
Then a series of cassette-sized incendiary devices were carefully hidden in a number of stores.
The terrorists' worrying ability to change the method and the target of their attacks gives local forces little chance of preventing them.
Over the years the IRA has extended its target list from military, political and establishment targets to economic ones.
20,000 more jobs to go
Ian Fletcher
UNEMPLOYMENT gloom hit more than 20,000 workers yesterday.
The biggest job losses during Black Thursday were announced by the Post Office.
More than 16,000 jobs will be axed over the next five years.
Another 1,300 are to go from Royal Ordnance factories.
The unions at Ford claimed the car giant is to shed 3,000 jobs at its main assembly plants.
Post Office Chief executive Bill Cockburn said 15,000 jobs will be lost in the Royal Mail and another 1,200 from its Counters division.
He promised there would be no compulsory redundancies.
But Alan Johnson, general secretary-elect of the Union of Communication Workers was unimpressed.
He said: ‘When this business loses jobs, it affects every city, town and village in the country.
‘The Government has now managed to make working for the Post Office an insecure occupation.’
Ford union leaders said fresh cutbacks were on the way after a meeting with management.
Chief negotiator Jimmy Airlie said the company had ‘a hidden agenda’.
The unions are already holding a strike ballot because they fear compulsory redundancies.
Leaders of the Royal Ordnance workers said job cuts there were a ‘bitter pill we will not swallow’.
British Coal last night demanded Government action to save the jobs of 8,000 miners and keep open 13 threatened pits.
Coal bosses want 24-hour working to be allowed seven days a week to boost productivity.
They also demanded an end to imports of French electricity.
Toll falls
THE number of people killed or badly injured on England's roads in 1991 has fallen by almost a third to 47,404 since the early 1980s.
Well that's taken care of Fergie's presents
Nicki Pope
THE Queen went Christmas window-shopping yesterday — at Oxfam.
And, just like an ordinary housewife, she caught an ordinary British Rail train to do it.
Well, not quite that ordinary, even though just a week earlier, the Queen had agreed to join the ranks of income-tax payers.
The last two carriages of the 10.20am London-to-Oxford train had been reserved for the royal party.
And her fellow taxpayers didn't find their sovereign queueing at a cubby-hole for her £17.40 first-class ticket.
Come to that, the Queen didn't have a ticket.
She was ushered straight on to the train at Paddington with her staff.
‘The accommodation was a mixture of first and standard class,’ said a BR spokesman.
‘We are assuming the Queen chose first class.’
As the train rocketed to Oxford, the Queen gazed at the floods just like her paid-up fellow-passengers.
But unlike so many BR travellers, the royal party were in luck — the train arrived three minutes early.
And off the Queen dashed to the Oxfam shop.
A porcelain corgi in the window took her fancy.
Sadly, she never carries cash, so any hope of seeing her choose something unusually revolting for daughter-in-law Fergie soon faded.
Then the Queen headed for her next destination.
This time, perhaps reluctant to push her luck, she went by car.
Sources said the Queen often uses ordinary BR services.
No doubt.
But as one of yesterday's fellow travellers muttered: ‘I just hope she didn't have ordinary BR tea.’
We are not amused
A SPITTING Image scene poking fun at the Royal Family has been removed from a store window at the Queen's request.
The Queen was not amused when Liberty's in London's West End used the puppets to portray Prince Andrew as Prince Charming, Fergie as Cinderella and Prince Edward as an ugly sister.
A Liberty's staff member said: ‘We were told a phone call was made from the Palace saying the Queen was not happy and it had to come down.’
All that was left yesterday was a ‘display removed’ sign.
Spitting Image creator Roger Law joked: ‘I think I may have lost my OBE over this.’
Baby mix-up riddle of fire alarm alert
Simon Trump and Nick Craven
THE mix-up that means two families may have been bringing up the wrong babies could have happened in a fire alert, it emerged yesterday.
Maternity unit staff may have panicked on hearing alarm bells and put the wrong name tags on the girls, health chiefs admitted.
The mistake was not spotted later because the children ‘could almost be twins’.
New tagging procedures have been introduced at Southampton's Princess Anne Hospital as a result of the blunder.
Babies used to be given one tag each for the arm and ankle.
From now on, they will be tagged on both ankles following advice from the Royal College of Midwives, said hospital spokesman Peter Campion.
The babies were born hours apart.
Their mothers, who gave birth in the same delivery room, were in separate wards.
But the girls were taken to the same nursery while their mothers rested.
The fire alarm went off that evening — Tuesday, November 24.
Baby One was sent home with its mother 48 hours later.
Baby Two and her mother were transferred to a hospital nearer their home the day before.
They were allowed home on Friday, November 27.
At 9pm that night, the parents of Baby One discovered their daughter's ankle tag had the wrong surname.
She had no wrist tag at all.
They contacted the hospital which phoned the parents of Baby Two.
When they checked the tags on their baby, they found the correct surname on its wrist but the wrong one on her ankle.
Normal hospital procedure is to tag a baby on its wrist within 10 minutes of its birth.
It is shown to the mother to check it is correct.
Ankle tags are added later.
A hospital source said: ‘We are hoping that procedure has saved us.
‘If both babies had the correct name tags on their wrists, then it is highly probable they are with their correct parents.
It would mean someone put the wrong tags on the ankles, possibly during the panic over the fire alarm.’
The hospital spokesman said it was believed a smoke alarm was set off by someone having a cigarette in a toilet.
‘There are different levels of alert depending on the seriousness of the fire,’ he explained.
‘It led to some confusion in the department and mistakes may have been made.
‘There are no identifying marks on these babies.
They are very similar.’
The two families, who have had no contact and do not plan to meet, face a week of agony before knowing if they were given the right child.
Blood samples taken from the mothers and babies will be genetically fingerprinted.
Both mothers could take legal action against the hospital even if they have the correct child.
They may claim damages for any mental anguish.
Baby One has been handed back to the local health authority and is being cared for at another hospital.
‘The parents have visited it every day since Friday,’ said Mr Campion.
Baby Two is still being looked after by the parents who took it home.
The 126-bed Princess Anne delivers 6,000 babies a year.
Victims of triple killing tortured
AN elderly couple and their crippled son were tortured before being murdered in their home, police revealed yesterday.
Harry Smith, 71, his wife Mary, 72, and their 47-year-old wheelchair-bound son, Harold, were tied up and stabbed repeatedly and battered in a frenzied attack.
Their bodies were discovered in a blood-spattered, ransacked bedroom of their Birmingham council house.
Detective Superintendent Paul Gough, leading the hunt for the killer, said: ‘The attack lasted some time.
It is not known at which point any of the three died.
It was a horrendous attack which leaves me stuck for words.
‘All three had injuries inflicted by possibly a knife or piece of wood.
‘Mr Smith senior had his wrists bound with a tie behind his back.
‘Harold had a sock stuffed in his mouth and his hands bound with a dressing gown cord.
An attempt had been made to remove Mrs Smith's underclothing.’
Police believe the murders occurred on Monday.
‘We have not been able to establish a true motive,’ said Mr Gough.
The bodies were found on Wednesday after the couple's daughter, Cathleen Mustow, alerted police because she could not contact her parents.
Mrs Mustow, 35, said: ‘Anything that would help catch the person responsible is needed.’
Own up, Masons
FREEMASONS were urged to come out of hiding by John Major yesterday.
Any member of the secret society who takes public office or joins the police should declare they have taken the Masonic oath to counter, he told MPs.
Labour MP Chris Mullin is trying to introduce a Bill making declaration a legal requirement to counter allegations of corruption.
Mum carjacked at supermarket
A TERRIFIED woman shopper became Britain's latest carjacking victim yesterday.
The 41-year-old mother realised she was being followed by two men as she returned to a multi-storey car park after a lunchtime trip to a supermarket in Fareham, Hants.
When she opened the boot of her car to dump her shopping inside, one of the thieves suddenly grabbed her round the neck from behind.
He then held a knife to her throat while his accomplice snatched her keys.
The woman was pushed to the ground before her attackers sped off in her Ford Cortina.
One of the men is described as thick set and about 6ft 3in with short, dark hair.
He was wearing a black bomber jacket, red T-shirt and faded jeans.
The woman suffered shock and slight bruising.
Detective Sergeant Roger Coe, who is heading the investigation, said: ‘Someone must have seen something, this was at a very busy time of the day, right in the town centre.
‘We would ask anyone who saw these men to come forward.’
More than 12,000 TODAY readers have requested our FREE Lock It! windscreen stickers to remind drivers to lock car doors before driving off.
To join them send an SAE — indicating on it the number of stickers required — to Lock It!
Stickers, PO Box 490, London E1 9DW.
Up to his neck…
A MINISTER issued a drought warning while MPs were being told of flood damage in Wales.
Environment Minister David Maclean told an audience at Tory Central Office: ‘The rain of the last few days goes some way to replenishing the reservoirs.
But there is no getting away from the fact that we must still use water wisely.’
As he spoke Welsh Secretary David Hunt was cataloguing the tragedy across the border.
Shadow Welsh secretary Ron Davies said: ‘This is in very bad taste.’
Little Man Nick ‘a sad little boy’
CHILD genius Nicholas MacMahon is one of the saddest boys his teachers have known.
His story mirrors the gifted boy in Jodie Foster's 1991 film Little Man Tate, who became depressed about the world's problems by the age of seven.
Coniston School principal Madeleine Harvey hit back yesterday at claims that her teachers could not cater for four-year-old Nicholas.
He had been unable to adapt to life at the school, she said.
‘He walked around with shoulders hunched, head bent, unable to communicate, with hands over his ears to block out the noise of other people,’ she said in a letter to The Times.
The 90-pupil school in Reigate, Surrey, did not have the chance to assess him because he attended only three mornings in two weeks, she said.
Tony mercy ruling
THE Appeal Court hinted yesterday that it wants Hillsborough coma victim Tony Bland to be allowed to die.
The court will decide next Wednesday on the High Court ruling that doctors can stop feeding Tony, 21, but has already reached a preliminary finding, said Master of the Rolls Sir Thomas Bingham.
Jumbos take off without pilots
PASSENGERS waiting to board two 400-seater jumbo jets saw the planes lifted up and thrown across the tarmac by a freak gust of wind.
The 165-ton jets were sent flying six feet, smashing into cargo trucks at Gatwick Airport, West Sussex, yesterday.
Eye-witness Maureen Darwin, who was waiting to board one of the US-bound jumbos, said: ‘It was as if a giant unseen hand had come down from the heavens and just lifted the planes up and across the tarmac.
‘Everyone on the passenger lounge watched in total silence.
We couldn't believe what we had just seen.’
The North West Airlines planes and the cargo trucks were empty and nobody was hurt.
North West spokesman David Rose said: ‘One jumbo suffered major damage but people seemed remarkably calm about it.
They all caught their flights — on fresh planes.’
Insurers were yesterday starting to count the cost of the storms as driving rain finally turned to showers — and even snow in parts of Wales.
Villagers in Usk, Powys, thought they were to be the next flood victims when the River Usk rose 20 feet in three hours.
But their newly-installed river defences held fast.
No train services were operating west of Swansea, West Glamorgan, and the main rail link between the South-West and London was again broken when the River Exe flooded at a bridge outside Exeter.
An RSPCA inspector was hailed a hero after the River Teifi broke its banks to pour through farmland near Newcastle Emlyn, Dyfed.
Tony Lloyd helped rescue 123 stranded sheep, horses and cows.
Five students and an adventure group leader stranded in force 10 winds, torrential rain and sub-zero temperatures were found huddling under a plastic bag and singing songs at Dartmoor, Devon.
All six were taken to hospital suffering hypothermia.
The Viking Hotel in York was cut off by the River Ouse after rising water stopped work on a new pumping station designed to stop flooding.
TV artist Rolf Harris had his garden flooded when the Thames burst its banks in Bray, Berkshire.
Neighbour Ernie Wise said: ‘My boat would come in handy — but I can't reach it.’
Mercy doctor goes back
THE doctor convicted of attempting to murder a patient is to return to his old job.
Dr Nigel Cox, who gave the terminally ill woman a lethal injection, has accepted an offer from bosses to go back under supervision.
He will start seeing patients at Winchester's Royal Hampshire County Hospital from February.
Wessex Regional Health Authority laid down strict conditions for his return, but Dr Cox said yesterday he had received ‘certain assurances’ and was happy to accept them.
‘I shall return to work around February 1,’ said the consultant.
‘I want to get back to normal again.’
When asked how he felt about working with Roisin Hart, the nurse who reported him, he said he did not foresee any problems.
‘She will be working on a different ward, I am confident there will not be any problem,’ he said.
Dr Cox, 47, of Colden Common, Hants, was convicted at Winchester Crown Court in September of attempting to murder Lillian Boyes, 70, who suffered from rheumatoid arthritis.
Despite his one-year suspended prison sentence, the General Medical Council decided last month not to strike him off.
Life for fatal attraction wife in hitman murder
Rob Perkins
A CHEATING wife who hired a hitman to kill her husband because she could not divorce him was yesterday jailed for life.
Devout Catholic Noeleen Hendley collapsed in the dock after hearing the sentence.
Hitman Paul Buxton, 42, who used a rolling pin to bludgeon father-of-three Tony Hendley to death, was also jailed for life.
It took the jury at Nottingham Crown Court less than three hours to convict them after a two-week trial.
Hendley's lover, Terry McIntosh, 46, who admitted murder, also received life.
Scuffles broke out in the public gallery after victim Tony's relatives cheered at the sentences.
Below them, Hendley, 46, had to be carried out of the court by prison officers.
Earlier Mr Justice Holland told her she was ‘fundamentally wicked for plotting murder for over a month.
‘It eventually culminated in a murderous attack, the eventual brutality of which surprised even you.
‘Any one person could have brought the whole thing to an end on the spot.’
McIntosh and Hendley, of Breadsall, Derby, met as they planned the wedding of her son Shane and his daughter, Kay.
They were immediately attracted and began having sex before their children were married.
It became a fatal attraction.
Guns N' Roses fan Hendley, who has the rock group's rose trademark tattooed on her leg, told the court: ‘He was like a sex drug.
We made love as often as possible.
I couldn't get enough of him.’
McIntosh urged Hendley to leave her husband, a 46-year-old catering manager, but because of her Catholic upbringing she would not consider separation or divorce.
It was then McIntosh, of Little Eaton, near Derby, suggested they hire contract killer Buxton, of Loscoe, Derbyshire, to get rid of Tony for just £5,500.
Hendley claimed during the trial that her lover came up with hundreds of schemes for disposing of her husband.
Five plots were aborted.
On the night of the fatal attack Tony, who had no idea of his wife's affair, joined her lover at a pub.
While he was out, Buxton was let into the house by Hendley and lay in wait at the top of the stairs.
Tony was hit 29 times over the head after he returned home.
He died two days later in hospital.
Describing the attack in court, Hendley said: ‘I could hear the bangs on Tony's head.
They never seemed to stop.
I can still hear them.’
After the case Tony's sister, Carmel Mujico, 54, said: ‘She murdered a man who worshipped the ground she trod on.
If she spends the rest of her life in prison it will not be long enough.’
It emerged last night that Tony Hendley saved the life of two dying youngsters by donating his kidneys.
Within minutes of his death at Derby Royal Infirmary, surgeons alerted a transplant team at the Queen's Medical Centre, Nottingham.
One detective said last night: ‘It is nice to think that some happiness has come out of this.
We never found anyone who had a bad word to say against Tony.’
For Paul Ryan, from Sinatra
FRANK Sinatra sent flowers to the funeral of Sixties pop star Paul Ryan yesterday.
Paul's twin brother Barry, 44, composer Lionel Bart, disc jockey Alan Freeman and Dave Clark were among the 200 personalities at the crematorium service at Putney Vale, southwest London.
Women wept as Barry Ryan, in a moving tribute to his twin, said: ‘You were at my first breath and I felt your last breath, we should smile at such perfect symmetry.’
Paul Ryan, singer-turned composer, whose stepfather Harold Davison is Sinatra's manager, died of cancer just 14 weeks after the illness was diagnosed.
Writing for TODAY, Paul said: ‘I could get angry and bitter and say Why me?
But that would be implying Why not you?
And that's not how I feel.’
The mourners included Paul's widow, model Karen Ryan.
‘I miss Paul desperately,’ Karen, 25, said.
‘We'd been together for — since I was 17.
‘I'd just finished treatment for a drug problem and Paul was getting over valium addiction.
I fell desperately in love.’
Girl student killed herself ‘in despair’
A BRILLIANT student who killed herself after just one week at university may have acted in ‘a moment of despair,’ an inquest heard yesterday.
Tracey Cole, 18, was found in her room at Oxford's Lady Margaret Hall, after hanging herself with a dressing gown cord.
Oxfordshire coroner Nicholas Gardiner recorded a verdict of suicide, saying he believed Tracey, from Exeter, Devon, intended to kill herself.
He said: ‘It may have been simply a moment of despair and nothing more than that.
Tragically, the means were at her disposal.’
Mask rapist alert after new attack
A MASKED man who tried to attack a courting couple in their car was a serial rapist, police believe.
Dressed in black and wearing a balaclava, he tried to force his way into the car, but the doors were locked.
The couple then drove off from the beauty spot at Fort Nelson, near Fareham, Hants.
Police fear it was same attacker who last month locked a man in his car boot, kidnapped his girlfriend from a Winchester beauty spot and raped her.
It may also be the same man who last month raped a mother who was pushing a pram at Tarrant, Hants.
Blunders mean more BBC repeats
A SERIES of accounting blunders has caused BBC TV to overspend by £60 million.
Some new programmes have already been scrapped as part of immediate budget cuts of £20 million.
But there was still a estimated overspend of at least the same amount this year, on top of a deficit of £38 million last year, said BBC spokesman Will Wyatt.
He said there had not been, and would not be, any resignations as a result of the ‘deeply disturbing’ situation although finance director Ian Phillips will leave in February.
‘There will be some more repeats in the New Year but I hope it will not be too evident,’ he added.
Blessed is Friar Dunce
THE man whose name inspired the word ‘dunce’ is being made a saint.
Franciscan theologian John Duns Scotus, who died in 1308, was no dunce — he was a leading church intellectual.
But during the 16th-century Reformation, fellow Scots made his name a term of abuse.
Next March, the Pope will declare him ‘blessed’, the final stage before sainthood.
Cash blow to Labour
LABOUR'S biggest backer is slashing its donations to the parliamentary party by a third to £1 million.
The Transport and General Workers Union's decision comes amid a row with Labour leader John Smith over plans to limit union votes on party matters.
In another snub, the amount saved will be redirected to Labour councillors and MEPs.
Brideshead Reinherited
A TORY MP's wife has won a three-year battle to inherit the Pounds 10 million mansion that inspired Evelyn Waugh's Brideshead Revisited.
Madresfield Court at Malvern, Worcs, had stayed empty because the previous tenant had no male heir.
Now relatives have allowed Lady Sara Morrison and husband Sir Charles to move in.
Up-and-down house prices levelling off
HOUSE prices appear to have steadied according to a survey by Britain's biggest building society.
But the Halifax survey contrasts with in a report by the Nationwide Building Society.
The Halifax reported at 0.1 per cent rise in the cost of new homes but the Nationwide a claimed two per cent fall.
Despite the discrepancy, a Halifax spokesman said: ‘House prices could remain stable during 1993.’
Smoke from burning oil billows from the crippled Aegean Sea, blotting out the sky above the northern Spanish coast
Robin's return is question of timing
Ivan Waterman
SIR Robin Day is coming back to TV as a rival to his BBC Question Time successor Peter Sissons.
He will be chairing Central TV's weekly debate forum, Central Lobby.
It will be shown in the Midlands at the same time as Question Time on Thursdays.
Sir Robin, 69, left the BBC two years ago after director-general designate John Birt ordered a reshuffle in news and current affairs.
He said last night: ‘This is an opportunity I could not resist.
I do like a challenge.
Who knows?
There might even be an election next year.
That would be the icing on the cake.’
Giving a hint of the rivalry to come, a Central TV spokesman said: ‘We felt the slot was right for Sir Robin and ideally placed on that particular night.
Does anybody watch Question Time now anyway?’
Sticky end for pests
SEX-MAD flies are being lured to a sticky end as scientists search for a new pesticide.
Southampton University researchers are testing flypaper impregnated with a sex stimulant and insecticide.
Men are so vain
WOMEN wondering where their moisturiser, tanning lotion and facial scrub go should look no further than their partner.
Shower and bath gels, face masks and deodorants bought by women are also favourites, although men are too lazy to shop for their own.
Four out of five regularly reach for their wife's or girlfriend's face cream and 13 per cent use their partner's shampoo, a survey in Good Housekeeping magazine reveals.
Women get their own back by borrowing their man's razor.
Big Mac ban on bomber
AN animal rights activist who hurled a smoke bomb across the counter of a burger bar was yesterday banned from all McDonald's restaurants.
Christopher Tucker, 29, of Hounslow, west London, who will be sentenced later this month, was allowed bail on condition he does not enter any of the fast food chain's stores.
Customers in Kensington, south London, branch dived for cover believing the device was a bomb, Southwark Crown Court was told.
A brave staff member believed he was risking his life by throwing it into the street.
Surprise baby gave away cheating wife
CHEATING wife Patricia Martin had no chance of hiding her secret affair from her husband…the resulting bulge was plain for all to see.
She thought her fling with another man would stay secret because she had been sterilised.
But when her husband Timothy Donovan was confronted with the evidence it ‘completely finished the marriage’, she told the High Court yesterday.
Mrs Martin, 38, says doctors failed to warn her of the risks that her sterilisation operation might not work forever.
She is claiming damages for the pain, suffering and distress of the unwanted pregnancy and the extra cost of bringing up her daughter, including the loss of her job at a DIY centre.
The operation was carried out 10 years ago at Huntingdon County Hospital, Cambs, when the couple decided their family was complete with daughter Samantha, now 15.
But by the summer of 1984 the marriage began to break down and Mrs Martin embarked on an affair without her husband's knowledge.
She did not use contraception because she believed she was infertile.
‘If her marriage had been happy she might well have been philosophical about the new baby,’ her lawyer said.
‘But it made a difficult situation impossible, caused distress to her and her husband and sounded the death knell on the marriage which until then, although in difficulties, neither of them had given up hope of saving.’
Mrs Martin told the court: ‘My husband could not accept the child of another man.’
The marriage ended in divorce in June 1985, five months before baby Jaqueline, now seven, was born.
Mrs Martin, of Huntington, Cambs, married the child's father in March 1990.
Huntingdon Health Authority denies breach of duty or care and is fighting the claim for damages.
It also claims Mrs Martin has left it too late to bring an action.
The hearing continues.
Bogus PCs hijack mail
ARMED robbers hijacked a mail van by posing as police officers.
The three-man gang, wearing uniforms and driving a car with a blue flashing light, stopped the lorry heading for Dover on the A2 near Cobham, Kent.
They threatened the driver with a revolver, handcuffed him and dumped him.
The 58-year-old man, from Kent, was unhurt.
Kent police said: ‘The lorry was carrying a large quantity of Royal Mail parcels.’
Matthew's first kiss
BABY Matthew O'Neill got his first kiss from his mother yesterday at 14 months old.
Matthew suffered from Severe Combined Deficiency Syndrome, which left him open to any infection.
He has spent most of his life in a sterile unit at Newcastle General Hospital.
But now parents Seamus and Martine can take him home to County Antrim, Northern Ireland.
‘This will be my best Christmas ever,’ Martine said.
Soccer ace cleared of GBH on pitch
FOOTBALLER Gary Blissett was cleared yesterday of causing grievous bodily harm to an opponent in a tussle for the ball.
Blissett, the Brentford striker, was found not guilty by a jury which watched video recordings of an incident which put Torquay United defender John Uzzell in hospital.
Blissett, 28, had been accused of ‘cynically and deliberately’ thrusting his elbow into Uzzell's face in a mid-air duel, leaving him with a fractured cheek bone and eye socket.
He denied the charge, claiming it was an accident as they jumped.
As the jury of eight men and four women returned its verdict Blissett, who is married with two young daughters, momentarily shut his eyes in obvious relief.
After the hearing, Blissett said: ‘I am delighted.’
Uzzell, 33, said it was a ‘sad day for football’.
Blissett, of Rickmansworth, Herts, was sent off by the referee after the challenge, in a Third Division match last December.
In a rare prosecution following an incident on the field during a Football League game, Salisbury Crown Court was told the tussle followed a clearance from defence.
The ball bounced high and Blissett and Uzzell jumped for it.
Andrew Chubb, prosecuting, claimed Blissett elbowed Uzzell after the defender beat him to the ball and headed it away.
Blissett, who joined Brentford eight years ago from Crewe, told the court footballers used their arms when jumping.
This helped them to gain height and get power when heading the ball.
He wanted to win the ball and did not have the slightest intention of injuring Uzzell, he added.
Agony of surgery cancelled 9 times
A PATIENT has been left in agony after a hospital cancelled an operation on his legs for the ninth time.
Former lorry driver Leonard Marder finds it difficult to walk because of an infected leg caused by varicose veins.
He had one operation in 1989, but has now waited three-and-a-half years for the promised follow-up surgery.
That is nearly twice as long as patients should have to wait according to the John Major's Patients' Charter.
Mr Marder, from Tottenham, north London, is now used to the hospital's excuses.
‘Every time they give me a date, I get ready to go in, but then they call to say there is no room,’ he said.
Cameron Ward, a manager at the North Middlesex Hospital in Edmonton, north London, said: ‘We must give priority to emergencies.’
The NHS Trust hospital is having to cut operations due to lack of cash.
Health chiefs say Mr Marder will undergo surgery ‘some time next year’.
£1 buys sanctuary for birds
TYCOON Peter de Savary has sold 300 acres of mudflats and salt marsh at Hayle, Cornwall, to the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds for £1.
RSPB official Stan Davies said: ‘The area is important to migrating and wintering birds as it remains frost-free.’
The deadly price of fame
SHOWBIZ stars are twice as likely as other people to die in accidents and three times as likely to commit suicide, according to an American researcher.
They pass on about 13 years earlier than those in other professions.
Actresses are particularly at risk, dying on average 21 years younger than women in other walks of life, says Professor Jib Fowles.
Celebrities are much less likely to die from heart attack or stroke, but that is probably only because they die young in other ways.
Allied carpeted
HIGH STREET giants Allied Carpets conned thousands of shoppers by holding a bogus sale, a court heard yesterday.
Just days before the sale, Allied bumped up their prices by a quarter and then offered everything at ‘25 per cent off’.
Bargain-hunters flocked to the stores, believing they were getting a good deal only to find they had paid the normal price or, in some cases, more.
Curtains advertised with 25 per cent off were in reality £20 a pair more than advertised eight days earlier, Reading magistrates heard.
In another case, Allied increased the price of a wall unit by more than £200 just days before offering the ‘massive reductions’.
The store, whose motto is Simply The Best, mounted a massive advertising campaign in national newspapers and on television offering ‘25 per cent off everything’.
The court heard that irate shoppers complained to trading standards officers after finding out the reductions were bogus.
Willan Cyrus, prosecuting, told the court: ‘In fact, customers were not getting any discount at all.’
One couple from Emmer Green, near Reading, visited the Allied store in Rose Kiln Lane, Reading, in December last year, and bought a carpet originally priced at £12.99 per square yard for a sale price of £9.99.
As they left the store they picked up a copy of Allied's 1991/1992 brochure and found the carpet was normally priced at £9.99.
The court heard how another customer saw curtains in the same Allied branch at £59.99 on March 8 this year.
However, when she visited the store a week later, during the sale, she found that the curtains were £109.99 and would cost £79.49 even with the discount.
The Allied Maples Group Ltd, based at West Bromwich, West Midlands, was fined £3,250 on five charges of misleading advertisements and ordered to pay prosecution costs of £2,232.
It could now face a flood of prosecutions across the country.
If the car's dirty, it's a woman's
IF you're travelling in a dirty car today the chances are it's being driven by a woman.
For men wash, clean out and check over their cars more frequently than women, according to a report.
It says nearly a third of women think their cars are dirty compared with one in five men.
One in 10 women and eight per cent of men say their vehicles are in a disgusting state.
While a quarter of men wash their cars once a week, fewer than one in five women carry out the chore.
More than 40 per cent of men give their cars a once-a-fortnight wash, compared to 22 per cent of women.
Nearly a quarter of men clean out their cars once a month whereas nearly three in four women do it less frequently.
The survey was conducted by petrol station forecourt facility company Carebridge, which questioned 1,060 motorists over the past two months.
It says no women check their cars twice a week, although 15 per cent of men do.
All men check their tyres at least once a month but six per cent of women check them less often.
Men also check their oil and water levels more frequently.
Knopfler bucks torture victim
DIRE Straits star Mark Knopfler joined hundreds of wellwishers who sent messages of support to pensioner Lennie Perkes after hearing how he was tortured by burglars.
Widower Lennie, 80, was beaten up and had his toes sliced with a knife until he told the thugs where his wife's jewellery was kept.
He was yesterday preparing to leave hospital in Basingstoke, Hants, with a sack load of gifts and cards.
My lucky punch-up
THE day short-tempered Ronnie Garth punched the town's mayor was the luckiest of his life.
It helped him find his long-lost daughter.
Ronnie, 54, hit the headlines when he thumped the mayor in the face after his civic car ran over Christmas lights he was stringing up in the centre of Frome, Somerset.
His daughter Tracey, now in her twenties, who he had not seen since she was three, got in touch and the two plan to meet.
Ronnie, who also learned he is a grandfather, said: ‘It broke my heart when I read her letter saying she had missed me.’
£10,000 win for sex pest's victim
A HIGH-FLYING executive hounded out of her job after complaining of sexual harassment by her boss has won the maximum award of Pounds 10,000.
Jenny Weston, 34, claimed Colin Webb made a barrage of unrelenting sexual demands and once pinned her down on a hotel bed.
An industrial tribunal in Ashford, Kent, decided the area manageress was unfairly dismissed by Pall Mall Cleaning Services Group, of Rochester.
The Equal Opportunities Commission, which backed Mrs Weston's 18-month battle, said: ‘It is probably the most unreserved victory we have ever won in a case of this kind.’
All white on the night
ACTOR Kenneth Branagh is making his next appearance on stage as Hamlet thanks to a packet of Persil.
Makers Unilever are sponsoring the Royal Shakespeare Company production.
And part of the £50,000 deal includes advertising household products like the washing powder and Flora margarine in the foyer.
The giant Unilever company has found a link between dishwasher sales and people who attend the opera and theatre.
It believes sponsoring 32-year-old Branagh's Hamlet will be a way of chasing potential upmarket customers.
The idea was welcomed as a way of shaking the elitist tag from the arts last night by the Association for Business Sponsorship of the Arts.
Spokesman Colin Tweedie said: ‘It's not as if when Ophelia drowns someone will jump on stage brandishing a packet of Comfort.
There won't be product placement on stage but you will get clear branding in the foyer and on literature.
‘Anything more obvious would be counter-productive because everyone would just laugh.
There has to be an incredible amount of subtlety or it would be nonsense.’
Branagh's Hamlet, his fourth portrayal of the role, previews at the Barbican on December 12 and is expected to run until March — ticket and Persil sales permitting.
‘Jilted lover in disguise stabbed girl’
A SPURNED lover disguised himself to kidnap his ex-girlfriend then tried to stab her in the neck with a syringe, a court heard yesterday.
Martin Rolfe, 47, also attempted to pour a liquid down Maureen Armsby's throat at a cemetery in Cheshunt, Herts, St Albans Crown Court was told.
Rolfe, of Broxbourne, denies threatening to kill and kidnapping Mrs Armsby, 45.
The trial continues.
A degree of stupidity
OXFORD university students were branded ‘over-privileged plonkers’ by the editor of a top women's magazine yesterday after a debate turned into a drunken farce.
Cosmopolitan chief Marcelle d'Argy Smith stormed out of the historic Oxford Union debating chamber after sitting through 90 minutes of bawdy horseplay.
She claimed Union President Christopher Hall, who was dressed in a multi-coloured clown suit, was ‘completely plastered and couldn't string a sentence together’.
‘I had to sit and listen to a lot of boys acting as over-privileged plonkers,’ said Ms d'Argy Smith, whose magazine forked out £1,000 to back the end-of-term debate.
‘It was cretinous behaviour.
The level of debate was non-existent.’.
Comedian Jim Bowen, Viz magazine editor Chris Donald and TV presenter James Whale took part in the debate on sex alongside Oxford students.
Mr Hall looked flushed and glassy eyed when the event started 30 minutes late after a sumptuous dinner.
At one point Ms d'Argy Smith feared he was going to be sick over her designer jacket.
Students poked fun at Mr Hall and told a stream of dirty jokes.
In an earlier debate one speaker demonstrated a condom with banana.
Mr Hall is to send an apology to Ms d'Argy Smith.
He said: ‘I'm afraid it was a bit of a riot, I'm sorry if she was offended.’
Tammy's smile
Andrew Russell
BRAVE teenager Tammy Beard, whose weeping face brought home the full horror of the IRA bomb blitz on Manchester, went back to work yesterday declaring: ‘We can't let the IRA win.’
Restaurant worker Tammy, 17, was dramatically pictured on our front page seconds after being caught up in the second of the two explosions.
Her shocked and sobbing face epitomised the terror that the bombs had brought to thousands of innocent city centre workers and shoppers.
But yesterday courageous Tammy was all smiles as she served customers in the Arndale Centre, just 500 yards from the blast.
She was being shepherded to safety by police after the first blast when the second bomb exploded just 50 ft away.
‘It sounded like an earthquake,’ she said.
‘I felt the ground move under me.
It was terrifying.
There was brickwork and glass flying all over the place.
I was hit on the leg and the wrist and knocked to the floor.
My mind went blank.
I couldn't scream because I was simply so scared.
‘People were literally running for their lives but I was rooted to the spot.’
Colleague Evelyn Cookson and a stranger hoisted Tammy to her feet and helped her into a waiting ambulance.
As she was treated in hospital, the terrified teenager had confessed: ‘I don't know if I will have the nerve to go back to work.
I am scared about going into the city again.’
But yesterday she said: ‘My boss said the best thing would be to get back to work as normal and I feel better for coming in straight away.’
The worst injured bomb victim, 23-year-old shop worker Neil Tattersall, was still in hospital yesterday.
Another 66 were released after treatment.
As defiant shoppers and workers flooded back into Manchester city centre yesterday, police rejected claims they herded hundreds of workers directly into the path of the second bomb.
Chief Superintendent Tim Moran, in charge of the evacuation, said: ‘We were deliberately given misinformation about the location of the bombs in a most callous way.
‘You can imagine the thoughts we were having knowing that one bomb had goine off and three more were likely to explode.
‘It was a race against time.
There were thousands of people to alert and evacuate.’
Charles in French farm row
Russell Jenkins
PRINCE Charles came under furious criticism from MPs last night after he spoke up for France's rioting farmers.
In fluent French at a meeting in Paris, the Prince supported their fight for the country's traditional way of life — a campaign which has included burning the Union Jack and attacking lorryloads of British meat.
He backed the plans to support the uneconomic farms and asked: ‘Do we really need to compress the traditions and vitality of rural life and culture into the straitjacket of an industry like any other?’
And he called France's defence of the farms ‘an inspiring example.’
MPs branded his speech naive and ill-timed.
Dr Robert Spink, Tory MP for Castle Point, said that Charles should be defending those in this country having to pay out an extra £16 a week per family to subsidise the French farmers.
Dr Spink said: ‘He ought to be defending those who are finding it difficult to make ends meet here.’
Charles was accused of meddling in politics and inflaming the row between London and Paris over a trade deal with America.
His speech was also seen as a veiled attack on the free-market policies of Premier John Major.
He told his audience at the French Academy of Political and Moral Sciences: ‘One of the joys for me of being in France is that you have a particularly strong sense of the ultimate cost to the human spirit of unrelenting migration from the countryside to the big cities.’
France had given ‘due importance to the kind of rural traditions without which it would be impossible to enjoy a way of life that recognises the importance of elements in our lives which enrich and enoble us, but which are not ‘cost-effective’ in strictly economic terms.’
Buckingham Palace last night insisted the prince had been misinterpreted.
However, Andrew Hargreaves, Conservative MP for Hall Green, said: ‘He seems to be particularly attached to the rural idyll, into which harsh reality seems to be an inconvenience.’
Bob Cryer, Labour MP for Bradford South, added: ‘It is unacceptable and remarkably insensitive and ignorant of the prince to step into finely balanced negotiations in which thousands of British jobs are at stake.
‘What he is hoping, by blurting out such nonsense, is that he is keeping his finger firmly on the self-destruct button for the British monarchy.’
Harry Cohen, Labour MP for Leyton, said: ‘Supporting uneconomic farmers is not the way forward for the world economy as a whole.’
Chancellor or nothing
CHANCELLOR Norman Lamont yesterday quashed speculation that he will be swapping jobs in a New Year cabinet reshuffle.
Under fire for his handling of the economy and his personal finances, Mr Lamont said he did not want any other Government job.
He told the Wall Street Journal there was ‘absolutely no other position’ which interested him.
Some Tory MPs have canvassed support for a swap involving Mr Lamont and Home Secretary Kenneth Clark.
Hopes rise with pound
THE pound rose again on the money markets yesterday sparking Government predictions of ‘gentle’ economic recovery.
Treasury financial secretary Stephen Dorrell said: ‘There is very clear evidence, not of a full blown recovery under way— but that confidence is growing.
‘All the independent analysts are now backing their words with money that they expect a gentle recovery to take root next year.’
Sterling climbed to a healthy 2.50 marks before falling back later to 2.47.
Bombers on video
Richard Creasy
IRA terrorists who planted one of the two bombs which rocked Manchester city centre may have been captured on video tape.
Police confirmed last night that the site of the second bomb, the corner of Deansgate and Cateaton Street, is continually taped by a camera which monitors traffic.
A police spokesman said: ‘A camera does operate at that site 24 hours a day.
Whether it was pointing the right way to capture who planted the bomb, we are still checking.’
Shoppers are urged today to act as the ‘eyes and ears’ of the police after the IRA promised more carnage in the 21 days to Christmas.
As shopping centres prepared for a busy Saturday, anti-terrorist chief Commander David Tucker warned the IRA could strike in any major city.
‘London may have faced the brunt of their criminal acts over the past few weeks but the attacks in Manchester clearly show that the IRA is prepared to strike anywhere,’ he said.
‘With the public acting as our eyes and ears, we can make it more difficult for the IRA to carry out their atrocities.
‘It is important that people immediately report anything suspicious to police.
They should not feel embarrassed or that our time may be wasted.’
In particular, people using busy main line and underground stations, airports and bus terminals should be aware of unaccompanied luggage.
Parked vehicles that arouse suspicion should be reported.
And the thousands going to sports stadiums, restaurants and theatres over the weekend need to keep alert.
People seeing anything suspicious should dial 999 or call the anti-terrorist hotline on 0800 789321.
In a spirit of defiance shoppers and office workers yesterday flooded back into the heart of Manchester that was targeted by the IRA on Thursday, leaving 67 people injured.
Lord Mayor Bill Egerton said: ‘We have seen shards of glass embedded in the ground.
Anybody could have been impaled on them.
However, there is a real determination to carry on as usual.’
As he spoke, the so-called Irish Republic Publicity Bureau issued a statement declaring: ‘Until the British Government recognises Ireland's right to national self-determination, attacks such as these will continue.’
John Major yesterday dashed insurers' hopes that the Government would underwrite claims for bomb damage.
Insurance bosses will press ahead with banning all claims for bomb damage of more than £100,000 from four weeks' time.
The action could bankrupt firms hit by IRA bombs.
Terror scare at Army base
Stuart Qualtrough
A SENTRYMAN opened fire on an armed gang who infiltrated one of Britain's biggest army bases.
The brave soldier was alone but stood his ground after confronting the men in the dead of night.
He suspected they were terrorists when the they failed to answer his challenge and he fired off a volley of shots from his semi-automatic rifle.
The gang fled and it is not thought any were hit.
They had penetrated the giant Catterick Garrison, North Yorks, after scaling 10ft perimeter fences topped with razor wire.
A Red Alert swung into action and an Army Lynx helicopter and a police search helicopter hovered over nearby woodland as mounted police and dog handlers combed the area.
The identity of the soldier was being kept secret last night.
An Army spokesman said: ‘A number of intruders were disturbed within the security area.
‘They chose to ignore warnings so the soldier opened fire.’
He said the soldier acted with ‘admirable calmness, courage and diligence’.
Last night police virtually ruled out a suggestion that the intruders were poachers.
Inspector Alan Miller, of North Yorks Police, said: ‘They would have had to be very determined to breach the wires, ignore warning signs and risk confronting armed guards for the sake of a few rabbits.’
The camp is occupied by men from the Duke of Edinburgh Royal Regiment.
Other units on the base, home to about 600 men, include the Royal Artillery, Royal Engineers and Royal Signals Corps.
Del Boy set to make millions
DEL Boy and Rodders are favourites to pull in most Christmas Day viewers.
Bookies William Hill has made the BBC's Only Fools And Horses 13-8 with Coronation Street ITV's top hope in second slot at 9-4.
The Trotters' Christmas Day special was last year's top programme pulling in 17.7 million viewers.
Four of Hills' top six come from the BBC but Eldorado is well down the field at 50-1.
Four-year-old wondergraduate
Jane Moore
BOY wonder Nicholas MacMahon enters a brave new world as he takes his first tentative taps on a computer keyboard.
Brunel University chiefs invited the talented four-year-old, who can already speak French and knows the Highway Code by heart, to their West London Institute after hearing he found primary school dull.
But while Nicholas sits alongside undergraduates and gets to grips with computing, a row brews over his future.
Nicholas's story has parallels with the fictional film Little Man Tate, directed by Jodie Foster.
It tells the story of a little boy who is alienated at school because of his exceptional ability.
An academic takes him away for extensive intelligence tests, but he becomes disruptive and eventually opts to return home.
Now Nicholas's parents and his old school are at loggerheads.
In retaliation to the MacMahons' comments that their son was ‘frustrated and bored’ at school, his former head teacher has said Nicholas is ‘a very sad little boy’who may never know a happy childhood.
Madeleine Harvey, of Coniston school in Reigate, said: ‘He walked around with shoulders hunched, head bent, unable to communicate with anyone very well, with hands over his ears to block out the noise of other people.’
From the family home in Betchworth, Surrey, Nicholas's stunned father Peter said: ‘I want to know what I can legally say about this whole sad and unhappy upset.’
But the row was far away from the little genius as he got to grips with the wonders of computers.
Dr Peter Stokes, head of education at the West London Institute, which is running courses on how to teach gifted children, said: ‘He is an exceptionally bright boy for his age.
He typed in the letters of the alphabet without hesitation and his name and address fluently.
‘When I asked him what sort of things he liked, he typed in the word aeroplane, spelt perfectly.’
Colleague Roseanne Boyle, communications co-ordinator, said: ‘He was very chatty and inquisitive about everything, but occasionally he'd get very wide-eyed about all the attention and duck behind his mother's legs, just like any other four-year-old.’
Dr Stokes added: ‘Exceptionally able children have a terrific curiosity and rarely sit still.
They make challenging comments and behave in a markedly different way to the rest of the children in the class.’
Mrs Harvey had a different view of Nicholas's behaviour.
In a letter to The Times she wrote: ‘He is used to one-to-one relationships but society, and certainly schools, are composed of groups of people.
I have to say that we found Nicholas a very sad little boy.’
He attended Coniston only three times, she added.
‘It is difficult to do anything for a child who is not attending school.’
Soon Nicholas may find that great intelligence can be a curse as well as a blessing.
Man jailed for urging wife to cry rape
A HUSBAND who got his wife to falsely accuse a teenager of raping her was jailed yesterday for three months.
The youth was held by police for seven hours before Patricia Zahn, 22, confessed to the lie.
Peter Zahn 23, urged his wife to do it because the boy had spread stories about him, Teesside Crown Court was told.
The couple, from Darlington, County Durham, admitted trying to pervert justice.
Mrs Zahn was ordered to do 150 hours community service.
Judge Tony Briggs said: ‘What that 16-year-old went through was quite appalling.’
Exam on exams
A-LEVEL exams will be investigated by a new education watchdog to ensure standards are not slipping.
The Office for Standards in Education will begin work early in the new year for next summer's exams.
Education Minister Baroness Blatch said the inspections, which will be repeated every three years, were part of ‘a continuing programme of quality assurance’.
One love affair that lasted
Alison James in Paris
TWO lovers steal a kiss on a busy Paris street, oblivious to everything around them — including a photographer.
Forty-two years on, the same pair stand in the same spot, still very much in love.
At least, Denise and Jean-Louis Lavergne claim they are the lovers in the world's most romantic picture taken on a spring morning in 1950.
Photographer Robert Doisneau, 80, says otherwise.
The dispute over ‘The kiss by the Hotel de Ville’ will now be settled in court.
The Lavergnes are demanding £50,000 plus a share of the millions the famous shot has made for Doisneau and his picture agency Rapho since it was made into a poster in the 1980s.
Denise, 64, who runs a small Paris printing company with her 66-year-old husband, said: ‘It was a romantic time, we were young, engaged, so in love and oblivious to the people around us.
We didn't even see that our picture was being taken.
We got married on July 8 that year.’
It was only when they saw the picture on the cover of a magazine — on their 38th wedding anniversary — that they realised their kiss had been captured forever.
They tracked down Doisneau and met him in 1990.
‘He was very friendly and told us other people, but no couples, had come forward claiming to be in his picture.’
Last night Doisneau's lawyer Julien Hay said he had proof that models posed for the picture.
He said the photographer humoured the Lavergnes to let them believe they were the romantic subjects.
‘They won't get a franc,’ he added.
Cheating wife gets go-ahead for baby claim
A CHEATING wife yesterday got the go-ahead to claim damages for an unwanted pregnancy which ruined her marriage.
Patricia Martin, 38, had hoped to keep an affair secret from her husband but she fell pregnant despite having been sterilised.
Mr Justice Laws, said in the High Court if she had known there was a risk of pregnancy she would never have had sex with her lover.
He allowed her to claim against the Huntingdon Health Authority responsible for the hospital where the operation was performed in December 1982.
Moors killer Myra beaten by prisoner
MOORS murderer Myra Hindley has been beaten up in prison.
The 50-year-old child killer suffered a black eye, bruises and minor cuts as she sat down for a meal at Cookham Wood jail in Kent.
‘Myra was attacked by a psychologically-disturbed inmate,’ said Hindley's lawyer Andrew McCooey.
The attacker has been moved to another jail.
Spot the singles
VICTIMS of acne are less likely to marry than non-sufferers.
Three in five people plagued by unsightly spots are single, compared with a national average of just one in five, says a survey for the Acne Support Group.
Look at bargains you missed, Ma'am
THE Queen missed the ideal Christmas shopping chance when she left her purse at home on a visit to Oxfam.
The price-conscious monarch could have bought presents for the whole family — and still had change from £50.
TODAY dropped in to the Oxfam shop in Oxford to see what she missed.
A charming book for £1.70 on the longest-lasting royal romance, Elizabeth And Philip — Our Heiress And Her Consort, would make an ideal gift for the Duke of Edinburgh.
Prince Charles could brighten his study with a £12.45 wall-hanging from south India.
For Diana, a heavy tweed jacket for draughty Balmoral would be a snip at £9.95.
Prince Andrew is an easy choice — Union Jack boxer shorts for just 99p.
A second-hand ski jacket would keep Fergie warm at Klosters.
Prince Anne's modest needs could be met with a hand-knitted hat — exclusive to Oxfam — at £9.95.
Prince Edward would be delighted with one of the shop's theatrical costumes.
A selection of Thai silk flowers, at just 20p each, would make an elegant gift for the Queen Mother.
Beatrice and Eugenie would love a carved wooden toy — £2.95 each.
And William and Harry could practise managing the Duchy of Cornwall with a second-hand Monopoly set at £5.95.
The Queen did not even buy a gift for herself.
TODAY snapped up the £5.25 china corgi she had her eye on.
It's still here if she wants it — at cost price.
Queen's train is late
COMMUTERS who shared their train with the Queen came back to earth yesterday.
The 10.20am from Paddington to Oxford, which arrived early when the soverign used it on Thursday, was four minutes late without her on board.
A BR spokesman said: ‘It was something to do with points.
We can only be thankful it didn't happen to the Queen.’
One regular passenger said: ‘Her presence seems to be the only thing that makes the trains run on time.’
Former US president Ronald Reagan followed the Queen's lead yesterday by taking a train to London after speaking in Oxford.
Fury over Windsor fire whitewash
Russell Jenkins
THE terse official report into the cause of the Windsor Castle fire was branded an inadequate whitewash by MPs last night.
Investigators concluded that no one was to blame for the blaze started by a spotlight overheating a curtain.
A five-man team of police, forensic and fire officers spent eight days carrying out more than 100 interviews.
Their 368-word report claims the fire started on the first floor of the Private Chapel close to the altar.
Liberal Democrat heritage spokesman Don Foster demanded that Heritage Secretary Peter Brooke make a Commons statement over the whitewash charge.
‘This fire is going to cost taxpayers something like £60 million,’ said Mr Foster.
‘Yet all there is, is a report one and half sides long.
‘It tells us nothing in terms of lessons that can be learned, what sort of materials were used for the curtains, whether a sprinkler system was installed and whether they worked properly.
These and a number of other questions should have been answered.’
The investigating team ruled out other causes including arson, a discarded cigarette, art work restoration, electrical faults and the possibility of the fire spreading to the chapel from elsewhere.
Buckingham Palace said the report had been seen by the Queen.
‘The fire appears to have resulted from an unfortunate combination of circumstances with no single factor or individual directly to blame,’ a spokesman said.
‘Further investigation is not thought necessary.’
Boy, 6, hurt in hit-and-run
A BOY of six was seriously ill in hospital last night after being mown down by a hit-and-run driver.
He suffered massive head injuries in the accident on the A5 at Milton Keynes, Bucks.
His pal, also six, helped drag him to safety.
Drunken police escort end up behind bars
Rob Perkins
TWO police officers who set out to pick up a prisoner ended up behind bars themselves, a court heard yesterday.
They spent their six-hour train journey drinking — and went into a pub for more while they waited for a connection.
Within minutes they had become involved in a brawl, attacking a fellow drinker so fiercely his arm was broken, Stafford Crown Court heard.
PCs Thomas McGrath, 45, and John Milliken, 54, chased their victim into an alleyway and battered him to the ground.
Injured Kevin Mc Alynne, 30, said: ‘I felt 10 or 15 kicks and curled up in a ball.
Suddenly I felt my arm go and fall out of its joint.’
The two plain-clothes officers had drunk half a bottle of scotch and several cans of lager on the train journey from Glasgow to Telford to escort a prisoner back to Scotland, said Estelle Hindely, prosecuting.
When they stopped off in Wolverhampton to change trains a fight broke out after they angered other drinkers by waving their warrant cards.
McGrath, a father of three, of Paisley, and Milliken of Glasgow, both members of the Strathclyde force, deny causing grevious bodily harm and an alternative charge of wounding and assault.
The trial continues.
ITV report threatens top shows
ITV chiefs yesterday attacked an Office of Fair Trading report which could threaten top-rated shows.
The report says ITV companies which commission programmes from independent producers should no longer have exclusive rights to a second series if it proves successful.
But ITV Association chairman Greg Dyke said the proposal would lead to the network losing hit shows and mean stars like The Bill's Christopher Ellison would only be seen on satellite TV.
‘We would be surprised if this could be described as fair trading in any circumstances,’ said Mr Dyke.
130mph chef in the soup
CHEF Raymond Blanc was clocked driving at 130mph along a motorway.
Five weeks later he was seen doing 95mph through roadworks.
The 43-year-old, of Old Marston, Oxon, was yesterday banned from driving for six months and fined £350 by Witney magistrates.
When stopped for the first offence, he claimed the cruise control on his BMW was set at 98mph.
Women pass Marines test
THE first women Royal Marines recruits have waltzed through the elite corps' gruelling military training.
Eight out of 10 women passed the 15-week course of physical training, weapon firing, survival and first aid.
They will go on to join the Royal Marines Band Service after musical training.
Death fine
TOP builder Wimpey was fined £4,000 yesterday over the death of a worker who fell more than 70ft to his death.
Birmingham magistrates heard scaffolding snapped under him.
Computer booby-trap
A COMPUTER expert planted a ‘logic bomb’ programme in his employers' system when he left the firm after a clash with the boss.
A month after Gareth Hardy, 25, resigned from Chilworth Communications, of Paddington, London, his booby-trap wrecked vital files and did Pounds 30,000 damage.
The firm had to close while an expert sorted out the mess, the Old Bailey heard.
Hardy, of Cowley, near Uxbridge, Middlesex, admitted tampering with computer material.
He was fined £3,500 and told to do 140 hours' community service.
Judge Anthony Lewisohn said he had come ‘very close’ to going to jail.
Mothers pray they have right daughters
Richard Creasy
THE mothers at the centre of the hospital baby swop case talked of their anguish for the first time last night.
Babies Gemma and Carla-Marie may have been switched during a fire alert at the Princess Anne maternity hospital in Southampton.
Now both mothers face an agonising wait while DNA tests determine which child belongs to which woman.
Marie Coyle, who believes she is Gemma's mother, said: ‘She is everything I could ever have wanted.
‘It will break my heart if I had to give my little girl up.
In my heart I know she is mine but the uncertainty over all this is agonising.
‘She is so beautiful.
Whatever happens I just know that she need's a mother's love.’
The other mother, Maureen Bursey, 46, added: ‘I just hope and pray Carla-Marie is mine.
One minute I feel she is and then I am not so sure.
‘If we have to let her go it will be terrible.
But I have to know the truth.’
It could be several days before Maureen and lorry driver husband Tony, and Marie and boyfriend Peter Wadsley get conclusive proof of their babies' identities.
Both women gave birth on November 24 to daughters and left the Princess Anne hospital three days later.
The babies were almost identical weight and both had brown hair.
They could pass as twins.
The mothers did not suspect anything until Mrs Bursey noticed a name tag on her baby showed the mother as Marie Coyle.
Mrs Bursey, a supermarket supervisor, added: ‘I feel sick all the time.
I've been so frightened of giving her all my love.
‘That Friday night we just sat there rocking her backwards and forwards and crying.
‘I keep looking at her face and saying ‘Are you mine?’’
The couple, who live in a village in the New Forest, took the baby back to the hospital because they feared they would become too fond of her, but have now taken her back.
Twenty miles away on the outskirts of Southampton, former hospital worker Marie, 27, is suffering the same anguish.
Sitting next to Peter, 24, she said she was unaware of the mix-up until there was a knock at the door after their first full day at home with Gemma.
‘It was 11pm and we were watching television.
My little boy Connor, who is five, took to Gemma straight away and we were a really happy family.
‘Two women came in and said we have some bad news for you.
I thought they were joking.’
But a glance at the name tags on the baby's wrist and ankle confirmed their fears.
‘On her wrist was the name Coyle but on the ankle was the name Bursey.
‘My world was thrown upside down.
I think I will go mad if they finally say she isn't mine.’
Stephanie police find more cash
A SPECIAL police task force yesterday uncovered more of the Stephanie Slater ransom.
Police refused to say exactly how much of £14,000 still outstanding had been unearthed near Lincoln just yards from where almost £140,000 was discovered on Wednesday.
A total of £175,000 was paid for the freedom of estate agent Stephanie, 25, who was seized in January as she showed a client a house in Birmingham.
Michael Sams, 50, goes on trial next month charged with kidnapping Stephanie and murdering teenager Julie Dart.
Ferry blaze
FIRE broke out yesterday on a cross-Channel ferry sailing from Dieppe to Newhaven.
Twenty-seven people needed treatment after breathing in smoke on the Stena Londoner.
UN men free
SIX United Nations military hostages, including three Britons, were freed unconditionally yesterday by Cambodia's Khmer Rouge, who had been demanding a UN pullout.
Stately store
LORD Romsey plans to build a supermarket and offices on his Broadlands estate.
The store and 600-space car park will help finance Lord Mountbatten's former home in Hampshire.
Lucky strike
A SMALL boy slept on as a thunderbolt wrecked his bedroom.
Joseph Aspinall, five, escaped unhurt when the fireplace exploded in his room at Bispham, Lancs, yesterday.
Booted out
HIJACKERS drove a trucker in their car boot for two hours yesterday.
Then they dumped him at Markyate, Herts, and gave back his keys — plus £5 for a taxi ride to his looted truck.
Bob a slob
BOB Geldof has been voted the worst dressed celebrity for the second year running by youngsters between 11 and 18 in a Lloyds Bank survey.
Princess Diana came top.
Down and out
LOVESICK Andrew Blacklock, 30, was jailed for 10 years after admitting armed robbery at a bank in Maida Vale, London, because he needed cash to get married in Australia.
Gary swops factory floor for the Bar
DETERMINED Gary Envis is swapping his toolmaker's overalls for a barrister's wig and gown after seven years of night classes and exams.
Gary, 26, left school with just four CSEs and began working as an engineer.
Then he was made redundant and started an apprenticeship in his father's trade of toolmaking — until he got fed up with it.
Gary, said yesterday: ‘I realised how bored I was standing behind a machine all day.’
From 1985 he began evening classes and within three years had passed two O-levels and two A-levels.
This year Gary, of Enderby, Leicestershire, passed his law degree and is now on the last stage of training which will take him from factory to court.
Stun gun rape attack
A JILTED lover who drugged a young mother, tortured her with an electric shock gun and raped her in front of her children was jailed for six years yesterday.
Old Bailey Judge Neil Denison said the 38-year-old salesman would remain dangerous after his release.
The man, who can not be named, told police: ‘I wanted to hurt her as she hurt me.’
Tot poisoned by salt mum
A MOTHER poisoned her nine-month-old baby with salt, a court heard yesterday.
Deborah Rhodes, 25, of Hull, admitted two charges of giving poison to her daughter Emily Buckton.
Rhodes and her baby were at the centre of a nationwide hunt last month when they went missing.
Hull Crown Court adjourned the case for reports.
Spider dad convicted
A CRUEL stepfather who force-fed two young boys with spider sandwiches was convicted yesterday of starving and beating them.
A jury at Guildford, Surrey, is still considering 16 more cruelty charges against him.
The court heard the boys were subjected to humiliating rituals.
Boys shave pal's blushes
CARING schoolmates of leukaemia victim Mark Lowry are going bald to stop him feeling the odd man out.
The 15 other boys in his class are having their heads shaved so that Mark will not be out of place when his hair falls out during his treatment.
Only one of the 15 still had his hair yesterday, and he is getting it shaved over the weekend.
Mark, 13, will still have his hair when he returns to Cross Lutheran School at Yorkville, Illinois.
‘It probably won't be for long, though,’ he said.
‘And my dad might cut my hair to match the others.’
Toy blunders cost £23,000
A STORE chain was fined £23,000 yesterday for putting old price tags on toys but charging the up-to-date cost at its tills.
Customers at Toys R Us buying a Knight Rider marked £29.92 would have to fork out £34.97 when they got to the till, a court heard.
In one case a price sticker was 22 months old.
The Gloucester branch had already been fined £3,600 for similar offences, the city's magistrates were told.
The problem came to light when an off-duty policeman complained to consumer watchdogs that his sons were ‘overcharged.’
Gloucestershire trading standards officers moved in immediately, said Barry Berlin, prosecuting for Gloucestershire county council.
‘What happened was the result of sloppy supervision, a poor system and inadequate checks,’ he said.
The company admitted the offences under the Consumer Protection Act.
It was ordered to pay £2,940 costs.
A spokesman said Gloucester was the only one of its 33 stores in Britain to have the problem.
Three staff have since been fired.
£25 fee for 25p overdraft
STUNNED Helena Peck paid the price for going 25p over-drawn.
Bank bosses sent her a bill for £25.
Tight-fisted Lloyds spotted she had slipped into the red when it came to pay her £41.62 mortgage instalment.
They refused to make the payment and cancelled her direct debit.
Then they charged her £25 for a letter telling her what they had done.
Helena, 24, who owns a one-bedroom flat in Frome, Somerset, said: ‘I can't believe Lloyds are so incredibly mean.
I thought the bank had made an error at first.’
Unrepentant Lloyds said last night the error was all Helena's — she should not have gone overdrawn in the first place.
Helena said: ‘I know I have no overdraft facility but I genuinely believed there was enough money to pay my mortgage and feel I have been punished out of all proportion.
‘I was a few pence in the red to a bank that makes millions of pounds in profit every year.
‘A simple phone call to tell me about the problem would have saved me all this fuss and expense.’
Helena, who earns £150 a week as a machine operator, said: ‘I have been treated abominably, like an irresponsible child, not a customer who made a very small mistake.’
Lloyds spokesman Jo Harper said: ‘This customer has a savings account which has no overdraft facility.
It was impossible for us to pay her direct debit whether it was 25p or £25 overdrawn.
‘She had been warned on four previous occasions about going overdrawn.
‘Our standard charge for a letter is £25 so that was what she was charged.’
Have you got a horror story about your bank?
Write to us at TODAY, 1 Virginia Street, London E1 9BS.
There's a crate of champagne for the reader with the worst tale to tell.
Gun slip killed top designer
A BRILLIANT designer shot himself while protecting his doves from hawks, an inquest decided yesterday.
Oliver Gregory, who set High Street trends as co-founder of the Habitat chain, might have slipped on wet grass while carrying his shotgun in the garden of his home at Collingbourne Ducis, Wilts.
The inquest at Salisbury heard that the safety-catch was off.
Verdict: Misadventure.
Sisters burn alive in petrol bomb attack
Rob Perkins
TWO young sisters died after petrol was poured through a letterbox and set alight during a lovers' row.
Laura Smith, four, and her sister Emma, two, were found huddled in the living room after the fireball ripped through their home.
Plumber Andrew Jones set light to the house after an argument with his girlfriend Christine Smith, the girls' aunt, a court heard.
The pair had been drinking all day and Jones downed more than 10 pints, while Miss Smith, 29, drank six or seven pints of cider, Nottingham Crown Court was told yesterday.
She returned to the house at Sutton in Ashfield, Notts, where she was supposed to be babysitting.
Jones, 29, followed her, smashed the front door, then fetched a jar full of petrol, said Peter Joyce QC, prosecuting.
‘He poured it through and tried to light several matches before one took hold and was tossed through the gap,’ said Mr Joyce.
Miss Smith told how she pleaded with Jones to stop.
‘I said, ‘No, no, for God's sake don't, the kids are in here’.
I said it three times,’ she said.
She also dialled 999 but police were diverted to another emergency.
The girls' grandmother, Frances Smith, was badly burned and spent months in hospital after the attack in September last year.
Jones, 29, of Sutton in Ashfield, denies murder, attempted murder and causing grievous bodily harm.
The trial continues.
Blind woman died after scalding bath
A BLIND woman died after being lowered into a scalding bath at a nursing home.
Pensioner Hilda Lynes, 78, suffered burns to her shins and feet at the privately owned Haddon Nursing Home in Birkenhead, Merseyside.
This led to her death from pneumonia in November last year.
An inquest jury returned a verdict of misadventure aggravated by lack of care.
121mph car tester gets ban
A MOTORING writer was banned from the road for three months yesterday after admitting doing 121 mph while testing a new car.
Clinton Manning, who works for the Birmingham Evening Mail, was stopped as he put the £17,582 Rover 220 turbo through its paces.
Manning, 31, tried out the 150mph car on September 21, a month before its launch.
Jamie Champkin, defending, said Manning was travelling at between 70 and 80mph on the A40 near Curbridge, Oxon, and only went faster when an unmarked police car began gaining on him.
‘He noticed the Rover he had overtaken closing in on him,’ he told magistrates at nearby Witney.
‘Not wanting to attract any more attention than necessary in an as yet unannounced vehicle, he accelerated to gain some distance.’
Manning, of Sutton Coldfield, West Midlands, who was also fined Pounds 350, could lose his job, the court heard.
TV Crimewatch critic ‘boasted of murder’
A MURDERER watched the reconstruction of his killing on TV's Crimewatch, pointing out the parts that were right or wrong, a court heard yesterday.
Then Gary Gregory leaned over to a pal viewing the programme with him and said: ‘Can you keep a secret?
I did it,’ it was alleged.
Gregory, 20, denies murdering Marion Rilka, 51, by slitting her throat in a robbery attempt at her home.
The crime was discovered after Mrs Rilka failed to collect her nine-year-old daughter Verena from school.
‘We had breakfast and Mummy dropped me off at the playground,’ Verena told police.
‘I kissed Mummy goodbye and she went to catch the bus.
‘After school, I could not find Mummy outside.
‘I told my teacher and she telephoned Mummy but it was engaged.
‘I went to sit in the library to wait for Mummy and I started to cry.’
Worried friends went to Mrs Rilka's home in Hove, East Sussex.
Through the letterbox, they saw her lying in the hall, covered in blood.
A phone test showed she tried to ring 999, but died before the third nine.
Blood samples linked Gregory, also of Hove, to the murder, said prosecutor Robert Seabrook.
‘The chances of the blood belonging to anybody else are one in 1,400 million,’ he added.
The trial continues.
Pig rustlers shot at car chase cops
Rob Perkins
POACHERS shot at police who caught them killing pigs on a farm.
The two gunmen triggered a massive search when they fled in a stolen car and opened fire on pursuing officers.
As the hunt was called off last night detectives dismissed earlier claims the men could have been terrorists.
Sniffer dogs, brought in to follow the men after they abandoned the vehicle in a ditch, tracked them to Laughterton, near Gainsborough, Lincs.
Road blocks were set up and a helicopter equipped with heat-seeking equipment was brought in from Manchester as police began a house-to-house search.
Detectives dismissed the theory the attack was carried out by animal rights activists after the farm owner found the bodies of two pigs.
A third was seriously injured.
All had been shot.
Spokesman Tony Diggins said they believed the men planned to take away the animals and sell the meat on the black market.
‘We don't know what weapon was used by the men to fire at our officers,’ he said.
‘There was no damage to the police vehicle involved and the officers inside were not injured.
‘The men we are seeking may be wet and bedraggled and possibly injured and we are fairly confident they are still in the area.’
He warned the public not to approach the men, who are armed and dangerous.
Police raid fort ‘zoo’
THE owner of a historic hill fort is facing prosecution after police and RSPCA officers rounded up a number of wild animals.
The team found 15 monkeys, a buzzard, a peregrine falcon and 10 chihuahua dogs at Rodborough Fort, in Stroud, Gloucs.
Owner Joanne Willies-Williams, 44, has applied to open part of the Victorian folly as a museum for stuffed animals called Get Stuffed.
She was once involved in running a wildlife park in north Wales.
Italian job ordeal
A DREAM offer of work in Italy turned into a frightening three-day ordeal for two young job seekers.
After flying to Sicily to take up jobs as waitresses, Lynne Yates, 19, of York, and her friend Vicki Harrison, 20, found there were no jobs and they were there merely as ‘bait’ to boost business.
‘The idea was once word got round it would get the men to go there,’ said Lynne, now back home.
Flogging Brit in appeal gamble
Christian Gysin
A BRITON sentenced by a Saudi court to a flogging for allegedly swearing at his staff may have the sentence doubled for appealing.
Hospital executive David Brown, 32, could suffer 100 strokes from a six foot bamboo cane if his attempt to have the harsh ruling reversed fails.
The Foreign Office, aware of a new £40 billion arms sale to the Saudis, last night played down the case.
Senior British officials in Jeddah refused to discuss Mr Brown's plight.
Consul John Dimmock said: ‘Why are you ringing me about this?
Why is there so much publicity about it?’
Meanwhile, Foreign Office sources claimed public floggings were designed as a ‘humiliation’ and ‘not to draw blood.’
‘The man who beats the victim has to hold the Koran under his arm,’ a senior official said.
‘That limits the force.’
Mr Brown went to Saudi Arabia last February to increase efficiency at the British-run King Khaled National Guard Hospital, near the Saudi capital, Jeddah.
In a row with hospital workers he allegedly called them ‘lazy bastards’.
Mr Brown apologised for the outburst.
But a religious court convicted him of using insulting language and ordered the flogging.
Last night a storm of protest was growing over the Government's ‘do nothing’ approach.
Labour MP Bob Cryer said: ‘The Foreign Office should make strong representations to halt this barbaric medieval punishment.
But if they follow their usual form they will do nothing, because they are prepared to accept medieval barbarity rather than strain trade relations.’
A doctor who works in Saudi told TODAY: ‘The floggings are ferociously inflicted.
One hundred lashes could cause severe internal injuries.’
Mark to wed
CAPTAIN Mark Phillips is set to announce his own engagement.
Former air-stewardess Jane Thornton, 32, has been his constant companion for more than a year and shares Mark's passion for horses.
The two dined together last night after a weekend with her parents.
Her father Reg, a former businessman, confirmed the couple were ‘very close’.
‘I wouldn't rule out an announcement quite soon,’ he said.
£100 bear necessities
ADULTS are turning to teddy bears for comfort from stress.
Shops say the recession and divorce blues have caused booming sales with some selling for £100 each.
‘Love is what teddies are all about,’ said Kim Hayward, of Brighton, at the first British Bear Fair.
Kylie Minogue
KYLIE Minogue restored family honour with a thrilling routine at the Smash Hits awards in London last night after her sister Dannii was voted the worst female singer.
Fellow Australian Jason Donovan was named worst male singer at the ceremony organised by the popular teen magazine.
Her Royal housewife
Clive Nelson
PRINCESS Anne is to slash her official duties by half when she becomes Mrs Tim Laurence.
The Princess Royal intends to devote all her spare time to establishing a happy home life with her new husband and family.
Now she no longer receives £230,000 a year from the Civil List, she is under no obligation to remain Britain's hardest working royal.
One of her closest aides revealed last night: ‘You will see a new Princess Royal in 1993.
‘She has worked harder than all the others put together in the past few years.
Now she is determined to do something for herself.’
But Anne will not be giving up her work as president of the Save The Children Fund.
And she has not ruled out the prospect of having another baby, according to royal sources.
But, at 42, she intends acting ‘sooner, rather than later’ if her wish is to be fulfilled.
The aide continued: ‘She knows that time is not on her side.
‘She and Commander Laurence will be living together in as normal a family life as is possible in the circumstances.’
Unless Buckingham Palace acts quickly to provide a new home, the couple will live at Anne's mansion on the Gatcombe Park estate in Gloucestershire.
It was the Queen's wedding present to Anne on her marriage to Captain Mark Phillips in November 1973.
Captain Phillips, who was divorced from Anne eight months ago, still lives in a cottage there.
Almost all the Royal Family is expected at the tiny Crathie church, close to Balmoral, for the wedding ceremony at 3pm on Saturday.
Only Fergie will stay away.
All the other senior royals — including the Queen, Prince Philip, Prince Charles and Princess Diana — have official engagements in Scotland which will allow them to attend.
Prince Andrew and Prince Edward are expected to fly up separately.
The ceremony will be a bitter-sweet reminder of what might have been for Princess Margaret, forbidden from marrying her divorced sweetheart Peter Townsend.
It will be the first royal re-marriage since Henry VIII and a sure sign the monarchy is moving with the times.
But Anne and Tim are being forced to circumvent the Chuch of England's rigid approach to divorce by marrying in Scotland.
Elaborate steps had been taken to conceal plans for the wedding.
Notice is set to go up in the local regsistrar's office on Thursday, just 48 hours before they walk down the aisle.
Only a handful of friends and staff from the estate have been included in the 30-strong guest list.
Following the 45-minute ceremony, the newlyweds will return to the castle for a brief and informal reception.
Soon afterwards, the Queen and many of the other royals will fly back to London from Aberdeen airport.
Anne and Tim will spend the first night of their honeymoon at Balmoral before travelling next day to an unknown destination.
They have just three days together before Anne goes back to work.
She is due at a charity meeting in London on Tuesday.
Mark Phillips's father, Major Peter Phillips, wished the couple happiness yesterday.
He said: ‘Mark is not a bitter man and, like myself I'm sure, will wish the couple well.’
Tim's mother Barbara was ‘absolutely thrilled’.
At her home, in Wishford, Wilts, she said: ‘I am delighted.
What mother wouldn't be?
‘I am extremely happy for them both.
The whole family is delighted.
Tim could not have made a better choice.’
And the announcement of the engagement could not have come at a better time for the battle-weary Royal Family.
After a string of scandals involving the younger royals, many believe the House of Windsor is facing its biggest crisis since Edward VIII's abdication in 1936.
Anne and Tim's marriage should help put back some of the fairytale magic.
Armed roadblocks round Britain
John Jones
TOUGH Belfast-style stop and search tactics are to be used across Britain for the first time to combat IRA bombers.
Police nationwide will be setting up roadblocks to stop the killers transporting van loads of explosives at will.
Armed members of the the London Metropolitan force have been pulling in drivers for the past two weeks in 20 operations.
Now Greater Manchester, Merseyside and the West Midlands are expected to follow the lead.
The roadblocks in the capital were part of the anti-terrorist squad's own ‘guerrilla’ strikes at the terrorists.
Scotland Yard's operation, codenamed Rolling Rock, was set in motion by Commander David Tucker, the new national anti-terrorism coordinator.
It was the first phase of his new police offensive in the fight against the bombers.
It is hoped the introduction of random searches will force the IRA to change its tactics.
Yesterday officers from the City of London police set up a roadblock on Lower Thames Street — a scene which will now be repeated throughout the country.
At least 20 officers in personnel carriers and patrol cars took up position outside the old Billingsgate fish market, just yards from the Baltic Exchange, where three people died in the IRA bomb blast in April.
Vehicles were selected at random and directed into a ‘sterile zone’ where they were searched.
A police officer armed with a semi-automatic gun stood guard.
More than 12 vans and cars were stopped during the 35 minutes the road block was in position.
All the officers involved in the operation were armed and wore flak jackets.
There were no arrests.
Peter Turner, a computer installation manager from Lower Earley, near Reading, Berks, was stopped in his white Astra.
‘I have witnessed one bombing and I am very pleased that this sort of operation is being carried out,’ he said.
‘I am carrying a load of wiring and electronic equipment so I knew they would be interested in it, but I am completely in favour of this type of search.’
Jasbir Singh was stopped for the second time in two days driving his blue Ford Escort van.
‘I am all for it if it stops the bombings,’ he said.
In the past month, vans carrying bombs weighing up to a ton have been discovered in London's East End at Canary Wharf and Bethnal Green.
Others were found at Stoke Newington, north London, and at Tottenham Court Road in the West End.
Superintendent Don Randall of the City police said the road blocks would not become a permanent feature on city streets.
‘We have been co-operating with the Met police since November 30 in an effort to protect the public and prevent further bomb attacks,’ he said.
The City was a vulnerable and vital economic target.
The road blocks were a police response to criminal action, a counter to terrorist attacks in this area, he said.
They had been set up in response to the current level of terrorist activity, but the need for them was assessed daily.
‘There's no question that it would become a permanent feature.
It has to be justified,’ he said.
A Scotland Yard spokesman said 83 vehicles were stopped on Friday and Saturday.
Detectives believe an IRA cell is operating outside London, possibly in rural Essex.
There they are able to make large fertiliser-based explosives unnoticed and then transport them into east London.
Last week's Manchester bombing, which injured 67 people, has convinced police forces outside London that random searches are necessary.
Norman no to a quickie cut
Russell Jenkins
CHANCELLOR Norman Lamont ruled out a quick interest-rate cut to boost spending in the shops.
The pound's strong showing against the German mark last week has given him the chance to reduce base landing rates.
But his Treasury team think they have done enough to put life into the stagnant economy.
They are growing more confident now that the ‘green shoots of recovery’ are beginning to sprout.
Earlier rate cuts are beginning to filter through the economy and the retail trade is making optimistic noises about shoppers coming back to the High Street.
Retail credit demand has jumped two per cent above the same period last year.
New car sales last month were up 6.3 per cent on last year.
And house prices have shown the first rise since June.
In this climate, Mr Lamont is anxious not to upset the applecart by cutting the present 7 per cent lending rate too quickly.
Opt-out threat to the over-50s
NEW rules are needed to protect over-50s who seek life-saving treatment at profit-hungry opt-out hospitals, it is claimed today.
Leading geriatric specialists fear that old people may be denied help because they stay in hospital for longer than average — and run up bigger bills.
Professor Grimley Evans, of Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford, says, in a report out today, that older people are already being refused help in some heart-care units.
A survey of 175 centersshowed that one fifth take age into account when deciding who to let in.
And two fifths put age limits on who should get anti-clotting drugs.
In honour of soccer's dead
VICTIMS of the Hillsborough disaster are to be commemorated on the shirts of their Liverpool soccer heroes.
The Hillsborough Relatives' Association put the idea to football club bosses and a badge is planned as a permanent reminder of the April 1989 tragedy in which 95 people died.
Association chairman Trevor Hickes, who lost two daughters in the disaster, said he was delighted by the idea.
Club chairman Peter Robinson confirmed: ‘We are looking to have a lasting reminder of the victims of the disaster.’
The badge will replace the insignia celebrating the club's centenary year, which ends this season.
The Force Four was tearing at their soaked oilskins…
Tim leaned across to Anne and asked her to be his wife
Clive Nelson
IT WAS an unlikely setting for a marriage proposal.
The bride-to-be and her groom were wearing oilskins and there was a Force Four blowing across the Solent.
As their 35ft yacht, the Blue Doublet, bobbed about on the choppy waters, Commander Tim Laurence finally plucked up the courage to pop the question.
Princess Anne, who was at the helm of the boat she chose with his help, gazed back and told him simply: ‘Yes.’
One aide let into the secret of the wedding plans said: ‘All we have been told is that the question was asked on board her new boat.
‘It makes perfect sense.
He is happiest on the water, and the Blue Doublet is the one place she can really call her own.’
Anne took delivery of the £93,000 Blue Doublet in April, about the same time as her divorce from Captain Mark Phillips.
One of the few senior aides in the confidence of the couple admits it is unlikely Tim bent down on one knee to pop the question.
He said: ‘I don't think he's the sort of chap to do that — especially if there's a stiff breeze at the time.
‘Landing face down in the bottom of a boat would hardly be the way to win the heart of the woman you love.
‘And I rather suspect Anne prefers a different sort of approach.
She'd agree to marry him as part of a partnership — not as some sort of meek, mild bride agreeing to graciously give her hand.’
Others who remember Anne from her days as Mrs Mark Phillips said she was the one who wore the trousers.
‘She was the boss in that marriage — and I am sure she will be in this,’ said one.
That view was supported last night when it was revealed that Anne would not promise to obey her new husband during the service at the stone and slate-built Crathie Church, close to Balmoral, on Saturday.
Both will vow to say ‘loving, faithful and loyal until God shall separate us by death’ before the Rev Keith Angus.
Her children Peter, 15, and 11-year-old Zara are expected to sit in the front pew for the short service.
Anne wants the children to play ‘as large a part as possible’ in the ceremony — and last night there were rumours that Peter may even give his mother away.
One royal source says: ‘There is nothing she would like more than to be given away by Peter with Zara acting as a bridesmaid.’
Tim, 37, is already treated by them as a favourite uncle.
One friend said: ‘They've spent a lot of time together and there is no problem there.’
Princess Diana is to join Anne and her new husband at Sandringham for a ‘happy families’ royal Christmas.
Diana was originally going to spend just Christmas Day with her in-laws and the rest of the time with sons William and Harry at Althorp House with her brother Earl Spencer.
Now she has buckled under pressure and will spend the entire holiday there.
A royal insider said: ‘The Queen was determined to finish such a terrible year in better shape.
She has Anne's marriage to unite the family and now a full turn-out, including the Duchess of York, at Christmas.
‘There might be a lot of bitterness behind the scenes but at least there will be a show of togetherness on the surface.’
Royal probe fury
PRINCESS Anne's senior bodyguard, Inspector Peter Schmidt, claims an investigation into his alleged ‘moonlighting’ is a police vendetta.
The inspector, 44, who has worked for the Princess for eight years, is currently on sick leave.
Undercover officers are keeping a 24-hour watch on his home and bugging his telephone conversations, he claims.
‘It doesn't make sense,’ he said.
‘I've done nothing wrong.’
Nanny gets wed
A FORMER royal nanny is to marry a man she met while looking after Princesses Beatrice and Eugenie.
Alison Wardley, 25, who left her post last September, is said to have asked the princesses to be bridesmaids and invited the Duchess of York to the April wedding in Withington, Manchester.
Her mother Irene shed a little light on mystery fiance Ben yesterday.
‘They met three years ago,’ she said.
‘He is charming — tall, dark and handsome.’
Lamont is in the doghouse
CHANCELLOR Norman Lamont has been ‘acting like a disgruntled chihuahua,’ Labour's Lord Healey said yesterday.
The charge came after the peer was asked about the £4,700 of taxpayers' money put towards Mr Lamont's legal bill to evict a sex therapist from his flat.
Joining the clamour for the Chancellor's head, he added: ‘He is loathed on the Continent.
He is despised in the City.’
Shadow Chancellor Gordon Brown also continued his attack.
He accused Mr Lamont of ignoring the rules governing gifts to ministers after the remainder of his legal billwas met from Tory party funds.
He said: ‘I want to know from the Chancellor why the Ministerial rules were not observed; why the Law Officers were not informed immediately of the legal action which cost the taxpayer £4,700; whether the Prime Minister was consulted as the rules suggest he should be — and whether the permanent secretary to the Treasury was told about the source of the gift of the £18,000.’
Ad tough on drink-drivers
A HARD-hitting TV advert will tonight spearhead the Government's Christmas crackdown on drink-driving.
The campaign, under the banner ‘Drinking and driving wrecks lives’, is aimed at 25 to 40-year-olds.
In the past 10 years drink-driving deaths have halved to 700 a year.
Schools will cut teachers
SCHOOLS may lose two teachers each as local councils struggle to balance their budgets.
Books and equipment will also be cut because of tight grants and the new council tax, authority chiefs warned yesterday.
‘Every child's education will be affected,’ said one teacher group.
Plane crash kills couple
A HUSBAND and wife died when their hired plane crashed in dense forest last night.
The Cessna 182 was coming in to land at High Wycombe, Bucks, when it crashed in nearby Hambleden.
Police took two hours to find the wreckage and the bodies of the couple.
Break a leg
LORD Sutch missed the first night of his pantomime season in Northampton after falling through the stage.
Lesson in love from cavemen
MEN who want to attract women should throw away their expensive aftershaves.
They only cover up the ‘caveman’ body smells which act as a natural stimulant, says chemist Dr David Kelly.
Men's pores release five times as many natural chemicals, called pheromones, at this time of year, according to Dr Kelly, who will air his theory at a chemists' conference in Guildford, Surrey, today.
‘These make women feel comfortable with a man and in the mood for making love,’ he said.
Wife finds CID man hanged
A DETECTIVE was found hanged in his garage yesterday.
Detective Sergeant Clive Astle, 41, was discovered by his wife at their home in Lichfield, Staffs, shortly after midday.
Mr Astle was stationed with the CID at nearby Rugeley.
A statement issued by Staffordshire police said there were no suspicious circumstances surrounding the sergeant's death.
A spokesman said an inquest will be held later.
Maxwell fury at Mr Greed
THE son of millionaire fraudster Robert Maxwell tried to ban a charity children's book which he claimed would set a jury against him.
Bankrupt Kevin Maxwell, who faces £140 million theft and fraud charges, claimed the new version of Happy Families featuring Maxwell lookalikes the Greeds could prejudice his case.
A High Court judge refused to grant an injunction which would have forced publishers Methuen to remove the characters, drawn by former Daily Mirror cartoonist Griffin.
Richard Cohen, who commissioned the book, said: ‘I was very glad the judge threw it out at the very first stage.
‘We never claimed the drawings had been modelled on the Maxwells.
It would have been very sad if it had been stopped.’
The money will be split between the Russell Project for Romanian youngsters and the Marilyn Monroe Children's Fund.
Twenty families for the Nineties, each drawn by a different artist, appear in the book.
Instead of Mr Bun the Baker, there is Master Steamer the football hooligan and Mr Poll the politician (Edward Heath).
Don't blink
BLINK at the wrong moment on Christmas Eve and you could miss a new world record being set.
The shortest-ever television commerical, lasting just one second, will be screened on BSkyB and Discovery Channel.
And the product being advertised is, of course, the 1993 edition of the Guinness Book of Records.
A spokesman for Leo Burnett, who created the idea for the £50,000 TV ad campaign, said: ‘We faced huge problems convincing the contractors we were serious.’
If I'm not your mother I'll be your godparent
Simon Trump and Nick Craven
THE couples at the centre of the heartbreaking baby mix-up may become godparents to one another 's children.
They met for the first time at the weekend as their two-week-old girls were swopped and handed back to the right mothers.
The horrific experience of taking the wrong baby home from hospital has forged strong bonds between Tony and Maureen Bursey and Marie Coyle and her boyfriend Peter Wadsley.
Inevitably, both sets of parents are still attached to their ‘wrong’ daughter.
Now, they want to make a commitment to the child they handed back.
A close family friend said: ‘Everyone is getting along famously considering the circumstances.
‘Fate has thrown them together in a way which could have led to conflict, resentment and bitterness.
‘Instead, they have shared their hopes and fears and reached a deep understanding of their situation.
‘They all feel they can't just split up and never see or speak to one another again.
‘Becoming godparents to the babies they invested such time and love in would be the ideal answer.’
A health authority spokesman added: ‘There is no doubting the couples interacted well.
‘It would appear there is every chance of them maintaining a relationship in the future.’
Just seven days earlier, they were warned their new-born babies may have been tagged wrongly when a fire alarm went off.
Genetic fingerprinting tests later confirmed their worst fears.
Today, an independent inquiry will begin into the muddle at Southampton's Princess Anne hospital.
Tony, 47, and Maureen, 46, from Brockenhurst, Hants, sparked the alert when they discovered the girl they had called Carla had an ankle tag with the surname Coyle.
They immediately decided to hand the child back until the matter was resolved to prevent their other two daughters becoming too attached to the new baby.
Meanwhile, Marie, 27, and fork-lift driver Peter, 24, found a wrist tag with the correct surname and an ankle tag with the Bursey's surname on the baby they had named Gemma.
All four were taken to a hotel to go through the agonising ordeal of kissing goodbye to the baby they had thought was theirs.
Minutes after being informed of the test results Maureen said: ‘I'm just glad I'm going to get the right one back.
‘It was Marie and Peter I felt sorry for.
It was worse for them because they had kept their child and had time to form a bond with it.’
Husband Tony added: ‘The results came through a lot quicker than we expected.
I didn't know whether to laugh or cry.
I'm glad it's all over and we can start again.’
Last night, Marie, the mother of a school-age son Connor, was not at her two-bedroom flat in Southampton.
A neighbour said: ‘We saw her when she first brought the baby home.
She was beautiful.
‘It's terrible for her.
She was obviously growing so attacked to her little girl and then she had to give her away.’
A second hospital has been accused of mixing up a baby's name tag, making the mother fear she had the wrong child.
Blood tests finally convinced Elaine Hinchcliff, of Stanton, Suffolk, she had the right baby in West Suffolk hospital, Bury St Edmonds.
She said: ‘It was an agonising wait until I knew for sure.’
Moment Mr Gold Blend says: I love you
Sarah Grady
THE golden moment millions of TV viewers have been waiting for goes on air tonight.
Gold Blend beauty Sharon Maughan finally gets her man when co-star Tony Head declares his love for her over a coffee.
Tony, 37, bursts into a plush restaurant where Sharon, 41, is being wined and dined by a romantic Italian rival for her affections.
Pretending to be her husband, Tony asks: ‘It's always Italians.
‘Has she talked off-shore investments yet?’
He ushers her out of the restaurant saying: ‘I think we should leave before the paparazzi get here.’
The scene cuts to the couple having a cup of coffee.
Sharon says: ‘I don't know why I let you do that.
Tony says: ‘Because I ser…’
Sharon: ‘Because you serve better cof fee.’
Tony replies: ‘Besides, I love you.’
Sharon's face lights up as she hears his admission of love.
A Nestle spokesman said: ‘Security was ultra-tight for this final episode.
‘We have been bombarded with letters from people wanting to know what happens to Tony and Sharon.
‘They get their answer tonight.’
The long-brewing courtship started in 1987.
Since then, it has been as keenly followed as many full-length TV programmes.
Gold Blend sales rocketed by 40 per cent to 10 million cups a day through the award-winning campaign.
It all started when Sharon moved in to the flat next door to Tony and asked to borrow some coffee.
The rest, as they say, is history.
Gold Blend makers Nestle say this episode will be the last.
But they have deliberately left the story line open…just in case.
Killed by prank with car window
A PRANKSTER who dangled his head out of a car window was killed when he was hit by a lorry coming the other way.
Adrian Chapham, 26, of Dymchurch, Kent, received horrific head injuries and died instantly.
Police said: ‘He appears to have been hanging out of the window as a prank.
This graphically highlights the dangers of this sort of behaviour.’
Last twitch for the warbler spotters
Clive Nelson
THE twitchers were all of a twitter.
On the birdwatch grapevine they heard the news: The barred warbler has landed.
The warbler, one of Britain's rarest bird visitors, had been blown off course from eastern Europe and landed near an Essex supermarket.
Hundreds of twitchers — bird-spotters, to the rest of us — grabbed their binoculars and swarmed from all over Britain to the Asda car park at South Woodham Ferrers.
And there it was, in all its distinctive plumage.
The barred warbler.
A hush fell over the car park.
Binoculars glinted.
Suddenly, Nature intervened.
Nature red in tooth and claw.
As the twitchers gawped, a sleek tabby cat slithered up over the wall…
‘It gobbled up the bird in one go,’ said a mournful bird-watcher yesterday.
‘One minute the warbler was warbling happily.
Next minute, there were feathers everywhere.
‘It was a bit like the Monty Python parrot sketch.
‘All of a sudden, this was an ex-warbler.
It had ceased to be.
Expired.
Gone to meet its Maker.
‘In the words of John Cleese, it had rung down the curtain, joined the Choir Invisible.’
Lenny role is no joke
COMEDIAN Lenny Henry nearly turned vegetarian while researching his new TV role as a temperamental chef.
He had to slice up dead rabbits and pick the heads off snails as he visited some of the top kitchens in the county.
‘I learned how to bake bread, cakes and ice things,’ he said.
‘They were always thinking of things to do with me.
One day I spent a whole morning preparing snails.
I was nearly sick.’
The show, Chef, is to be screened on BBC1 next month.
Rent a tree for a green Christmas
David Jones
TWO enterprising traders are renting out hundreds of Christmas trees to families.
Ru Hartwell and Nick Burton will then collect and replant the Norwegian spruces after Twelfth Night.
The 300 trees on Ru's land at Llanfair, near Lampeter, mid Wales, are being hired for £20-£30.
They are dug up with roots, potted, wrapped, delivered by van and collected later for replanting.
The London pilot scheme is proving so successful that Ru, 34, and Nick, 33, expect to make more than £8,000 this year.
‘I can't believe the response,’ said Ru.
‘We expect to recover 90 to 95 per cent of the trees.
‘The smaller ones will be rented out for several Christmases.
‘When they get too tall they will retire happily to their natural habitat.’
Which is more than can be said for the thousands of turkeys destined for the Christmas dinner table.
French are card meanies
THE French are the meanest when it comes to sending Christmas cards, a survey revealed yesterday.
They prefer to send seasonal greetings to their loved one by fax or with a telephone call.
Big-hearted Britons top the league in Europe for buying greeting cards and writing paper.
Sales of personal mail topped £286 million in 1990.
Writing paper and personal cards make up only 29 per cent of the stationery market in France.
The Euromonitor survey also found that enviromentally friendly stationery was becoming more popular, especially among the Germans.
Writing paper sales are largest in Germany where output has increased by 25 per cent in the past five years.
Boy locked up because of haircut
A PUPIL was locked in an isolation room at his school because of his haircut.
Teachers said 12-year-old Tommy Woods's new wedge-style cut was against the school rules.
They hauled Tommy out of class and forced him to spend a whole day alone in a tiny punishment room.
His mother Karen, 35, said Tommy missed his lunch because teachers at Bridlington School, Humberside, forgot he was there.
‘When he came home he was cold, starving and very upset,’ she said.
‘He brought a letter with him saying he had broken school rules.
‘He had been shut in a virtual cupboard all day without anything to eat just because of his haircut.
‘His hair is neat, tidy and short.
I cannot see what's wrong with it.
The school's attitude is Dickensian.’
Mrs Woods, of Bridlington, refused to send Tommy back to school until she was guaranteed he would be allowed to sit with the other children.
Headteacher Kerrigan Redman said: ‘We are a school that believes in standards.
They are clearly set out and if they are flouted we cannot accept it.’
Watson home for Christmas
BOXER Michael Watson will celebrate Christmas at home — after 14 months in hospital.
Watson, 27, was in a coma for 40 days after he was knocked out during a title fight with Chris Eubank.
He has learnt to speak again but is still unable to walk.
Doctors at the East London rehabilitation unit where he is recovering are sending him home for Christmas with his family in Chingford, Essex.
‘It's joyous news,’ said his delighted mother Joan last night.
Rover beats the slump
SOARING sales mean workers at car giant Rover are being asked to work Sundays for the first time in living memory.
The cheering news for the employees at the firm's plant in Cowley, Oxfordshire, comes after November sales leapt by more than 16 per cent, while those of rivals Ford slumped.
Cowley's managing director Paul Kirk said: ‘The whole team is working flat out to satisfy demand.’
Train death leap riddle
A TRAVELLER jumped in front of a speeding train mid-way through a conversation with a fellow passenger.
The young man had been standing on the platform at Portslade station in East Sussex yesterday shortly before the London to Brighton train passed.
His body was taken to Brighton mortuary for identification.
BA jet crew cockpit terror at 33,000ft
Rob Perkins
A BRITISH Airways crew feared they would be sucked out of the cockpit when the windscreen shattered at 33,000ft yesterday.
Passengers were ordered to fasten seat belts and some received oxygen as the pilot began a race against time to land the plane before the screen blew out.
The cracks appeared as Flight BA 5332 was an hour into its journey from Birmingham to Portugal, with 30 passengers on board.
The five-strong crew thought they were about to suffer the same disaster that struck another British Airways flight in June 1990.
That plane was also a BAC 1-11, and was also en route from Birmingham International Airport.
Its window blew out as the jet, packed with holidaymakers, was heading to Malaga in Spain.
The force of the decompression was so great that Captain Tim Lancaster was sucked from his seat and dashed against the outside of the aircraft.
His life was saved by three stewards who managed to grab his feet.
They hung on as the plane made an emergency dive to a lower altitude when they pulled him back on board.
The plane went on to land safely at Eastleigh Airport, Hants.
Radio sports reporter Tom Wadrop, a passenger on the plane during yesterday's drama, said: ‘We were about an hour into the journey when suddenly the cabin lights came on telling us to return to our seats, fasten seat belts and everyone was ordered to put out cigarettes.
‘The captain fed us bits of information about decompression and what to do, and after 10 minutes we were told we were returning to Birmingham because of a shattered windscreen on the aircraft.
‘There was no real panic but when we landed and got off the plane the window looked like a spider's web.
‘It was quite a frightening ordeal really.’
The passengers boarded another aircraft and finally landed at Faro airport yesterday afternoon, five hours behind schedule.
A British Airways spokeswoman said the damaged windscreen had been removed by engineers and taken away for examination.
‘The pilot decided to return to Birmingham where a precautionary landing was made,’ she said.
‘None of the passengers or crew was injured.
There was no danger.’
Tasty platter
ENGLAND soccer star David Platt is tackling a new role as a chef.
The 26-year-old midfielder has flown home from Italy while recovering from a knee operation to help in the kitchen of his wife Rachel's Italian restaurant Amici Mia in Wolverhampton.
‘I enjoy cooking,’ said the £8 million player, who is equally at home in the kitchen as he is displaying his skills for Juventus.
Tax on snobs
SNOBBISH homeowners are appealing to be put into higher council tax bands to boost their property's price and their own social status.
‘We have been surprised by people wanting to go even higher, with most wanting to jump from band G — between £160,000 and £320,000 — to the highest band H,’ said an East Hertfordshire council spokesman.
Anger at real-life baby ad
ADVERTS featuring real couples discovering the results of a home pregnancy testing kit have sparked controversy in America.
Church groups and America's militant right wing say the EPT Home Pregnancy adverts are ‘an intrusion on a sacred family discovery’.
They claim British film director Michael Apted has ‘surrendered the sanctity of conceptions to the salesman’.
Equal numbers have congratulated the ad agency for reviving memories of the thrill of discovering a baby is on the way.
Hot pursuit
POLICE in Northumbria are to use Ford's new 140mph Escort RS Cosworth as a pursuit vehicle to beat joyriders and ramraiders.
They will be the first force to use the car, which makes its international competition debut at Monte Carlo next year.
£1m quacker of a contract
A BRITISH company has clinched a £1 million deal to supply Donald Ducks for Walt Disney.
Paul Brazier, manager for Connoisseur china firm based in Ledbury, Hereford, said the deal for limited edition pottery was a major coup and the company was now attracting interest from other major film makers such as MGM.
‘Americans go crazy over collecting Disney,’ he said.
American enthusiasts including film boss Steven Spielberg pay Pounds 3,300 for Donald in various poses.
Umbrella stand blows off hand
A WARTIME shell blew off a man's hand as he was cleaning it to make an umbrella stand.
Retired John Ownsworth, 55, of Penistone, South Yorks, yesterday needed plastic surgery to save his thumb after the four fingers on his left hand were severed in the explosion.
His wife Josephine, 53, said: ‘John loves cleaning up old shell casings and turning them into umbrella stands.
He had done it many times before.
What he thought was mud was obviously explosive.’
Like our Jag or get money back
JAGUAR is backing its luxury car sales in the US with an unprecedented 30-day money-back guarantee.
The attention-grabbing deal comes as the US market, which in the past has made up more than 40 per cent of sales of the Coventry-produced supercars, shows the first signs of upturn in three years.
‘We know we are producing our best cars, so we are backing this with a simple offer to refund the price for unhappy customers,’ said Jaguar president Michael Dale.
‘Call me son’ says rapist
A RAPIST forced his victim to chant ‘yes son’ over and over again during a two-hour ordeal yesterday.
He told his 24-year-old victim he had been abused by his mother as a child.
The rapist and an accomplice, both wielding knives, grabbed the woman as she walked past waste ground on the way home from her sister's house in Smethwick, Birmingham, at 3am.
M-way woman ‘abandoned for 6 hours at night by RAC’
A LONE woman driver says she waited six hours to be rescued by the RAC when her car broke down on a motorway at night.
Cold and frightened, Beryl Hayden sat locked inside her Ford Escort on the M25 from 7pm until 1am as traffic roared past.
The rescue service, which describes its staff as the ‘new knights of the road,’ boasts women alone should only have to wait 20 minutes.
Beryl's ordeal began when she phoned the police, who promised to fax her details to the motoring organisation.
She returned to her car, and a passing police patrol told her not to worry as she would get priority.
A mechanic contracted to the RAC arrived within an hour, she claimed, but went to help a man who had broken down after her.
‘I was horrified.
He told me he had no authority to rescue me then, and he had to rescue two other people,’ said Beryl, 53, from Exeter, Devon.
Another policeman came along at 9.40pm and radioed his control to contact the RAC again.
He left her on the hard shoulder, near Epping, Essex, saying she would only have to wait 15 minutes.
The tow truck eventually arrived three hours later, but broke down on the way to her fiance's home near Norwich.
She had to drive her overheating car the last 18 miles, Beryl claimed.
‘I had seen the RAC adverts where the woman doctor breaks down and gets help straight away,’ she said.
‘But I ended up getting very cold and scared.’
The RAC has promised an inquiry.
Hero Sam reunited with pal he saved
Neil Hyde and Mike Jarvis
A HEROIC six-year-old was reunited yesterday with the friend he thought had been killed by a hit-and-run driver.
Brave Sam King saw Scott Long, also six, run down by a van.
He stepped on to the busy road and dragged badly injured Scott clear of the traffic.
Sam stood guard over his blood-covered friend and tried in vain to flag down passing motorists.
Two cyclists eventually stopped and went off to raise the alarm.
In hospital yesterday Scott was able to momentarily forget his broken leg and head injuries and give Sam a thank-you hug and a beaming smile.
The pair had been playing together near the busy A50 in Milton Keynes, Bucks, when Scott was hit by a white van or bus.
The driver sped off, leaving the blood-covered boy lying in the road.
‘Sam dragged Scott from the road because he was afraid he was going to be hit by another car,’ said Scott's grateful mother Caroline at Milton Keynes General Hospital yesterday.
‘He was trying to flag down cars to help, but no one took any notice.
‘I find it incredible than no one stopped, especially as Sam was covered in blood, running down the road.’
The tearful lad then tried to revive his schoolfriend by blowing in his face, believing he was giving Scott the kiss of life.
Sam's mother Lillian, 29, said: ‘Sam was crying because he thought Scott was dead.
No one would stop for him.
‘Then two older boys came along on bikes and one of them went off to get help.’
Caroline, 29, is planning a Christmas party at Scott's bedside, as he will be in hospital for Christmas and the New Year.
And Sam, of course, will be the guest of honour.
Poachers open fire on police
POACHERS shot at police who caught them killing pigs on a farm.
The two gunmen triggered a massive search when they fled in a stolen car and opened fire.
Sniffer dogs tracked them to Laughterton, Lincs.
Road blocks were set up and a helicopter brought in from Manchester as police began house-to-house inquiries.
Detectives dismissed theories that the attack was carried out by terrorists or animal rights activists after the farm owner found the bodies of two shot pigs.
A third was seriously hurt.
Spokesman Tony Diggins said they believed the men planned to take away the animals and sell the meat on the black market.
‘We are fairly confident the men are still in the area,’ he said.
He warned the public not to approach the men, who are armed and dangerous.
IRA scare at barracks
AN Army barracks rocked by an IRA blast three years ago was again on full alert yesterday.
Security at Tern Hill barracks, near Market Drayton, Shropshire, was increased after two guards saw a suspicious figure in woods near the perimeter fence.
A search found no evidence of IRA activity.
Drugs raid halts coaches
THREE coaches heading for Amsterdam were halted by police after claims that travellers were smoking cannabis, drinking and abusing coach drivers.
They were stopped at Watford Gap and sent back to West Yorkshire.
Inmate killed with table leg
A PRISONER was battered to death with a table leg.
Burglary suspect Ian McLeod, 31, was discovered in a pool of blood in his two-man cell of Cardiff jail.
Viewers warm to Detective Frost
Ivan Waterman
COMEDY star David Jason has scored another hit with his new detective series, A Touch Of Frost.
Yorkshire Television, which made the £2 million ITV series, claimed yesterday that nearly 18 million people watched Sunday's first story.
Official viewing figures will be out in two weeks' time.
YTV executives predicted that Jason's performance as Detective Inspector Jack Frost will prove to have wiped out the BBC's audience for a Perry Mason film, The Case Of The Desperate Deception.
‘We are absolutely delighted,’ said a spokesman.
‘The figures are well in excess of what we expected.
‘We have been overwhelmed by the response.
This is a great credit to David's versatility as a character actor.’
At the weekend, at the British Comedy Awards ceremony, 53-year-old Jason was voted top TV comedy actor for his performance as Pop Larkin in The Darling Buds Of May.
Safety probe at all palaces
AN investigation into fire precautions at all royal palaces is to be launched.
The move is the first official admission of serious concern over adequacy of anti-fire measures in royal buildings.
The inquiry will start immediately, with a full report expected inside three months, Heritage Secretary Peter Brooke told the Commons yesterday.
Investigators will examine every royal building that is paid for by the state.
They are Buckingham Palace, Windsor Castle, Clarence House — the Queen Mother's home — Kensington Palace, St James Palace, Hampton Court, Kew Palace, the Tower of London and the City's Banqueting House.
Balmoral in Scotland and Sandringham in Norfolk will not be included because they are the Queen's personal property.
Freak fumes killed golfer and his angel
Graham Keen
A FREAK gas accident was yesterday blamed for the death of brilliant young golfer Paul Hurring and his ‘angelic’ girlfriend.
Paul and Charlotte Turtle were found dead in bed together on Sunday in a cottage at Horsham, west Sussex,
British Gas says there were no faults with installations in the cottage, which 21-year-old Charlotte shared with her mother, but a cold snap may have caused poisonous carbon monoxide fumes to leak back into the bedroom.
Spokesman Andrew Davis said: ‘We believe freak weather conditions may have caused an inversion, but it is difficult to be certain at this stage.
‘It is the only thing that presents itself with the information we have at the moment.’
Paul, 23, of Crawley, west Sussex, was on the verge of international stardom, recently coming in the top 30 in the Austrian Open.
Heartbroken father Bill, 51, who introduced Paul to golf as a young boy, said: ‘I'm distraught.
We are all devastated.
‘Golf was his love and I just wanted to help him.
I have no doubt he would have reached the very top.
‘He and Charlotte were very, very close.
They were talking of marriage and were perfectly matched.’
The couple had met just a couple of months ago and appeared completely devoted.
Calum Callan, 24, a close friend of Paul, said: ‘He seemed very keen on her and in his own words said she was angelic.
From what I saw, she was.’
A post-mortem examination has been carried out and Sussex police are working with British Gas on the cause of the tragedy.
The rainforest robber
A ROBBER who held up banks as a protest against the destruction of the rainforests was jailed for five years yesterday.
Steven White, 21, terrified staff at five banks into handing over cash, Southwark Crown Court heard.
He then scattered it on pub floors or gave it to friends to buy drugs.
White, of no fixed address, was arrested after he threatened to detonate a bomb at the NatWest in Piccadilly, London.
‘Fishing too easy’
FURIOUS anglers claimed yesterday their sport has been ruined because they are catching too many fish.
They say they are always hooking rainbow trout which escaped from a fish farm, instead of the wild brown trout which are much harder to catch.
Savernake Fly Fishing Club, near Marlborough, Wilts, is suing the insurers of nearby Church Farm on the River Kennet, after the April 1990 incident.
‘Wild trout give a better fight,’ river keeper John Hounslow told Swindon County Court.
The case continues.
The man who destroyed all I loved
Cheryl Stonehouse
POLICEMAN's widow Monica King spoke of her hatred last night for the man who has destroyed her life.
She fought back tears as she blamed Nicholas Vernage not just for her husband's murder but also for the deaths of her parents.
‘I can never forgive him,’ she said.
The judge gave Vernage five life sentences and recommended that he serve at least 25 years.
Sergeant Alan King died after being stabbed repeatedly by Vernage as he tried to crawl to safety.
For his distraught family, only hanging would have avenged the death of the father of four.
Monica, 44, said: ‘I know that nothing can bring Alan back but for me no sentence that our courts are allowed to impose could ever be enough.
This man is still alive and my husband is dead.
‘Vernage was directly responsible for the death of my husband and, as far as I am concerned, indirectly responsible for the deaths of both my parents.
The stress and trauma of this past year, I am convinced, contributed to their deaths.’
Her mother Lillian Jones, 77, died in May from a long-term illness, and her father Ron, 75, collapsed with a heart attack two months before the trial.
Monica was left to face the ordeal of watching Vernage slumped in the dock with his hands in his pockets, chewing insolently on a matchstick while the horrific details of her husband's death were relived in court.
Also in the public gallery were Sergeant King's first wife, Marion Winters, 42, and their two children, Amanda, 17, and 14-year-old Mark.
As the jury returned unanimous guilty verdicts on Vernage for three murders, the attempted murders of two other policemen and three burglaries, Amanda buried her head in her mother's neck.
Monica, tears pouring down her cheeks, gave a tragic smile of triumph.
Vernage's accomplice Peter Grenfell, 29, described as a pathetic character verging on the mentally ill, was acquitted on the judge's directions of murdering Sergeant King, 41.
Judge Robert Lymbery told Vernage: ‘Ever since you were arrested you have shown no vestige of remorse for the devastation you have caused the families and friends of your victims.
‘It is not pleasant for a human being to pass judgment on another and say that he is evil through and through without any redeeming features, but that is the conclusion I am forced to come to about you.’
Vernage could not resist one last arrogant swipe at Monica's grief.
As he was being led to the cells he sniggered and said: ‘Happy Christmas, by the way.’
Mandarins blocked Fergie's mercy trip to Sunnie
Lisa Reynolds
THE Duchess of York was prevented by the Foreign Office from flying to Sunnie Mann's death bed in Cyprus, it was revealed last night.
Diplomats asked Buckingham Palace to warn her against any trip to the island, which has not received a royal visitor for many years.
The duchess told friends she was totally misled by officials about the condition of 79-year-old Sunnie.
She regarded the wife of former Beirut hostage Jackie Mann as a ‘dear friend' and was heartbroken she could not see her before she died of lung cancer on November 30.
She reportedly told a friend: ‘They assured me she was not seriously ill, they told me she was fine.’
Last night the Foreign Office said: ‘We can see now it would have been better if the advice had not been given.’
The duchess stayed away from Sunnie's funeral because she didn't want to turn it into a photo opportunity.
She sent a wreath bearing the codename they used: ‘From the Tinkerbells.’
Road blocks in bomb city
ARMED police began random checks on main roads in Manchester yesterday.
Police said the measures were ‘to reassure the public that we are doing everything to ensure their safety’.
An Army barracks rocked by an IRA blast three years ago was put on full alert yesterday.
Guards at Tern Hill, near Market Drayton, Shropshire, saw a suspicious person in woods outside the fence.
Beckett in knife attack
Rob Perkins
KNIFE-wielding burglars held Labour's deputy leader Margaret Beckett captive in a terrifying 20-minute ordeal.
The masked four-man gang burst into her house, knocked Mrs Beckett to the ground and threatened her, her husband Leo and a woman dinner guest.
Brandishing a knife taken from the kitchen, the gang took all three to separate bedrooms and told them they would be stabbed if they did not reveal where their valuables were.
‘They were all wearing scarves over their faces’ Mrs Beckett said last night.
‘When they came in they threatened us.’
After holding their victims hostage, the raiders left with £70 cash, credit cards, a driving licence and jewellery.
Mrs Beckett, 49, and her 66-year-old husband were preparing for a dinner party when the gang knocked at their white pebble-dashed detached cottage in the Derbyshire village of Littleover on Sunday.
She said: ‘Leo went to answer it because we were expecting a constituency worker with some papers.
‘As he opened the door he saw the youths and tried to push the door to.
But he was forced to one side as they bundled their way in.’
Mrs Beckett, MP for Derby South, added: ‘I was just surprised by what was happening and there was a bit of a scuffle.
We did not expect anything like this could happen in such a small village like Littleover.
‘Our house in London has been burgled but we were not in it at the time.
This was a totally different matter all together.
‘It was not an experience I would wish to relive but we consider ourselves very lucky indeed.
It could have been a lot worse.
‘They said they wanted money but fortunately we do not keep very much in the house.
But they did escape with some cash and costume jewellery which did not have any great value but which was important sentimentally to me.
‘We were just shocked after the robbery but felt that it could have been a lot worse and no great harm had been done to anybody.
‘Being deputy leader I do not have any complex security arr-ange-ments.
‘We do have a spyhole in the door but because we were expecting someone we did not use it.
We will be using it from now on.
‘Police have told us that they do not think it was a deliberate attack on our house because I am deputy leader.’
Providing security for politicians increasingly under threat from terrorists costs millions of pounds a year.
Recent improvements in security at numbers 10, 11 and 12 Downing Street cost £76 million.
Protecting Mr Major and his family, who live in Cambridgeshire, costs £1.5 million a year.
Former Labour leader Neil Kinnock told police he wanted to lead as normal a life as possible but was forced to have more security when his home in Ealing, West London was broken into and bricks were thrown through a window.
Police alert in bomb city
ARMED police began random checks on main roads in Manchester yesterday.
Police said the measures were ‘to reassure the public that we are doing everything to ensure their safety.’
The tactics follow an IRA hoax call which closed city mainline railway stations for five hours on Sunday.
An Army barracks rocked by an IRA blast three years ago was put on full alert yesterday.
Guards at Tern Hill, near Market Drayton, Shropshire, saw a suspicious person in woods near the perimeter fence.
Probe over Clinton file
HOME Office Press rules are to be reviewed after revelations that confidential files were combed for dirt on Bill Clinton.
Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke ordered the review, despite telling MPs yesterday: ‘If officials had found out any information about Mr Clinton it would not have been given out.’
A journalist who requested the check to see if Mr Clinton had applied for citizenship to avoid the draft was told to ‘stop wasting time chasing silly American stories’, said Mr Clarke.
Bosses hold off on pay
COMPANY bosses are leading by example on pay restraint.
Directors gave themselves an average five per cent pay rise in the past year, according to a survey yesterday.
A third took rises below five per cent, 14 per cent got no rise and one per cent took a pay cut.
The Institute of Directors said its survey showed that bosses were not lining their own pockets while holding down employees' pay.
‘Large and apparently unjustified increases are unrepresentative,’ it said.
Mosque riot MPs attacked
TWO British MPs were attacked by Hindu rioters in Bombay yesterday.
Labour frontbencher Jack Straw and Tory Jim Lester were in an armour-plated Land-Rover when it was hit by a boulder.
India has been torn apart by religious strife after Hindus tore down a mosque in Northern India on Sunday.
Last night Mr Straw said: ‘The situation is very grave.
Many roads are closed and there are fires everywhere.’
The MPs are part of a six-strong Commons party who have been in India a week.
Police killed at least 40 rioters in Bombay while, at home, there were three attacks on Hindu centres in Bradford and Derby.
Dr Kalim Siddiqui, who heads the self-styled Moslem parliament in Britain, said: ‘We must not fight over issues in the sub-continent.’
The Foreign Office called on Moslems and Hindus ‘everywhere’ to show restraint.
BR sell-off is on track
MOVES to allow a British Rail sell-off could be complete within a year.
Transport minister Roger Freeman said yesterday he expected legislation to begin in the new year and be complete by October.
Mr Freeman told a conference in London he wanted to scotch rumours that the move was on hold.
‘The Railway Bill is prepared and we are ready to introduce it into the Commons,’ he said.
Jingle tills all the way
MILLIONS of people are beginning to spend, spend, spend on the High Street at last.
Latest official figures show that shoppers are even turning to credit again, to buy presents and stock up for Christmas.
But there are still worries that rising credit will only suck in more imports, as shoppers rush to buy computers, camcorders and other foreign goods.
Customer confidence collapsed after Black Wednesday, in mid-September.
But latest figures show that after a two-month slide, it is on the way up again.
Outstanding credit increased by £76 million in October, said the Central Statistical Office.
This is even more welcome since all through autumn people have been repaying debts from the free-spending 1980s.
Fear of unemployment had led to many consumers paying off their debts rather than spending.
EC junket will cost taxpayers £6.5m
TAXPAYERS will fork out £6.5 million for the Edinburgh Euro-junket this weekend.
Hospitality for leaders of the 12 EC states includes prime Aberdeen Angus beef, Scottish salmon and malt whiskies, served at the Holyroodhouse royal palace.
The palace has been refurbished for the summit.
Security will cost a further £3 million.
The bill includes converting the Meadowbank sports stadium, a mile and a half from the palace, into a media centre at a cost of £1 million.
Mr Major will have to share a flight with French Euro Commission president Jacques Delors when he makes his controversial trip to America.
The last time they met Mr Major gave Mr Delors — his main opponent in the battle over the future shape of Europe — a dressing down over his bid to scupper the Gatt talks.
Doomed to failure
THE Edinburgh summit seems doomed to fail before it starts.
The Maastricht deal is under threat as Premier John Major struggles to get agreement on a series of deals.
Downing Street admitted: ‘There is a long way to go.
The list of problems is formidable.
We would not use the word optimism at all.’
Give us a vote
THREE out of four people want a referendum on the Maastricht Treaty, a Gallup poll revealed yesterday.
However Premier John Major rejected the survey of 7,000 people for BBC TV.
Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd also gave a flat ‘No’ when asked if the Government would hold a poll.
A royal variety of belly laughs
THEY'RE boozy, incoherent and fat — and they left Prince Charles and Princess Diana shaking with laughter.
Comedians Griff Rhys Jones and Mel Smith went for huge belly laughs as they poked fun at ‘a small group of people for whom this has been a terrible year — the British tabloid journalists’.
Unable to get their own back on the media hacks, Charles and Diana seemed happy to let the comic pair, clutching drinks and slurring their words, do it for them.
They didn't have it all their own way at the Royal Variety Show last night.
Veteran comic Jimmy Tarbuck greeted the Dominion Theatre audience with ‘Ladies, gentlemen and future taxpayers’.
He then suggested a way in which The Queen might get a tax rebate — by claiming ‘the Crown Jewels were made by Ratner’.
The three-hour show, to be screened on BBC1 this Saturday, also starred Michael Crawford, Barry Manilow and Nigel Kennedy.
It is expected to raise £400,000 for a benevolent fund for ageing former performers.
Lisa wins tape ban
SOUL singer Lisa Stansfield won a High Court ban yesterday preventing a record company cashing in on her fame by releasing ‘embarrassing’ teenage recordings.
In a statement to the court the 26-year-old singer said her fans would be ‘shocked’ to hear the recordings, made in 1981 and 1982.
Ian Mill, counsel for the Rochdale-born singer, said her voice on the tape is ‘poor and shrill’ and her reputation would be damaged if the songs were widely heard.
Midlands-based Sovereign Music was barred from releasing the album Lisa Stansfield In Session, pending a full hearing.
However Deputy Judge Anthony Watson QC refused to order Sovereign to return to Stansfield the master tapes of 14 songs, including Bitter Sweet, Walking On Thin Ice and Listen To Your Heart.
The case could now take two years to come to court.
The company claims full rights over the recordings, passed on to them under an agreement signed by Lisa's father and manager when she was 16.
A spokesman for Sovereign, who already had 40,000 orders for the album, said: ‘It would be a real shame if fans of Lisa never get to hear these recordings.’
‘We are not trying to rip people off and planned to put a sticker on the records saying they were recorded 10 years ago.
‘Her voice is different but you can hear the potential.’
TODAY managed to get hold of a sample of the record and music critic Gary Leboff said it ‘showed real star quality’.
He said: ‘There's nothing here for Lisa or her horde of advisers to feel ashamed of.
Compared to the early works of the Beatles, the Shamen or David Bowie, Lisa Stansfield In Session is a commendable first effort.’
Charmer Nigel steps in after plumbers rip off young mother
Adrian Lee
ACTOR Nigel Havers dipped into his own pocket yesterday when he heard how a plumber charged a young single mother more than £300 for a simple job.
The 43-year-old star of The Charmer telephoned the BBC moments after its Watchdog programme told of the plight of mother-of-three Jenny Graham.
He offered to pay the £300 she lost when the plumber sent her a £336 bill for unblocking her toilet.
Havers, whose Charmer character in the hit ITV series would have thought nothing of ripping off a needy mother, told the BBC he was touched by her story and wanted to give her a happy Christmas.
Miss Graham, who has three sons, Sam, eight, Jack, six, and Georgie, three, was last night overwhelmed by his generous offer.
She is surviving on family credit and before the actor stepped in had no idea how she would buy Christmas presents for her sons.
Miss Graham, 27, from Wimbledon, South London, said: ‘I was stunned and absolutely delighted when I heard Nigel had called.
‘I didn't know how I was going to cope.’
Jenny does not have a TV of her own.
She was watching the show at her mother's home.
Watchdog featured her after she called out a plumber to her home to unblock a toilet.
She was expecting a bill of no more than £50 for the short job, presenter John Stapleton told viewers.
A Watchdog spokeswoman said: ‘Mr Havers contacted us completely out of the blue.
‘There is a phone in number for viewers to air their opinions and he called in and said he was furious about what had happened to this poor woman and wanted to give her the money so she could buy presents for the boys.
‘Jenny contacted us to tell us she was delighted to accept his kind offer.
We are just glad the whole unfortunate episode has had a happy ending.’
The company which carried out the job last night refused to comment.
Your card is in the snail
HUNGRY snails are munching their way through thousands of Christmas cards to get at their favourite snack — the glue on envelopes and stamps.
Now the Post Office is trying out a special anti-snail surface on post boxes to deter the mischievous molluscs.
Teenage nanny in 3-hour sex ordeal
A TEENAGE nanny was dragged screaming, from a house and stabbed during a nightmare sex ordeal, a court heard yesterday.
Kenneth Brown, 21, had tricked his way into the Surrey home by asking to use the toilet, an Old Bailey jury was told.
He dragged the 18-year-old girl to a nearby common and forced her into humiliating sex acts for more than an hour while the three-month-old baby she had been caring for lay alone in the house.
‘Brown compelled her on a nightmarish walk,’ said Anthony Wilken, prosecuting.
‘He tried to rape her twice.
He tried to strangle her, but she fought him off.’
The girl eventually fled, half-naked, to a nearby house.
‘It was plain to the householder that she had been stabbed.
Her hands were covered in dry blood and she had mud on her back,’ said Mr Wilken.
Brown, of Mitcham, Surrey, denies kidnap and attempted rape and murder in April last year.
He allegedly told police that he had no memory of what happened that night.
He said he had drunk eight to 10 pints of lager and some vodka and tonic, the court was told.
The trial continues.
Great Windsor fire mystery
Charles Rae
THIS picture shows the charred remains of art restorers' materials said to have been found by investigators feet away from the seat of the Windsor Castle fire.
Flammable liquids were found in the Queen's private chapel, a castle source claimed yesterday.
TODAY has also discovered that the castle's own fire service warned of the danger of a blaze during restoration work.
In one case five fire extinguishers in the same room were found to be empty — some of which had been used by workmen to get rid of dust.
Action was taken, but the improvements did not last long.
Details of the materials in the chapel were not known at the time the official report into the £60 million blaze was put together.
‘It was a timebomb just waiting to be ignited,’ said a source.
‘Even if there was no restoration going on the castle fire service should have been informed this stuff was being stored in the chapel.’
The official report says no one was to blame for the fire, which started after a halogen lamp overheated near a curtain.
But just 6ft away, it is claimed dozens of beakers and containers used to mix cleaning liquids, the remains of paint brushes, a paint box and a palette knife, were discovered.
‘The castle fire brigade knew nothing about it,’ said the source.
‘All these items were found in the Queen's private chapel and are not mentioned in the official report.
‘Material must have been impregnated with the liquid and it would not have helped put the fire out.’
The claims came as Heritage Secretary Peter Brooke announced an investigation into fire precautions at all royal palaces.
A full report is expected inside three months.
The Windsor Castle source alleged countless breaches of fire regulations.
‘Each time a memo was fired off and the problem was solved, but it only lasted a few days and they were using the extinguishers again,’ he said.
‘I know they don't want to blame one particular person or persons.
‘But surely someone should be carrying the can for everything that's gone on.’
Official statements said that no art restoration work was being carried out in the Chapel at the time of the fire.
A Buckingham Palace spokesman denied claims yesterday that the materials were in the chapel.
‘Some pictures were being stored in the chapel,’ he said.
‘There was no restoration work going on and no restoration materials stored there.
‘The only things there were pictures, I can be categoric about that.’
Jerry Hall and Mick Jagger
TEXAN beauty Jerry Hall yesterday confirmed her marriage to Mick Jagger is definitely back on again.
Jerry, above, split with the Rolling Stone earlier this year over claims he had been dating model Carla Bruni.
‘We have sorted out our problems and everything is fine now,’ she said at Heathrow airport before flying out to host the Miss World contest in South Africa.
Breakfast can be the death of you
A MORNING bowl of muesli could contain as much fat as two fried eggs and four teaspoons of sugar, a report has warned.
Far from being the healthy breakfast choice, some cereals can be bad for your heart, says the report in Which?
Way To Health magazine.
Many children's cereals were very sweet and low in fibre, it added.
‘Cereal can be healthy but the nutritional value depends on the one you pick,’ said Magazine editor David Dickinson.
The best fibre-rich breakfasts were Nestle Shredded Wheat and Sainsbury's Mini Wheats.
The worst were frosted flakes and honey or crunchy nut flakes.
The fattiest muesli was Quaker's Tropical Harvest Crunch.
St Michael Chocolate Flake Crunchy Cereal was low in fibre and very sweet.
David Jason, another hit with A Touch Of Frost
COMEDY star David Jason has scored another hit with his new detective series, A Touch Of Frost.
Yorkshire TV, which made the £2 million series, said yesterday nearly 18 million people watched Sunday's first story in which Jason, above, plays Detective Inspector Jack Frost.
‘It's a great credit to David's versatility as a character actor,’ said a spokesman.
Elton's prize Jag crashed by chauffeur
Lisa Reynolds
ROCK star Elton John's prized £400,000 Jaguar sports car has been smashed up just a month after it was delivered.
The singer's chauffeur was running errands in the 219mph XJ220 when he hit a concrete bollard, denting the bonnet, wing, and spoiler.
No other vehicle was involved, and the driver walked unhurt from the smash near Elton's Berkshire home.
The repair bill for the 3.5-litre twin turbo, one of only 350 in the world, will run into thousands of pounds.
The superstar, who has 14 other cars including a number of Bentleys, is said to be devastated.
He beat hundreds of rival customers to win possession of one of the metallic blue XJ220s — the world's fastest sports car.
A friend said last night: ‘It will cost a fortune to get this car back to its former glory.
‘On a normal car some panel-beating and touching up would do the trick, but this is no normal car.
‘The slightest bang can ruin the finely tuned engine.
‘The car is at the garage now and Elton has been told the damage can be repaired and the car will be back on the road as soon as possible.’
A spokesman for Elton said: ‘It seems the car collided with a bollard that was out of position on the road.’
Elton's is the second XJ220 to be involved in a crash — in August Guardian journalist John Samuel did £20,000 damage to one when he hit the wrong gear during a test drive.
Insurance for one of the sleek motors, which can reach 100mph in eight seconds without leaving second gear, costs between £5,500 and £20,000 a year.
Hot water is the best cough cure
A GLASS of hot water soothes a cough as well as costly medicines, experts said yesterday.
The Consumers' Association magazine Which? said Britons, who spend £63 million a year on cough medicines, would better off using tried and tested methods such as inhaling steam and going to bed early.
The report tested 19 popular medicines, including expectorants for loosening a cough, and suppressants which should stop coughing.
Which? editor David Dickinson said there was no convincing evidence that expectorants worked.
And suppressants should never be used for a chesty cough.
He added: ‘Short term relief or a good night's sleep to help you recover is the best you can expect.’
Mars a day helps you work, rest and pay
Ian Fletcher, Consumer Correspondent
A MARS a day is easy on the British wallet.
At just 24p, the chocolate treat is cheaper here than anywhere else in the world, except America where it costs the same.
Icelanders have to fork out 57p for the same product.
Mind you, that's nothing compared to the £5.10 they pay for a McDonald's Big Mac which sets Britons back just £1.66.
Baked beans are cheapest here but our vices are punished — cigarettes and alcohol cost more in Britain.
The variation in prices is revealed in a survey published today.
Despite cheap chocolate, the World in a Shopping Basket study put the UK fifth most expensive in a league table of shopping prices.
The survey found we pay £42 for a basket of 22 everyday items compared to just £20.40 in Mexico.
The 13 countries surveyed pay an average of £37.63.
Market analysts Mintel compared prices of branded goods such as Heinz beans and Lux soap — 44p in Britain, 13p in Mexico — fresh produce like eggs and milk, and services such as taxi fares and dry cleaning — Pounds 5.85 here but just 95p in India.
Only Icelanders pay more than tax-penalised Britons for Marlboro cigarettes and Bacardi rum.
They're cheapest in Australia and Mexico although Mexican wages are lower.
Mintel chief executive John Cunningham said: ‘Some of the variations in price will be due to differences in exchange rates, some will be due to the differences in local raw materials and production or shipping costs, and some will be due to variation in taxes.
‘Some products have too wide a variation to be explained by these factors and one must assume that many multi-national companies are charging what they believe the market will bear.’
Joking Leslie takes his first step to fitness
Simon Trump
GAME show host Leslie Crowther is back on his feet and cracking jokes.
Doctors feared he could be permanently brain-damaged after an horrific motorway crash.
But TV star Leslie has amazed experts with his speedy recovery in the two months since the accident.
Consultant neurologist David Sandeman said: ‘His voice is weak but improves every day.
‘The rehabilitation process will be long and frustrating for him, but Leslie's determination is such I am confident he will do well.’
Mr Sandeman removed two blood clots from Leslie's brain in a critical 48 hours after the crash.
It was also feared an emergency tracheotomy could have ruined his distinctive voice for good.
For three weeks the Price Is Right celebrity was in a deep coma at Bristol's Frenchay Hospital.
Then came the first signs of recovery with the opening of his eyes and a squeeze of his wife's hand.
Devoted Jean Crowther and their sons and daughters kept a round-the-clock vigil at his bedside.
One of Leslie's first visitors since coming round was Rev Richard Hall, vicar of All Saints Church in the family's home village of Corston, near Bath.
‘He is still weak, but he is telling jokes,’ he said.
‘We talked about gardening and cricket which Leslie is keen on.
‘He was smiling and the twinkle was back in his eye.
‘The whole family is over the moon with his improvements.
Our prayers have been answered.’
Mr Sandeman said Leslie had made dramatic progress over the past 10 days.
‘He has been able to speak to us.
He has taken his first steps and is eating and drinking well.
‘It is nine weeks since his accident and only now is the acute phase of his recovery coming to an end.
From now, the rehabilitation phase begins.’
A spokeswoman for the Lord's Taverners charity, of which Leslie, 59, is president, said: ‘It is most encouraging news.
Leslie is daily gaining strength.
‘It remains too early for visitors other than family and very close friends.
It is essential his routine is not affected.’
Leslie's former Crackerjack co-presenter Don McLean said: ‘It's brilliant news.
I've been praying for him and this looks like the best possible outcome.
‘Hopefully, by the New Year he will be back to the Leslie Crowther we all know and love.’
Comedian Bernard Manning added: ‘It's fantastic.
There's been so much doom and gloom around it's nice to have some good news.’
Bride makes brother's dying wish come true
Ian Key
A BRIDE wed four months early yesterday to grant her brother's dying wish.
Margarita Georgiou brought her wedding day forward after cancer victim Nick was told by doctors he didn't have long to live.
She married music producer Mark Gamble, 26, who works with top group KWS.
And her frail brother bravely struggled from his sick bed to be best man.
Nick, 23, of Darlington, County Durham, has battled with leukaemia since he was 14.
Then this summer his condition deteriorated after a trip to Cyprus.
Nick said: ‘When doctors told me I wouldn't live past Christmas, my only wish was to see my sister get married.
‘Being best man was more than I could hope for.
Now I will die peacefully, having shared my sister's special day.’
Margarita, 25, a disc jockey at a Nottingham nightclub, said: ‘Getting married was beautiful and having Nick there was even better.’
Now Nick would like to hold his sister's baby, due on her birthday on February 17.
He added: ‘I would love to see Margarita's child.
‘Sadly, I don't feel that I will last that long.’
Tot hurled from stolen car in crash
A BABY'S skull was fractured yesterday after he was thrown from a stolen car as it overturned in a crash.
The 18-month-old boy was picked up by his mother as she fled with a man and a teenage youth from the wrecked car.
Police in Peterborough, Cambs, traced them within 15 minutes and took the baby and the man to hospital.
A youth of 16 was helping with their inquiries.
‘The child's welfare was the last thing on their minds,’ said a police spokesman.
‘They just wanted to get away from the car.’
Brave Dessie can go home
RACEHORSE Desert Orchid was due to return home today after a miracle recovery from major surgery.
Vets who cut out 10ft of his gut to cure colic on November 25 gave him a less than even chance of survival.
Dessie will still have to take it easy when he returns to his stable in Melton Mowbray, Leics.
Tragedy after knee surgery
A FATHER of three died from a blood clot eight days after knee replacement surgery to relieve arthritis in his leg.
Tony Petteford, 45, developed the clot which travelled to his lungs at Bath's Royal United Hospital.
‘I'm concerned about the after-care treatment,’ his widow Carol, of Bath, Avon, said yesterday.
From the pit to the catwalk
A MINER has become a fashion model.
Jon Booth, 25, appears in a Kay's mail order catalogue after responding to an ad for hunky men wanting a taste of the fashion world.
‘It was a lot of fun and I enjoyed it,’ said Jon of Kilton, Notts.
‘But there is no way I would be a professional model, its too exhausting.’
Bent bananas
BANANAS worth £3 million will be left to rot after Customs seized a cargo at Felixstowe, Suffolk, in a smuggling raid.
Gas kills couple
A FREAK gas accident was yesterday blamed for the death of brilliant young golfer Paul Hurring and his girlfriend.
Paul, and 21-year-old Charlotte Turtle, were found dead in bed on Sunday at Horsham, West Sussex.
British Gas said there were no faults at the cottage, but a cold snap may have caused poisonous carbon monoxide fumes to leak back in.
Paul, 23, of nearby Crawley, was tipped for stardom after finishing in the top 30 at the Austrian Open.
‘We are devastated,’ said his father Bill.
Fred's wrong turn causes M-way chaos
A PENSIONER caused havoc after getting lost and driving the wrong way up a motorway.
Fred Gilbert, 77, hit two vehicles as he headed west along the eastbound carriageway of the M4 in Wales, finally crashing near Newport, Gwent.
His family believes Fred, from Hereford, Hereford and Worcester, took a wrong turn in the torrential rain, ending up 50 miles from his destination of the Brecon Beacon mountains.
‘I hope they take his licence away,’ said his wife Nora, 79.
£2.2m sting of workaholic bank swindler
A SWINDLER who fleeced banks out of £2.2 million was jailed for four years yesterday.
Workaholic Stephen Cantor, 51, of Barnet, North London, who used forged share certificates as collateral for loans, was found guilty of 19 deception charges.
Peter McGrail, defending, told Knightsbridge Crown Court: ‘Cantor was a man driven by ambition.
This was a humiliating downfall.’
Cantor was ordered to pay £30,000 costs and was banned from being a director for 10 years.
Windsor whitewash insults all taxpayers
I WAS disgusted to read that the inquiry into the Windsor Castle fire produced only a one-and-a-half-page report writing it all off as an unfortunate accident.
After all, British taxpayers are picking up the £60 million bill and we ought to be told a lot more about why it happened and why so much damage was caused.
If an insurance company were having to pay out, they would want a lot more information than we are being offered.
Does this secretive attitude mean that the Royal Family will continue to refuse to allow detailed fire brigade inspections of their private quarters?
If so, what happens when Buckingham Palace, Sandringham or Balmoral go up in smoke?
I suppose taxpayers will have to cough up again.
We need a comprehensive, open investigation into this hugely expensive blaze so that the same mistakes will not recur.
Windsor whitewash insults all taxpayers
WHY on earth did Prince Charles defend the hooligan antics of the French farmers?
He must be living in a dream world talking about the traditions and vitality of rural life as if we were still stuck in the Middle Ages.
Farming these days is big business and the French farmers are fighting over cash, not some romantic rustic idyll.
Has the Prince forgotten that it was the French farmers who attacked British lorry drivers and burned their cargoes of lamb?
Baby in carrycot snatched
Rob Perkins
A NINE-week-old baby was snatched from a shopping centre last night.
The boy was last seen in his blue carrycot left outside a shop while his mother went inside.
When she returned a few minutes later, the carrycot and child had gone.
Witnesses said a man wearing a long, dark coat was seen running from the Willenhall Shopping Centre in Coventry.
White and slim, he had dark hair and a moustache.
The dark-haired child was wearing a white woollen coat, white trousers and a blue peaked hat.
He weighs 10lbs and wore distinctive red booties.
The 32-year-old mother was being counselled by a WPC trained specifically in child snatch cases.
She told detectives she was in the Co-op store for less than 10 minutes at about 4.15pm.
‘The mother is in a terrible state,’ said Detective Chief Inspector Alan Burrell.
‘We are trying everything we can to help her.’
‘A man was seen running away, though we don't know whether this is connected.
We want to trace him.
‘More than 60 officers have been drafted into the area to search for the baby.
‘We are also checking known sex offenders in Coventry.’
West Midlands police have set up an incident room at the city's Little Park Street police station where the mother is being interviewed.
They appealed to Christmas shoppers: ‘Contact us if you saw anything.’
Electricity charges cut
ELECTRICITY bills are to be cut by one per cent from April, power watchdogs announced yesterday.
The reduction of the Government's fossil fuel levy on bills to 10 per cent will save a typical family £2.45 a year.
‘We shall make sure that the cut is passed on,’ said a spokesman for the Office of Electricity Regulation.
The levy is used to subsidise nuclear power and the development of tidal and wind power.
Strip off for the TV Valentine
A LIVE nudes show is being planned by Channel 4 as part of a Love Weekend coinciding with St Valentine's Day.
The Naked Chat Show is planned as a highlight of the three-night event next February.
It will feature celebrities and members of the public who dare to strip for the cameras.
Among those who might be invited to bare all for the show are actress Antonia de Sanchez — ex-minister David Mellor's former lover — and ‘Miss Whiplash’ Sarah Dale, Chancellor Lamont's former tenant.
Politicians such as Ken Livingstone and Sir Nicholas Fairbairn may be invited to get extra-controversial by discussing sex and beauty in the altogether, with hosts Richard Jobson and Nina Myskow.
The show will be screened live after midnight.
‘Some people will get cross,’ independent producer Eleanor Stephens said yesterday.
‘But we are not out to sensationalise.’
Channel 4's New Year schedule also includes Harry Enfield's Guide to Opera and a Dennis Potter series, Lipstick on Your Collar.
Boris on the forecourt
TENNIS star Boris Becker is moving into car sales with Mercedes-Benz, it was revealed yesterday.
The three-times Wimbledon champion is paying more than £8 million for two dealerships to be called Autohaus Boris Becker.
The takeovers in the German coastal towns of Stralsund and Ribnitz from next July will create 70 jobs.
Becker, 25, and Mercedes chairman Werner Niefer will sign a contract on Friday.
Fashion grab gang strikes
RAIDERS escaped with £15,000 worth of menswear destined for the Clothes Show exhibition.
Their haul of 90 complete outfits included suits, leather jackets and shoes, said Roy Kent of For Him magazine, which is organising the men's section of the show beginning at Earl's Court tomorrow.
‘As you can imagine it has been total panic but fortunately the suppliers have been very co-operative and we will be ready.’
Foreign stars steal Royal Variety Show
By Chris Hutchins
THE big names of British showbusiness were out in force at this year's Royal Variety Show — but it was overseas performers who milked the loudest applause.
American singer Gloria Estefan and Bolshoi Ballet stars Yuri Klevtsov and Madezhda Gracheva stole the show in front of a West End audience which included Prince Charles and Princess Diana.
The power of Gloria was matched only by the grace of the Russian dancers.
Another big favourite was 75-year-old tenor Josef Locke.
The Irishman won a rousing reception for Goodbye From White Horse Inn in what he had vowed was his ‘last ever singing appearance in public’.
Locke's surprise appearance was his way of repaying Diana for her part in setting him up recently on TV's This Is Your Life.
He even outstripped Michael Crawford, who performed Gethsemane from Jesus Christ Superstar, and Barry Manilow, who put on a faultless showpiece.
Mike Michaels the Mechanical Magician proved to be the best novelty act the show has unearthed in years.
His speciality — opening his face mask to reveal the electronic workings of his head — had the audience gasping.
American comedienne Rita Rudner was another hit newcomer to the show.
She told the audience for the birth of her 18lb baby she was given dynamite instead of pethidine.
Diana laughed loudest when Rita added: ‘The baby could walk before I could.’
Rita confessed her frock had come from a Beverly Hills shop which was so snooty the assistant asked her if she had an appointment: ‘I asked, ‘Why, do the dresses have something else to do?’’
Mel Smith took a sideswipe at Nigel Kennedy with his announcement that he had good news for music lovers — the violinist's appearance had been cancelled.
But Kennedy's talent won over the hard-to-please punters despite him being one of the scruffiest acts ever to face the Royal box.
Sporting matted hair, an unkempt beard and purple sneakers he even gave Charles and Diana a thumbs-up sign at the end of his performance.
Smith and partner Griff Rhys Jones took the stage after Jimmy Tarbuck.
Their parody of two drunken journalists provided the Royal couple with a chance to have the last laugh on Fleet Street.
‘We must remember that small group of people who have had such a dreadful year — the tabloid journalists,’ said Mel.
Jobs fear as £2.3bn jet order called off
By Alan Jones
BRITAIN'S crisis-hit aircraft industry could face more job losses after the cancellation of a £2.3 billion order for the European Airbus, union leaders feared last night.
America's Northwest Airlines, fighting off bankruptcy, has scrapped plans to buy 74 of the jets.
British Aerospace, which has a one-fifth partnership in the European Airbus combine, makes all the wings for the plane, at its Chester plant.
About 7,000 people work on the project there and at Filton, Bristol.
‘This is a bitter blow, coming on top of massive job losses in aerospace,’ union spokesman John Weakley said yesterday.
Mr Weakley, chief aerospace negotiator for the Amalgamated Engineering and Electrical Union, added: ‘We are concerned about the effect this will have on jobs.’
The Airbus project gives work to 300 firms and about 30,000 people in Britain.
Hundreds of the aircraft are on order, but loss of the Northwest batch is a serious setback.
Airbus made no official comment on the cancellation yesterday, as negotiations with Northwest Airlines continued.
America's airlines have been badly hit by the world recession.
Many have suspended or cancelled orders for new planes.
AEEU president Bill Jordan agreed that the Northwest cancellation was a serious blow.
But it would not stop the project's ‘upward path to success’, he said.
He added: ‘The Airbus has been the most successful venture into the civilian aerospace industry in the last 20 years.’
A leader of the white-collar Manufacturing, Science and Finance Union, Tim Webb, said: ‘We believe that the Northwest Airlines cancellation is only a temporary setback.’
BRITISH Petroleum and Jet cut the price of petrol by up to 13.5p a gallon — 3p a litre — yesterday, ending a run of increases over recent months.
Diesel was cut by 4.5p a gallon — 1p a litre.
Rivals Jet followed BP's lead, and other firms are expected to follow soon.
Armed raid pensioner pedals off
A PENSIONER bandit held up a bank with a sawn-off shotgun before escaping on a bicycle yesterday.
The greying gunman pulled the weapon out of a carrier bag and threatened to shoot a cashier unless she handed over money.
The girl gave him an undisclosed amount of cash and he hurried out.
He was last seen pedalling furiously away from the Midland Bank in Chiswick, west London.
The balding robber, whose face was partly masked by a scarf, appeared to be in his seventies.
‘Fortunately, no shots were fired and no-one was hurt,’ a bank spokesman said.
‘Police were on the scene very quickly, but he had already cycled away.
‘All we can assume is he must be very fit for his age.’
Bomb scare capital chaos
LONDON was plunged into chaos last night when two of its busiest rail stations were closed for three hours by a bomb scare.
Thousands of commuters using Victoria and Waterloo stations — which serve the south of England -had to find alternative routes home after a coded message claiming to be from the IRA warned of two devices in the capital.
The closures hit motorists as rush-hour traffic ground to a halt.
Both stations were searched but nothing was found.
Police make 3 in 4 happy
THREE out of four people think the police do a good job, a new report reveals.
Support is lower among black people, with only 52 per cent of Afro-Caribbeans rating performance as good, says a Gallup survey.
Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke, who yesterday unveiled a five-point police plan, said: ‘Quality is about getting the job done.’
Mr Green Shield dies
THE man who launched Green Shield Stamps and the Argos catalogue chain has died aged 74.
Londoner Richard Tompkins worked as a petrol pump attendant before starting the stamp company in 1956.
In the 1970s it turned over more than £50 million, but it sank last year after an unsuccessful relaunch.
He started the Argos chain in 1973.
Fury as Ford car prices rise by £1,000
Paul Wilenius, Political Editor
CAR giant Ford is to increase its prices — wrecking Government hopes of boosting the industry.
Bosses announced yesterday they will be putting more than £1,000 on the price of some models from January 3.
Treasury chiefs are furious at the move that more than wipes out the benefits of the scrapping of the car sales tax.
Three weeks ago Chancellor Norman Lamont cut the tax by up to £400 in the Autumn Statement in a bid to revive the flagging motor industry.
Ford blamed the rises on the fall in the pound since the Government pulled out of the exchange rate mechanism in September.
The increases, ranging from 4.5 per cent to 10 per cent, will push the price of a Fiesta 1.1 from £6,215 to £6,495, and an Escort Cosworth from £22,555 to £24,810.
Labour MP John Spellar said: ‘These rises put at risk the fragile recovery in the car industry.
They're gambling with car workers' jobs.’
Labour consumer affairs spokesman Nigel Griffiths said: ‘The Chancellor is being walked over by the manufacturers.
He's allowing companies to pocket the tax reduction.’
A Ford spokesman said: ‘I refute we're trying to take advantage of price reductions as a result of the abolition of the car tax.
Our costs have risen far more than the increases we have put forward as a result of the devaluation.’
The Consumers' Association said devaluation of the pound had brought British car prices roughly into line with the rest of the EC.
Policy director Stephen Locke said: ‘This confirms all our worst fears about the manufacturers' desire to see the UK as a high-price, high-profit market.
‘We've been worried for years about their tendency to see Britain as a soft market in which to make a killing.’
Ministers said last night they expected market pressures would force Ford to scrap their price rises within a few months, or they could be forced to discount their prices very heavily.
Anne's little sparkler
Charles Rae and Clive Nelson
PRINCESS Anne reluctantly showed off her new engagement ring yesterday — a large ruby flanked by two diamonds.
Publicity shy Anne, who tried to keep details of her wedding secret, set out with black gloves to hide the sparkler.
But her guard slipped briefly as she walked back to her limousine after an official visit in London.
A gems expert said Commander Tim Laurence's choice of a Victorian-style ring was perfect.
‘The ruby is the most romantic of all the stones.
It's the colour of warmth and blood and passion,’ said jewellery writer Vivienne Becker.
It is thought the ring would cost between £5,000 and Pounds 20,000, depending on the size of the stones.
But the sparkler failed to put a smile on Anne's face as she attended a meeting to discuss the construction of horses' saddles yesterday.
Wearing a green and red tartan dress, she kept her head down as she spotted newsmen.
But she told one VIP she was ‘looking forward tremendously’ to Saturday's ceremony at Balmoral.
A furious row broke out last night over who should film the happy couple outside tiny Crathie church.
A freelance camerman will be the only person allowed near — and television companies will have to pay him if they want to include the footage in their news bulletins.
Television chiefs from the BBC, ITN and BSkyB, partly owned by News International which also publishes TODAY, have all lodged complaints that the deal will cost them a total of £4,500.
Cameraman Phillip Bonham-Carter, a favourite of the Queen, stands to make up to Pounds 100,000 from repeat fees and payments from foreign news organisations each time the shots are shown.
Buckingham Palace bosses, who describe the deal as a ‘private arrangement between the Princess Royal, Commander Laurence and the cameraman’, have told the TV stations to ‘take it or leave it’.
A source at ITN said: ‘The whole thing is outrageous.
Each one of the TV companies would have done it for free and pooled the material.
The only cost would have been for the satellite transmission, which would have been shared.’
A Palace spokesman said: ‘The Princess Royal and Commander Laurence are having some pictures and film taken for themselves.
‘Whoever is doing this film is covering their costs in making this material available to the media.
We are not prepared to say any more.’
Mr Bonham-Carter, who recently worked on the documentary Elizabeth R to commemorate the Queen's 40 years on the throne, was not available for comment yesterday.
But his video may not find as many overseas buyers as his rivals think.
The royal wedding is creating little media frenzy around the world.
In America, the big four organisations — ABC, NBC, CBS and CNN — are not even sending their London-based crews to Scotland.
Meanwhile, fashion pundits were speculating last night that although Anne is likely to splash out on a new outfit, she will be wearing an old hat when she walks up the aisle.
Her personal milliner John Boyd, who has been making hats for the princess since she was 16, said: ‘She already has such a collection of hats that she doesn't need anything new for this occasion.’
The Princess Royal has around 10 hats made each year which means she must have at least 260 to choose from by now.
Mr Boyd predicted: ‘She will go for a classic style which never dates.
It will have a wide brim and be in a subtle pastel colour.
We work very closely with her dress designer Jacques Reiss, getting patterns of her dresses and then we make up hats to match.
But I believe her wedding outfit is already made.’
Reiss, Anne's favourite designer and hot tip for the outfit, favours knee-length styles in soft pastels.
But he is not letting any secrets slip before the big day.
‘I have been asked not to comment,’ he said.
After following the age-old tradition of marrying in something old and something new, practical Anne has also opted for something four-wheel drive.
She will arrive at the church in her own dark green Range Rover.
Her choice of transport is in stark contrast to the glitz and glamour of a horse-drawn carriage she used in 1973 when she married Captain Mark Phillips.
This time the Princess Royal is trying to keep her wedding as private as possible.
One source said: ‘It would come as no surprise to find her driving herself to the church.
‘You know what she is like for fuss.’
Appeal for calm after arson blitz on temples
Rob Perkins
MOSLEM and Hindu leaders appealed for calm yesterday after a Hindu temple was burnt to the ground and three others fire-bombed.
More than 70 firemen fought the blaze at Shree Krishna Hindu temple in Blacklake, West Bromwich, in the early hours of the morning.
The former Methodist church, a listed building, was gutted and nearly all its valuable artefacts destroyed.
‘This was an act of sheer barbarism,’ said a temple official.
‘But we are peaceful people and we are not looking for revenge.
We will rebuild this temple.’
Just hours before the West Bromwich blaze a Hindu temple in Sparkbrook, Birmingham, was slightly damaged when three youths threw a petrol bomb against an outside wall.
An hour later youths threw a petrol bomb at a temple in Coventry, before breaking a rear window and throwing two more petrol bombs inside, causing slight damage.
The Wishwa Parishad Hindu temple in Bolton, Greater Manchester, was slightly damaged when inflammable liquid was set alight.
The attacks followed riots in India, Pakistan and Bangladesh which flared up after Hindus destroyed a mosque in the Indian city of Ayodhya.
‘Every member of the Hindu community is deeeply saddened by what has happened, things are escalating at an alarming rate,’ said Bob Patel, a president of the burnt-out temple.
‘But it is vital that we remain calm.
What is happening in India at the moment is something we were not expecting.
It is important that we do not allow such incidents to affect our own lives here in Britain.’
But he warned that Moslems could be forced to take action to protect their community.
‘We are a peaceful community but we cannot stand by and allow the people responsible to destroy the fabric of our society.
‘It is important that we protect against these outrageous actions.’
Another president Chiman Patel added: ‘There is anger running through the community.’
West Bromwich police Chief Superintendent Brian Quilter also appealed for calm.
‘I am calling on my officers to give extra attention to temples and mosques in the area and people must be urged to be vigilant to protect their property,’ he said.
Labour MP Peter Snape, who turned back en route to Westminster from his West Bromwich home, said he shared the concern of community leaders.
‘We have managed to keep relations very harmonious for many years and we will not let anything disrupt that harmony,’ he said.
‘Feelings are running high following this outrage but it is important that the community remains calm.’
Where 1.3m Asians have set up home
Matthew Benns
THERE are 840,000 people of Indian origin and 475,000 Pakistanis in Britain.
Over half the Indians are in the South East, with 340,000 in London, says expert Dr David Owen.
‘The Indians who initally came here in the Sixties had skills and capital which allowed them to move into small businesses,’ said Dr Owen, research fellow at the Centre for Ethnic Relations at Warwick University.
Nearly 17 per cent of Indians are in Birmingham and Coventry, with most of the rest in West Yorkshire, and the East Midlands.
Almost 150,000 Pakistanis live in the South of England, 100,000 in London, with similar numbers in Birmingham and Coventry.
Dr Owen said: ‘The Pakistani population arrived after the Indians and found the bulk of its employment in the North.’
Manchester has 50,000 Pakistanis and the North West and West Yorkshire together 150,000.
‘A great many were born in Britain and have adopted the British culture whilst keeping in contact with their religious roots,’ said Dr Owen.
Dr Robert Bradnock of the School of Oriental and African Studies in London said: ‘Although the older generation strongly feel the pull of the old countries, I think they will put a lot of pressure on the young people to try and stop them rushing off and doing something which might escalate out of control.’
Cost of petrol comes down
PETROL prices are set to be slashed by up to 14p a gallon, bringing some unleaded fuel back below the £2 a gallon mark.
Jet, which already sells cut-price petrol, will knock 12p off a gallon of unleaded, reducing it to £199.6p.
BP will cut by up to 13.6p a gallon — but warned many of their 1,500 stations ‘already reflect the reduction’.
Rises in the value of the pound against the dollar and a fall in oil prices have sparked the cuts.
BA swoop for Aussie rivals
BRITISH Airways launched a multi-million pound bid for the Australian giant Qantas yesterday.
BA has submitted a sealed bid for up to 35 per cent of the airline, due for privatisation.
If accepted by the Australian government it will be the last major link in a global network.
BA is also on the verge of acquiring a £400 million stake in USAir.
Charges cut
ELECTRICITY bills are to be cut by one per cent from April.
The Government has reduced its fossil fuel levy on bills to 10 per cent which will save a typical family £2.45 a year.
‘We shall make sure the cut is passed on,’ said a spokesman for the Office of Electricity Regulation.
Temple president Chiman Patel surveys the burnt-out shell of the Shree Krishna Hindu building which was destroyed in a wave of arson attacks
Volkswagen Paula sued for £17,000
MODEL Paula Hamilton is being sued for £17,000 by a firm of lawyers.
The star of the Volkswagen adverts, who earns £1,000 a day, has paid only £21.50 of fees over a court case, says the company.
Solicitors Campbell Hooper claim they sent the 33-year-old star eight bills.
Now they are taking her to the High Court.
The firm represented Paula when she was given a conditional discharge for causing £570 damage to a taxi in a drunken rage.
The court heard then that Paula had lost contracts because of the publicity.
Celebrities strip off for a TV valentine
A LIVE nudes show is being planned by Channel 4 as part of a Love Weekend to mark St Valentine's Day.
The Naked Chat Show, to screen after midnight, will feature celebrities and members of the public who dare to strip for the cameras.
The guest list may include actress Antonia de Sancha — David Mellor's former lover — and ‘Miss Whiplash’ Sarah Dale, Chancellor Lamont's former tenant.
MPs may also be asked to discuss sex and beauty naturally with hosts Richard Jobson and Nina Myskow.
‘We are not out to sensationalise,’ said independent producer Eleanor Stephens.
Jobs fear as £2.3bn jet deal dumped
THE crisis-hit aircraft industry could face more job losses after the cancellation of a £2.3 billion order for the European Airbus.
Financially troubled US firm Northwest Airlines, has scrapped plans to buy 74 of the jets.
The Airbus project gives work to 300 firms and about 30,000 British workers.
British Aerospace makes all the wings for the plane at its Chester plant.
About 7,000 people work on the project there and at Filton, Bristol.
‘This is a bitter blow, coming on top of massive job losses in aerospace,’ said union leader John Weakley.
As 120 jobs were axed at Scottish Power's giant Longannet coal-fired power station in Fife yesterday, the Government announced plans to create 1.5 million new training places to help the long-term unemployed.
‘It is targeted on those who need most help to get back to work,’ said Employment Secretary Gillian Shephard.
The moves include loans for training and a scheme involving enterprise councils and local firms.
Summit for everyone
Dominic Midgley
HUNDREDS of Eurocrats will turn Edinburgh into a City of Gold when they EC summit circus descends this week.
The city council estimates that the conference will bring an £11 million bonanza for hotels, restaurants, shops and security services.
Hire cars will be a £1 million earner.
The main contract firm, W A Slay, had to approach undertakers to get enough black Daimler limousines for status-conscious dignitaries.
Each delegation is allotted two Daimler limousines and two saloon cars.
‘We didn't get as many cars as we would have liked from funeral directors,’ said managing director Lowrie as copySlay, ‘but they've got their responsibility to their trade.
‘It would mean tying up cars for four to five days — and a lot of people wouldn't get buried.’
At the Royal Mile Whiskies shop there's a cannily-timed Scotch malt at £27.70, sporting the Royal Blue and gold stars of the EC flag.
Even car towaways are in on the act.
Bristol Towing and Storage have the contract to haul away illegally-parked cars.
‘But we won't benefit,’ manager Richard Abram insisted.
‘It'll be policed so heavily there will be no extra work for us.’
Major woos foes to avert disaster
Paul Wilenius, Political Editor
PREMIER John Major is so worried this weekend's EC summit will end in disaster he has called on bitter enemy Francois Mitterrand for help.
Mr Major has invited the French president to dinner tomorrow in a bid to win his support.
He will also meet German Chancellor Helmut Kohl for a working breakfast immediately before discussions start on Friday morning.
The Premier is desperate to mark his EC presidency with a British led Euro-recovery plan.
He wants to start with a virtual pay freeze on the public sector throughout Europe and a commitment to big capital spending.
But without the support of the other big two, he is likely to face a humiliating rejection.
And Mr Mitterrand is already smarting over the British-backed Gatt deal, which he claims will ruin French farming.
The scale of the problems facing Mr Major worsened yesterday as it became clear the Danes want even more concessions over Maastricht.
They have even demanded that their troops never be forced to fight in a European army.
Even if these disputes can be overcome, Mr Major will struggle to force through a broad range of measures aimed at lifting recession.
He admitted his difficulties in the Commons yesterday, describing the forthcoming negotiations as ‘very complex’.
His toughest will centre on enlargement of the Community and future contributions to the huge EC budget.
But he is adamant there will be no change in the British rebate from the Community, worth £2 billion a year in repaid contributions.
He claims his recovery plan kills off Labour claims that he is doing nothing to combat unemployment.
It was Britain which had made sure finance ministers would be at the summit so the recovery talks can go ahead, he said.
‘The economy has been a main topic of discussion at all meetings we have had in Europe in recent months.
‘A team of Treasury officials has been travelling throughout Europe to coordinate positions.
‘I very much hope that co-ordinated measures will emerge from these discussions.
‘But we will have to wait and see what our European partners also feel at Edinburgh.’
Money talks
THIS is how Edinburgh expects its windfall to add up:
CATERING: Delegates' food and drink bill — £1.5 million.
HOTELS: £2.4 million.
The 216-room, five-star Caledonian Hotel, housing UK and Irish delegates, charges £225 for a room with view of castle and its Pompadour restaurant doesn't come cheap: a starter of pan-fried foie gras costs £22.
Six hotels are taking delegations.
Many others will house the horde of Press, television and radio people.
SHOPPING: Visitors are expected to part with £4.3 million.
TRANSPORT: £1 million for delegates from 12 nations.
SECURITY: Another £1 million for police without accounting for specialist anti-terrorist units.
SOUVENIRS: These are likely to top up the EC jackpot, though it's hard to guess a figure.
But an on-the-ball whisky shop could make a killing with its special EC-label malt Scotch at £27.70 a bottle.
PRESS CENTRE: Conversion at Meadowbank Sports Centre £1 million.
Income from feeding around 2,000 journalists, £700,000.
Leith's catering company has been hired to look after the Press at the stadium, which has been booked for three weeks.
Royal wedding plans rift
PRINCESS Anne and the Queen Mother both carried out duties in the City of London yesterday.
Though their functions were only 200 yards apart, the thorny issue of who will attend the royal wedding has caused a huge gulf between them.
The Queen Mother is believed to be strongly against divorced Anne's decision to remarry on Saturday.
She looked relaxed at a Guildhall lunch but a spokesman said: ‘She has no plans to travel to Scotland at present but she has not made a final decision.’
Health problems were ruled out as a reason for possibly avoiding the trip.
The spokesman added: ‘She already has a programme of engagements.’
Miracle on his hands
A POLICEMAN whose hand was sewn back on after a sword attack yesterday picked up an object for the first time.
Detective Sergeant Robin Window unrolled a bandage — and passed a milestone since his hand was severed by a blow from a samurai sword six weeks ago.
‘I could get a job as a mechanical grabber down at Southend Pier,’ he joked.
The hand was sewn back on in an 11½-hour operation at Mount Vernon Hospital in Northwood, north London.
Already Robin's fingernails are growing and blood is flowing through the hand, although he has little feeling higher than the base of his palm.
‘I have got no doubt there will be some disability at the end of the day,’ the Edmonton PC told BBC Newsroom South East.
‘The injury was such that if there was not some disability it will be nothing short of a miracle.
There has been one miracle already and that has been the hand put back on.’
Det Sgt Window, 39, who is married with two children, was attacked when he and two colleagues called at a house in Tottenham, north London.
He is having intensive physiotherapy at Mount Vernon to restore flexibility.
‘If I am motivated and do the work myself they are quite happy there will be considerable improvement,’ he said.
One in five only dream of a good night's sleep
Nicki Pope, Medical Correspondent
THE dream of a good night's sleep can turn into a nightmare for one in five people who often find themselves awake into the early hours.
One in seven men and more than one in four women have difficulty sleeping — regardless of whether they are unemployed or working irregular shifts.
Men find work problems keep them awake, while women worry about family troubles.
Doctors are being urged to treat insomnia as a medical problem and will today get new guidelines on how to deal with it.
Stress and worry are the main causes, but fear of oversleeping in the morning, late-night eating and snoring partners can lead to restless nights, says a survey for the Royal Society of Medicine.
Over-active minds affect one in eight men and women, and another one in 10 stay awake through pain or illness.
Up to a quarter said their relationships with partners suffered as they became more irritable, and one in 20 have problems staying awake while driving or operating machinery.
Suggested cures include warm, milky drinks before bedtime, deep breathing, avoiding caffeine and thinking of warm beaches and green fields.
But getting rid of the TV and keeping the bedroom for sex could be the best cure of all.
‘Bedrooms should be reserved for sleeping and not for work or an office or watching TV,’ said Dr George Beaumont, an expert in sleeping disorders.
‘The only other thing it should be reserved for is sex,’
There is just one problem.
While men find sex can be a great relaxant, it often has the opposite effect on women.
Now, that's something to sleep on.
Gift for Janet
COMMANDER Fabian Malbon, skipper of HMS Invincible, yesterday handed over a cheque for £1,250 to cancer victim Janet Murray, right, at a Kent nursing home.
The commander, above, and his crew raced up the Rock of Gibraltar to help Janet's Team-Up appeal.
Three in 4 are happy with police
THREE out of four people think the police do a good job, a new report reveals.
However, support is lower among black people, with only 62 per cent of Asians and 52 per cent of Afro-Caribbeans rating performance as good.
Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke announced the Gallup findings yesterday as he unveiled a five-point plan designed to lead to better policing.
‘Quality is about getting the job done,’ he said.
‘It means asking the public what sort of service they want, then acting on that knowledge.’
Cheers for brave Dessie
RACEHORSE Desert Orchid was cheered as he set off home yesterday after a life-saving operation.
Dessie, who stunned vets with his amazing recovery, returned to stables in Melton Mowbray, Leics.
‘He's such a brave horse,’ said vet Tim Greet, of the Rossdale Veterinary practice in Newmarket, Suffolk.
Pupils call for cash lessons
PUPILS want personal finance to be taught in primary schools.
They called for a broader curriculum in a survey that revealed that 14 per cent believe bank loans are interest-free.
The survey of 13 to 18-year-olds for Pearl Assurance said 40 per cent had bank accounts while 18 per cent had piggy banks.
Well done, you're fired
A STORE boss who chased two thieves and recovered most of their £1,200 haul has been rewarded with the sack.
Gary Whitham, manager of the Jolly Giant in Lincoln, was dismissed for gross negligence after leaving the cash office unlocked.
‘I don't think my actions warranted this,’ he said.
Stargazer's terror alert
A STARGAZER sparked a terrorist alert with a telescope overlooking Territorial Army barracks.
Police kicked down the door of a flat belonging to Maria Shenton's boyfriend, in Meir, Staffs, suspecting an IRA plot.
Maria, 34, said: ‘I think it is shocking the way they have handled the whole affair.’
Murder photos dumped on tip
POLICE launched an inquiry yesterday after four sacks full of highly-sensitive police papers were found dumped on a public tip in Brighton, Sussex.
The material, including details of court witnesses, sex offenders and a photograph of a naked murdered woman, had been supplied to a legal firm in the town.
A police spokesman said: ‘We are very annoyed.’
Young drug-users double
THE number of under-25s who have taken drugs in Britain has almost doubled in the last three years.
Three out of 10 aged over 15 admit to it, with half believing marijuana should be legalised.
One in four has taken Ecstacy, while LSD users have doubled to 35 per cent, says a survey by jeans company Wrangler.
200-mile highway robbery
MASKED raiders followed a market trader for 200 miles before hijacking his car and stealing £15,000 takings.
The three robbers trailed their 38-year-old victim from Blackbushe market, Hants, to Ashbourne, Derbyshire.
Outrage as drink-drive killer gets four months
Simon Trump
A DRINK-DRIVER was jailed for just four months yesterday for mowing down a nine-year-old girl.
Sharon Townsend was thrown through the air and left on the roadside with fatal head injuries, a court heard.
Christopher Hart told police he did not stop because he thought he had run over a cardboard box.
Sharon's heartbroken family and drink-drive campaigners were left devastated by the lenient sentence.
They claim he should have faced a Crown Court judge for causing death by reckless driving.
Instead he admitted lesser motoring offences including drink-driving, failing to give a breath test and not stopping after an accident.
Sharon's mother Bella, 35, left the hearing in Swindon, Wilts, in tears.
Family friend Bernard Williams said: ‘The sentence is a joke.
‘This bloke left a young girl for dead and ruined a family's life.
Every time Sharon's father Steve walks past the spot where she was killed, he stops and stares and his eyes fill up with tears.
He's devastated.
Bella can't even bear to look.’
Derek Probart, chairman of the Campaign Against Drinking And Driving, said: ‘I'm shattered by the decision to deal with this tragic case before magistrates.
He was over the legal limit, he was driving that car and he killed that little girl.
‘Surely with a death involved, it should have a charge of reckless driving been heard by a judge.’
Marian Page, of Keep Death Off Our Roads, said: ‘It seems there is a law to protect this drink-driver but not his little victim.
This person should have been made to feel the full weight of the law.’
The court heard that jobless Hart, 39, hit Sharon as she crossed the road on the way back from fetching sweets.
He told his girlfriend he thought he had run over a box.
He gave himself up to police later that night and said he had drunk two cans of lager.
It was calculated from a breath test taken then that he was nearly one and a half times over the limit for driving at the time of the accident.
The court heard that while on bail Hart, who was also banned from driving for four and a half years, was caught behind the wheel in a pub car park but refused to take breath tests.
Martyn Lewis, defending, said: ‘The defendant was devastated by the loss of his father who died within 10 days of this tragic accident.’
Firebomb killer is jailed for life
A PLUMBER was jailed for life yesterday for killing two sisters in a firebomb attack.
Alan Jones, 29, poured petrol through the letterbox of his girlfriend Christine Smith's home after a row over a burger.
Miss Smith's nieces Laura, four, and Emma, three, died in the blaze at Sutton in Ashfield, Notts.
Jones was convicted of murder and attempted murder at Nottingham Crown Court.
Tribute to hero sergeant
A MEMORIAL to police sergeant Alan King will mark the spot where he died on duty.
The 3ft granite memorial will be unveiled next spring in Walthamstow, east London, where Nicholas Vernage stabbed Mr King to death.
Triple murderer Vernage, 27, was jailed for life at the Old Bailey on Monday.
Here we go-go again
READY Steady Go! is to make a comeback.
Former pop star Dave Clark, who owns the rights to the Sixties music show, said yesterday he had clinched a deal with Channel 4 to screen 13 of the original episodes next year.
Heading for the charts
RADIO One's first black DJ is to replace Alan Freeman on the Sunday lunchtime chart show.
‘The Man’ Ezeke, 50, who hosts the stations's reggae show, takes over on January 3.
Snatched baby back with mum
Rob Perkins
A RELIEVED mother was reunited with her baby last night after he was kidnapped.
The nine-week-old boy was grabbed as he slept in his carry-cot outside a shopping centre.
His 32-year-old mother had popped in to finish her weekly shopping in the local Co-Op store and returned just five minutes later to find him missing.
The abduction sparked a house-to-house police search in the Willenhall area of Coventry.
After a tip-off to police the baby was recovered and he was reunited with his mother at a West Midlands hospital four hours after he was taken.
‘The mother was extremely upset but very relieved that her son has been returned to her,’ said police Superintendent Ray Starkey.
‘He is safe and well and we are treating it as a genuine abduction.’
Two women were helping police with their inquiries last night.
Mr Grand National is killed
THE man who saved the Grand National was killed in a hunting accident yesterday.
Horse race supremo John Parrett died instantly after falling from his horse.
Mr Parrett, 44, managing director and clerk at Aintree, was out with the Wynstay Hunt in Cheshire.
He joined the famous Aintree course in 1983 when its future was in jeopardy, but won major sponsorship for the National.
Plans included a casino on the site.
Colleague Nigel Payne said: ‘We're all devastated.’
Check mate shot loser
A GAMES player shot his lodger after beating him at chess.
Robert Bryan put a shotgun to the neck of poor loser Matthew Hay during a quarrel the next morning.
Then the retired postman pulled the trigger, the Old Bailey heard.
Male model Hay, 22, only escaped death by moving his head at the critical moment.
‘He has got an angel's face but a devil's brain.
I hated playing chess with him, I always had to lose,’ Bryan, 65, told police.
‘I would have drained him of blood in the bath and buried him in Epping Forest.’
During their ‘strange relationship’, Bryan had shot his friend in the chest with a crossbow, hit him on the head with a medieval mace and slashed at him with a sword, the judge heard.
Hay, who shared Bryan's house in Fulham, south London, always forgave him.
But for months, Hay had been forcing Bryan to hand over hundreds of pounds to pay for an expensive lifestyle.
He had also threatened to make false claims of homosexual advances.
Bryan, said to have severe arthritis and heart trouble, admitted attempted murder.
He was jailed for 10 years.
Hanging judged
ARTIST David Mach has won a £12,000 prize for his sculpture of a rock star made from coathangers.
Mach, 36, was awarded the Glasgow Lord Provost's prize for his ‘brilliantly inventive’ head of former Strangler Hugh Cornwell.
Maxwell son fury at war medals sale
THE son of disgraced tycoon Robert Maxwell protested yesterday at the forced sale of his father's bravery medals.
Czech-born Maxwell won the Military Cross as a young British Army lieutenant in World War Two for leading his Queen's Royal Regiment platoon in an attack through heavy gunfire.
Now his MC and other wartime awards are to go under the hammer as receivers sell his belongings to pay creditors.
His son Kevin, 33, complained on Central Television yesterday that the medals should have been left out of the sale.
‘I am particularly sad that my mother has not been given an opportunity even to purchase his Military Cross,’ said Maxwell, who is now a job consultant after being made Britain's biggest bankrupt, with £400 million debts.
‘She would have liked them to be contributed to his regimental museum.’
He was angry when questioned about the contrast between war hero and crooked businessman.
‘We do not make comparisons,’ he said from his home in Hailey, Oxfordshire.
‘Our family take great pride in his military service and awards for bravery.
‘One does not compare or contrast that.
He did serve in the war along with hundreds and thousands of other people and it's something one can justifiably be proud of.’
The medals, expected to make £2,000 at Sotheby's next month, were never on show in his father's house, he said.
‘My father never glorified war, but we were always aware of a tradition of service.’
Gun-toting ‘Santa’ in bank raid
A ROBBER wearing a Santa hat held up a bank with a sawn-off shotgun before escaping on a bicycle yesterday.
The greying gunman pulled the weapon out of a carrier bag and threatened to shoot a cashier unless she handed over money.
The girl gave him an undisclosed amount of cash and he hurried out.
He was last seen pedalling furiously away from the Midland Bank in Chiswick, west London.
The balding robber, whose face was partly masked by a scarf, appeared to be aged about 50.
‘Fortunately, no shots were fired and no one was hurt,’ a bank spokesman said.
‘Police were on the scene very quickly, but he had already cycled away.
‘All we can assume is he must be very fit for his age.’
Royal slip-up
A COUSIN of Prince Charles was pulled over by police yesterday for trying to dodge a queue of traffic on a motorway slip road.
Lord Romsey, of Hampshire, found himself issued with a £40 fixed penalty and a ‘severe ticking-off’ after he drove on to the hard shoulder to join the M271 near Southampton.
‘He looked annoyed.
I think he was in a hurry and was cross about being stopped,’ said an eyewitness.
Radiation leak
FOUR workers were contaminated in a radiation leak at top-secret Aldermaston atomic weapons base yesterday.
All were treated at the Berkshire base's medical centre, but were not seriously affected.
Officials said the radiation leak did not reach the open air.
£4m bus station of future goes blank
A POWER cut turned the reopening of Britain's busiest coach station after a £4 million refurbishment into a farce yesterday.
Transport minister Steven Norris arrived at Victoria to find no lighting, no heating, no new electronic passenger information and no computer ticketing.
His coach from the nearby Department of Transport headquarters was 20 minutes late due to heavy traffic.
‘It's sod's law and an example of the best laid plans of mice and men going wrong,’ said Mr Norris.
His mother Eileen, a regular coach traveller, came down from her home in Nottingham for the ceremony.
The two were forced to view empty information screens and tour gloomy lounges where passengers waited in the dark.
The problem was caused by a fault at an electricity sub-station.
A back-up power system at the coach station did operate but only lasted three hours.
Mr Norris said he was happy with what he could see, describing the improvements to the station which handles 10 million passengers a year as ‘excellent.’
‘I used Victoria when I was younger and thought it was terrible,’ he said.
‘But they've done a great job.
It's the kind of environment I would want for visitors to London.’
Mrs Norris said the new facilities were ‘lovely’.
Thirty bus companies use Victoria with National Express carrying 70 per cent of passengers.
Kathy Pitkin
SACKED Eldorado actress Kathy Pitkin, above, claimed yesterday that BBC bosses ‘used’ her, then dumped her.
‘They needed something to sell the show, and used a young girl in skimpy bathing costumes to draw people to watch,’ said Kathy, 16, who played child bride Fizz.
‘I went along with it.’
Soap trio are good Neighbours
NEIGHBOURS stars Stefan Dennis and Gayle Blakeney, a couple on and off the screen, are getting away from it all in a sleepy English village.
And, like the show, Gayle's real-life twin Gillian is keeping them company.
The threesome share a house in the soap but Gayle will be hoping the similarity stops there — her on-screen sister Caroline, played by Gillian, is heading for a fling with her husband Paul, played by Stefan.
In any case, Gillian has invited a mystery man to share the cottage in Witham Friary, Somerset.
When the group first walked into the White Hart pub the whole place went quiet, said landlord Adam Rimmer, 33, yesterday.
Then they started signing autographs and even posed for a photograph with pub regular Frank Gait.
‘I had no idea who they were,’ said Frank, 63.
‘But some of the young people in the bar explained and I rushed off to get a camera.’
During the week, the Neighbours trio go their separate ways.
Stefan is playing Buttons in Cinderella, at Bournemouth, and the sisters are in Dick Whittington in Liverpool.
Lollipop lady comes unstuck
LOLLIPOP lady Iris Pearce has been threatened with the sack — because she is too nice.
Iris, 58, halts traffic for pensioners and invalids, not just children, on her school crossing at Keighley, West Yorkshire.
She has had three official police warnings after complaints from motorists.
‘They told me they could sack me, but I don't care,’ she said yesterday.
Accident prevention officer PC Ken Bland said: ‘She's a lovely woman, but she's breaking the law.’
Loneliest man on the block
HE was the only tenant to buy his flat in the giant tower block.
Now Philip McKenna has been told the council is pulling the block from under him.
Mr McKenna bought his top-floor, two-bedroom flat for £3,000 in 1988.
The rest of the 900 flats in the 14-storey Kelvin complex are to be demolished by Sheffield council.
‘They sell me my flat, then decide to demolish the place,’ Mr McKenna said yesterday.
‘I'll have to see how much the council offer.’
Thief makes a meal of it
A BURGLAR cooked himself a hearty meal after breaking into a fish and chip shop.
He also played the video game machine and sank cans of drink in the Lemon Plaice, Axminster, Devon.
Owner Stewart Tarratt said: ‘There were several burglaries that night and I think the thief just stopped here for a meal break.’
‘The good work goes on’ pledge
PRINCESS Diana has promised to keep up her good work for charities, including Relate, the marriage-guidance organisation.
Relate spokeswoman Zelda West-Meads said last night that her charity and others had received letters pledging continued support from the princess.
‘I am extremely sorry to hear about the royal situation, but it is a personal matter,’ she added.
‘It is not appropriate for us to comment further.’
Diana has been patron of Relate since 1989, when she agreed to head a campaign to save marriages and promote traditional family life.
£2m a year from Duchy
THE Duchy of Cornwall will continue to provide an income for the Prince and Princess of Wales.
The royal pair are not on the Civil List.
They depend on annual profits — less 25 per cent voluntary tax — from the Duchy's 130,000 acres of farmland, which came to £2,176,798 last year.
The sum may be reduced dramatically in future if a review of the Royal Family's tax recommends Charles pays 40 per cent tax on his income.
50-1 against abdication
ODDS on the Prince of Wales renouncing his right to the throne before 1994 shortened dramatically yesterday.
Bookmaker William Hill is now offering 6-1, down from 10-1.
The odds on the Queen abdicating in Charles's favour before then have lengthened — from 25-1 to 50-1.
William Hill said it refuses to accept wagers on the state of royal marriages and has often turned down bets on a Charles and Diana split.
Drama at TV spoof
SATIRICAL film producer Geoff Atkinson has been forced to hurriedly re-edit his royal TV spoof Pallas 2.
Atkinson was visibly shaken when told by TODAY that the royals were parting company.
In Channel 4's £150,000 black comedy, set to screen on December 22, Atkinson has Prince Charles running the country alone after being dumped by Princess Diana…a little too close to the truth for a spoof like Pallas.
From horribilis to worse
THE retired courtier who coined the Latin phrase ‘annus horribilis’ said the separation of the Prince and Princess of Wales was another blow to the Queen during her ‘horrible year’.
‘This latest development is very sad, especially for the Queen,’ Sir Edward Ford said yesterday.
Then he added: ‘Perhaps it is a solution to their difficulties.’
Sir Edward, 82, was private secretary to the Queen until 1967 and to her father, George VI, for six years before his death.
He coined the Latin phrase, which the Queen used in her 40th anniversary speech at the Guildhall, in a letter to her expressing sympathy over the Windsor Castle fire.
‘I never thought two words could earn one such fame,’ he said from his home in West London.
‘I said how disappointing it was that her annus mirabilis had turned out to be an annus horribilis.
‘The phrase is derived from Dryden's poem Annus Mirabilis.’
Sir Edward, whose wife Virginia is the niece of Lord Astor, said he had not had an annus horribilis.
‘At 82, every year is a good year because it is a bonus — you are not supposed to live after 70.’
Ripper to write his life story
THE Yorkshire Ripper has pledged to write his autobiography.
Peter Sutcliffe, 46, says he wants to share the ‘awesome burden’ of his murderous campaign against women.
Serving 13 life sentences in Broadmoor, he told penpal Olive Curry he would start the project over the new year.
Olive has received 450 letters from the killer.
‘He has talked about it before and nothing came of it,’ she said.
‘Mrs Walsh’ alias kept legal talks a secret
by Lisa Reynolds
PRINCESS Diana became ‘Mrs Walsh’ as she fought to end her marriage, it was revealed last night.
She took on the alias in a bid to avoid publicity when dealing with her solicitor Paul Butner.
When Diana gave the false name to secretaries in phone calls to the London offices of Wright, Son and Pepper they had no idea it was the princess on the other end of the line.
It was just one tactic she used to ensure negotiations with Prince Charles's lawyers stayed secret.
They met at flats around London, avoiding Diana's apartments at Kensington Palace or the lawyers' offices in Gray's Inn.
There were discreet meetings at French and Thai restaurants as Diana fought her corner in the marriage crisis.
But as the pressure increased the princess cracked and at one point is said to have told her solicitor: ‘I can't stand anymore.’
Mr Butner — who developed a friendly, working relationship with Diana — eventually called on her at the palace.
He assured her that the end was in sight and a friend has since described the case as the pinnacle of his career.
When the separation was made public Mr Butner is reported to have told a friend: ‘We got what we were after.
Now read the newspapers.’
No more than a dozen people were involved in advising how Charles and Diana could reach a civilised arrangement.
Charles relied on the tried and trusted legal figures of Lord Goodman — who negotiated in the break-up of the marriages of Princess Margaret and the Princess Royal — and Sir Mathew Farrer.
Back in July, the Queen told Premier John Major that the royal marriage was in a desperate situation.
And by early autumn, Mr Major was preparing for the worst — and yesterday he delivered it in a statement to the Commons.
The royal marriage had finally ended.
Man's legs torn off in car smash
A DRIVER'S legs were torn off at the knees yesterday when his car split in two in a horrific crash.
David Buckley, 29, of Speke, Merseyside, was giving a friend a lift when his car clipped the kerb, somersaulted 15ft and smashed through a lamp-post.
The bonnet and dashboard landed 25ft away — with his legs inside.
Passenger Donna Jackson, 17, suffered head and pelvic injuries in the crash at Ditton, Widnes.
His fiancee Maureen Savage, 35, and her two sons, aged 17 and nine, who were also in the car, had minor injuries.
‘This was an absolutely horrific accident,’ said an ambulance spokesman.
Recession-hit Tiny sells £50m shares
TYCOON Tiny Rowland is selling shares in his troubled Lonrho conglomerate for the first time, it was revealed last night.
The sell-off paves the way for 75-year-old Rowland to retire within three years.
A £300 million rescue package will virtually hand control of the company to German property magnate Dieter Bock.
Bock, owner of the Kempinski luxury hotels chain, will buy nearly half of Rowland's 15 per cent stake worth £50 million with an option to buy the remainder in three years.
It will leave him heir-apparent to the Lonrho empire.
Lonrho is also selling its UK Volkswagen distributorship back to the German car manufacturer for £124 million.
The moves are designed to alleviate Lonrho's estimated £1 billion debts.
Profits slumped from £109 million to £38 million in the six months to last March.
Chairman Rene Leclezio said: ‘We have had two difficult years and there was a need for decisive action.’
Rowland built the group from a tiny African mining company in the sixties.
After selling his shares Rowland said: ‘It is only my age which occasions this.’
The boy who could be King after Elizabeth
AS Prince William began his second birthday celebrations with a photo call in the gardens of Kensington Palace, he toddled curiously towards a TV crew.
His father chose that moment to deliver an early reminder of his son's extraordinary position in life.
‘Those big sausage things record everything you say — start learning.’
Then he was still two generations away from the throne.
Now, before he has even turned 11, he is faced with taking on his grandmother's burdens far earlier than anyone imagined.
The consolation for him and for Britain is that he has been far better prepared for the emotional pressures of his destiny than ever his father was.
When he was seven, his mother revealed that the young lives of William and Harry were divided into Fun Days and Work Days.
‘The point is that I am teaching them a difference,’ Diana told a friend.
Just before the age of four, William's first regal wave came from his parents' horse-drawn carriage during a procession to celebrate the Queen's 60th birthday.
Before he went to school, he was opening doors for ladies and addressing all the adult men around him — from the footman to Prince Philip — as ‘sir’.
But the effect of Diana's Fun Days is also clearly seen.
In contrast to his father, who was once bizarrely pictured as a shy five-year-old formally shaking his own mother's hand, there are hundreds of photographs showing William enthusiastically throwing his arms around both his parents.
Drawing on the experience of her own broken home, Diana has not been afraid to hug her sons in public, dry their tears, share a childish joke with them or simply take them to McDonald's.
When it was suggested that he would go to the tough Gordonstoun school, she put her foot down.
Its regime — which Prince Philip believed would turn his sons into real men — had caused Charles untold misery and damage.
It could be only eight years before he becomes King William V. But unlike his father, he will be well equipped for another role — that of partner and parent.
Now Diana will never be Queen
PRINCESS Diana will never be crowned Queen.
Her claim to the throne was shattered the moment Premier John Major read out Buckingham Palace's statement that she and Charles are to separate.
Constitutional experts believe divorce is inevitable and that Prince Charles plans to renounce the throne in favour of Prince William.
The experts said the most amazing part of Mr Major's announcement was that he saw no reason why Diana could not be Queen.
Palace advisers have already told the Queen that a divorce between Charles and Diana would not be catastrophic.
But constitutional expert Michael Nash, who is soon to bring out a book, A Royal Divorce, about the history of the British monarchy, said last night: ‘The best thing to happen would be for William to become the next in line to the throne.
It would solve four problems.
‘If there was a divorce it would be very difficult for Charles to become king.
A divorcee has only become king once before and that was George I. It would be unacceptable to most people in this country.
‘Also, Diana has become a world star in her own right who wields great influence.
If Charles remarried it would be unbearable for his second wife.
‘The only solution would be for Diana to go and live abroad like Edward VIII.
‘Charles could not be crowned and be head of the Church of England.
It simply wouldn't be on.
‘And the last problem is age.
If the Queen lives to 92 — and she has said she won't abdicate — Charles would be 70 before coming to the throne.
It would be terrible.
‘I don't believe they will separate and not divorce.
‘After this extraordinary year it is about time the nettle was grasped.
‘It is better for these problems to be dealt with now rather than later.
‘The whole thing was over-ripe for an overhaul.’
If the Prince and Princess of Wales do decide to divorce there is nothing in law that says Charles cannot still become king.
But a more pertinent question is, could he morally continue to become Defender of the Faith and head of the Church of England?
As a highly moral person it would seem not.
Palace aides secretly expect that if a divorce did take place, Charles would renounce his right to the throne.
Royal author Andrew Morton, whose best-seller Diana: Her True Story, is said to have been approved by Diana and many believe was the nail in the coffin of the royal marriage, said the princess may marry again.
‘I see no let or hindrance why she should not divorce,’ he said on TV.
‘Diana has always said to her friends throughout her royal career, ‘I will never become Queen’.’
On the statement emphasising that she could still be Queen, he said: ‘The situation is very volatile.
That's what they are saying at the moment.
Two years hence they might say something quite different.’
He predicted that if the Royal Family now led a ‘less flamboyant life-style’ they would find that media interest in them would diminish.
‘As examples of that we can cite the Duke and Duchess of Gloucester and the Kents,’ he said.
‘They have maintained a low profile in their life and as a result the coverage of matters affecting them is virtually non existent.’
He said the princess was building up a separate Kensington Palace court and international platform for herself, predicting: ‘We will see the phoenix princess arising from the ashes of this whole crumbling mess of the monarchy.
‘Now that the genie is out of the bottle, we have to face the fact that the monarchy as we have understood it since Victorian times is virtually over.
‘What we are talking about in the future is the House of Wales, not the House of Windsor.’
Many MPs believe yesterday's announcement is the first stage in the process towards Prince Charles renouncing his chances of the throne.
Tory Tony Marlow spoke for many of his colleagues last night.
‘It is not conceivable that Princess Diana can now become queen,’ he said.
‘It would destroy the monarchy.’
If the Queen dies before Prince William is of age to take the throne, Princess Anne should be considered as the monarch, he said.
‘If we were to look at the constitutional situation we may have to look at the position of the Princess Royal.
‘If the Prince of Wales does not succeed she's the one person people would feel would be acceptable.
‘The thought of Princess Diana becoming Queen in these new circumstances is inconceivable.’
Labour front bencher Tony Banks added: ‘You're not going to tell me they are both now going to live a life of celibacy.
So we would have a queen who is in another relationship and a king who is another relationship.
‘My guess is they will have to jump a generation because the situation will become untenable.’
Harold Brooks-Baker, editor of Burke's Peerage said: ‘The fact that the Prime Minister announced the separation of the prince and princess leaves one to suspect there is more drastic news to come and that could be divorce.
‘Charles has at times given the impression that he would prefer to renounce the throne in favour of his son.
It is a sad reflection on the present state of constitutional monarchy in this country that one so driven to do his best for the good of mankind, as he sees it, should think, indeed know, that he cannot do so as king.
‘Uncertainty has brought down many monarchies throughout history.
It is essential to decide now whether William or Charles will be the next king for the sake of the constitution.
‘Charles's problem has been that he married a 19-year-old inexperienced girl who over the years has become a world figure, the most famous woman on the planet.
‘She is an international star, a prima donna.
‘Anyone who comes into the monarchy should play second fiddle to their royal half but this has not happened.
I do not blame Diana, it is just force of circumstances.
‘But there is not much future for a king without a queen.’
Sir Robin Maxwell-Hyslop, who has made a lifetime study of the British Constitution, spelled out the constitutional realities as he saw them.
‘Despite living separate lives, Diana remains married to Charles.
Therefore there is no impediment to her becoming Queen,’ said Sir Robin.
‘Constitutional matters do not have anything to do with being on speaking terms, they have to do with legal status.
‘Two people who are separating are still married.
If Charles and Diana were to divorce, then it would mean the then King Charles would have no wife.
If he has no wife, then it follows he has no Queen.’
Even senior Tory back-bencher Sir John Wheeler expressed reservations about the future.
He warned the exact arrangement announced yesterday will have to remain unchanged if Diana has any possibility of becoming queen.
‘What will happen in many years to come if the prince and princess should choose to divorce the future only knows.’
Sir John, one of the most respected Conservative back-benchers in the Commons, added: ‘I am personally glad that the air has been cleared but sorry.
‘Prince Charles is an admirable man.
He embodies the spirit of the age.
In fact, this strengthens his position in that the situation has been dealt with.
There is nothing wrong with the truth.’
Ralph Howell, MP for Norfolk North which includes the royal home of Sandringham, said on the suggestion that Princess Diana could still be crowned queen in Westminster Abbey: ‘There was some surprise in the Commons.
‘I do not know how that fits into historical precedence.
This is a very bad day.’
Tory Dame Jill Knight said: ‘Constitutionally there is no reason why you could not have two people crowned who are separated.
‘But it is certainly true that there have never been a king and queen who are divorced.
‘If it is said the constitutional position is not affected then that is the position.
But what happens in the future may take a different line.’
Former Tory Cabinet Minister, leading constitutional expert and friend of the Royal family Lord St John of Fawsley said last night the announcement ‘must mean a change in the role of the Monarchy because they have for this century, and indeed the whole of the last one, been held up as an example of model family rectitude.
‘Many people expect a standard from members of the Royal Family, which they don't expect from their own families.
‘Well, that can't go on.
The Royal Family will have to adapt itself to new circumstances, and, in some ways, it will be approaching nearer to the people, because it will be sharing many of the problems which all of us have faced.’
He insisted the princess could be crowned queen if Charles was king and they lived separate lives but said: ‘There would be no constitutional bar, but it certainly requires a strong effort of imagination to project oneself forward into that situation.’
TODAY reporting team:
Facing holiday without her sons
PRINCESS Diana will face some of the Christmas festivities without her children so they can be with their father.
The princes will spend part of the holiday with each parent, Buckingham Palace confirmed.
Diana will put on a united front for the sake of her sons and spend Christmas Day at Sandringham with the other Royals.
And she will probably spend ‘one or two other days’ on the Norfolk estate, according to a source.
Then she will take William and Harry to visit their uncle Earl Spencer at Althorp House in Northants.
Buckingham Palace refused to elaborate on the holiday arrangements, saying they were ‘totally private’.
During term time, the princes are expected to alternate their two weekends home a term between Highgrove with Charles and Kensington Palace with Diana.
They will also split holidays between their parents.
A Royal source said: ‘It is quite lucky really that the only thing to worry about are the weekend breaks and holidays from school.
‘It will not be too difficult to sort out amicable arrangements of who sees whom and when.’
Charles wasted no time in moving in with his beloved grandmother — the Queen Mother — last night.
Servants filled two removal vans with his possessions from Kensington Palace to take to Clarence House three miles away while he was on an official visit to Wales.
He will use the suite of rooms as his base whenever he is in London but Highgrove, 90 miles away in Gloucestershire, will continue to be his main home.
Princess Diana is unlikely to ever return to the 12-bedroom country house she grew to loathe during her 11-year marriage.
During the weekend of the Windsor fire, she and her sons spent their last weekend there together — so Diana could pack up her belongings and move them all back to London.
Charles has already made plans to take his sons skiing alone in February.
They will go to Klosters, his favourite resort in the Swiss Alps where four years ago he nearly lost his life in the avalanche which killed Major Hugh Lindsay.
Riddle behind the timing of rift statement
Charles Rae
ROYAL observers were in a quandary last night over what was the final straw that thrust the marriage split into the open.
It could not have come at a worse time for the Royal Family, almost on the eve of the wedding of Princess Anne to Commander Tim Laurence.
The wedding was set to give the royals their best publicity of the year.
Buckingham Palace has always insisted there was never any reason to make a formal statement on the state of Charles and Diana's marriage unless a new scandal was about to explode.
Author Andrew Morton said that there are further, as yet unheard, tapes of conversations between Charles and Camilla Parker Bowles.
Mr Morton said: ‘The fact that the so-called Camilla-gate tapes have not yet been published remains a sword of Damocles hanging over Prince Charles's head and could certainly damage his position.’
The Palace said both Charles and Diana decided two weeks ago the statement should be made just prior to their sons' Christmas break from school.
That line was supported by Labour MP Brian Gould, who knows the prince well.
He said: ‘I'm not sure if the princess held a gun to Charles's head, figuratively speaking, but it seems if she wanted something said.’
However, it is also understood the announcement was to be made in the New Year and was brought forward because the Prime Minister and the Queen decided to pre-empt publicity after being advised of a leak.
The Queen gave Mr Major an urgent message on Tuesday night asking him to tell the nation.
Downing Street sources said: ‘The prince and princess wanted this statement made before the children came home.’
Day that shook the House of Windsor
Matthew Benns and Paul Wilenius
AT 3.30pm yesterday a hushed House of Commons listened as Prime Minister said the words the nation hoped it would never hear: ‘With regret, The Prince and Princess of Wales have decided to separate.’
John Major's announcement — which left him obviously shaken — was the culmination of a day of behind-the-scenes constitutional drama which began at 10am with a crisis meeting of the Government's top ministers.
The couple made the decision ‘in the last few weeks’.
They pushed for the statement to be brought forward to clear the air before their sons came home for the Christmas holidays at the weekend, palace sources claimed.
Talks have been going on for weeks over the future of the Royal marriage, but despite repeated attempts to save it, the Queen finally decided it was all over on Tuesday afternoon.
There followed 24 hours of high drama involving the couple, the Queen, Mr Major, most of the Cabinet and a host of advisors.
But the Prince and Princess of Wales never let their public face slip and even on the day of the announcement were carrying on with planned engagements.
The news that could well have wrecked forever Prince Charles' hopes of one day becoming king was broken by the urbane Sir Robert Fellowes — the Queen's Private Secretary — in a call to Downing Street.
Tuesday: In hushed tones he tells Alex Allan, the civil servant in charge of Number 10, that the marriage is finally over.
Sir Robert, who is Princess Diana's brother in law, says a statement on the future of the marriage must be made on Wednesday as a matter of urgency.
This short call sets off a chain reaction of events.
Downing Street officials work late into the night drawing up plans to tell the Commons, the nation and the world that Charles and Diana can no longer bear to live together.
Wednesday 8am: Officials from Buckingham Palace and Number 10 finalise the details of the statement and discuss the way in which it should be handled.
9am: Mr Major meets international industry bosses and union leaders including TUC chief Norman Willis.
10.10am: Mr Major goes into a crunch meeting with senior ministers and advisers on the split.
They include Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd, Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke, Chancellor Norman Lamont, Lord Chancellor Lord Mackay, Leader of the Lords Lord Wakeham, Leader of the Commons Tony Newton and Attorney General Sir Nicholas Lyell.
11am: The Government decks are cleared for the announcement, and both the Palace and the Archbishop of Canterbury are kept fully informed.
First rumours of the marriage split begin to sweep through Westminster.
12 Noon: Vital meeting with EC Commission President Jacques Delors is re-arranged for today.
1pm: Number 10 officially confirms Mr Major will be making an important statement on the Royal Family.
1 to 2 pm: The rest of the Cabinet is told of the impending statement.
3.30pm: Mr Major rises in the Commons to tell the world of the separation.
4pm: The full details of the split are revealed as shocked MPs in the Commons lobbies raise doubts about Diana becoming Queen.
Mr Major, his hand shaking as he speaks, tells the Commons: ‘The affection for the monarchy and members of the royal family in this country is deep, is widespread and is enduring.
‘We live in a monarchy, and if I may speak personally, I hope and believe we always will.
‘I am also sure that the House will sympathise with the wish that they should both be afforded a degree of privacy.
The House will wish to know that the decision to separate has no constitutional implications.
‘The succession to the Throne is unaffected by it.
The children of the prince and princess retain their position in the line of succession, and there is no reason why the Princess of Wales should not be crowned Queen in due course.
‘The Prince of Wales's succession as Head of the Church of England is also unaffected.
‘Neither the Prince nor the Princess is supported by the Civil List, and this position will remain unchanged.
‘Madam Speaker, I know that there will be great sadness at this news.
‘But I know also that, as they continue with their royal duties and with bringing up their children, the Prince and Princess will have the full support, understanding and affection of this House and of the country.’
Labour leader John Smith told Mr Major: ‘I am sure that the whole House will share the feeling of sadness which you have expressed and will also share the hope that a greater degree of privacy might result for the Prince and Princess of Wales and their children in what would be a difficult time for any family.’
Liberal Democrat leader Paddy Ashdown added: ‘These are going to be difficult times for the Royal Family and the whole House will wish to extend to them our sympathy, in particular to the Prince and Princess of Wales.’
Peers expressed their sorrow at the news of the separation of the Prince and Princess of Wales after the Lord Chancellor Lord Mackay of Clashfern relayed the Prime Minister's announcement to them.
The Archbishop of York, Dr John Habgood, said he had consulted the Archbishop of Canterbury Dr George Carey, now in Sri Lanka.
He said: ‘We ask the public to join us in praying that God will bring comfort and strength to the Prince and Princess.’
Prince Charles yesterday spent most of the day in Wales.
He flew to Holyhead in a helicopter from the Queen's flight and then on to Anglesey for a series of visits which had been arranged months in advance.
He laughed and joked with guests until he was asked whether a personal announcement was due.
The shouted question turned the prince stern faced and glum.
He ignored it and quickly stepped into a waiting official car.
The news of the imminent announcement broke when he was enjoying a private buffet lunch given by Anglesey Borough Council after completing three engagements.
One diner said: ‘It is hard to believe the news.
He seemed so relaxed and gave no hint that anything was wrong.’
Holyhead mayor Tom Ross added: ‘He was very happy and seemed to be in good spirits.
He did not mention his family and did not give the impression of a man with marital problems.’
Later he put on a brave face, showing little sign of the strain of the day as he smiled and joked with guests at the Guildhall in the City of London.
The prince arrived 15 minutes late but during his hour-long visit to a 60th anniversary reception for the BBC, he made no reference to the news of his marriage split.
One guest said: ‘He seemed completely at ease after making his speech.
He just plunged straight into the crowd and started chatting with people.
‘He was joking and smiling.
You would never guess that he had any problems.’
The prince's press secretary Dickie Arbiter said: ‘The evening went very well, all according to plan.
Prince Charles was a little late arriving because of the traffic.’
But Charles switched his smile off as soon as he left.
His face was set grimly as he sped away in his chauffeured Bentley with his personal assistant Belinda Harley.
Princess Diana spent a busy day in Tyne and Wear as scheduled.
She visited an alcohol and drug abuse centre, opened a £600,000 swimming pool for disabled children and toured a factory.
She gave no outward signs of her problems when she went on a walkabout.
News of the break-up reached some tour officials soon after the princess arrived in Whitley Bay, but she carried on staunchly chatting and laughing with everyone she met.
Queen Mum to see Anne wed
THE Queen Mother will attend the Princess Royal's wedding to Commander Tim Laurence after all, her aides said last night.
The announcement followed intense speculation that her heartfelt objections to divorce and remarriage would stop her travelling to the service near Balmoral on Saturday.
Aides had denied she had any moral objections but said she had longstanding private engagements to fulfil.
In a day of high royal drama, a spokeswoman for her office confirmed the Queen Mother would now attend.
The apparent indecision was blamed on difficulties in working out travel arrangements for her to make the return trip to Scotland in one day.
The Queen Mother, 92, is now to make the journey to Crathie Church on Saturday.
The spokeswoman said: ‘It was really just a difficult logistics problem.
It was how to work everything out for her guests, herself and her family.
She was entertaining at Windsor on Saturday.’
The Queen Mother's strong beliefs are thought to be rooted in her intense disapproval of her brother-in-law Edward VIII's decision in 1936 to abdicate for the love of American divorcee Mrs Wallis Simpson.
Diana heals Fergie rift by warning her of split
PRINCESS Diana telephoned the Duchess of York last Sunday morning to warn her that the announcement was coming.
The friendly, warm call took Fergie by surprise — it was the first time she had spoken to Diana since leaving Balmoral in disgrace last August following the scandalous St Tropez pictures.
‘She says that Diana started the conversation by calling her ‘Duch’,’ says one with whom Fergie shared the big secret.
‘Duch is Diana's affectionate nickname for Fergie.
As we all know from the Squidgy tape, when she is displeased with her she refers to her as ‘the red head’.
‘She confirmed a newspaper report that she had moved all her things out of Highgrove.
Then she told Fergie that she and Charles had agreed to separate and it would be made official before the week was over.
‘Diana clearly believed that Fergie should hear the news from her own lips rather than read about it.
‘After all they were once the very best of friends.
‘They had talked openly of their respective marital difficulties at Sandringham last Christmas, although the Duchess insists that they did not make a pact by which they would both end their marriages this year.’
Then there were none
Isla Whitcroft
CHARLES and Diana's separation sets the seal on a long line of Windsor marital disasters.
The Prince and Princess of Wales may blame media intrusions, Prince Andrew point to John Bryan, and Princess Anne cite irreconcilable differences for her divorce from Captain Mark Phillips, but it seems just being close to the Crown is a recipe for unhappiness.
The Queen must take some of the blame.
Her sense of duty meant that she was an absent parent, while Prince Philip was a cold and distant father who instilled fear rather than affection.
Together they inadvertently ensured that their four children would be little more than emotional cripples.
To marry such a damaged person would be difficult for anyone.
But Fergie, Diana and Mark Phillips hardly came from stable backgrounds themselves.
It seems tragic that the royal youngsters were drawn to people who carried similar wounds.
With hindsight, it seems as if each marriage was doomed to failure from the start.
The curse of royal divorce had already been put upon the House of Windsor years before.
The marriage of the Queen's sister, Princess Margaret had already ended in divorce.
After 18 years of marriage to Lord Snowdon the couple agreed to a divorce in May 1978 after living separate lives for two years.
But other factors play a part in this royal drama.
Palace courtiers often aligned themselves with one or other marriage partner and that would stir up trouble between them.
Diana recognised this when she tried to get rid of Charles's old advisers whom she felt were working against her.
Later she became so paranoid about their power that she had her room searched for bugs.
Fergie too, realised what a danger they were.
She pleaded with Andrew to curtail their power, but her easy-going husband was unable to prevent them from stabbing his wife in the back.
The media must also accept its share of the blame.
Fifty years ago the Royal Family were in control of their image.
But the advent of long-range camera lenses, satellite television and instantaneous news changed that forever.
Today the Royals cannot relax for a second, cannot step one foot outside their own home without being met by a barrage of photographers waiting for them to make the smallest slip.
Surviving in this goldfish bowl of publicity would crack the strongest union.
The Queen and Prince Philip survived it only because it came upon them in middle age — when any youthful indescretion or misbehaviour had long since been enjoyed and then forgotten in the mists of time.
The Royal Family must now rethink its attitude to marriage.
A conventional union based on love and mutual respect is, quite clearly, impossible to maintain.
Either they must draw back from the spotlight and forfeit their privileges or pick their partners based on purely practical criteria.
They certainly cannot afford many more marital failures.
Charles flies to break news to sons at school
Jane Moore
PRINCE Charles made a special flight to break the news of the separation to his two sons yesterday.
Shortly before 4pm, he was shown into a room at Ludgrove School to tell 10-year-old William and Harry, eight, their mother and father would no longer be living together.
Charles had ensured he completed his royal duties in Anglesey before rushing to be by their side at the school in Berkshire.
The young princes had already been warned that an announcement concerning their parents was being made.
Charles insisted on being there to explain — and share their pain.
He was aware his eldest son, the sensitive William, could be the biggest loser.
The young prince will feel emotionally bruised that his parents' marriage is over.
He may need counselling to overcome the trauma in the future.
A source at Buckingham Palace said: ‘Nothing will physically change for the young princes.
‘They will carry on attending Ludgrove School.
‘Obviously, the royal couple wanted to remove the uncertainty — more importantly to let the boys to know where they stand.’
Charles and Diana were anxious to stress they will carry on providing a secure and loving environment.
But the finality of the announcement is another cruel blow to the young princes who have already been through the wringer over revelations in the Andrew Morton book Diana: Her True Story.
Psychology expert John Street said: ‘Outwardly, Prince William may look as though he's coping, but inside he will be finding it very difficult.
‘Children often feel guilt and think they are to blame.’
World rocked by news of split
RADIO and TV stations around the world broke into their regular programmes, no matter what the time yesterday, to announce the news of the royal separation.
In Australia news of the split came at 3am Sydney time, and soon after talk-back radio shows were inviting comment from night-owl listeners.
One woman said: ‘They are obviously doing this with the children in mind.
If they are happy with what they are doing, their children will be happy.’
King Juan Carlos of Spain, who regularly hosted visits from Charles and Diana, was saddened, but a spokesman said: ‘The separation is a private matter.’
In Belgium King Baudouin was shaken by the news.
A palace official said: ‘It's all rather breathtaking.
But I think the Belgian people would tolerate it, if it saved the monarchy.’
In France the news was the main topic of conversation in cafes and restaurants but President Mitterrand did not make an official statement.
A spokesman for President Bush said: ‘We have been informed that the couple have separated.’
Celebrities also have been voicing their opinions of the end to the ‘fairytale romance’.
Novelist Dame Barbara Cartland, Diana's step-grandmother, fears for the young princes.
‘I am concerned that they will feel insecure, but I am sure the Prince and Princess will make sure the boys don't suffer,’ she said.
Radio personality Michael Parkinson said: ‘It's been general knowledge for ages.
I think we're all bored by it, I certainly am.’
Michael Aspel expressed greater concern for constitutional matters.
He said: ‘Every day seems to bring us closer to the collapse of the monarchy.’
American talk show host Joan Rivers managed to find the funny side.
She told viewers: ‘I'm just being told that Princess Di and Prince Charles are going to get a separation.
And the palace is saying that Charles is seeking custody of the plants.’
Sky TV presenter Tania Bryer said: ‘I think it is sad’.
Actress Susan Hampshire added: ‘It's something that we'd all been led to expect.’
TV host Robert Kilroy-Silk said: ‘Diana is the acceptable face of the British monarchy — if they lose her services it is a great blow.’
It's sad but not surprising
MOST people questioned by TODAY said they were saddened by the split — but not surprised.
Mandy Hudson, 34, of Stourbridge, West Midlands, said: ‘As far as I can see this spells the beginning of the end of the British monarchy.
‘Most people already think it has become a farce.’
Dawn Farley, 27, of Birmingham, thought it was particularly bad news for the young princes William and Harry.
‘They are the ones who will suffer the most,’ she said.
She was ‘amazed’ the way had been left open for Diana to still become queen.
‘I just can't see that working,’ she said.
Travel agent Peter Marsh, 46, of Colchester, Essex, said: ‘Both should have made more effort to be together and to make the marriage work.
Grandmother Hilda Mason, of Clapham, south London, said: ‘I'm heartbroken but it seems to be the way young people go about their business these days.’
Nichola Raven, 20, blamed Charles for spending too much time with Camilla Parker Bowles.
‘He married Diana and he should have made much more of an effort with her rather than turning to another woman for support,’ she said.
Businessman Paul Watson, 42, of Brighton, East Sussex, said: ‘This does not surprise me in the least.
They seemed to have reached a point of no return some time ago.’
Palaces that were prisons full of hatred
Charles Rae
THE end of the royal marriage means that the couple will never again have to live together in the homes they grew to hate.
Charles and Diana had ‘absolute loathing’ for their partner's favourite place.
Charles adored his country residence, Highgrove in Gloucestershire, while Diana preferred the much smaller apartment she had in Kensington Palace, more than 90 miles away in London.
They stood as symbols over the years of everything that was going wrong in the one-time fairytale marriage.
The 325-acre Highrove estate was bought by the prince just before his marriage to the then Lady Diana Spencer.
It was the base for his ‘Highgrove set’, the gang of pals which included Camilla Parker Bowles whose friendship with Charles over the years made Diana so jealous.
When she discovered Camilla had acted as Charles's unofficial hostess at Highgrove functions in her absence it made Diana loathe the place even more.
The prince used the excuse of his broken arm, after a fall from polo, to effectively move out from Kensington Palace.
He spent more and more time at Highgrove — while Diana refused point blank to be away from the London scene.
She chose to remain close to friends she had made as a teenager and moved in the pop and art worlds which the prince saw as ‘frivolous’.
Despite repeated denials from Buckingham Palace, the royal couple were spending less and less time together.
Soon Diana was only spending weekends at Highgrove — and only to be with her adored sons, William and Harry.
But as the young princes were soon to be spending their time at boarding school, Diana had little excuse to visit Highgrove.
She used the weekend of the Windsor Castle blaze to remove what little personal possessions she had left.
Diana had made an effort and put up with the ‘Highgrove set’ during her heady first months with Prince Charles.
Even throughout the first years of her marriage, she remained the dutiful wife, never complaining when her husband wanted to involve her in the country life.
But as the rot set in, Diana showed her loathing for Highgrove by showing the world what she really enjoyed — intimate dinners with old chums at her favourite restarants like San Lorenzo in Beauchamp Place, Knightsbridge.
For Charles, Highgrove represented everything he cared about — except his wife.
The glamour and glitter of London that his wife clearly loved was not for him and at any opportunity, he would fly back by helicopter to Highgrove late at night.
Now they can live separate lives.
But will Charles and Diana ever find happiness in the homes that helped tear them apart?
HIS
HOME:Highgrove, 90 miles from London
INTERESTS:Architecture, organic farming, painting, polo, fishing, skiing
RETREATS:Balmoral, Hebrides
FRIENDS:Hugh Van Cutsem, Gerald and Amanda Ward, Camilla Parker Bowles, Lady Dale Tryon
MUSIC:Classical, opera, Genesis, Three Degrees
CARS:Aston Martin, Bentley
EATING:Quiet dinners with close friends at Highgrove, including Camilla.
HERS
HOME:Kensington Palace, London
INTERESTS:Shopping, her children, charities, swimming, skiing
RETREATS: Fun parks, Majorca
FRIENDS:Antonia Marchioness of Duro, Caroline Bartholomew, James Gilbey, James Hewitt
MUSIC: Genesis, Michael Jackson, Dire Straits
CARS:Jaguar (would like a Mercedes)
EATING: Trendy restaurants like San Lorenzo in Knightsbridge, McDonald's.
Secret that put a smile on Camilla's anxious face
FOR days Camilla Parker Bowles had seemed strangely happy, after a summer of fixed glares and grim-set jaw.
Yesterday, at 3.30pm, her neighbours realised why she had been smiling and waving once more, driving the green Subaru down the winding dirt-track to her Wiltshire home.
As the royal separation was announced, Camilla may have been glued to the TV in the fusty drawing-room of 18th-century Middlewick House in Corsham.
But she did not need John Major to tell her what was going on.
With her customary curtness, Camilla insisted she had not been told in advance about the announcement.
‘I do not know what you are talking about,’ she snapped at reporters.
‘I don't know anything about it.
All I know is what I've seen on the news.’
Her cheerful manner over recent days, though, had told a different story.
Prince Charles almost certainly told her personally about his intentions.
And his formal split from Diana clears the decks for a marked change in the way he and Camilla, 44, conduct their friendship.
Until yesterday, he and his closest confidante had been forced to meet in secret, at carefully-chosen safe houses — such as the high-walled home of Camilla's sister, Annabel Elliot, at Stourpaine, Dorset, or her best friend Amanda Ward's secluded Berkshire mansion.
Their intimate conversations were usually by phone — and late at night, while Diana was away from Highgrove, and Camilla's brigadier husband, Andrew, 52 was leading his largely-separate life in London and Aldershot, Hants.
Diana's decision to quit Highgrove leaves Charles free to drive the short distance to Middlewick whenever he likes.
The new arrangement also allows Diana's detested rival, Camilla —‘The Rottweiller’— to visit Highgrove as she pleases.
In the past, she had played hostess at dinner parties there.
But only when Di ana was away.
‘It is an open secret that they were seeing each other regularly until all hell broke loose back in the summer,’ said a source close to Camilla last night.
‘But they were very clever at concealing it.
Now, we expect the prince to be far less sensitive about their relationship.’
Camilla's husband was in London last night, at the home of family friend Lord Cavendish.
‘You will not get a comment from me,’ he said.
‘You are wasting your time.’
They have my sympathy, by Squidgy tape James
JAMES GILBEY reacted to the royal split with the discretion and fierce loyalty which is typical of one of the Princess of Wales's special friends.
TODAY broke the news to him as he worked at Team Lotus's offices in central London.
‘I think if any couple goes through a separation, it is very difficult and I sympathise with them,’ he said.
Less than an hour later, he was seen slipping from his offices.
Diana's close friendship with the bachelor was revealed in sensational tapes published this summer.
Gilbey, 35, is a member of Diana's select circle of confidants.
It is to these trusted friends Diana will now turn to as she begins a new life on her own.
She will return to the fold which has enveloped her with love and support during her difficult marriage.
Andrew Morton's Diana: Her True Story was written with their full co-operation and the result was a stunning picture of a royal marriage poisoned by loneliness and despair.
Now admirers like Major James Hewitt will no longer be forced to stay in the background.
Hewitt, 34, fell under Diana's spell while teaching Princes William and Harry to ride.
The princess confessed to being worried for his safety during the Gulf War.
Diana's three best pals are the women who shared her bachelor-girl pad in in Knightsbridge before she was married.
Carolyn Pride, Virginia Pitman and Anne Bolton have remained pillars of support to their emotional friend.
Carolyn is closest.
The pair met at West Heath School and Carolyn was godmother to Prince Harry.
Yesterday, Carolyn said: ‘All I can say is it is very, very sad.
‘I hope that the children will be able to cope with the separation.
‘I'm sure that the Prince and Princess of Wales will remain friends.’
The well-heeled circle of friends are regular dinner guests at Kensington Palace — mainly when Charles is away — and will be the core of her new social life.
People like handsome Major David Waterhouse, newsagent chain heiress Kate Menzies and the Earl of Arundel cheerfully refer to their old friend as ‘Duch’— a nickname from her pre-royal days.
Family will also have a crucial role to play.
Sisters Lady Sarah and Lady Jane have provided invaluable support.
They have been close ever since their parents' divorce drew them together.
Although separated from her husband of 11 years, Diana's loneliest chapter may have come to an end.
Car suicide of banker who cared so much
Emma Campbell
A BANK manager killed himself because he could not cope with the worry and pressure of his work in the recession.
Ian Miller, 34, was swamped by the problems of small businesses, an inquest heard.
The strain finally became too much for the father-of-three who worked in John Major's Huntingdon constituency in Cambridgeshire.
He drove his Volvo to a beauty spot last month, drank most of a bottle of whisky and gassed himself with fumes from the car's exhaust.
‘There is bit of an anti-bank campaign going on and it worried Ian,’ his manager Jean Temple told the inquest.
‘It worries all of us.
We take it very seriously.
‘He was very likeable and had lots of friends.
We just find it unbelievable.
‘Like all bank managers, the workload was heavy.
At no time did he indicate he couldn't cope.
‘It's a tough job at the moment.’
Since his death, business people had phoned the bank to say how sorry they were and what a good job Mr Miller had done, said Mrs Temple.
His wife Fenella told the Huntingdon inquest her husband had been extremely conscientious in his 18 years with Barclays.
But for the first time, shortly before his death, he had stopped looking forward to going to work.
In a statement read to the inquest, she told how her husband of 11 years had been having difficulty sleeping, but had never talked of suicide.
There had been no problems at home.
‘I knew he was under a lot of strain and pressure as most bankers are.
‘He brought home lots of work all the time and found it frustrating that he couldn't get on top of it,’ said Mrs Miller, of Earith, Cambs.
The day he died, he told her he was going out to get some air.
Instead, he drove off and was later found dead by police after she raised the alarm.
Recording a verdict of suicide, coroner David Morris said: ‘It is easy enough to criticise the bank as a body — there is always someone at the sharp end.
‘In the present economic climate, there is a tendency to blame the bank for some of our misfortune.
One can easily overlook the effect this might have on individuals.
‘He worked under considerable pressure and was concerned with other people's problems as well as his own.’
Mr Miller, the son of a lifelong Barclays employee, joined the bank at the age of 16.
He had risen to the post of corporate manager at the Ermine Business Park branch in Huntingdon.
THE boss of one of Britain's big four banks hit back last night at claims that small firms were being squeezed into bankruptcy.
Lloyds Bank chief Brian Pitman denied they were increasing margins on loans to support profits in the recession.
‘It's not in our interests to push a company into liquidation,’ he said.
TV licence fee rises to £83
COLOUR television licence fees will go up to £83 from April.
Heritage Secretary Peter Brooke said the £3 rise is in line with inflation.
A black and white licence will be £27.50 — up from £26.50.
‘Increases are based on retail price rises at the preceding September,’ said Mr Brooke.
Despite suggestions of advertising, last month's Green Paper confirmed the fee will remain the BBC's chief funding.
I won't love my neighbour
Rob Perkins
ANNE Garwood was horrified when she looked out of the window and saw her husband taking in the milk.
Her surprise stemmed from the fact she had walked out on him two years earlier, sworn her friends to secrecy and moved hundreds of miles to make a new life for herself.
But her lovelorn millionaire husband, Bill, had spent more than Pounds 50,000 on private detectives to track her down.
When they found her, on an estate in Leominster, Hereford and Worcester, he spent another £68,000 — snapping up the house next door.
Now Anne, 67, has got a court order banning Bill, 70, from living within 20 miles of her — or staying overnight at his house in Mallards Close.
‘I can't believe she's doing this to me after 33 years of marriage,’ said Bill, who had retired with Anne to Guernsey after selling his shopfitting business in north London.
‘I thought if I got next door, we might get talking, perhaps get back together.
‘Now I can only go there to cut the lawn and pick up mail.
It's ridiculous.
‘I've done everything to get her back.
But I'm banging my head against a brick wall.’
He added: ‘I'm going to appeal against this order.’
Anne would not comment.
Her solicitor said: ‘Legal proceedings are under way in Guernsey.’
Temple bombers target businesses
SHOPS run by Asians became the latest firebomb targets yesterday as violence sparked by religious rioting spread.
A chemist, estate agent and travel agent in Bradford were attacked with petrol bombs and three Hindu temples set on fire.
In Luton, vandals who caused £50,000 damage to a Sikh temple were condemned for inflaming tension between the Hindus and Moslems, which has now claimed 600 lives in India.
‘Don't wreck Euro summit’
Eben Black
JOHN Major made a desperate attempt to stop the Edinburgh summit turning into a disaster last night.
In an eve-of-summit letter to fellow Government leaders, the Prime Minister — pressed on all sides by opposition to his plans — warned: ‘We share a determination to reach agreement.
But it will not be easy.’
Government sources have admitted the 12 EC member nations could emerge from Edinburgh more divided than before.
Mr Major, EC president for 11 more days, has to wrestle with difficult issues like Denmark, which voted against Maastricht in a referendum, and plans from Brussels for a massive increase in spending.
This has split the Community down the middle with the poorer nations like Portugal, Spain, Greece and Ireland demanding more hand-outs.
Mr Major will embark on a round of last-minute diplomacy in Edinburgh tonight seeing Commission president Jacques Delors and French president Francois Mitterrand.
He will meet German Chancellor Helmut Kohl for a crucial breakfast meeting tomorrow.
Mr Major's appeal to the rest of the EC came as he launched a late plan to bring Denmark back on board by allowing them a range of opt-outs from the Treaty — without altering the terms of the agreement itself.
Mr Delors yesterday warned the EC faced ‘survival or decline — there is no further way’.
Phil makes his home in Hollywood
ROCK star Phil Collins is leaving Britain to make his mark in Hollywood as a movie star.
The Grammy-winning Genesis singer has decided to live full-time in America, where he is planning three films deals for next year.
Collins's wife Jill and young daughter Lily have been living in Los Angeles since April in a Tudor-style £5 million Beverly Hills mansion.
Friends say American-born Jill was homesick and played a large factor in the move.
Collins, 41, currently touring with Genesis, is no stranger to acting.
He was praised for his screen performance in Buster.
Our difficult decision, by Tony judges
THREE Appeal Court judges tried to view the tragedy of Hillsborough coma victim Tony Bland through his eyes when deciding he should be allowed to die.
Explaining the decision, Lord Justice Hoffman said yesterday: ‘We think it more likely he would choose to end the humiliation of his being and the distress of his family.’
The House of Lords will make a final ruling on the case next week.
Car crash tears off driver's legs
A DRIVER'S legs were torn off at the knees yesterday when his car split in two in a horrific crash.
David Buckley, 29, was giving a friend a lift home when his car clipped the kerb, somersaulted 15ft into the air and smashed through the top of a lamp-post.
The S-registration car, borrowed from a neighbour, was cut in two and the bonnet and dashboard landed 25ft away — with Mr Buckley's legs inside.
He crashed on the main ‘Route 7’ Speke Road in Ditton, Widnes, after offering to give 17-year-old Donna Jackson a lift home to Runcorn when she missed her last bus.
She suffered head and pelvic injuries and suspected leg fractures.
Mr Buckley's fiancee Maureen Savage, 35, who was travelling in the back with her sons Daniel Savage, nine, and 17-year-old Malcolm Berry, all from Speke, escaped with minor injuries.
‘This was an absolutely horrific accident and it is a tragedy he lost his legs,’ said an ambulance spokesman.
Mr Buckley, of Speke, Merseyside, was last night said to be ‘very poorly’ in hospital.
IRA tube station explosion
A BOMB went off outside a north London tube station yesterday.
No one was injured in the blast which wrecked one car and damaged several others at Wood Park station.
A man claiming to be from the IRA gave a coded warning to a news agency 45 minutes before the explosion.
A shopkeeper near the blast site said: ‘There wasn't much of a bang, more of a thud.’
Back surgery ordeal for Lady Kanga
By Charles Rae
ONE of Prince Charles's closest friends is to undergo surgery to save her from a crippling disease.
Lady Dale Tryon, nicknamed Kanga by the prince, goes into Buckinghamshire's Stoke Mandeville hospital today for an exploratory examination.
She was born with severe back problems and spent much of her childhood wearing splints and fearing she would not walk again.
In February this year, the pain grew so much that she was confined to a wheelchair.
She now has to wear a neck brace, keep her left arm still with a sling and use a walking stick.
‘It has been very, very painful,’ she said.
‘The main problem is that some of my bones are crumbling and doctors have got to have a look to see what they can do for me.
‘I have already been told I will need an operation and it is going to take some time to sort out my problem.
‘I just hope surgery is put off until after Christmas because I want to spend the holiday with my children.
I shall just have to put up with the pain.’
Last week Australian-born Lady Tryon ignored her problems to hold a fashion sale in the grounds of her home in Great Durnford, Wiltshire, where she lives with husband Anthony and four children.
A large amount of the proceeds, ‘expected to be several thousands of pounds’, is to go to the Leonora Children's Cancer Fund.
The appeal was started by Prince Charles' cousin Lord Romsey and his wife Penny in memory of their daughter Leonora Knatchbull who died last year at the age of five.
Fergie tells of her annus horribilis THE Duchess of York told millions of TV viewers last night that she, too, had suffered a bad year — and blamed herself for it.
Fergie went on to say that despite her separation from Prince Andrew he was still ‘my best friend’.
‘He's a lovely man who deserves to be loved,’ she said.
‘I had a lot of lessons to learn.
I still do make mistakes.’
The 31-year-old duchess partly blamed her marriage break-up on Andrew's work in the Navy.
Of 1992, which saw the couple split as well as her topless pictures with friend Johnny Bryan, Fergie said: ‘I can't go through a year like this ever again.
It's too much stress.
And, of course, I brought it all on myself.’
She told America's ABC network that the topless photos were an intrusion on a private scene and described Mr Bryan as a ‘fantastic friend’.
Interviewer Diane Sawyer asked her: ‘But he was not just a financial adviser?’
Fergie insisted: ‘I didn't say he was.
He has been a fantastic friend helping me with financial work.’
999 hero saves tot at his desk
AN ambulance boss saved the life of a choking baby when her parents raced into his control room as he handled a 999 call.
Radio controller John Fletcher, 42, gave four-month-old Lauren McNamara, who was choking after swallowing a battery at Anfield, Liverpool, the kiss of life.
John of Ellesmere Port, said: ‘I've nicknamed her Ever Ready.
‘She's a very beautiful baby and I'd always be ready to help her.’
Channel crossing
THE man behind Eldorado is quitting as £100,000-a-year BBC1 controller to become director of drama at new ITV station, Carlton.
Jonathan Powell, 44, will join the fledgling station before its broadcasting debut on January 1.
The move comes a year before his six-year BBC contract ends.
His likely successors include his new boss, Carlton programmes director Paul Jackson, and Janet Street-Porter, the BBC's head of youth programmes.
Letterbox meal for sad baby
A BABY had lunch passed outside to her through a letterbox after bailiffs repossessed her family's rented house.
Jenny Love arrived home with her 10-month-old daughter Anna to find the locks changed and all their belongings inside, including the baby food.
An estate agent — representing the landlord's mortgage lender the Alliance and Leicester building society — refused to let them in to eat.
Instead he heated up Anna's food in a microwave as 30-year-old Mrs Love shouted instructions.
He then passed it through the letterbox and the baby ate her meal on the freezing patio.
Mrs Love said: ‘I was horrified.
The whole situation was ridiculous.’
She and her husband Don, 37, a pathology researcher at nearby Cambridge University, had not received any warning of repossession.
They had earlier approached the building society about buying the house and had put in an offer for £80,000.
That was refused and the property is now on the market for Pounds 75,000.
Pots of money
A POTTERY firm chairman has returned a £236,000 bonus to help his firm beat the recession.
Gerald Tams, of Stoke, Staffs, said: ‘I didn't really need it.’
BBC does deal for Neighbours
NEIGHBOURS is to stay on TV screens until at least 1995 after BBC chiefs made a U-turn over their plan to axe the Australian soap.
A spokesman for producers the Grundy Organisation said: ‘We are delighted that the BBC continue to view Neighbours as a key element in its weekday schedules.’
Vauxhall alert
VAUXHALL are recalling more than 1,000 Vauxhall Senator and Carlton cars built since August because of a possible steering assembly problem.
Jab hope in aids war
AIDS patients are being given a new vaccine which could slow down the effects of the disease.
The jab, developed from yeast cells, sparks immunity to the protein surrounding the Aids virus and stimulates the body's own defence mechanism.
Patients with a high immunity to the protein, called P24, show a slower progression to full-blown Aids than those with low-level.
Fifteen HIV-positive patients at top Aids centre, St Mary's Hospital, London, are receiving treatment with the new vaccine.
The injection is not a conventional vaccine as it treats the infection rather than being used as a preventive measure.
The pilot study is being carried out by Aids expert Professor Jonathan Weber and results are due by the end of 1993.
Further trials are planned to start in Europe during 1993.
Diana Outlaws the Inlaws
Clive Nelson and Charles Rae
DEFIANT Princess Diana asserted her newly won independence yesterday by announcing that she will NOT attend Princess Anne's wedding tomorrow.
She gave notice that she is determined to live the rest of her life as a woman independent in her own right, unfettered by false loyalties to the Royal Family.
She also informed the Queen she will share Christmas with the Royal Family on her own terms, and will stay with the Duchess of York in a farmhouse two miles from Sandringham.
And Diana will NOT, senior courtiers believe, be content with a mere separation from Charles.
She WILL, they believe, divorce him within a year — and cast the monarchy into even deeper crisis.
As the rest of the royals head to Balmoral tomorrow morning, Diana will pick up ten-year-old William and Harry, eight, when they break up for the Christmas holidays from Ludgrove school in Wokingham.
Diana's decision not to attend Princess Anne's wedding to Commander Tim Laurence has stunned the Queen.
Instead the princess simply sent the couple her best wishes for the future.
Diana has never been close to the Princess Royal, and demonstrated that she now has no intention of pretending otherwise.
Her decision was reinforced when she heard that the Queen Mother, with whom she has also clashed, was also going to attend the wedding.
A courtier told TODAY: ‘The Princess of Wales is expected to carry out her royal engagements but is no longer expected to attend family occasions, which do not in involve the attendance of Prince William and Prince Harry.’
Divorce within a year was ‘inevitable’ he added, as Diana is unwilling to spend her life shackled to what little remains of her loveless marriage.
The Queen will almost certainly insist that Prince William take over as King when he is old enough — and that Prince Charles should renounce the throne.
One said: ‘Once we have King William on the throne, the view is we shall be seeing the start of a cleansed monarchy.’
Diana and Charles will be together this evening with other royals when the Queen hosts a dinner on board Britannia for leaders attending the European summit.
The couple were also together last night hosting a private Christmas get together for staff at Kensington Palace.
Diana's Christmas plans are also clearly in defiance of the Queen's wishes.
While Charles goes to join the family at Sandringham, Diana will join the Duchess of York in the nine-bedroomed Wood Farm in the village of Wolferton, Norfolk…just two miles away.
William and Harry will stay with Charles and the rest of the Royal Family.
Diana is expected to leave Wood Farm after a few days to spend the rest of the Christmas holiday with her brother Earl Spencer.
Fergie is taking Princess Beatrice and Eugenie to Wood Farm so they can see their father Prince Andrew, who will also be staying with the Queen.
Fergie's mum Susan Barrantes and sister Jane Makin will also be at Wood Farm.
Royal watcher Marget Holder said: ‘It looks like a Christmas gathering of the estranged wives of Windsor.
‘It really is incredible.
It is a case of the outlaws who have become outcasts staying in the outhouse.’
The guest list for Anne's wedding, at Crathie Church, has varied almost day by day.
The Queen Mother was at first expected to stay at her London home, Clarence House, but is now scheduled to attend.
To add to the royal confusion Prince Andrew is also unlikely to attend because of‘prior engagements’.
He is hosting a shooting party for a dozen close friends at Sandringham and is said to be ‘most unwilling’ to alter his plans.
A Sandringham insider said: ‘He learnt of the wedding very late because arrangements were kept secret.’
Despite Anne's wishes, facilities are being provided for vast numbers of public and Press.
Up to 4,000 spectators are expected and police believe around 500 journalists from around the world will cover the 3pm service.
‘As ‘quiet’ weddings go this promises to be quite a rumbustious affair,’a police spokesman said.
Anne's wedding banns
PRINCESS Anne's proposed marriage to Tim Laurence finally became legal yesterday — when this notice was pinned outside a tiny register office in the village of Ballater, near Balmoral.
The couple were listed simply as Extract 41 — the 41st wedding to take place in registrar Molly Croll's district this year.
My battle to beat break-up
ROYAL-watcher Andrew Morton rushed out his book early to beat an announcement of the royal marriage split, he revealed yesterday.
Denying claims that Diana: Her True Story was to blame for the separation, he said: ‘While researching the book the volatility and turbulence in the marriage was very apparent to me.
‘By the hour I was getting reports coming through to me that the princess wanted to leave the Royal Family.
‘We brought publication forward from September to June because the situation was so uncertain.’
Home for one and one's gran
THIS is Clarence House, the 19th century mansion Prince Charles is sharing with his grandmother.
He will have a suite of apartments in the four-storey building, which was once the official residence of his mother.
Built in 1825 for William IV, it is just down the road from Buckingham Palace and, as our pictures reveal, Charles will live in the luxury he has become accustomed to at Kensington Palace and Highgrove.
The drawing room with its magnificent chandelier and antique furniture is in a wing of the house built by John Nash.
The second picture shows the sitting room once used by Prince Charles's father, the Duke of Edinburgh, who moved into Clarence House with the future Queen in 1947.
The entire room is panelled in highest quality Canadian maple wood.
Little has changed since Prince Philip and the then Princess Elizabeth moved in.
As a boy Prince Charles played in the rooms and corridors of Clarence House and had a nursery on the top floor.
He moved into Buckingham Palace when his mother became Queen and the Queen Mother made the reverse journey with Princess Margaret.
Despite its grandeur, Clarence House has always had a reputation as a happy home.
‘The rooms are full of light, colour and a sense of gaiety,’ wrote one author.
As he moves in with his beloved grandmother, the troubled prince will hope some of that gaiety rubs off on him.
Princess keeps her composure
Cheryl Stonehouse
THE Princess of Wales faced the first day of her formal separation with a composure and dignity which never slipped.
Her sister, Lady Jane Fellowes, is believed to have made an early morning visit to Kensington Palace to offer support, but the Princess kept her distress private.
She left early for her morning swim at Buckingham Palace and later went on a 35-minute errand.
She looked happy and relaxed, even managing a professional pause for photographs later at the door of London's Park Lane Hilton.
Lord Archer and Lord Healey, both in Santa Claus outfits, had been with her at an event in honour of Headway, the National Head Injuries Association.
They escorted her to the door, where she turned, smiling, to shake hands.
She has felt a rapport with Headway since Prince William narrowly escaped brain damage in an accident at school last year.
‘I understand some of the anxieties and traumas caused on hearing the news of a head injury to a loved one,’ she told guests.
Asked how the princess had been during lunch, Lord Healey said: ‘The princess was wonderful.
She was happy — as always.’
In their first appearance together since Wednesday's announcement Charles and Diana were last night hosting Christmas drinks for those who have helped with their work this year.
Tonight they are together at a banquet aboard the Royal Yacht Britannia to mark the EC summit.
Prince's low profile visit
PRINCE Charles kept a low profile during an official visit yesterday when he was taken 20ft underground into a sewer.
Showing no signs of strain following the previous day's announcement, he opened Thames Water's new testing laboratory in London's Docklands.
‘I will be particularly interested to see how Thames Water deals with sewage sludge which is one of my particular interests,’ he told staff.
He made no reference to the separation and everyone who spoke to him avoided the subject.
When he arrived at the £10 million water testing laboratory the prince was greeted by a host of staff dressed in white coats.
Striding from the car he quipped: ‘Have I got a disease or something.’
Earlier, as president of Business in the Community, he had attended presentations to business leaders at St James's Palace, following a night at Kensington Palace in a separate suite to Princess Diana.
Major's royal statement misled the nation
Penny Wark
JOHN Major has failed to tell the complete truth about Charles and Diana's marriage, a leading royal commentator said last night.
Harold Brooks-Baker, publishing director of Burke's Peerage, accused the Premier of palming off the British people with a phoney version of the truth.
‘The Prime Minister is guilty of releasing only part of the information,’ he said.
‘The people will not accept this, they will demand to know the whole story.
‘The only reason for the Prime Minister to make a statement was if it concerned a matter of grave constitutional importance.
We can expect more statements in the coming weeks and months and I am certain they will be about more than the separation of the Prince and Princess of Wales, which is not a grave legal or constitutional matter.
A fully fledged divorce is.
Or, if the Prince of Wales was to remove himself from the line of succession, that would be a grave matter.
I think both are on the cards.’
Here, Mr Brooks-Baker dissects the Prime Minister's statement and reveals the truth behind it: It is announced from Buckingham Palace that, with regret, the Prince and Princess of Wales have decided to separate.
‘There is nothing here that is of constitutional or political importance.’
Their Royal Highnesses have no plans to divorce and their constitutional positions are unaffected.
‘The real story will show that the constitutional position will be affected.
The question we must ask is why the real story has not been given?
I would guess Mr Major is testing opinion.
‘Support for the monarchy has been strong but it is weakening.
‘The Palace is playing a dangerous game in not telling the whole truth because we have seen from other countries, Romania, Bulgaria, Austria and Belgium, when monarchies are not open with their people they lose support and even disappear.’
This decision has been reached amicably, and they will both continue to participate fully in the upbringing of their children.
‘This is nonsense.
There has been nothing amicable about this arrangement.
They have been at each others' throats.
‘The position of the children is not really in dispute.
They will continue to be brought up as heirs to the throne.’
Their Royal Highnesses will continue to carry out full and separate programmes of public engagements and will, from time to time, attend family occasions and national events together.
‘When the princess went to Paris she was received in an official capacity by President Mitterrand.
There will certainly be no more trips for her that involve political importance.
‘If she operates as a separate entity I have no doubt her charm, beauty and popularity will mean her charity work will continue.
‘It is impossible for someone to marry into the Royal Family and have separate but equal status.
Either they work together or one of them is more important.
‘On the matter of family events, Lord Snowdon attends these and there is no friction.’
The Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh, though saddened, understand and sympathise with the difficulties that have led to this decision.
‘To talk of their sadness is an understatement.
They have no choice but to accept the position.
This is an arranged marriage, one of the few in many centuries for this family that has gone wrong.’
Her Majesty and His Royal Highness particularly hope that the intrusions into the privacy of the Prince and Princess of Wales may now cease.
‘You can be certain they hope for that but I don't believe for a moment they expect it.
Unfortunately until the palace has decent public relations advisers and an attitude of complete openness, the opposite will happen.’
They believe that a degree of privacy and understanding is essential if Their Royal Highnesses are to provide a happy and secure upbringing for their children, while continuing to give a wholehearted commitment to their public duties.
‘This is putting the children in a rather middle class position, as opposed to a royal position.
I think this is window-dressing.’
There is no reason why the Princess of Wales should not be crowned Queen in due course.
‘The idea of having a queen not in full communication with her husband is inconceivable.
How could it possibly work?’
The Prince of Wales's succession as Head of the Church of England is also unaffected.
‘How could this happen?
Princess Anne is remarrying in Scotland because the Church of England won't marry her.
If the Prince of Wales divorced and remarried the church would not remarry him either.
‘The king must be able to carry out his duties as head of the Church of England.
Now that his marriage has broken down there is no way round this problem.
I know that as they continue with their royal duties and with bringing up their children, the prince and princess will have the full support, understanding and affection of this House and of the country.
‘This is wishful thinking.
The country has a great deal of sympathy for the prince and princess but the people are anxious to know the whole story.’
40,000 jet jobs saved
DEFENCE Secretary Malcolm Rifkind yesterday saved the £20 billion European Fighter Aircraft project — and 40,000 British jobs.
Germany wanted a cheaper plane, but Nato agreed to the EFA, as long as savings are made.
Production schedules will now be reorganised and the target trimmed from 460 planes.
Deliveries are due to start in four years.
Patient died tied to pipe
A MENTALLY handicapped patient choked to death after being tied to a toilet pipe while nurses went to lunch, an inquiry heard yesterday.
The body of Freda Latham, 42, was found later by a cleaner.
‘Hooking on’ patients at Stallington Hospital, Blythe Bridge, Staffs, was common practice, the hearing heard.
‘It was a tragic incident,’ said health authority boss Richard Priestley.
Fakes a lot
HARD-UP shoppers were warned yesterday to beware of cut-price fakes.
Illegal traders are using the recession to hawk rip-off clothing, perfume and music tapes.
‘Counterfeiting is at its highest level for 10 years,’ said trading standards officer Peter Mawdsley.
‘Recession-hit consumers are being lured by cheap prices, then exploited.’
Torturer is jailed
A MEMBER of a West Indian ‘Yardie’ gang who tortured and sexually assaulted a businesswoman for two days was jailed for 10 years yesterday.
Eldon Brown's 40-year-old victim broke her pelvis, ankle and four bones in her back, after jumping from a fourth floor window to escape him.
Brown, 25, of Shepherd's Bush, West London, was convicted at the Old Bailey of kidnap, false imprisonment, unlawful wounding, grievous bodily harm and sexual assault.
Now all our high streets are bomb targets for IRA
Neville Thurlbeck
THE people of Wood Green were wary of Christmas shopping in the city.
With the IRA's latest bombing campaign it would be safer to stick to local shops.
Then, at 9.30am yesterday, the terrorists chose the north London suburb to deliver a deadly message.
Two explosions made it clear that the IRA sees every high street in Britain, every parade of shops, a potential target.
The horror of their latest outrage will always remain a sickening memory for Clinton Cards assistant Marion Bell, 25.
‘Shop girls were screaming and young mothers were crying as they ran up the street,’ she said.
‘A lot of them had babies in buggies and they and the kiddies looked absolutely terrified.
I'll never forget that sight.
‘There were literally hundreds if not thousands of people who looked as though they were running for their lives.’
Amazingly only 11 people were injured — including five police officers — when the bombs exploded within five minutes of each other.
The first was planted in a litter bin outside W H Smith in the High Road.
The second was in another bin beside the Argos showroom two doors away.
Police were given a 15-minute warning by telephone and had just begun to clear the area.
People sensed that the chilling emergency announcements on shop tannoys were for real.
As they began to rush out of the shops, the bombs exploded.
One of the injured was Lulu Ahmet, 23, who works in The Gold Shop, a jewellers sandwiched between W H Smith and Argos.
The shop's owner Andrew Lazarus, 25, said: ‘Lulu was hit by flying glass and want sprawling on the floor.
Her head and hands were bleeding and the manager picked her up and got her away.
‘These people were trying to kill us.
It's all incredible, we can't believe it.’
Shopworker Marian Clarke, 27, of Hornsey, said: ‘You could tell from the warning that it was real and everyone started to run and the police were shooing people away from the buildings.
‘When a second much larger explosion went off, there was so much confusion that people were running towards it.
‘They were crying because they knew friends and relatives were still in the area.’
In the Kingsbury furniture store opposite W H Smith, manager Davie Glover, 39, claimed police were herding his staff the wrong way.
‘They were telling everying to go out of the front of the shop,’ he said.
‘We couldn't understand it because normally our drill is to go out of the back to the car park.
But they insisted to go out of the front.’
The bomb went off and Joe Matos, a salesman, and Ayidan Zekai, a secretary, were thrown to the ground.
‘They were very close to the blast, just a matter of feet away,’ said Mr Glover.
‘They were hit by glass, but were not seriously injured.
‘Then the police said just run, run.
We all ran like hell and when we stopped to catch our breath the police said keep on running, there's another one.’
Labourer Nick Stylianou, 26, was repairing paving stones when he saw the first bomb explode.
‘It went off inside a bin which shot into the air sending clouds of smoke everywhere.
‘A policeman was standing beside it and took the full force of the blast.
I saw him crying out and holding his hands over his face.
‘After a minute he came staggering out of the smoke.’
The injured officer, PC John Adams, 40, was rushed to North Middlesex Hospital, along with a 19-year-old rookie officer and PC Helen Kelly.
She was one of three WPCs and a sergeant seriously injured when a knifeman went berserk last year, just 100 yards from yesterday's explosions.
She has only recently returned to full duties, and was treated for shock and minor cuts.
Another of the casualties was believed to be a boy of nine.
By last night only one victim remained in hospital — a 25-year-old man recovering from surgery to remove glass from his arm.
Hornsey and Wood Green's Labour MP Barbara Roache said from the scene: ‘There are many people living in the flats above the shopping centre.
‘They chose the busiest time of the year when the Christmas rush is on and that makes it even more appalling.
They intended to inflict maximum damage.
‘The people here today were mainly women and children and elderly people, and the place was packed.’
She added: ‘Police had just a few minutes to evacuate thousands of people.’
The double explosion came just a few hours after a bomb exploded at Woodside Park tube station.
No one was injured.
Commander David Tucker head of the anti-terrorist squad believes both attacks were carried out by the same IRA unit.
Blaze at temple
A HINDU temple became the latest target for religious violence yesterday when it was set alight in the early hours.
Worshippers arrived at the temple in Ealing, west London, to find the doors had been soaked in petrol and set on fire.
The inside of the building was slightly smoke-damaged.
The attack is the third in two days on London temples since clashes between Hindus and Moslems erupted in India.
‘We appeal to anyone with information to contact us,’ said police.
Wimbledon with no Dan will be like strawberries with no cream
Geraint Jones
HE was renowned for the three most famous words in tennis —‘Oh, I say.’
As players and spectators heated up at Wimbledon's Centre Court Dan Maskell stayed cool.
The old-fashioned English gentleman, who died in hospital yesterday aged 84, was the master of the understatement.
His quaint commentaries made him the voice of the modern game, providing stark contrast to the loud-mouthed antics of some superbrat players.
The sport was united in mourning for Maskell who graced the game as player, coach and commentator for most of this century.
Maskell — nicknamed the Voice of Wimbledon — illuminated the All England championships for 43 years.
Wimbledon without him will be like having its famous strawberries — without cream.
His catchphrases like ‘What a peach of a shot’ and ‘That's a dream of a pass’are now part of tennis language.
He was admitted to hospital in Redhill, Surrey on Monday and died in the early hours yesterday from heart failure.
His daughter Robin said at the family home in Dorking: ‘Dad had 84 wonderful years.’
News of Maskell's death was released by the Lawn Tennis Association.
Its president Ian King said: ‘Dan was an absolute gentleman.’
Gerald Williams described his former commentary box partner as ‘an immensely warm person who was proud to be a part of tennis establishment.
‘He didn't always agree with some of the things in modern tennis, but he was never stuck in the past.’
John Barrett, who succeeded his lifelong friend as the BBC's senior tennis commentator, said: ‘It's so sad that he didn't have time to enjoy his retirement.
‘Like John Arlott and Henry Longhurst, he was a one-off, irreplaceable.
‘He had great respect for the participants, even when people like John McEnroe were behaving badly.’
Britain's last Wimbledon singles champion, Virginia Wade, said: ‘He symbolised the game in the whole of the country.
His greatest asset was his enthusiasm.’
Arthur Ashe, 1975 Wimbledon champion turned commentator in the US, said Maskell was ‘the doyen of commentators’.
‘The standard we all sought was Dan's,’ he said.
Maskell, one of eight children, grew up in Fulham, west London.
He launched his tennis career in 1923 as a ball boy.
A year later, aged 16, he became British junior rackets champion.
He was regarded as the professional equivalent of Fred Perry but, as a professional, was never allowed to play for his country.
However, in 1933 he coached Britain to a Davis Cup triumph.
After the war he began commentating on radio then moved to television in 1951.
Delight in his work shrouded personal tragedy.
He lost his only son Jay, 26, in an air crash and his first wife Connie drowned in Antigua.
He married his second wife Kay in 1980 and was awarded the CBE two years later.
Despite his misfortunes Maskell once reflected: ‘I am the luckiest chap in the world.
The gods have smiled on me.’
Suitcases take more hols alone
COMPLAINTS about airline baggage which disappears into thin air are soaring, a new report revealed yesterday.
They jumped from 134 to 213 this year — an increase of 60 per cent.
Without enough personal insurance, passengers will only receive Pounds 13.63 compensation for each kilogram of luggage lost in Britain.
‘Adequate personal insurance provides the only real defence against serious loss,’ said the report by the Air Transport Users' Committee.
Passengers, fed up with cancellations and delays, made 1018 complaints this year, up from 898.
They are only satisfied with ticket procedures, airport standards and tariffs.
Jailed soccer boss is freed
A SOCCER boss jailed for tax fraud was freed by the Appeal Court yesterday.
Brian Hillier, former chairman of Swindon Town, had his 12-month sentence halved, allowing him to leave prison immediately.
Hillier, 49, of Heddington, Wilts, was jailed in July after Winchester Crown Court heard how he cheated the taxman of £40,000 through secret payments to players.
He said after his release: ‘I am delighted I can now start a new phase in my life.’
Op has actor over a barrel
THE Royal Shakespeare Company has rewritten a famous death scene in one of the Bard's best-known plays — because an actor has been ordered by doctors not to stick his head in a barrel of water.
The Duke of Clarence in Richard III is supposed to be drowned in a butt of malmsey wine.
But actor Simon Dormandy has been banned form immersing his head following a delicate eye operation.
So now he is clubbed to death instead, much to the surprise of the audience.
Smash tot flung 70ft in car seat
A BABY was catapulted 70ft along a road strapped in his car seat after a horror smash — and escaped with a broken arm.
Five-month-old Charles Goodchild, from Nanpean, near St Austell, was in the front of the family's Ford Sierra when it crashed with a lorry near Liskeard, Cornwall.
His mother, Karen, 32, sister Danielle, 12, and brother Robert, three, suffered minor injuries.
The Sierra was smashed into four pieces in the accident.
Duke's blood clue to bones
SCIENTISTS are closer to solving the mystery of the fate of Russia's royal family after testing a blood sample from the Duke of Edinburgh.
Home Office experts at Aldermaston, Berks, have matched DNA from the duke, a direct descendant of Tsarina Alexandria, with samples from bones unearthed last year.
The family was executed by Bolsheviks in 1918.
Sir Angus gets speeding fine
PRINCESS Alexandra's husband Sir Angus Ogilvy escaped a motoring ban yesterday after admitting driving at 82mph through roadworks.
In a letter to magistrates at Wetherby, West Yorks, he said he was rushing to a speaking date when stopped in a 50mph zone on the A1.
Sir Angus, 64, of Richmond Park, Surrey, was fined £150 with £25 costs.
Brains behind Eldorado flop quits the BBC
Adrian Lee
THE man who gave TV viewers Eldorado is quitting his job with the BBC.
Controller Jonathan Powell is leaving his £100,000-a-year post to join fledgling ITV station Carlton.
The BBC yesterday denied his shock departure — nearly a year before the end of his contract — was linked to the flop of the Spanish set soap opera.
Mr Powell, 44, came in for fierce criticism when he replaced Terry Wogan with the £10 million drama.
The show is not expected to survive his departure for long.
Mr Powell's leaving will be mourned by colleagues.
One described it as ‘a sad day for the BBC’.
Among Mr Powell's successes in his five years in the hot seat were EastEnders and Birds Of A Feather.
He helped push up ratings and doubled its comedy output.
Mr Powell will step down at Christmas, days before Carlton takes over the franchise held by Thames on New Year's Day.
He joins Carlton as controller of drama but has been tipped as a future programme chief.
Mr Powell said: ‘I'm thrilled by the opportunity to join its team.’
BBC Network Television director Will Wyatt said: ‘Jonathan has done one of the toughest jobs in television for longer than almost all of his predecessors.’
His move puts one of TV's top jobs up for grabs.
Carlton boss Paul Jackson, BBC2 controller Alan Yentob and the BBC's head of youth programmes Janet Street-Porter are front runners.
Mr Yentob will take over Mr Powell's post until an appointment is made.
Killer on the street
HOMELESSNESS is a killer, according to a new report by the charity Crisis.
Their research, detailed in Sick to Death of Homelessness, shows the death rate among the homeless is three times higher than the rest of the population, with more than 600 dying on the streets last year.
Suicide was the biggest cause of death, but the homeless are also 150 times more likely to be killed in an assault.
The average age of death was 47 compared to over 70 in normal circumstances.
Feud win Doc ends up loser
A FEUDING doctor who was awarded a record £150,000 damages against his partner for slander has been forced to give up his battle to get her to pay the cash.
Malcolm Smith, 36, is on the verge of financial ruin because of mounting legal costs a year after winning the case against Alanah Houston, his former partner at a Northampton surgery.
A High Court jury ruled in his favour after hearing how Dr Houston, 47, made claims in front of staff and patients that Dr Smith had sexually harassed her.
She has since declared herself bankrupt and has not paid anything towards damages or Dr Smith's costs.
‘I haven't received a penny from her,’ said Dr Smith yesterday.
‘I have already paid out £100,000 in legal fees.
I can't go on like this.’
Bachelor Dr Smith, of Northampton, said he and his father had remortgaged their homes to help meet the growing bills.
‘I really don't have any regrets, but now I could lose everything.’
Dr Houston, who has recently beaten breast cancer, said she was continuing with plans to appeal.
The sinking detectives
TWO PCs landed in deep water when their car spun into a canal on a 999 call in Merevale, Warwicks, yesterday.
Tony Haighway, 40, is comfortable in hospital.
Christopher Edmond, 35, suffered shock.
Supermarkets add fat profit
SUPERMARKET chains are ripping off customers by packaging joints of beef with extra fat.
Trading standards officers found two thirds of the joints tested in Yorkshire and Humberside had fat added to look as if it was a natural part of the meat.
An officer described the practice as ‘grossly misleading’ and warned stores could be prosecuted.
BA strike threat
CHRISTMAS holiday plans for thousands of families faced chaos last night as British Airways prepared for a strike.
Talks over new contracts for workers at Gatwick airport broke down.
A strike ballot will now be held which could spread the dispute, grounding all services throughout Britain and Europe.
The threat comes at a time when BA is putting on extra flights to cover the rush, which would have seen 100,000 passengers a day at Heathrow alone.
Gatwick has already sanctioned a strike.
Manchester, Belfast, Glasgow, Edinburgh, Aberdeen — and Heathrow — are to vote.
Union official George Ryde said: ‘There could be considerable disruption.’
But an airline spokesman insisted: ‘We hope to resume negotiations.
Passengers should not alter holiday plans.’
Trouble started with a cost-cutting exercise after BA took over Dan Air.
£290,000 for family of hero sliced in two by helicopter
Adrian Lee
THE family of an Army hero sliced in two as a helicopter pilot showed off were yesterday awarded £290,000.
Ulster veteran Captain John Green, who received a commendation for defusing a terrorist bomb, was hit with the full force of the rotor blades.
At the High Court in Manchester yesterday the Ministry of Defence agreed to pay damages to Captain Green's widow, Patricia and her two daughters.
The historic award was the first fatal accident claim to be started after the MoD lost its immunity from law suits in 1987.
The end of Mrs Green's five-year battle will help pave the way for scores of other claims from servicemen and their families.
Captain Green, 41, had been standing with other men from the Royal Artillery's 32nd Heavy Regiment after a training exercise in Alberta, Canada, when he was hit.
The pilot, who was later court martialled, was unable to pull up from a dive and ploughed into the ground.
A helicopter passenger was badly injured.
Mrs Green, of Little Holton, Manchester, will receive most of the damages.
Her daughters, Melanie, 16, will receive £20,000 and nine-year-old Tammy will get £34,000.
Judge, Mr Justice Swinton-Thomas said he had no difficulty in approving the settlement.
After the award Mrs Green's solicitor Raymond Donn, who is handling another 60 cases involving dead and injured servicemen, said people should not be frightened of claiming from the Ministry of Defence.
He predicted some future settlements for cases he is handling would top £1 million.
Mrs Green was first told her husband, who had 25 years service, had died in a training accident.
‘The money did not matter to Mrs Green,’ said Mr Donn.
‘She just wanted to find out how her husband died.’
Fine for brush with the law
A MOTORIST has been fined £50 for brushing his hair and admiring his looks as he drove at 50mph.
Nigel Buxton, 41, swerved snarply across the road when he lifted both his hands off the wheel and ran them through his hair, Didcot magistrates heard.
Buxton, of Harwell, Oxon, was convicted of not being in control of his vehicle.
Women wasted
WOMEN'S talents were going to waste, said Commons Speaker Betty Boothroyd.
She is backing a drive to get more women top jobs.
High Court opens a can of worms
A FISHERMAN yesterday called for a change in the law to allow anglers to dig for bait on the seashore.
Tony Anderson, 46, of Seaton Delaval, Northumberland, appealed to the High Court to quash his 1990 conviction of unlawfully digging for worms at nearby Boulmer.
He was fined £50 for breaching a local by-law but yesterday claimed it was everybody's right to search for bait in a ruling dating back to the Magna Carta in 1215.
The hearing continues.
999 hero saves baby at his desk
Andrew Russell
AN ambulance boss saved the life of a choking baby at his desk when her parents raced into his control room as he handled a 999 call.
Radio controller John Fletcher grabbed four-month-old Lauren McNamara and gave her the kiss of life as her face turned blue from lack of oxygen.
But seconds later she stopped breathing again — and John, who had not given emergency treatment for three years, had to give her mouth-to-mouth resuscitation four times until paramedics arrived.
The dark-haired baby had tried to swallow a battery, which her 20-month-old brother Jordan had given her.
She was taken to Alder Hey Children's Hospital in Liverpool after paramedics cleared her throat.
‘All the ambulance staff did a brilliant job and we will be forever grateful,’ said Lauren's father, Kieran, 27.
He and his 25-year-old wife Astrid had rushed to the control centre near their home in Anfield, thinking it was the station.
John, 42, of Ellesmere Port, said: ‘I was on the phone taking a 999 call when someone came in screaming that there was a baby who could not breathe.
‘I jumped out of my seat, my headphones flew off and I started giving her mouth-to-mouth.
‘I've nicknamed her Ever Ready.
She's a very beautiful baby and I'd always be ready to help her.’
Husband next door gives up
LOVELORN millionaire Bill Garwood, who bought the house next door to his estranged wife to try to win her back, yesterday conceded defeat.
He is to sell up after his extravagant act failed to persuade her.
Besotted Bill spent £50,000 hiring private detectives to track down 67-year-old Anne after she left their Channel Islands home in Guernsey in 1990.
When he found her at Leominster, Hereford and Worcester, he spent Pounds 68,000 on the house next door.
But his bid backfired when Anne got a court order banning Bill, 70, from living within 20 miles of her.
Now, as a final act of love after 33 years of marriage, he has given Anne first refusal on the property.
‘I've done everything to prove I love her,’ he said.
‘I know when I'm beaten.
I'll have to try to forget about Anne and get on with life — but it will be hard.’
‘Armed thief left address’
AN ARMED robber was caught after he filled in his road tax form in his real name at the post office he was raiding.
Then Michael Stewart dropped it as he fled with £5,000, the Old Bailey was told yesterday.
Stewart had filled in the V62 form while standing in the queue moments before staging the hold-up, the jury heard.
Stewart, 32, of Forest Gate, east London, has denied robbery.
The trial continues.
Three freed over killing
THREE men convicted of murdering prostitute Lynette White have been freed by the Appeal Court.
Stephen Miller, 26, Tony Paris, 35, and Yusef Abdullahi, corr 30, were jailed for life at Swansea Crown Court in 1990 after Lynette, 20, was killed in Cardiff.
The convictions were declared unsafe after the judges ruled tapes of Miller's police questioning inadmissable.
You pay £300m for deal
Paul Wilenius, Political Editor
TAXPAYERS will have to fork out an extra £300 million to save Prime Minister John Major's face at the EC Edinburgh Summit today.
He was last night on the verge of coaxing Denmark back on to the path to European unity — but he will have to back down on the EC budget to close the deal.
After intense meetings with EC Commission president Jacques Delors and French president Francois Mitterrand, the British leader was confident of a Denmark deal.
But Mr Delors had made it clear he wants the annual budget to rise to £73 billion over the next seven years.
Britain has only agreed to a package of £65 billion a year.
A compromise of £68 or £69 billion by 1999 is expected today.
Britain's share of this new spending is likely to be around £300 million.
Much of this will be spent on improving EC road, rail and communications systems and on agriculture.
Last night Mr Major was remaining cautiously optimistic that he could save the Maastricht Treaty.
‘I'm not going to make predictions about what could be done, because whether anything can be done depends upon the will of all the heads of government,’ he said.
‘If someone is determined to prevent an agreement or cannot agree then there won't be one.’
A Denmark deal could pave the way for a successful second Danish referendum next May.
That could lead to full ratification of the Maastricht treaty by Britain shortly afterwards.
Delors under student fire
RIGHT-WING anti-Europe students ambushed EC Commission president Jacques Delors yesterday as he received an honorary degree from Edinburgh University.
The students, who call themselves the EC Unwelcoming Committee shouted: ‘Its your slump, we won't pay.’
Then they unfurled a banner warning Delors ‘Don't bulldoze Europe.’
Mr Delors was able to finish his speech in which he urged leaders to ‘rise above present difficulties.’
Scots give a gift protest
DIPLOMATS and journalists expecting lavish Euro hospitality at the Edinburgh Summit came away empty-handed yesterday.
The expected bag of gifts did not materialise because the Government had failed to get any donations from local businesses like smoked salmon merchants and whisky distillers.
The distillers believe the EC tax policy is strangling their business.
Mr Delors wants extra money for the EC budget
A force for the future
Douglas Hurd, Foreign Secretary
THE 12 heads of government of the EC gather in Edinburgh today.
A lot will hinge on their decisions.
1992 has been a difficult year.
We have seen convulsions in the currency markets, bloody conflict in the former Yugoslavia and economic slowdown across Europe.
The Danish and French referendums on the Maastricht treaty have put a question mark over the future of the European Community.
At the same time, we have seen ugly outbreaks of racism, fuelled by fears of an uncontrolled influx of immigrants from Eastern Europe.
These tensions have to be addressed urgently.
Now, more than ever, we need the European Community to hold our continent together.
Its chances of success are finely balanced.
The Edinburgh Summit will tell us whether it has a real will to succeed.
There are at least two good reasons why it should.
Both of them bear directly on our everyday lives.
Both of them have made important progress under the British Presidency which ends on December 31.
They greatly improve the prospects for beating the world recession.
First, thanks to the Single European Market, the New Year will usher in a dramatic new set of opportunities for businesses.
It will bring more choice — and lower prices — for ordinary citizens and consumers.
It will also mean the freedom to live, study and work anywhere in the EC.
Second, we have seen off the threat of a world trade war which would have destroyed any hope of economic recovery.
Instead, the Premier's efforts to keep the Gatt talks on track have opened up the prospect of a world trade deal.
At Edinburgh we shall also discuss what else we can do to promote economic recovery.
In Britain, there are some early signs that lower interest rates and lower inflation are putting us back on course for growth.
That strategy will stand Europe in good stead too.
As for Britain's EC rebate, we shall stand firm against any adverse charge.
We need to sort out the EC's finances if we are to get on with the community's enlargement.
The queue of applicants for EC membership continues to grow.
It is easy to see why.
Even with its present difficulties, the European Community stands as a beacon of economic success and political stability in Europe.
At Edinburgh I hope we can set the new membership negotiations in train.
That will be the first step towards building the wider Europe for which Britain has long argued.
Eventually we hope to see the European Community take in the new democracies of Eastern Europe as well.
There is another task for the Twelve at Edinburgh.
We need to show our determination to move ahead together.
That means reaching an agreement with Denmark on the Maastricht treaty which is acceptable to all the other member states as well.
That treaty contains many ideas for which Britain has fought long and hard.
It is the best and only basis for strengthening cooperation between the Twelve, while leaving ultimate power with national governments.
But treaties are not enough.
We also need to show in practice that the community is working with its own peoples — not taking decisions over their heads.
That must mean more openness in the way it conducts its business.
Above all, it means that national action should be the rule and community action the exception.
The European Commission itself now recognises that principle.
It is producing a list of unnecessary EC measures which should be repealed or shelved.
Agreement at Edinburgh will not be easy, but everyone knows that the price of failure would be high.
For this is Europe's chance to turn the corner.
A lesson the teacher will never forget
Simon Trump
A TEACHER was more than four times over the drink-drive limit after leaving her junior school's afternoon carol concert, a court heard yesterday.
Christine Pritchard was arrested just 20 minutes after the children's event ended at 3.30pm.
Yesterday she was hit by the ‘instant justice’ promised in a tough Christmas drink drive blitz.
She was fined £3,900, ordered to forfeit her Ford Fiesta car, worth £800, and banned from driving for three years.
Pritchard, 37, admitted drinking wine at the school concert.
But police also found an empty bottle of Cinzano in her car, the court heard.
A patrol saw her weaving across a dual carriageway as she drove home to Abergavenny from Oakfield Primary School in Pontypool, South Wales.
‘An officer signalled for her to stop but she carried on for a mile and mounted the kerb on one occasion,’ Tony Malyon, prosecuting, told Pontypool magistrates.
‘Miss Pritchard only stopped when the officers put their siren on.
‘She smelled of alcohol and was unsteady on her feet.
When she was questioned she told the officer she had consumed two glasses of wine at the school Christmas concert.’
The incident happened the day after the local Gwent police force had launched their anti-drink drive campaign.
Pritchard failed a roadside breath test which recorded 151 micrograms of alcohol in 100 millilitres of breath.
The legal limit is 35 micrograms.
David John, defending, said: ‘Miss Pritchard has some history of a drink problem and she regrets this incident.’
Mrs Freda Hindley, chairman of the bench, told her: ‘You only escaped prison because of your previous good character and because you pleaded guilty.’
Pritchard, wearing a grey skirt and jumper, offered to pay the fine at £60 a week.
Police kept her locked up in a cell until she gave a negative breath test and was deemed fit to leave.
Superintendent Jeff Rodway said: ‘It was a spectacular reading in anyone's book.
‘People should remember alcohol is dangerous whether you drink it in the pub or at the Christmas carol concert.’
Gwent education chiefs have been informed of Pritchard's conviction.
A spokesman said: ‘We are investigating the incident and whatever action is deemed suitable will be taken.’
Pritchard has 42 days to appeal against her sentence.
If she does not, or if the appeal is rejected, her car will be sold and the proceeds donated to a road safety campaign.
Last night, a man who answered the door at Pritchard's home said: ‘We are both law abiding citizens.
‘It hasn't sunk in yet but it's a very harsh and unfair punishment.’
Police to shut Aids loophole
Emma Campbell
POLICE are poised to close a drink-drive loophole after a motorist who refused a breath test because he was scared of catching Aids was supported by judges in the High Court.
Officers failed to tell Simon Kinnersley, 42, that he would be given a sterile mouthpiece which had been sealed to blow into.
City of London magistrates fined him for the refusal but ruled he could keep his licence.
Judges in the High Court yesterday rejected a Crown Prosecution Service appeal against the decision.
Mr Kinnersley, a journalist who lives near Bath, Avon, said last night: ‘I'm very pleased about this decision but it isn't a charter for people to drink and drive.
‘I was stunned by how lax the police were.
The first mouthpiece brought to me was out of the van they used for transporting tramps.
‘At the station they showed me the machine with an old mouthpiece and said I would have to blow into that.
‘I didn't realise if I agreed they would take off the old mouthpiece and put on a new one.
‘If I had known the mouthpiece was sterile, I would have had no hesitation in agreeing to the test.
‘I'd had one drink but I would have taken the same stand if I hadn't had a drink at all.
‘The Government spends millions of pounds warning people about Aids yet the police have this incredibly sloppy procedure.’
Last night police pledged a review.
Chief Superintendent Kevin Delaney, of the Metropolitan Police traffic division, said: ‘Normally mouthpieces are always opened in front of the person being asked to take the breath test.
‘That is strict procedure but it may well be that we need to have another look.
‘We might see if an element should be introduced in training to explain to officers about reassuring the public that the mouthpieces are completely sterile.
‘Normally they don't bother running through that in words because they open the sealed packages in front of the person.
Motorists should ask about hygiene if they have any worries.’
A spokesman for the Association of Chief Police Officers said: ‘I cannot understand how this happened.’
Driver was tanked-up
A FRENCH trucker was banned from driving for two years yesterday after after he was caught nearly four times over the drink drive limit.
Patrick Meurdesoif, 42, was stopped after weaving in and out of rush hour traffic in his 38-ton tanker on the M6 near West Bromwich, West Midlands, town magistrates heard.
Meurdesoif, whose firm agreed to pay a £1,250 fine, claimed he had only had a few drinks with lunch on a cross-channel ferry.
Big Rab's wee yin
SCOTS comedian Robbie Coltrane, 42, was taken by surprise yesterday when he became a father for the first time.
He and sculptress girlfriend Rhona Gemmell, 22, had been give a January date for the arrival of their 8lb 10oz baby boy.
Students ‘critical’ after jilted lover put poison in sweets
FOUR students were fighting for their lives last night after eating sweets that a jilted boyfriend had laced with one of the deadliest poisons in the world.
The victims, from New York's Columbia Univeristy, were undergoing dialysis to flush the thallium out of their bodies.
Their condition was described as worse than critical.
Saddam Hussein used the poison to kill Kurds in Iraq.
Maggie makes peace
BARONESS Thatcher and Hong Kong governor Chris Patten have buried the hatchet.
Mr Patten, accused of playing a leading part in her downfall, has been taking her advice on how to deal with China over the 1997 hand-over of the colony.
Late trains bring BR discounts
THOUSANDS of rail commuters will get a discount on next year's season tickets.
The move comes after nearly one in four of BR's routes failed to hit their performance targets under John Major's new Citizen's Charter.
Roasting for bank chiefs
BANK chiefs are to be hauled over the coals by Chancellor Norman Lamont over the way they treat small businesses.
A Bank of England probe revealed some charge nearly three times the base interest rate on loans.
On the record
SCHOOL-leavers are to get a ‘passport for life’ showing academic achievements and other successes, Education Secretary John Patten said yesterday.
Wife's in the boot killer told police
A SPIRITUALIST bludgeoned and strangled his wife to death.
Then he drove to tell police the murdered woman was in his car boot.
But the only officer on duty was a woman — and the killer was too shy to say what he had done, a court heard yesterday.
Edward Ryman, 58, twice smashed his wife with a club hammer and used a ‘do it yourself garotte’ to strangle her, Nottingham Crown Court was told.
Spiritualists Ryman and wife Lily were ‘distressed by allegations of indecent assault against him’.
He killed Lily to save her the pain of taking her own life, he had told police.
Ryman, of Spalding, Lincs, admitted manslaughter with diminished responsibility and was jailed for five years.
Major hit by Euro ambush
Paul Wilenius, Political Editor
GERMANY ambushed Premier John Major at the Edinburgh Summit yesterday, demanding that the Maastricht Treaty be ratified by July next year.
Mr Major had promised to push the bill through Parliament by November.
But with the French, Spanish and Portuguese backing Chancellor Helmut Kohl's demand, he now faces a race against time to prevent Britain being left in the cold.
His senior aides are convinced they can speed up the Maastricht ratification process to meet the new deadline.
With anti-European Tory MPs openly defying their leader, earlier this year, it appears Mr Major must rely — once again— on the Liberal Democrats' support.
The man most likely…
Cheryl Stonehouse
SPORTING James Gilbey is the favourite to replace Prince Charles at the side of Princess Diana.
He is tipped to succeed Charles by royal author Andrew Morton, the man whose book, Diana: Her True Story, exposed the sham of the royal marriage.
One of Morton's many sources was Gilbey, a friend of the princess since her teenage years.
Morton, asked whether he believed Diana's long-time friend and confidante would now publicly declare his love for her, said last night: ‘The way things are at the moment, nothing at all would surprise me.
‘He is in many people's minds the next logical man to fill Charles' place and there is no smoke without fire.’
Gilbey was the man Diana trusted to reveal sympathetically her suicide attempts and her disastrously unhappy marriage.
She authorised him to speak to Morton.
The author also hinted yesterday at fresh scandals to come which would damage Prince Charles' reputation so badly that he could never become King.
New extracts from the taped telephone conversation Prince Charles had with Camilla Parker Bowles were likely to be published in the next few weeks, Morton said.
He added: ‘People who have heard it tell me it is extremely damaging, based not only on what Camilla Parker Bowles is heard to say to him, but more so on what he says to her.
‘It does not look good for the Prince of Wales.
Whether he becomes King or not is looking more and more like an academic question.
There's nothing worse to come but just a different perspective which will probably put this whole thing into a new light.’
Gilbey hit the headlines when he was taped having an intimate phone conversation with Diana.
During the 23-minute chat he called her by her pet name ‘Squidgy’, told her he loved her and asked her to blow kisses down the phone to him.
Three years before Diana had dismissed her bodyguard so she could spend an evening with Gilbey at his Kensington flat.
They first met when she moved to London to share the flat which her father had bought for her.
Gilbey, then 21, became a member of her social circle and many of their friends assumed for a while that they were a couple.
She ironed his shirts and once threw flour and eggs over his car after he stood her up on a date, friends have said.
But after she married, they lost touch until a mutual friend arranged a lunch and invited both of them.
Gilbey quickly became the first person Diana turned to when the pressures of her life and marriage became too much.
Although his family are distant relatives of the Gilbey gin dynasty, his connections, background and personal wealth are far more humble than hers.
His parents are well-off farmers in Somerset, and although he went to the prestigious Ampleforth school, he spent only a year after taking his A levels at agricultural college before becoming a BMW car salesman.
He now works for the Lotus Formula One team's publicity operation.
Also in line to become Princess Diana's escort is her debonair army pal Major James Hewitt.
The couple have remained close friends ever since he taught Diana and her sons to ride in 1980 while he was stationed at Combermere Barracks in Windsor.
The handsome copper-haired major, 34, is planning to leave the army and is now on the look-out for a new job.
Millfield-educated Hewitt already has his heart set on working for Virgin tycoon Richard Branson's planned privatised train service.
Hewitt, who even kept in contact with the princess while he was serving in the Gulf, is presently based just a quarter-of-a mile from Kensington Palace.
He is stationed with the Household Cavalry Mounted Division at Hyde Park Barracks in Knightsbridge.
Top-table Diana puts Charles on sidelines
by Charles Rae
PRINCESS DIANA got the star billing at a Royal banquet on board the Britannia last night.
She was seated next to the Queen and Duke of Edinburgh on the head table while Prince Charles was relegated to a side table.
His view of the Queen was obscured by his father's back.
Ironically, for two weeks in 1981, the royal yacht was the luxurious honeymoon base for Charles and Diana.
Away from the prying eyes of the world, the newlyweds sailed the Aegean and Ionian Seas and on through the Suez Canal.
Last night the atmosphere between them could not have been more different.
And they even arrived separately for the dinner in honour of leaders attending the European summit in Edinburgh.
The seating blunder saw the Queen sitting with French president Francois Mitterrand on her right.
Then came the Princess of Wales on his right.
The Duke of Edinburgh was opposite the Queen, sitting next to EEC chief Jacques Delors — and with his back to Charles.
The prince was positioned between German Chancellor Helmut Kohl and Spanish Prime Minister, Don Felipe Gonzalez.
Opposite him on one of the three tables set out for the lavish dinner was Prime Minister John Major.
On the third table sat Princess Anne in between the prime minister of Greece, Constantine Mitsotakis, and Irish prime minister, Albert Reynolds.
As 20 stewards busied about serving guests a sumptuous feast, Diana happily chatted away to both president Mitterrand and Spanish foreign minister Don Javier Solana Madariaga.
Her opposite number was the Lord Provost of Edinburgh, the Right Honourable Norman Irons.
Another surprise of the evening was that Anne's groom-to-be Commander Tim Laurence was not at the dinner.
But he may have been observing the traditional superstition that it is unlucky for the bridegroom to see the bride on the eve of her wedding.
Normally Charles and Diana would not sit together at state banquets, but their separation last night took on a new poignancy following the official announcement earlier this week that they have split.
They put on separate roadshows as they appeared at the same event for the first time since Mr Major's statement in the House of Commons.
First, they arrived at Edinburgh airport in different planes.
They left in separate car convoys for the docks in Leith where the Britannia is birthed.
Then it was to separate cabins to get ready to join the Queen in a royal line-up greeting the 60 guests.
Diana is due to return to London today, satwhile the rest of the Royals head north to the tiny Crathie Church in Balmoral for the wedding of the Princess Royal to Commander Laurence.
In a dramatic gesture, Diana pulled out of attending after the split was announced.
As the minutes ticked away to the dinner, excitement was rising among the European leaders lucky enough to have been invited.
The royals have been virtually the only gossip among their delegations following first the news that Anne and Tim were to marry and then the bombshell that Diana and Charles were to separate.
One official in Edinburgh said: ‘They are all like children with a new toy.
‘They thought they were doing well with just the anecdotes to bring home to their wives because they were going to see the Princess Royal on the eve of her wedding, but then they really hit the jackpot with Diana and Charles.
‘Every eye in that room will be on the royal couple and they would all love to ask questions but they're far too polite and obviously far too diplomatic.’
But as they walked into the dining room, which can accommodate up to 450 guests, their eyes could not have failed to take in the splendour of it all.
The tables took three hours to set.
At each place were five Brierley crystal glasses each engraved with the Queen's cipher, as was each knife, fork and spoon.
The meal was served on white Minton china with gold rim and the coffee and desert were served on a Spode service.
There was an orchestra playing during the meal and any fears that they were there to drown out any potential marital disputes were soon dispelled.
Prince: I will be at the wedding
by Geraint Jones
PRINCE Charles will attend the wedding of his sister Anne at Crathie, Balmoral today despite rumours he would be hunting instead.
Yesterday afternoon Charles was already in Scotland to make a keynote speech at the prestigious Caird Hall in Dundee.
Just two days after his separation from the Princess of Wales was announced, he told an elderly well-wisher he was feeling ‘not too bad’.
And in response to press questions, Charles said simply: ‘I always look forward to Crathie.’
Police had to erect barriers to keep crowds back as Charles was warmly greeted by hundreds of wellwishers as he arrived at Dundee's City Square.
He paused to chat with 15-year-old High School pupil Charlotte Blair about her school's forthcoming dance before heading into the Caird Hall.
When he left an hour later, he paused on the steps to wave to the still-waiting crowd.
In his speech to the Scottish County Surveyors' Society, the Prince called on road engineers to continue their great tradition by building with ‘sensitivity and even a sense of reverence in the countryside’.
Earlier Charles had surprised onlookers by sharing a stage with Diana.
But this was the actress Diana Rigg — star of the 1960s Avengers — not his estranged wife.
He spent the morning in jovial mood as guest of honour at a sponsorship of the arts award ceremony.
Charles presented distinctive ceramic bowler hats to firms for their financial backing of ‘the cultural life of our country’.
His marital troubles seemed far from his mind as he laughed and joked with the celebrity audience including actresses Patricia Routledge, Alison Steadman, and Frances Barber at the National Theatre.
Referring to the theatre's revolving stage, the Prince joked: ‘I have never hoped more than now that I might revolve round there behind the scenes.’
BOOKMAKERS William Hill suspended bets on Charles renouncing the throne after fears of an attempted betting coup by royal insiders.
Hours before the announcement, large wagers were placed in favour of his son William becoming next king.
A second Tim lucky at Crathie
THE last bridegroom to be married in Crathie church was also a Tim.
Landscape gardener Timothy Griffin married midwife Sheena Catto in what Sheena's mother Ann described as a ‘perfectly charming’ ceremony.
The October wedding could not have been further removed from the one planned for today.
Sheena, 25, wore a pale apricot wild silk dress made by her mother.
Mrs Catto, who runs a drapers store in nearby Aboyne, said: ‘It was a lovely family occasion.
‘I made Sheena's dress and those for all the bridesmaids.
‘Timothy wore a lounge suit, which was his own choice.’
The reception in Tarland village hall had a buffet which included locally caught salmon followed by a ceilidh with dancing until the small hours.
Timothy and Sheena, who now live in Southampton, spent a week in a cottage on the Isle of Skye for their honeymoon.
Mrs Catto and her husband Gordon will be too busy to join the crowd outside the church today.
She said: ‘We have our own happy memories of that church but we won't be there this time.
‘We'll both be working in the shop, but we might watch it on the TV later.’
Crathie school's 14 pupils, aged six to 11, have made cards of a warship for Commander Laurence and a good luck posy of horseshoes with tartan ribbons for Anne.
They hope to be allowed to present them to the couple today.
‘We are quite excited,’ said headmistress Patricia Birss.
Other locals were yesterday keeping a low profile, preserving the privacy requested by the couple.
Anne's big day with wotsisname
Clive Nelson
JUST one question about Princess Anne's wedding remained unanswered last night: Who exactly is she marrying?
No one— not even Buckingham Palace — seemed entirely sure.
On the eve of the ceremony in the stone-built parish church at Crathie, on the edge of the Balmoral estate, it was realised that the registrar had got the groom's name wrong.
The banns, posted outside the register office at nearby Ballater, under Church of Scotland law, Commander Tim Laurence's middle names were muddled up.
In all the excitement the Registrar, Mrs Molly Croll, suffered a slip of the pen.
And the Princess Royal's husband-to-be was wrongly named as Timothy Anthony Hamilton Laurence.
In fact, he is Timothy James Hamilton Laurence.
As soon as the mistake was pointed out, a corrected version was posted up outside the office at No 5 Queen Street, which doubles as Mrs Croll's home.
The switch had been spotted by a sharp-eyed pensioner out for a stroll.
Pausing at No 5, he noticed the middle name was different from the one published in TODAY.
Buckingham Palace weren't a lot of help in the matter yesterday.
At first they insisted that the Commander's correct name was Timothy John Hamilton Laurence.
Then they issued a correction — and admitted his second name really is James.
Not Anthony, not John…
Uncharitably, the Registrar General's office in Scotland put the blame firmly at Mrs Croll's door.
‘There was a wrong name put on the notice,’ a spokesman said.
‘It was a clerical error.
‘When it was being written, the wrong name was copied onto the notice.
That happened at the Ballater end.’
This muddle had no legal effect on the forth-coming marriage, the spokesman said.
He added: ‘It's just one of those things.’
Mrs Croll, Registrar in the Highland village for 24 years, was keeping a low profile.
When she arrived home to find a crowd of newsmen on her doorstep, she stepped back into her blue Ford Escort and drove off.
A neighbour said: ‘I think she's had enough.’
Anne's dream of a ‘quiet, private’ wedding looked increasingly unrealistic last night.
It's not going to be as big as her first marriage, when 47,000 well-wishers crowded the streets around Westminster Abbey to catch a glimpse of her in the magnificent Glass Coach.
But yesterday's arrangements could hardly be described as the preparation for a normal family ceremony.
For three miles around the tiny hillside church, streets were coned off by traffic police.
Sheep were turfed out of three nearby fields make temporary car parks.
The army were drafted in to help prepare car parks for the heavy trucks used by TV companies.
Around 20 trees have been felled on the edge of the estate so that royal protection officers have an uninterrupted view of the church.
‘No special permission is required for this,’ a Forestry Commission spokesman said.
‘It is in the public interest.’
Fifteen imitation Victorian gas lamps have been set in tarmac to line the royal party's route.
The lamps, at a total cost of £4,000, were installed by Grampian Regional Council after talks with local police.
‘They have a dual purpose,’ a spokesman explained.
‘They are for security as well as decoration.
‘It will be quite dark when the service ends and we need to be able to see precisely what is happening.’
The order of the wedding service remains secret.
The Church of Scotland minister, the Reverend Keith Angus, has been ordered not to discuss any aspect of the wedding.
The bride-to-be, in smart turquoise suit and carrying a posy of white flowers, flew north from Heathrow yesterday on an RAF Queen's Flight.
She was accompanied by two women aides as she boarded the Edinburgh-bound BAE146 jet.
The princess smiled and nodded at airport officials before hurrying on board, taking with her two briefcases.
Ten other pieces of luggage, including two large dress carriers, were loaded into the hold by royal aides, helped by the crew.
pic refLast night, Anne joined other senior royals on board HMY correct Britannia where the Queen was hosting a dinner for European summit leaders.
For today's ceremony, she is expected to wear a favourite broad-brimmed hat and an over the knee pastel coloured dress.
Her hat will be chosen from than 250 made by her personal milliner, John Boyd.
Mr Boyd said she would choose something with a wide brim in a subtle pastel colour — probably to match an outfit made by her favourite designer, Jacques Reiss.
’ She already has such a collection of hats that she doesn't need any other for this occasion,’Mr Boyd said.
‘I understand that the wedding dress has already been made.’
But designer Reiss was not discussing the trousseau — on orders from the Palace.
‘I've been asked not to comment,’ he said, coyly.
TODAY can reveal that contary to some reports, the couple's vows will be toasted in champagne.
Estate workers sent out last night for a dozen extra champagne glasses for the evening reception.
They were borrowed from a nearby hotel when it was revealed that the castle did not have enough.
The day's preparations will begin early as the first newsmen get into position.
Police plan security checks from 8am on the road between Balmoral Castle and the church.
At 2.30pm the main road will be closed and all spectators ordered behind erected barriers.
At 2.50, the first of the royals will travel the half mile from the castle gates in the wedding procession.
At precisely 3pm the bride will appear.
She is expected to be seen only briefly as she steps from her wedding car — a four wheel drive Range Rover — into the church.
At 3.50, the service will end and the wedding party will leave for the reception at Craigowan Lodge in the estate grounds.
There will be a separate party for staff at the Queen Victoria social club, in the heart of the estate.
Most of the royals will leave tonight, flying home from Aberdeen airport.
But Anne and her new husband will spend at least one night in the Lodge.
Their honeymoon will last just three days.
Anne is back at work on Tuesday.
Commander Laurence was thought to have arrived on the estate last night.
‘A cottage has been cleaned and the heating switched back on,’ an estate worker said.
‘And we were told Commander Laurence was on his way.’
The secret that was safe with a gem of a girl
by Cheryl Stonehouse
JEWELLER Carol Darby could not suppress a smile when she heard that Princess Anne's engagement and wedding rings had been made by royal jewellers Garrard.
She knew then that her secret had been well kept.
The sapphire and diamond ring, first revealed this week in TODAY, and the gold wedding band had their origins in a far humbler place — her own studio in the quiet cathedral city of Winchester, Hants.
The secret which Carol has faithfully kept for more than four months was finally out yesterday as Commander Tim Laurence and his bride-to-be allowed her to claim the credit she deserves.
‘I was very surprised and absolutely delighted to be asked — it was great honour and a great challenge,’ said Carol yesterday as the normally hushed shop and studio she runs with her husband Peter was suddenly thrust into the limelight.
‘Commander Laurence is a friend.
We already knew each other because he lives in Winchester, and I was very flattered to be given the commission by him.
‘I was thrilled, but also a little nervous initially.’
Carol, a jeweller for more than 25 years, has built up a steady following for her original designs in the six years since she moved out of London and started her own business.
She was Tim's first choice when he set out to find the perfect engagement ring for the woman he loved.
In a cloak and dagger operation, he got in touch and insisted he could only come to her shop when there would be no other customers around.
In a process which stretched over several weeks they exchanged ideas.
Finally, Carol came up with the design he wanted.
‘He was a very happy chap — any young man in love would be,’ she said.
‘Designing a ring is always a lengthy process which involves me producing a number of drawings until the customer and I get it right between us.
‘Once he was satisfied — and I feel sure that he must have consulted the lady concerned since she, after all, is the person who has to wear it — he ordered it.’
The finished design was brought to life with the help of four top craftsmen handpicked by Carol.
The gold wedding ring to complement it perfectly was made in her studio.
But the one difficulty was finding the right sapphire, and in the end she had to have one specially cut.
But Carol is remaining discreet on the exact design.
‘I feel as with any customer that it is up to the owner whether she wants to show the ring,’ she said.
‘An original design, particularly for the most special ring in any woman's life, is an intensely personal thing.’
But she admitted it was ‘very feminine’ and takes in four elements of the hard-working princess's life and personality.
‘Quite often when I design a ring for a woman, I don't know her or even meet her, so in some ways this was easier,’ Carol said.
‘I knew what she looked like, her lifestyle and something about her personality.
‘She is very classic in her dress, but there is an element of the unusual there.
She doesn't wear a lot of jewellery, she is an active working lady — and of course, she is a princess.
One must not forget that.
‘I feel confident that Princess Anne has the perfect ring that meets every element and it is beautiful.
‘It is a little unusual, and perhaps not what people would expect.’
The select band of customers scattered throughout Hampshire who know Carol's work were not at all surprised when they learned who had created the rings.
They know she can be relied on to make the big day for her clients sparkle with the perfect glittering accessory.
Princess Anne yesterday gave a tantalising glimpse of the ring — without meaning to.
She took off her gloves to blow her nose at an awards ceremony in Scotland, and flashed the sparkler to the 60 guests.
Today the ring will be out from its wraps.
But as the rest of the nation stays glued to TV sets or lines the streets near Crathie Church near Balmoral to watch the wedding, Carol will be hard at work in her studio.
‘Tim is very pleased with it and I am very pleased for him,’ she said.
Schofield to wed live-in girlfriend
Lisa Reynolds
TV presenter Phillip Schofield is to marry his live-in lover Stephanie Lowe, friends said last night.
Going Live host Phillip, 30, popped the question yesterday and was ‘thrilled to bits’ when 28-year-old Stephanie said yes.
The couple, who live in Chiswick, plan to wed next summer when Phillip finishes his run in the Andrew Lloyd Webber musical Joseph and the Amazing Technicolour Dreamcoat.
Only last week he bought a £550,000 love nest in Henley-on-Thames, Oxon.
Last night a close friend said: ‘He's really chuffed, it seals a great year for him.
‘We knew marriage was on the cards.’
Lolita's blood money
LONG Island Lolita Amy Fisher, who shot her alleged lover's wife, has clinched a £70,000 book deal days after being jailed.
Fisher, 17, has already been paid £50,000 for the film rights to her story.
Sue's little surprise
BROOKSIDE'S sexy Jackie Corkhill, played by Sue Jenkins, has revealed why she left the Channel 4 soap.
She's just given birth to daughter Rosie.
If you stayed in last night, you were home alone
by Matthew Benns
OVER 400 cinemas across Britain were packed last night as the country went Macaulay crazy for the launch of Home Alone 2: Lost In New York.
Queues began forming hours before doors opened for the first viewing of pint-sized superstar Macaulay Culkin's new blockbuster.
A record-breaking one million people will flock to see the film over this weekend alone.
‘It's an absolute knockout,’ said Mike Turner, manager of the Odeon cinema, Ipswich.
‘We have taken £5,000 in advance bookings for the movie up to the end of the December.’
At a preview in London's Leicester Square yesterday, grandmother Sheila Hadden said: ‘I'm looking forward to it.
It'll be jolly good fun.’
The only reason Home Alone 2 is unlikely to gross more in its opening three days than the hit Batman Returns is that half the audience will be paying children's prices.
The film sticks to the same ‘kid beats dumb robbers’ formula which made the original Home Alone the third-highest grossing movie of all time and top comedy with takings of over £330 million worldwide.
Child star Macaulay Culkin, 12, again takes on robbers Joe Pesci and Daniel Stern.
But for parents the cost will not stop at the price of a movie ticket.
Children are being targeted in a huge merchandising campaign, with worldwide sales possibly topping £1.3 billion.
Home Alone 2 has taken £60 million in ticket sales in America in just three weeks.
In Britain the biggest box-office hit was Batman Returns with Pounds 2.77 million in the first three days.
Shrewd movie bosses are laughing all the way to the bank — they have already planned Home Alone 3.
UK Top 10 box office hits in '92
1
Basic Instinct
2
Hook
3
Cape Fear
4
Lethal Weapon 3
5
Batman Returns
6
Wayne's World
7
Beauty And The Beast
8
My Girl
9
The Hand That Rocks The Cradle
10
JFK
Germans set Euro ambush for Major
Paul Wilenius
PREMIER John Major was ambushed by the Germans last night in a move which could force Britain off the road to European unity.
His ‘friend’ German chancellor Helmut Kohl led the unexpected push at the Edinburgh Summit to make Britain and Denmark ratify the Maastricht Treaty by July.
Mr Major has pledged that the treaty will be ratified by Britain by the end of this parliamentary session — which will be sometime in November.
Denmark plans a second referendum in May and says it will quit the EC if its citizens vote ‘No’ again.
An irritated Dutch official said: ‘If the Danes can do it with a referendum by July, I do not see why the British would need a longer time.’
The other 10 EC nations are determined to press ahead with the Maastricht Treaty on their own if either the Danes or the British fail to back it.
Britain cannot be thrown out of the EC, but if it fails to pass the bill it would be left behind as the others speed towards greater political and economic unity.
Senior British officials were last night urgently considering how they could accelerate the Maastricht process and ensure its passage through the Commons by the summer.
With anti-European Tories determined to wreck the bill, Mr Major will need the backing of the Liberal Democrats to make sure it gets through.
His senior aides were convinced last night he will succeed.
The ambush overshadowed Mr Major's diplomatic coup of stitching together a deal to bring the Danes back into the EC fold.
The deal gives Denmark legally enforceable opt outs from a European army, the EC citizenship agreements and a single EC currency.
Some countries such as Spain feel the deal has gone too far, but the EC is expected to buy them off.
The full deal on the EC's future budget are likely to be unveiled today when the 12 EC heads of state rubber stamp the final package.
And here's Summit else from Edinburgh
THE European gravy train is likely to stretch today as around 50 more MEPs climb on board.
German chancellor Helmut Kohl wants 18 more members to represent the former East Germany and the 12 heads of states are likely to agree if they get more representation too.
MEPs in Strasbourg enjoy ‘millionaire’ lifestyles.
The 518-strong elite band of jetsetting politicians cost taxpayers up to £200,000 a year each.
A NEW ‘shop’ called Delors's Deli opened in Edinburgh yesterday to illustrate a consumer watchdog's claim that the EC's food policy costs the average family up to £18 a week.
Sugar was displayed at the world market price of 33p a kilo and at the 68p it costs Britons because of the Common Agricultural Policy.
LABOUR MP Dennis Skinner yesterday demanded to know how a summit catering contract was awarded to Pru Leith's group of firms which employs Cabinet Minister William Waldegrave's wife Caroline.
‘I'd like to know whether this has been competitively tendered for,’ he said.
The Foreign Office said it was.
SECURITY was so tight at Edinburgh Castle yesterday that police refused to let the Greek prime minister's wife in.
Officers sent Marika Mitsotakis packing after she offered to pay the £3.40 entry fee.
Leaders to unveil £5bn jobs boost
by Russell Jenkins
SUMMIT leaders are today due to unveil a £5 billion recovery package to get Europe back to work and stop the EC falling deeper into depression.
The measures include multi-billion-pound loans for huge construction projects mastermined by the European Investment Bank.
Premier John Major is exporting the Government's Autumn Statement package for recovery across Europe, as the EC nations prepare to agree wage rise cutbacks for public sector workers.
They will also switch spending from their day-to-day Budgets to rail, road, communications and other prestige projects.
The deal, announced by Mr Major in the Commons last week, is designed to answer Labour accusations that his six-month EC presidency has done nothing for jobs.
Unemployment is soaring in all Community countries, especially Germany, and there are worries that without urgent action Europe will plunge into recession.
Chancellor Norman Lamont and fellow finance ministers began hammering out the final draft in Edinburgh yesterday afternoon.
British officials said last night: ‘Member states should switch public spending programmes towards their infrastructure, and they should introduce restraint on their wages bills.
‘On a Community level the priority is on investment programmes, and there will be more finance available for this.’
Britain was also able to unveil last night a breakthrough in cutting back on Euro red tape.
Mr Major has drawn up a hit list of 20 no-go areas for Brussels officials, including controversial moves to interfere with the Women's Institute's homemade jams and cakes.
EC demands for over-detailed labelling on food products, meddling in consumer rights and unnecessary rules on food safety, are all to be ruled out.
A British official said: ‘These all may seem very petty, but they would have very adverse consequences for voluntary bodies.’
The big battle over the EC's future Budget was still raging last night, as Spain, Ireland, Portugal and Greece demanded more cash subsidies in the next seven years.
German Chancellor Helmut Kohl told them bluntly: ‘Don't ask for more money.
‘You have to bear in mind the consequences for the German people and some of what you are proposing goes way beyond what is acceptable.’
Inflation lowest for six years
BRITAIN'S inflation rate yesterday went lower than Germany's for the first time in 24 years.
The underlying rate fell to 3.6 per cent, with Germany at 3.7.
Including mortgages, the UK rate hit three per cent, its lowest for six years.
Petrol price cut by 18p
OIL giant Shell is to cut the price of petrol by 18p a gallon from midnight tomorrow.
Four star comes down from 249.6p to 231.4p, following cuts by BP and Esso.
The reductions were made possible by falling world prices.
Jobs shock
TWO firms are to shed 700 jobs — 400 will go from GEC-Marconi's sonar factory in South Wales, and 300 from Premier Poultry, North Yorks.
‘Fabulous’ Nigel quits as minister
by Paul Wilenius
THE Government was hit by a surprise resignation last night as Junior Education Minister Nigel Forman suddenly quit.
The man once dubbed ‘Fabulous Forman’ for his extravagant taste in clothes is said to have walked out for ‘personal reasons’.
Premier John Major was told the news as he hosted delicate talks at the European Summit in Edinburgh.
He immediately appointed Tory Party whip Tim Boswell to take over the job.
Mr Forman, 49, only joined the Cabinet in April after the Tories' victory in the General Election, following years in the political wilderness.
Senior Tories believe the MP for Carshalton and Wallington must have had a very pressing reason to leave after staging such an unexpected comeback.
The Department of Education was only informed of his decision last night.
‘Mr Forman has decided to step down for personal reasons.
We cannot say anything else,’ a spokesman said.
In his early career Mr Forman worked as the Parliamentary Private Secretary to Sir Ian Gilmour, Douglas Hurd and former Chancellor Nigel Lawson.
He picked up the ‘Fabulous Forman’ title at Oxford for his flamboyant dress sense, although he toned this down when he entered Parliament in 1976 in a by-election.
He was also educated at Harvard and Sussex Universities and is said to have more diplomas than a university vice chancellor.
Racehorse tycoon in £20m fall
A RACEHORSE tycoon named as one of Britain's richest men two years ago has called in the receivers.
Tony Budge faces debts amounting to millions of pounds after a bank called in a £20 million loan.
The receivers are now going through the books of his company A F Budge, of Retford, Notts.
The move means 800 jobs at his contracting firm could be at risk.
The success of Budge, 52, allowed him to indulge his passion for horses and collecting military hardware, including a Scud missile.
Smack mum found guilty of assault
A MOTHER was yesterday convicted of assaulting her daughter by smacking her bottom with a slipper.
The woman told a court she hit the eight-year-old because she had taken sweets then lied when quizzed about them.
Other punishments she had imposed had not worked so she smacked the girl with the slipper ‘as a last resort’.
The assault left the girl badly bruised.
The 26-year-old woman, of Southampton, had a sliding scale of punishments for her two daughters, magistrates in the city were told.
She was reported after telling the girl's school what had happened.
The girl had been placed on a social services ‘at risk’ register after suffering a broken arm and collarbone in a fall.
The woman, who cannot be named for legal reasons, denied assault but was found guilty and given a conditional discharge.
Kevin Bodley, prosecuting, said the girl had recovered and was living with her mother.
After the hearing the woman said: ‘It's ridiculous that I have been brought to court.
‘I was trying to teach my daughter to behave.
‘Many children end up in trouble.
I don't want that to happen to my daughter so I smacked her for stealing and lying.’
Chris Eubank and Paula Yates
WORLD champion boxer Chris Eubank fought off Big Breakfast show presenter Paula Yates, above, when she tried to bed him for an interview on screen yesterday.
Instead he sat on a chair beside the bed and tried to cover Paula's saucy black lace see-through dress with the sheets.
‘This is improper,’ he told her.
Yob jailed for killing grandad in barbecue row
A GRANDFATHER was killed by a single punch as he tried to stop a gang of drunken teenagers ripping up his garden fence while he hosted a family barbecue.
As he fell, John Taylor, 48, banged his head with such force that the noise was heard by people further along the street.
He never regained consciousness after the attack by 18-year-old Phillip Hill, Winchester Crown Court heard.
Yesterday, Hill, of Gosport, Hants, who admitted manslaughter, was sent to a young offenders' institution for 2½ years.
After the attack, Hill walked away, but the rest of the gang turned on Mr Taylor's son-in-law Robert Allan.
He was kicked and punched as he lay huddled in a ball on the ground and had to spend three days in hospital.
The eight youths had each drunk up to 15 cans of lager and shared a bottle of Pernod before rampaging through the village of Alverstoke, Hants.
They urinated on gardens, kicked down fences, damaged trees and cars and verbally abused anyone they met.
‘They were looking for trouble,’ said prosecutor Nigel Mylne.
‘Hill threw a single punch at Mr Taylor who was knocked unconscious and fell back.
He never regained consciousness and died in Southampton General Hospital of a fractured skull hours later.’
The rest of the group, all students, turned on Mr Allan who tried to fend off the blows.
The seven, all from Gosport, admitted violent disorder.
Nathan Adams, 18, David Elsom, 17, Jason Green, 17, Simon Lindley, 17, Gavin Saunders, 17, Richard Whittaker, 18 and Nicholas Crook, 18, were sentenced to nine months in a young offenders' institution.
Mr Justice Hutchison told Hill: ‘Death was the unhappy and unlooked for tragic consequence of a momentary loss of temper on your part.’
Last night Mr Taylor's neighbours and his local Tory MP hit out at the sentences.
‘It was a disgusting and inexcusable act and I would have expected the sentence to reflect this,’ said Gosport MP Peter Viggers.
Village postmaster John Kerley, 61, said: ‘I'm appalled.
What's 2½ years compared to someone's life?’
Weights crush power lifter
A FITNESS fanatic died when 26 stone of weights fell on him as he exercised.
Jimmy Richards, 31, suffocated after the weights landed on his face and neck when he tried to lift them at a Bradford health club.
Club owner David McKay-Watson told an inquest yesterday: ‘That weight is excessive.
I could not even attempt to lift it.’
West Yorkshire coroner James Turnbull urged the makers of the machine used by Mr Richards to consider fitting a safety device.
Verdict: Accident.
Julia Roberts
PRETTY WOMAN star Julia Roberts has snatched a multi-million pound movie role from under the nose of Demi Moore.
The film, Him, is a romantic comedy role about a woman's search for a soul mate.
TriStar Pictures snapped up the rights after persuading Julia, 25, to take the part.
Columbia wanted Bruce Willis's wife Demi.
A spokesman said: ‘The writers felt Demi was a little too soft.’
Boss sacked for his 300 days off ill
A STORE boss was sacked for taking 60 weeks sick leave in just two years.
Manager Christopher Warner, 29, took one day off for every one he worked.
He insisted taking his three weeks annual leave on top, an industrial tribunal heard yesterday.
Mr Warner, who earned £17,000 a year, put his absences down to gall stones and depression.
But top London store John Lewis finally lost patience after the company doctor said he needed another five months' rest.
From June till February, he worked just 10 days, the Chelsea hearing was told.
Mr Warner, of Walthamstow, east London, claims unfair dismissal.
The hearing continues.
Panic attack cop's suicide
AN undercover detective who tracked terrorists shot himself dead with a police gun after developing ‘panic attacks’, an inquest heard yesterday.
Special Branch Detective Inspector Roger Watson, 46, who was based at Heathrow airport, saw a doctor and had hypnotherapy in a bid to cure the anxiety he kept a secret.
Verdict: Mr Watson, of Shepperton, Middlesex, took his own life.
Old hooch fetches £4m
PRICE records tumbled as more than £12 million changed hands at an auction of Old Masters by Christie's yesterday.
The 17th Century artist Pieter de Hooch's The Courtyard of a House in Delft was sold for £4.4million.
A design for a tapestry by Rubens set a record when it sold for £748,000.
Rubens' The Entombment sold to a private bidder at the London sales for £1,045,000.
Kiosk gangs cost BT £20m
ORGANISED gangs of high-tech thieves are costing BT £20 million a year.
They are getting away with £4 million by breaking into call boxes.
And it is costing the company another £16 million to repair the damage to the 1,000 kiosks plundered.
Now BT is to invest £6.5million in a bid to foil the highly organised gangs, who distribute manuals and videos explaining how to break into the cashboxes.
Blunder boy £15m victory
PARALYSED teenager David Merryweather won £15 million damages in the High Court yesterday.
The structured settlement will provide him with care for the next 45 years.
David was starved of oxygen during birth at Peterborough Hospital in 1979 and suffered cerebral palsy.
North West Anglia Health Authority admitted liability.
Bottomley mum 3-hour wait for op
Lisa Reynolds
THE elderly mother of Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley had to wait more than three hours for an emergency operation at an NHS hospital, it was revealed last night.
Barbara Garnett, 74, was rushed in after complaining of severe stomach pains.
Doctors told her she needed an emergency hysterectomy, but because of a bed shortage she had to wait in agony for three-and-a-half hours.
She did not tell doctors who her daughter was, and staff at Queen Mary's Hospital, Roehampton, West London, only discovered the connection when Mrs Garnett was admitted for the operation.
Mrs Bottomley, who is planning to close or merge up to 15 London hospitals, said she was ‘most impressed’ with her mother's treatment.
A spokesman for the Department of Health said: ‘Mrs Garnett was brought to the hospital on Wednesday by her GP.
‘She was admitted and treated like any other National Health Service patient to the accident and emergency department, and was then seen by a consultant.
‘Unfortunately she had to wait until a bed was available on the ward, but she was given a bed in casualty.
‘There was no question of her getting preferential treatment because she is the Secretary of State's mother.
In fact the staff didn't know who she was.’
Mrs Garnett, who had the operation on Thursday, is recovering in hospital.
She should be out in time for Christmas.
Showered with rubble
A LORRY veered off a road and crashed straight into a bathroom where 19-year-old sales assistant Joanna Betts had just stepped out of the shower.
She fled screaming as bricks smashed into the bath at her boyfriend's home in Tividale, West Midlands.
‘I rushed out of the bathroom with just a towel to cover myself,’ she said after being treated for shock and cuts.
A man was arrested and later freed on bail.
Camera ban on Woody showdown
FILM stars Woody Allen and Mia Farrow last night won a fight to keep TV cameras out of their courtroom custody battle.
The director and his former leading lady took action after a court ruled the case could be televised.
A judge in New York's Supreme Court overturned the decision.
The case — which centres around the couple's adopted children Moses, 14, Dylan, seven, and natural son Satchel, four — starts on Tuesday.
Mia's lawyer said: ‘We are very relieved.
We did not want cameras.’
The couple split after Mia, 47, discovered Allen was having an affair with her adopted daughter, Soon-Yi Previn.
The actress then claimed Allen, 57, molested Dylan at her Connecticut home.
£10,000 slip of mind
A PUNTER reached into his pocket for his keys and pulled out a forgotten betting slip worth £10,000.
Car dealer Ricky Evans, 30, of Basingstoke, Hants, said yesterday: ‘I didn't think I stood a chance so I'd thrown the slip aside.’
His £36 greyhound flutter was one of three big wins in five weeks.
He won £5,000 at a casino and £3,500 on the horses.
In court but only briefly
AN alleged IRA gunman wore nothing but a pair of boxer shorts when he appeared at the Old Bailey yesterday charged with murder.
Paul Magee, 42, stood bare-chested next to his co-defendant Michael O'Brien, 28, who was dressed in a smart suit.
Both denied shooting Special Constable Glenn Goodman, 37, near Tadcaster, Yorks, in June.
They also denied trying to murder three police officers and possessing a rifle with intent to endanger life.
Both were remanded in custody.
40 held in dole probe
POLICE smashed a social security scam when they arrested 40 men at seaside guest houses yesterday.
The men, from the Midlands, are alleged to have made thousands of pounds from doorstep sales while travelling south to sign on.
Crooks are everywhere
DETECTIVE Chief Inspector Bob Small had his Vauxhall Nova stolen by joyriders as he delivered a speech on how to stop car thefts.
He left a community meeting in Beaumont Leys, Leics, to find the Pounds 6,800 car gone.
It was found vandalised nearby.
2,000 quit jobs at Ford
THE threat of industrial action at Ford car plants was over last night after 2,000 workers volunteered for redundancy.
Union bosses, who warned of action over compulsory job losses, accused bosses of scaremongering about future pay-offs.
Nureyev party
FRIENDS of Aids-stricken ballet star Rudolf Nureyev are planning a New Year Eve's party in his honour.
They are hoping that Nureyev, 54, who is being nursed round the clock in a Paris hospital, will attend, it was reported yesterday.
Slump forces Norma's shop to shut down
by Sarah Grady
THE village shop used by Norma Major and her son has gone to the wall — the latest victim of the recession.
Owners Doug and Eileen Belcher say Premier John Major could have offered more support, both as an MP and a customer.
Debts of more than £150,000 have forced them to close the tiny store in the village of Great Stukeley in Mr Major's Huntingdon constituency.
Now the hard working couple say they face a miserable Christmas and a bleak future.
Mr Belcher, 64, and his 63-year-old wife took out a loan for their dream of becoming their own bosses.
They are three months behind with their payments.
Mr Major has never visited the shop, even though it is not far from his home and Mrs Major only visited occasionaly.
‘We haven't even had a telephone call from Mr Ma-jor,’ said Mr Belcher.
‘He has not come into the shop once.
‘I would have thought that he, as local MP, would have managed to come and visit us, even though he is busy.’
Mr Belcher said the only member of the Prime Minister's household to regularly patronise them was son James, but he is now away at school.
Mrs Belcher said: ‘My daughter-in-law told Mrs Major we were closing.
She said, ‘I'm very sorry for you…
I didn't realise it was as bad as this’.
‘It is not as though we are bad shopkeepers or have been foolish with our money.
‘I haven't taken a penny in wages since we opened the shop and in the past five months Douglas hasn't had a wage either.
I just don't know what we are going to do in the New Year.’
£200m on bill
THE Euro-summit deal will cost Britain £200 million a year — around £10 for every taxpayer.
That is the amount conceded by John Major to the EC budget, swelling the Brussels coffers managed by Commission President Jacques Delors to £64.4 billion a year by 1999.
The four poorest EC countries — Spain, Portugal, Greece and Ireland — will share £2.5 billion extra a year in EC grants.
The largest share of the money — known as cohesion cash — will go to Spain, which will take £1.25 billion.
Ireland will get 10 per cent, or £250 million and Greece and Portugal get double that.
But Britain will be able to keep its rebate on contributions to the EC — allowing us to claw back £2 billion of the £4.5 billion annually paid in by the Treasury.
Mandy: I confess
by Kevin Murphy
ROLLING STONE Bill Wyman last night admitted a ‘physical relationship’ with child love Mandy Smith when she was only 14½.
In the first extended interview about his relationship with Mandy, he condemned their later marriage as a sham.
Wyman, 56, admitted he was immediately besotted when he spotted willowy Mandy at a rock awards ceremony in London's Lyceum ballroom.
She looked 18 or 20.
But she told him she was only 13 years old.
For nine months he kept control of himself.
‘It had been bloody hard because we were sleeping with each other from very early on but we had always agreed not to get physical because I knew we shouldn't,’ he said.
But then when she was 14½ it became physical.
‘It just happened when we were half asleep.
We were in Paris.’
When she was 15 Mandy started taking the pill.
Bill said he discussed it with her mother and Mandy.
If it had been his daughter he would have tried to have stopped it.
‘But when it happens to you in that way it's another ball game entirely.
It just takes over.
‘She wasn't an underage girl to me.
She was a young woman.
She was a mature woman.
I really missed her if I didn't see her for six hours.
It was quite extraordinary.’
Mandy was 19 when they eventually married in 1989.
It lasted just 18 months.
Bass guitarist Bill called it a sham.
He said: ‘It was the worst thing that's ever happened to me in my whole life.
I was continually rebuffed.
‘We didn't consummate the marriage for two weeks and only then because she was pressured into it.
We had sex just four times during our marriage.’
It was not the first time Bill had felt let down by Mandy.
He spoke bitterly of the way she left him for another man, a student, when she was 16 then humiliated him by giving intimate details of their affair to the press.
‘I strongly suspected for a long time that there were other men.
There was a change in her sexually, a big change.’
She said she wanted to go to Marbella in Spain.
Bill told her they were finished if she did.
But she went.
Shortly afterwards Sunday paper headlines screamed ‘My School Days as Stone's Child Bride’.
‘That night was like a nightmare,’ he recalled.
‘Then I got a phone call out of the blue from Mandy the next morning.
She was quite flippant and said ‘Have you seen the papers?’.
‘I don't think she realised the seriousness of it.
She was endangering my future, my career and freedom.’
Two years later they were reconciled.
He thought at the time he was marrying the ‘prefect woman’.
Jail warder snatched
POLICE surrounded a top-security jail last night after a warder was taken hostage by prisoners.
The officer was seized in D Hall of Scotland's Perth Prison.
A Scottish Office spokesman said: ‘Negotiations to secure the officer's release are continuing.’
Last July, an inmate held a warder hostage at knifepoint for 13 hours.
Gun siege colonel turns his home into a fortress
by Roger Kasper
A RETIRED Army chief held police at bay for 27 hours after turning his country home into a fortress.
More than 40 officers went on alert when Colonel Martin Gillis-Tweed, 55, threatened to go berserk with an arsenal of guns.
They swooped on his detached home in Kennington, Kent, after his wife Elizabeth, 45, fled in terror with her two young boys under her arms.
It followed a furious row on Saturday morning.
Mrs Gillis-Tweed raised the alarm from a neighbour's home.
A country lane surrounding the house was sealed off and police from throughout the county were called to the scene.
Two women's hockey teams playing nearby fled into their clubhouse on police orders.
They were there for seven hours protected by plain-clothes officers.
Late on Saturday night, they were smuggled away to a safe area of the field and one of the teams was driven home to London.
Club groundsman Horace ‘Bowler’ Fuller, 63, said: ‘The girls were in good spirits.’
Gillis-Tweed finally gave himself up at 1.20pm yesterday when he dropped his weapon and left the house.
Last night he was waiting to be quizzed by police.
Gillis-Tweed was a gun club member and had firearms licences.
He owned rifles and handguns.
Neighbours believe life in Civvy Street had affected Gillis-Tweed who quit the Army two years ago.
One said: ‘Most people in this area always felt there was something a bit odd about him.’
Mr Fuller said: ‘Our club only heard from him when we had discos in the club house and he phoned us to keep the noise down.’
Doug Mills, 49, landlord of The Golden Ball — used as a base for the police operation — said: ‘Customers told me he had done several tours of Northern Ireland during his service.
‘They were a quiet couple who kept themselves to themselves.’
Mrs Gillis-Tweed, who chairs the local neighbourhood watch committee, was with relatives last night after talking to police for several hours.
‘She was very distressed and very tearful,’ said Mr Mills, who is looking the family's dog.
Marines take Somali airfield
US Marines took control of an airfield in Somalia yesterday in their first major sortie out of the war-torn country's capital.
The 200 Marines found no resistance from local gunmen as they were dumped from 13 helicopters at the disused Beli Dogle airfield, 60 miles north-west of Mogadishu.
Intruder jets from the aircraft carrier Ranger, and Cobra attack helicopters scoured the area for armed men.
Marines hit the ground either running or flopping on to their stomachs at three points along the 10,000ft runways as they took up positions.
‘It's about as benign as you can get,’ said Sergeant Dave Jamison of third platoon, Echo Company.
‘That's the way we like it.
The best landing is the one you don't get shot at.’
The airport is a former Soviet airbase that the Somalis took over after ousting the Russians in 1977.
It has fallen into semi-ruin since the civil war broke out two years ago.
The Marines brought in a first, small load of 30 bags of rice and grain to offer the local people as a gesture.
Less than an hour later, they were followed by C-130 transport planes with food for starving Somalis.
‘Basically what we did was occupy the airport and set up positions more or less to keep the locals, cattle and goats off the runway,’ said Captain Dave Hall.
The airstrip, which will also be occupied by Canadian forces, will become one of the major staging areas for food deliveries.
US troops, who eventually will have 28,000 soldiers in the country leading the United Nations action, will also be securing other airstrips as a base for food distribution.
Not me, says Gilbey
JAMES Gilbey, the man linked with the Princess of Wales, last night laughed off suggestions he was going to be her public escort.
Gilbey, who was taped making a phone call to Diana, said he is still friendly with her but would do nothing to embarrass her.
He was replying to a TODAY story on Saturday headlined The Man Most Likely To.
Gilbey, who is involved with Formula One's Team Lotus, said he was leading his own life and was not involved in the future plans of the princess.
Royal author Andrew Morton said yesterday his comments on the future friendship between Gilbey and the princess were based on hypothetical questions.
TODAY has learned Diana will not operate her own court from Kensington Palace.
She will, she says, employ fewer people than most small businesses.
She will not have her own press officer and will rely on the office of the Prince of Wales and Buckingham Palace to assist with her diary and future plans.
Diana says she does not intend to turn Kensington Palace into a rival of Buckingham Palace.
Sharks could beat tumours
DEADLY sharks could give a lifeline to cancer victims.
Cartilage from the terrifying fish contains a substance which limits the growth of tumours, says a controversial US researcher.
Dr William Lane says other scientists have ignored evidence that protein from the cartilage halts the development of blood vessels which supply tumours.
Without blood, cancer cells starve.
He said they were concentrating on producing a synthetic alternative.
‘There's a danger orthodox scientists will continue to attempt a synthesis instead of testing the potential of whole shark cartilage.
That might result in loss of life,’ said Dr Lane, in London to promote his book Sharks Don't Get Cancer.
Astrologer kept Diana from leaving 6 years ago
Charles Rae
A DESPERATELY unhappy Princess Diana had her bags packed ready to leave the Royal Family at least six years ago.
Royal author Andrew Morton said yesterday one of Diana's closest confidantes was aware in 1986 that she wanted to end her marriage to Prince Charles.
Morton said the Princess's astrologer, Penny Thornton of TODAY, revealed to him recently that she believed Diana was about to leave the Royal Family then.
Morton, author of Diana: Her True Story, said: ‘As far as Penny is concerned the bags were packed and Diana was ready to go.
‘She was desperate to find a chink of light at the end of the dark tunnel she found herself in.’
He said Diana had been ‘literally the Princess in the Ivory Tower’.
Throughout her married life she had to play second fiddle to the interests of her husband.
He added: ‘In reality, the royal women have a second-class place in the Royal Family, and no one more so than the Princess of Wales.’
Diana, portrayed as a ‘dumb blonde’ and the ‘Marilyn Monroe of the Royal Family’, now wanted to find her own destiny, he added.
And in an article in The Sunday Times, he said Diana may now be planning to move abroad, probably to Italy or France.
He wrote: ‘Her immediate plans are modest: to spend a private weekend in Paris, to take a course in psychology, to learn to play the piano to concert grade and to start painting again.
Another avenue is the unfolding vista of charity, community and social work.’
Yesterday the estranged couple arrived in separate cars to join princes William and Harry at Ludgrove School, in Wokingham, Berkshire, for a Christmas carol concert.
Diana, driving herself, arrived first, followed 25 minutes later by Prince Charles, who was chauffeured in his Bentley.
After the hour-long service Diana drove off with the boys in the back to Kensington Palace.
Charles drove out a short time later back to Highgrove.
The princess is expected to take her sons to Althorp House later this week to attend the traditional children's Christmas party, to be hosted by her brother Earl Spencer.
This year Charles and Diana are to send separate Christmas cards — with solo signatures.
Preparations for the his-and-hers festive cards were made some months ago.
For the first time they were not photographed together for the cards.
Instead, both have pictures of their sons William and Harry on the front wearing riding breeches.
TODAY has also learned that the princess will not operate her own court from Kensington Palace.
She will, she says, employ fewer people than most small businesses.
James Gilbey, whose intimate phone call to Diana was taped, yesterday laughed off suggestions that he was going to be her public escort.
Replying to a TODAY story on Saturday headlined The Man Most Likely To, he said he was still friendly with the princess but would do nothing to embarrass her.
Royal author Andrew Morton made it clear yesterday that his comments on the future friendship between James Gilbey and the Princess were based on hypothetical questions.
Another royal writer, Fiametta Rocco, claimed last night Charles is terrified of his father and was reduced to tears after a tongue-lashing.
Miss Rocco said Prince Philip was incapable of helping his sons when their marriages broke down because of his own austere upbringing.
He tried to toughen Charles up as a child by sending him to Gordonstoun public school in Scotland, where the prince became a target for bullies.
Keep him in jail for life
A TIMEBOMB is ticking away in a British jail.
It is called Dr Thomas Courtney.
Two weeks ago he was given a seven-year sentence for two rapes and two serious sexual assaults.
After the trial police revealed that he probably abused 100 other women.
Yet, if he receives full parole, in little more than two years Courtney will be free.
Free to drug more women.
Free to sexually assault them.
Free to rape them.
TODAY has discovered another of Courtney's victims who is still too terrified to tell the police that he also assaulted her.
It is not an exaggeration to say that no woman will be safe once he is out of prison.
For Courtney is no ordinary criminal.
He is a deeply sick man from whom society needs to be protected.
Until July this year nothing could have been done to increase his sentence.
But since then the law has been changed to allow the courts to review a sentence which they believe is too light.
Rarely will there be a more appropriate case for the new law than that of Thomas Courtney.
Yet there is no sign that it is to be applied.
The courts can only act when asked to by the Attorney General.
The Attorney General can only act when he is asked to.
And so far no one has done that.
Any action must be taken within 28 days of the sentence being imposed.
Today half of that time has elapsed.
There are only 14 days left for Courtney's case to be referred back.
Only 14 days for the seven years to be increased to the sentence that fits his crimes and his evil — life.
Already Teresa Gorman MP has supported TODAY's campaign by calling for an automatic life sentence for rape.
TODAY does not lightly ask for his or any criminal's sentence to be increased.
But this is a case where long imprisonment is needed not just as a punishment, but to protect society.
It is worth asking how Courtney got away with such an inadequate sentence.
During his trial much was made of the way he had abused his position as a doctor.
It was said that this made the assaults particularly dreadful.
Yet that was not reflected in the sentence he got.
It seemed as if he received a shorter term in jail because he was a doctor.
Would most multiple rapists have received only seven years for such horrific offences?
We think not.
Would any man who was obviously a pathological criminal be allowed his freedom so soon to enable him to continue a career of sexual violence?
Of course not.
The lightness of Courtney's sentence is obvious when it is compared to other recent sentences.
Just five days before Courtney was convicted, Anthony Heard, a 25-year-old man of no fixed address, was given three life sentences for three rapes.
He had given himself up when he saw his photofit picture on BBC's Crimewatch.
In February John Broom, 30, was given three life sentences for raping a schoolgirl aged 16, and later indecently assaulting a student.
A week later Michael Musgrove, 21, was jailed for 13 years for raping three women and indecently assaulting two others.
In April Stephen Tomkinson, 32, was jailed for 14 years for raping a woman in her home.
In June Paul Callaghan, 27, was jailed for 15 years after he admitted five robberies, a rape and an indecent assault.
Later the same month Edward Bartley, a 32-year-old serial rapist, was jailed for 20 years for attacking and raping five women.
In October Glory Kwantreng, a 32-year-old kitchen porter, was jailed for 14 years for raping a 19-year-old student.
All these men are guilty of horrific crimes.
But what makes Courtney especially dangerous is not that he abused his position as a doctor.
He will, after all, not be allowed to practise again.
It is that he is criminally insane — unable to stop himself from sexually abusing women he has lured with his position or his charm, and sometimes overpowered with drugs.
Courtney must be stopped from carrying out more despicable crimes.
This means that someone must urgently bring his case to the attention of the Attorney General and ask him to look at it.
Who can ask the Attorney General to do this?
We can ask, and we are asking him.
MPs can ask, and we urge them to ask.
The Crown Prosecution Service can ask, and we urge it to ask.
Public opinion can also ask.
We urge our readers to write to their MP at the House of Commons.
Deal to cost us £10 each
Eben Black, Political Correspondent
THE Euro-summit deal will cost Britain £200 million a year — around £10 for every taxpayer in the country.
That is the cost of the extra cash conceded by John Major for the EC budget held by Commission President Jacques Delors.
By 1999, Brussels' coffers will contain £64.4 billion a year.
The four poorest EC countries — Spain, Portugal, Greece and Ireland — will share £2.5 billion extra a year in EC grants.
The largest share of the money — known as cohesion cash — will go to Spain, which will take £1.25 billion, or half.
Ireland will get 10 per cent, or £250 million and Greece get and Portugal get double that.
But Britain will be able to keep its rebate on contributions to the EC — allowing us to claw back £2 billion of the £4.5 billion a year paid in by the Treasury.
The other main points of the Edinburgh agreement are:
Denmark gets special opt-outs on a single currency and a common defence policy.
But it will still have to vote in favour of the Maastricht Treaty in a referendum this spring before the treaty is allowed come into effect.
John Major won his battle for ‘subsidiarity’ -where member states take their own decisions unless the matter is only resolvable at EC level.
Under the deal, the Community will have to prove that it should take the decision, rather than the other way round as originally feared.
Community membership will be opened up to Finland, Sweden, Austria and Norway, bringing in richer nations to share the burden with Britain and Germany.
It was agreed in principle to admit former-Communist bloc nations Poland and Hungary as full members once their economies are closer to the Community level.
Stormin' Gorman
TORY Euro-rebel Teresa Gorman has warned that the EC budget deal is funding poorer countries at the expense of the rich.
The MP for Billericay said richer nations could ‘ill-afford’ hand-outs to countries like Spain in the present economic climate.
Phoney voters
BRITISH electors are to be given a chance to vote on the EC's Maastricht Treaty in a rebel referendum run by Tory Euro-sceptics.
The Government refuses to hold a national poll despite pressure from its own backbenchers and senior party figures.
Now the anti-Maastricht movement plans to give the voters a say in a Yes-No phone poll after the New Year.
The move is spearheaded by former MP Tony Favell, who lost his seat to Labour in the General Election.
Mr Favell resigned as John Major's official Commons aide when the Premier was Chancellor because of a clash of views over Europe.
Lord Tebbit, former Tory party chairman and right-hand man to Baroness Thatcher, is backing the plan.
We back Danes if they say no
Eben Black, Political Correspondent
THE fate of the Maastricht treaty was thrown into turmoil last night when Britain declared: We back Denmark.
If the Danes vote no in their next referendum the United Kingdom will also oppose closer European ties.
The message is: We stand united together, or there can be no treaty.
The dramatic revelations soured the victory celebrations of John Major, who had claimed a triumph at the Edinburgh European summit.
A no vote by the Danes in their referendum, due in May or April, would condemn Britain to remain in the slow lane of a two-speed Europe.
The Prime Minister issued the threat in private meetings with other EC leaders at the two-day summit, which ended late on Saturday.
His warning was disclosed yesterday in what appeared to be an amazing blunder by Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd.
Mr Major will now face a rough ride when he reports to the Commons on the summit tomorrow instead of the cheers of approval he was hoping for.
In Edinburgh, he managed to get the Danes back on board by winning agreement from the other 10 to give them special ‘opt-outs’ to encourage a yes vote to Maastricht.
The Danes will not have to go along with plans for a single currency, or with plans for a common Euro-defence policy.
But if they vote against Maastricht the entire treaty will fall because all 12 nations have to ratify it to make it law.
Mr Hurd stunned even diehard Tories by revealing that Britain will step aside from the European mainstream if Denmark goes for rejection.
‘If the Danes say no, the treaty will fall,’ he said.
‘The treaty is a treaty for 12.
The ex-members could go into a corner and negotiate a new treaty for a small er number, but that would not include us.’
He added: ‘It is not a political reality to say that we would sit down and negotiate a new treaty with 11 members without Denmark.’
But that is exactly what the other members — led by France and Germany — plan to do if the Danes do reject Maastricht.
Mr Major believes the concessions he won for Denmark's Premier Poul Schluter can deliver a yes vote.
Downing Street sources desperately described the issue as ‘hypothetical’ last night.
Mr Major's stance was also revealed last night by France's President Francois Mitterrand.
And he made clear that the other 10 nations are determined to press ahead whatever Denmark does.
Mr Mitterrand said: ‘During one of our meals, Mr Major said if Denmark was again to reject the treaty then he could not see how Britain could go along with Maastricht.
‘The other 10 said they will continue with the construction of Europe whatever happens.’
Mr Major is already under enormous pressure to ratify the Maastricht treaty in Parliament by July this year.
But it is likely to take until November before the Maastricht Bill passes all its stages in the Lords and Commons — leading to accusations that Britain is lagging behind.
Before his gaffe yesterday Mr Hurd said: ‘We have got the community back on track.
The Prime Minsiter handled the summit extremely well.’
Euro laws scrapped
EURO car number plates and the regulation of gambling were among proposals dropped as part of a deal to cut interference in national life.
The agreement was aimed at meeting demands for more openness over EC operations and less intrusion.
Chamber potty
MEMBERS of the European Parliament are furious with Prime Minister John Major after being landed with a £171 million debating chamber white elephant.
At the Edinburgh summit Mr Major promoted an agreement that Strasbourg would be the permanent seat of the parliament.
But most MEPs say the parliament should be in Brussels where they have their offices, and have signed a lease-buy deal on a £171 million debating chamber in Brussels which involves a legal obligation of annual rent of £16.7 million and will now be used for just a few hours each year.
‘We are now committed to a permanent merry-go-round for the European Parliament at a huge cost in terms of cash and efficiency,’ said Mr Peter Price, Euro MP for London South-East.
Societies feel cash squeeze
Nicki Pope
BUILDING societies are feeling the squeeze as savers withdraw cash because of falling interest rates.
Leading lenders were last night warning they may not be able to pass on any further rate reductions to mortgage holders.
Societies blame a combination of falling interest — basic rates are now 8.5 per cent— and a drive among consumers to pay off credit cards for the squeeze on funds.
Last year the cash coming across counters topped £5.8 billion after peaking at £13.6 billion in 1988.
For the first 10 months of this year, it totalled £362 million, although this is expected to be wiped out by outflows this month and last month.
‘There is a danger rates will become unacceptable if they are reduced again,’ says the Nationwide's Tim Melville-Ross.
David Blake, of the Woolwich, said one factor hitting the building societies was that people were living on their savings.
‘People this year have spent a lot of time paying off their debts and credit cards and digging into their savings.’
The backlog of homeowners prevented from moving by the recession in the housing market has increased, according to a survey today.
The Alliance and Leicester Building Society said that 31 per cent of people questioned said they had delayed a move because of the poor state of the housing market, an increase of three per cent on May.
The Frost Report
Tim Ewbank
DAVID Jason's latest TV role as hard-nosed sleuth Jack Frost was a guaranteed hit long before it ever reached the small screen.
For detective work carried out before the series was made showed that David is a favourite with male viewers while women are hooked on crime dramas like Morse, Miss Marple and Taggart.
The research by Yorkshire TV paid off last Sunday when 18 million tuned in for the first episode of A Touch of Frost.
It is only the second time the ITV company has followed the American idea of using a survey to back up launch plans.
‘It's not standard practice,’ said Yorkshire TV's Controller of Entertainment Vernon Lawrence.
‘We all think our gut reaction and intuition tells us what the public wants.
‘But now it's becoming so expensive to make programmes we are being forced into making sure we are going along the right lines.
‘The three shows in the series cost in excess of £3 million.
So £10,000 is not very much to spend on research.’
The survey revealed that it is women over the age of 45 and largely in the middle class AB and C1 social brackets who are addicted to detective series.
Men between the ages of 15 and 55 are the biggest David Jason fans.
The survey also showed 71 per cent of the 3,000 questioned disagreed that there were too many detective programmes on TV, and 79 per cent said that 7.45pm on a Sunday was a good time to screen A Touch of Frost.
Mr Lawrence said: ‘An awful lot of what we had felt all along was vindicated by the research.’
For 10 years, the star has enjoyed a high profile as Del Boy in Only Fools and Horses and as Pa Larkin in The Darling Buds of May.
‘Our problem was to convert audiences to accepting David in something they had never seen in him before,’ said Mr Lawrence.
Judging by the ratings, David Jason the comedy star has been accepted as a serious actor.
QUESTIONS THEY ASKED
Having read the description of A Touch of Frost, how likely is it that you will watch it?
Definitely watch it 11%
Likely to watch it 31%
May watch it 37%
Will not watch it 2%
Not answered 9%
If you think you will watch A Touch of Frost, what will be the main reason that you choose to view it?
I enjoy whodunnits 38%
I like David Jason 58%
Not answered 4%
If you think you will not watch A Touch of Frost, what is your main reasoon for this?
Don't like whodunnits 26%
Don't like David Jason 8%
Prefer Jason in comedy 20%
Need to know more 23%
Not answered 23%
Which of the following roles do you most associate with David Jason?
Comedy roles 78%
Serious roles 3%
Both 16%
Not answered 4%
Is it important to you that David Jason's character in A Touch of Frost has a girlfriend or a wife?
Yes 15%
No 84%
Not answered 1%
What music would you like to hear accompanying the series?
Jazz 12%
Opera 1%
Easy listening 57%
Modern 13%
Classical 14%
Not answered 4%
Do you think there are too many detective programmes on TV?
Yes 27%
No 71%
Not answered 2%
A Touch of Frost is probably going to be shown on Sundays at 7.45pm.
Do you think this is a good/convenient time?
Yes 79%
No 19%
Not answered 2%
If Sunday at 7.45 is not a good time for you, when would you prefer it to be on?
9pm or later on Sunday 31%
9pm or later on Saturday 16%
9pm or later in week 32%
8pm or earlier on Saturday 8%
8pm or earlier in week 12%
Not answered 2%
Have you read any of the best-selling novels of R D Wingfield?
Yes 1%
No 97%
Not answered 2%
My ropey old soap
Ian Key
THE man behind flop BBC soap Eldorado says critics were right to attack the show.
Tony Holland, who says he nearly quit before the first episode, admits the programme was ‘ropey’ when it first went out and is only ‘half decent’now.
‘I don't think the critics were hard enough,’ he said in a radio interview.
He complained the decision to bring forward the start date for the £10 million sun sea and sex drama from September to July left him high and dry.
‘Lots of people sent memos saying ‘I know we planned the whole thing for September or October but we are going out in July’, and it simply wasn't ready,’ he said.
Mr Holland, 48, revealed actors stood in front of walls in early episodes to hide the fact that parts of the set were not painted.
The show is watched by just six million viewers, but he said: ‘I think the public are beginning to take to it.’
Selfridges under siege in Sunday revolution
Karen Woolfson
ONE of Britain's most prestigious stores, Selfridges, made history yesterday by opening on a Sunday.
It was the first time since the store opened 80 years ago.
Bosses defied the law to woo last-minute Christmas shoppers from Oxford Street rivals.
As customers packed the gift departments, a spokesman said the break with tradition was inevitable.
‘The store is happy with the response,’ he said.
‘People are definitely spending seriously although there has been a late build-up to Christmas.’
The decision comes just two weeks after House of Fraser stores across Britain — excluding Harrods — gave in to Sunday trading.
‘We opened in the light of present economic conditions and the actions of our competitors,’ said a spokesman.
Across the country, retailers are ringing up record amounts as Sunday shoppers pack their shops.
Managers at the giant MetroCentre in Gateshead have reported a lull in the recession as takings continue to soar.
‘We are experiencing a temporary respite but retailers have an eye over their shoulder to the cold, dark days of January and February which will be hard,’ said marketing manager Ron Woodman.
Most shoppers were splashing out on practical items and steering clear of the luxury goods, he said.
And most preferred to pay by cash, fearing soaring credit card rates and the prospect of unemployment.
At Rackhams in Birmingham, sales have already beaten last year's figures after the store decided to open on the last four Sundays before Christmas.
‘We opened for the first time and we're doing extremely well,’ said assistant manager Greg Hughes.
In Plymouth, department store Dingles has reported a steady trade in the Christmas build-up.
‘Customers are certainly coming out for Sunday trading and trade is good,’ manager Peter Fairweather said.
Bosses at Toys R Us, which has been opening on Sundays for more than a year, say the extra day is a definite boost to sales.
Councils are poised to try to ban Sunday shopping next weekend if the European Court of Justice refers the debate back to the House of Lords this week.
More winners in state lottery
Eben Black
THOUSANDS of people stand to win a small fortune every week under new plans for a national lottery.
Ministers aim to widen interest by running a host of smaller competitions alongside the £1 million-a-week prize draw.
The legal framework for the move to a national lottery will be unveiled this week in what Government insiders call ‘a Christmas present to the nation’.
Outlets for the lottery — which could include post offices as well as small shops and newsagents — will sell scratch-off cards for the minor games at the same time as they take the money for the lottery.
Stakes for the lottery itself are likely to be £1 a time, with the other games costing less at about 50 pence a time.
Sales of the tickets will be carefully controlled, and Ministers are determined to avoid using street vendors like Spain.
Profits from the smaller games will go towards charities, arts, sport and leisure like the £1 billion a year expected from the lottery.
It was feared Heritage Secretary Peter Brooke was less supportive of state gambling than predecessor David Mellor.
But insiders say he is keen to make it a national obsession.
From next year, under the EC's single market, foreign lottery tickets will be on sale in Britain.
An adviser said: ‘We do not see why we should allow foreign lotteries to take the money when it can be used for the benefit of Britain.’
The National Lotteries Bill will be published before the Commons rises for the Christmas recess on Thursday, paving the way for it to become law next year.
Ross's new show comes under fire
TV PRESENTER Jonathan Ross was accused of plagiarism after his latest show Americana had its debut on Saturday.
Ross co-wrote the three part Channel 4 series, which takes a look at the underbelly of the US, with Jack Barth, who also collaborated on a book called Roadside America.
The book, which was published in 1986 and became a best-seller, was written with Americans Ken Smith, Michael Wilkes and Doug Kirby after several years of research.
Barth left soon after it was published.
Last night Mr Smith said: ‘We are mad with this programme, and especially with Barth.
‘We will be studying this programme very closely to see if it crosses over that legal line.
‘It is obvious the show is based on the first book we wrote together.
If it crosses over that line, being mad will turn into being a lawsuit.’
Ross says that his team searched for ‘the sort of things you would never find here, both to Britain's credit and to my great sorrow’.
Railway routes for axe
A POTENTIAL bidder for part of a privatised British Rail has named two lines which could close to ‘rationalise services and reduce costs’.
The disclosure from Sir James Sherwood, the man who revived the Orient Express, comes as Government plans to privatise BR are being questioned by two former Cabinet ministers.
Former deputy prime minister Lord Whitelaw and ex-Transport Secretary Lord Ridley warn of the problems caused by loss-making lines on BBC1's Panorama tomorrow night.
Sir James, who as president of Sea Containers has expressed interest in some of BR's busiest routes in the South East, says it would be ‘hopeless’ to try to run the railways as in the past.
He names the Coastway route between Southampton and Eastbourne through Portsmouth and Brighton, and the North Downs route between Reading, Guildford and Tonbridge as candidates for closure.
Lord Ridley, formerly in charge of water privatisation, says: ‘I never believed it was really possible to do very much with the railways, because basically they are loss-making.’
‘Switch off for miners’
UNION leaders hope to plunge Britain into darkness on Saturday as a gesture of support for miners.
They are appealing to the nation to switch off its lights for five minutes at 8pm to show the Government the depth of anger at the coal crisis.
The SOS (Switch Off Saturday) message is the latest phase in the campaign to save 31 pits and 30,000 jobs threatened by British Coal's closure programme.
Jail attack
LOYALIST terrorists fired a missile at the top security Crumlin Road jail in Belfast last night.
None of the republican prisoners inside was hurt in the attack.
Commander Anne
Clive Nelson
PRINCESS Anne began married life the second time around as she means to go on — by giving the orders.
Less than two minutes after becoming Mrs Tim Laurence, she stood beside him on the steps of Crathie Church, Balmoral and pointed to the nearest Range Rover.
‘Get in the car,’ she told her husband.
The words were said, not harshly but firmly, according to one guest at the most unconventional royal wedding ever.
‘There's no doubt who'll wear the trousers in that house,’ said one elderly lady watching with amusement.
Saturday's 35-minute wedding ceremony was as simple as Anne and Tim had wanted.
The church was not decorated.
The royals, who normally have a special pew screened from other worshippers, behaved like any other wedding family.
The Queen and Duke of Edinburgh sat on one side, Commander Laurence's relatives on the other.
There were three hymns, a lesson, prayers and the wedding service itself.
Following Church of Scotland tradition, the couple promised to be ‘loving, faithful and loyal, until God shall part us by death.’
But this time, Anne did not promise to obey her spouse, as she had done at Westminster Abbey, nearly 20 years ago.
And they did not kiss.
The couple drove the half-mile from the church to the grounds of Balmoral Castle in their Range Rover before climbing into a fairytale horse-drawn carriage.
For four days, the nearby town of Ballater had been awash with rumours that the Landau Carriage would be used — weather permitting.
In fact, the coach — drawn by two grey horses — was only called into service once the couple were out of the public gaze.
As they rode along the winding estate road, the handful of workers not invited to the service lined the route, clapping and cheering as they arrived.
‘It was a lovely moment, something I am sure they will remember for the rest of their lives,’ said one.
The hour-long reception in an annexe of the castle was as modest as the service: vegetable soup and wholemeal-bread sandwiches — with a little champagne.
By 5pm, the bridal pair were speeding south to the Princess's Gatcombe Park estate in the Cotswolds.
There, Anne's first husband, too, had got his orders — marching orders.
Captain Mark Phillips had been expected to remain for some time in his cottage on the estate, where he has lived since the marriage broke up three years ago.
But that meant Husband No 1 might, embarrassingly, bump into Husband No 2.
Now, Mark's departure from the estate — the Queen's £300,000 wedding present to him and Anne in 1973 — seems imminent.
Since early summer, workmen have been preparing a new home for Mark, at Aston Farm, a mile away.
‘We knew Mark was moving in,’ said a neighbour.
‘But we didn't expect it quite so soon.’
Golf couple bunkered in plans row
A GOLF-MAD couple have been banned from using an exclusive private course which surrounds their home.
Bill and Heddwen Molloy were barred after a planning row with owner Jack Minashi.
The argument started when Mr Minashi decided to landscape the 16th green which backs onto the Molloys' £200,000 17th century cottage.
The couple say it bore no relation to plans they had inspected and that Mr Minashi slammed the phone down when they rang.
Mr Molloy contacted the council planning officer and work at the Beadlow Manor Golf and Country Club, Beds, was halted.
‘There was steam coming out of Jack's ears,’ said Mrs Molloy, 49, who was ladies' captain.
Two days later letters arrived saying they were banned from the club.
‘Our whole golfing world has fallen in around our ears,’ said Mrs Molloy.
‘Our home is an island in the middle of the course and we are stranded.’
Mr Minashi said he could not comment.
Family lose their house
A SINGLE mother and her two children have been evicted from their home just two weeks before Christmas.
Pat Rutter, 37, fell into arrears totalling £5,000 after she separated from her husband two years ago.
Bailiffs moved in and boarded up the house in Ely, Cardiff, as Pat and her children, Maria, 16, and three-year-old Matthew watched.
‘It's absolutely heartless,’ said Pat.
‘I wanted to give the kids a proper Christmas.
Now we're homeless.’
A spokesman for the Bristol-based Chelsea Building Society said: ‘The timing is not ideal but it is at the end of a long series of events.’
New clue may clear sisters
NEW evidence emerged last night which may help clear two sisters jailed for life for the murder of bank worker Alison Shaughnessy.
A neighbour who did not give evidence at the trial of Lisa and Michelle Taylor has said she saw a girl resembling Alison, 21, arrive home at 6pm on the night she was stabbed.
Witnesses have put the women at the Churchill Clinic, in Lambeth, south London, at that time — at least 11 minutes' drive from Alison's Wandsworth flat.
Lisa, 19, and Michelle, 22, who was having an affair with Alison's husband John, are to appeal.
Yacht tragedy
THE skipper of a yacht died yesterday after he and two friends fell overboard during a race off Angle, Dyfed.
Keith Rogers, 53, from Pembroke Dock, was airlifted to hospital but died later.
His friends were unhurt.
Home Loan 2
Nick Craven
NERVOUS parents are already calling it Home Loan 2.
Many fear they will have to take out a second mortgage to pay for the spin-off merchandise from the Macauley Culkin sequel: Home Alone 2: Lost in New York.
The merchandising bonanza in the US has been one of the biggest ever connected with a Hollywood film.
Experts believe the worldwide total could beat the £1.3 billion figure netted by the original Batman.
So it's no wonder the 12-year-old multi-millionaire who plays Kevin McAllister in the film is smiling because he gets a cut every time a till jingles with another toy, poster or T-shirt sold.
This alone will double the £3 million that 4ft 7in Macauley received for his starring role.
British licensing agents PSL believe that the film will be bigger than ET, Ghostbusters or Star Wars.
Manufacturers are rubbing their hands in glee as they prepare to cash in on the success.
‘This time all the manufacturers are aware and the list of merchandise is a very long one,’ said spokeswoman Helen Bailey.
‘The strength of Home Alone 2 is that it is not one of those sequels which just tells the same story again.’
The original Home Alone was the third biggest box office release in the history of the cinema where it was seen by 6 million people.
A further 12.5 million saw it on video.
After Home Alone 2's record-breaking success in the US, British merchandisers have let their imaginations run riot to devise everything from computer games to yo-yos bearing either Macauley's face or the film's title.
Sports shops are stocking up on odd trainers as worn by the pint-sized star — leaving parents to foot a bill of around £160 when they are asked to provide the ill-matching black and white pairs.
For less than £5, parents can buy jockey caps and T-shirts with iron-on transfers.
For under £10, the film soundtrack can be bought on either cassette or LP before the prices rise to £14.99 for a Walkie Talkie set, £19.99 for an electronic board game, a Talk Boy cassette player or a talking Kevin Doll with the famous Culkin ‘scream’ for £24.99.
Also on the market are colouring books, posters, Kevin towels, duvets and sheets, buttons, jewellery, and shoelaces.
London's top toy store Hamley's may find they are wishing they had listened to the hype.
‘Our buyers believe that although it will be a mega film, the merchandising opportunities are not as big as, say the Ninja Turtles or Batman II,’ said spokesman Peter Skinner.
‘We are stocking the ‘Talk Boy’ and walkie-talkie and that's about it.’
Parents may well breathe a sigh of relief at that news.
Britain goes Culkin crazy
HUNDREDS of thousands of Macaulay Culkin fans packed cinemas at the weekend as Home Alone 2 blitzed Britain.
The smash sequel has already taken the United States by storm and is now doing the same here.
Cinema managers reported massive ticket sales, and huge advance bookings.
Queues formed hours before doors opened as parents took their children to see their 12-year-old hero in action.
Nigel Scott, deputy general manager of the UCI cinema in Bracknell, Berks, said: ‘We've got it on two screens and we're having to turn people away.
This film will run and run.’
GPs warn of crash diet peril
Nicki Pope
WITH millions already shaping up for their New Year diet, doctors have warned against some of Britain's most popular weight-loss plans.
The British Heart Foundation has sent a list of unsuitable diets to all 38,000 GPs in the run-up to the post-Christmas boom in diet books and programmes.
‘Crash diets encourage faddy eating and a cycle of starvation and bingeing,’ says the BHF.
Continual weight fluctuation increases the risk of heart disease and early death.
Fibre-rich diets such as the F-Plan Diet are rated as acceptable, while very low-calorie diets, such as the Cambridge diet, should only be used under medical supervision.
The multi-million pound diet industry comes under scrutiny in Channel 4's ‘Dispatches’ this week.
The BHF says the best way to slim is by losing just over 1lb a week, reducing energy intake to 1000 calories a day, cutting down on fat and alcohol and eating only moderate salt.
Working is a health hazard
ACCIDENTS at work killed 466 people in Britain last year and seriously injured a further 179,388.
A report from the Health and Safety Commission says that 23.2 million working days were lost to work-related injuries.
Sacked
David Jones and Matthew Benns
THE off-licence assistant who sparked the ‘Threshergate’ scandal expects to be sacked today — still protesting his innocence.
John Onanuga now admits that Chancellor Norman Lamont did not pay Pounds 17.47 for a bottle of Bricout champagne and a packet of Raffles cigarettes, as he and store manager David Newton first told reporters.
He says Mr Newton, 25, who also faces being fired by Thresher this morning, picked out the two items at random while under pressure to reveal precisely what Mr Lamont bought.
Mr Onanuga, 31, has told friends he naively went along with the story because Mr Newton believed it was good publicity for Thresher and his own branch, and he did not see how it could harm anyone.
But what he strenuously de nies inventing is that he DID serve Mr Lamont in Praed Street, Paddington, west London, on Monday, November 16.
Both Thresher and the Chancellor have since said he paid the Pounds 17.47 for three bottles of wine in the chain's nearby Connaught Street branch the previous day.
But Mr Onanuga is adamant that he sold Mr Lamont three bottles of Australian wine and two packets of Hamlet cigars for a total of Pounds 18.37 on a Gold Access card.
He says he almost refused to accept the card because he had never come across one before.
He says the card was in the name of the Rt Hon Norman Lamont, and the Chancellor simply signed as Norman Lamont.
TODAY has learned that on the following day, November 17, the Pounds 160-a-week assistant boasted to a female colleague the Chancellor had been a customer the previous evening.
He made the claim 10 days before details of Mr Lamont's credit card overspending emerged.
A source close to the inquiry said last night: ‘He gave very precise details.
He stands by what he says.
John is not malicious and has no political leanings.
Why should he make this up?’
TODAY has also discovered how Thresher went to extraordinary lengths to stop anyone apart from its own senior management and security staff proving conclusively whether or not Mr Lamont was in the Praed Street store on November 16.
The company:
Stripped film from the security camera that videos customers in the Praed Street shop, Took away the staff roster, which reveals who was working on the crucial day, Removed the shop's till rolls, Attempted to pursuade the female member of staff to forget Mr Onanuga told her he served Mr Lamont on the Monday, and Refused to allow the woman to keep a copy of her signed statement because, it said, it could be handed to a newspaper.
In addition, Thresher insiders are questioning the authenticity of the till receipt produced on November 30, which purports to prove beyond doubt that Mr Lamont was in Connaught Street on a Sunday evening.
Our source said: ‘Anyone who spends more than £10 is entitled to a free carrier bag.
When a carrier bag is given out this has to be marked on the receipt with a series of dots, but there aren't any on this one.
‘Are we to assume that the Chancellor walked out carrying three bottles of wine?’
Mr Onanuga admits that there are aspects of his story which do not appear to add up.
He recalls that the Chancellor came in to the store at around 5pm, and stands by this approximate time even though he is well aware that Mr Lamont was then in a Treasury Select Committee at the House of Commons.
If Mr Lamont was using a Gold Access card, as he says, it is also highly unlikely that he was exceeding his credit limit.
A holder can have £20,000 outstanding at any time.
However, if Mr Onanuga IS lying, his friends counter, surely he would have invented a story that that could not be knocked down so easily.
He had ample opportunity to change the time of Mr Lamont's alleged visit and he could have avoided mentioning that a Gold card was used.
Since Thresher suspended Mr Newton and Mr Onanuga with the stern warning that they must not speak about the affair, the pair have been hiding.
Mr Newton fled his bachelor flat in Cricklewood, north-west London, and is living with his parents in the Home Counties.
Mr Onanuga has left wife Bernadette and their 12-week old son Abdul at their flat in Tulse Hill, south-east London, and is staying with friends nearby.
Last night both men were clinging to the vain hope of salvaging their jobs and refused to comment before today's hearing.
Anguished Bernadette spoke of her ordeal since Mr Onanuga left home 16 days ago.
She claims she has been forced to wait for him to call her from phone boxes.
He is only in Britain on a work permit, and fears being deported back to Nigeria.
She said: ‘John hasn't told me where he is because he says it's best that I don't know, then I can't be tempted to tell anyone.’
Asked if she wast sure Mr Onanuga was telling the truth, she replied: ‘Why would he tell a lie?
He didn't get any money for it.
‘But he thinks that no one will ever believe him.
He's just an immigrant and works in an off-licence, and he is dealing with Norman Lamont and very big company, so what can he do?’
Last night Thresher's Jayne Bridges admitted it was extremely strange that Mr Onanuga still claimed he served Mr Lamont.
‘I have absolutely no idea why he should make this up,’ she added.
She said Thresher was aware of the receipt for £18.37 and had established that it belonged to another customer.
The roster, till rolls and security cameras were examined in Thresher's own internal investigation.
Ms Bridges added: ‘We have proved 100 per cent to our satisfaction that Norman Lamont was not in the Praed Street shop and there is no benefit for us to lie about it.
In every prima facae case there are always anomalies if somebody is looking for them.’
£800 tax bill for a shack
A WOMAN has been sent a council tax bill for £800 after bungling valuers put her shack in the highest tax band.
Mary Munton was stunned to learn her run-down converted mobile home was worth £320,000 — the same as nearby executive homes in Tenterden, Kent.
The bill was almost three times the amount of her last poll tax demand.
But red-faced valuers admitted they made a mistake when Mary, 41, invited them to view it.
‘The place isn't worth the £800, let alone £320,000,’ said Mary, who lives there with her 10-year-old son.
‘They just assumed my house was the same as the rest around here — big and worth a lot of money.
‘They refused us planning permission two years ago.
Now they are going to evict us.’
A spokeswoman for Ashford District Council said: ‘When you are dealing with computers and almost 250,000 houses, mistakes are bound to happen.
‘We have been round to view the house and agree it should be rebanded.’
Pile-up kills lorry driver
A LORRY driver was killed and six people were injured in a pile-up last night.
The lorry rolled on to a car after its rear wheels were hit by another car which had lost control.
Police had to keep the road where the accident happened in Farnborough, Hants, closed while the wreckage was cleared.
A spokesman said: ‘All the injured were taken to Frimley Park Hospital for treatment but we don't now how seriously hurt they were.’
Clear the air as you drive
SCIENTISTS have developed a car which cleans the air as it is driven.
Its engine acts like a vacuum cleaner by removing pollutants to become a smog buster.
Exhaust gases from the Trionic Saab 9000CS were purer than the surrounding air as it was driven through London.
The scientists at Stevenage, Herts, used a micro processor more powerful than those used in the US space programmes to make the engine.
Laura, 4, gets short-changed
Adrian Lee
MEAN bank bosses tried to charge a four-year-old girl for changing £8 in coins from her piggy bank into notes.
Laura Frost was told she would have to pay two per cent commission — 16p — because neither she, nor her mother, Wendy, had an account at NatWest.
Wendy was so furious at the demand by the bank, whose motto is ‘We are here to make life easier’, that she stormed out of the branch in Eastwood, Notts.
The pair went to the nearby Co-op Bank where the money was changed without a charge.
‘I was disgusted,’ said Wendy.
‘There was no way I was paying them just to change money.
‘It would only have cost us 16p but banks should provide a service for the public and not make life difficult for them.
‘Laura was determined to buy presents for her teachers.
She had saved up for such a long time and didn't want to carry a load of coins around.
‘The people at the other bank couldn't have been nicer.’
A NatWest spokeswoman said: ‘It's up to the individual branch management.
We will look into it.’
Stuart Cliffe, chairman of the Association of Bank Customers, was appalled by Laura's case.
He said: ‘We are seeing this sort of thing more and more often.’
Ex-slave art war
A FORMER slave who used to draw and paint on scraps of cardboard is at the centre of a multi-million pound legal battle.
Bill Traylor died in poverty in 1947, aged 93, but his art is worth a fortune.
His family now want Charles Shannon — the artist's one-time benefactor — to hand back Traylor's work.
The £1m that got away
Tracey Kandohla and Cathy Gunn
A FIDDLING financier has walked away with £1 million after striking an amazing deal with his bosses to escape prosecution.
The currency dealer, who worked for a US investment bank in London, stole £3 million — but promised to pay back £2 million in return for immunity.
Working late on a Friday evening, he transferred the cash to an offshore account, before flying to America.
On the Monday he phoned bosses back in England to tell them he would not be coming back, and that he planned to build a new life with their money.
Embarrassed bank officials agreed not to call in police rather than lose the entire haul and face bad publicity.
After hearing reports of the coup yesterday, the Bank of England urged the mystery firm to come forward.
‘It raises the question of internal control and we would expect a bank facing this difficulty to inform us right away,’ said an official.
Banks are often reluctant to admit being stung, but the company involved could be committing a crime itself, according to one police expert.
‘It depends on whose money it is,’ he said.
‘If the bank is the custodian of someone else's money then it is aiding and abetting a crime.
But you can do what you like with your own money.’
In the Eighties one High Street bank was taken for £15 million but struck a deal not to prosecute if the money was returned.
The crook was given a reference but ran out of luck when his new bosses caught him fiddling £60 million.
Mother stabbed
A WOMAN was stabbed to death in a frenzied attack at her home, detectives revealed yesterday.
Officers found the body of Janice Hollyoake, 42, in the hallway.
Mrs Hollyoake lived at the house in Belper, Derbys, with her husband and their 16-year-old daughter.
A man was arrested after Saturday's incident.
Patients molest nurses
THREE out of four nurses suffer sexual harassment at work from patients and colleagues, a new report reveals.
Groping, verbal abuse and pawing are among the daily humiliations that nurses face, says the study by Sarah Finnis and Ian Robbins.
And patients are the worst offenders.
A poll of Nursing Times readers showed that 70 per cent had suffered sexual intimidation at work.
One nurse in the study told how she had to give up training after being branded a trouble-maker for complaining about a male nurse who continually groped her.
Royal College of Nursing spokesman Jamie Fleming said: ‘The most important thing is for nurses to have an effective complaints procedure.
‘The more people complain, the more it will become established that harassment is not acceptable.’
What makes a mistake
SCIENTISTS are to be given £30,000 to study the human blunders that cause major disasters.
The Government wants them to find out more about the sort of error that leads to tragedies such as the Chernobyl blast in Russia.
A Health and Safety Executive spokesman said: ‘Research like this can help us take steps to reduce the risk of a mistake being made that could have catastrophic consequences.’
Lecturer Barry Kirwan of the Birmingham University research team said: ‘The aim is to develop a human error data bank.’
Fears for schoolgirl
FEARS are growing for the safety of a teenager who disappeared on her way home from school a week ago.
Phillippa Addai, 13, of Islington, north London, was last seen boarding the school bus with friends.
Police are appealing for help to trace Phillippa, a pupil at Classold Road Secondary School, Stoke Newington.
‘Her friends saw her catch the bus and say she was behaving normally,’ said a spokesman.
Rock bottom
THE Flintstones are having a rocky transition to the big screen.
Roseanne star John Goodman, who was to play Fred Flintstone, has pulled out because of other commitments.
An insider said: ‘Without Fred there can't be a film.’
Boys reel in £1,000 of gems
TWO young anglers hooked £1,000 of antique jewellery while out fishing.
Robert Taylor and Adam Wootton reeled in the catch, including two pearl necklaces, from the River Borne in Salisbury, Wilts.
‘We hadn't got a bite from any fish but then I felt a tug on the line,’ said Robert.
‘I didn't know what it all was at first.’
His father, Paul, said: ‘His mother asked him if he had caught anything.
He said ‘No, just this, this and this’.’
Detectives think the haul could from a burglary which went wrong.
Superintendent Roger Arnold said: ‘We'll try to find the owner but if we can't the boys could end up keeping their catch.’
Job seekers who lie to get work
JOB hunters are telling lies on their CVs, it was revealed yesterday.
One in three bosses said candidates were prepared to lie to get the jobs they were after.
An applicant for a job with a finance company claimed he had taken a lengthy career break which turned out to be a prison term for robbery.
Another seeking a management post in Saudi Arabia knocked 10 years off his age but was caught out when he had to hand in his passport.
A spokesman for financial consultants Robert Half, which questioned 200 bosses, said: ‘Candidates should always be asked to substantiate achievements.’
UFO alert on remote isles
THE Shetland Islands were shocked by their latest visitor at the weekend — creatures from Outer Space.
Coastguards, police and the Lerwick Observatory received 17 independent reports of a UFO.
A police chief inspector, an optician and the general manager of Lerwick Harbour Trust were among those who saw it.
Witnesses said there was a large white light, travelling low and very fast, and accompanied by up to four smaller lights.
‘It looked like a plane on fire,’ one said.
Others described a long tail of various colours streaming behind a big light.
Julia Roberts
FOR one of the world's most beautiful actresses, Pretty Woman star Julia Roberts was looking pretty ordinary yesterday.
Julia, wearing a black leather jacket and faded jeans, hid her face as she scurried through Heathrow.
She could have borrowed the hairstyle from the latest man to whom she has been romantically linked, British actor Daniel Day Lewis.
Christmas joy as cancer boy defies doctors
Simon Trump
A YOUNG cancer victim whose mother refused him treatment because he was too weak will be at home for the Christmas he thought he would never see.
Daniel Stoneman has defied the doctors who gave him a one-in-10 chance of survival from a rare brain tumour.
His mother Angela had risked legal action by blocking radiation treatment — saying she would rather her son died in peace at home than suffer in hospital.
Now Daniel, 10, appears to have made a remarkable recovery with just chemotherapy treatment and cancer tablets.
Angela is delighted with his progress,’ said his aunt Gail Boustead.
‘He has responded very well to chemotherapy so the question of radiotherapy has not risen again.
‘They will just be having a normal family Christmas, all of them together.’
Daniel's weight plummeted to just over two stone when his condition was diagnosed last February.
Mrs Stoneman, 31, faced an agonising choice when doctors said the radiotherapy tripled the odds in his favour.
But she decided Daniel's frail body would not stand up to the painful general anaesthetics and blocked the treatment.
Stunned health bosses gave the mother-of-five, from Torquay, Devon, a two-hour psychotherapy session, telling her she was being irrational.
They tried to make Daniel a ward of court — but Mrs Stoneman stuck to her guns.
‘He told me himself that he wanted to die.
‘I asked him why and he said because he could not talk or swallow,’ she said at the time.
‘He is being made to suffer with needles and drugs.
‘No mother can watch her child continue to be in pain — his frail body is not going to stand up to 30 general anaesthetics.
‘The doctors said what does it matter as long as he is alive but they don't think about the quality of life.
‘I want him to live forever but I know I'm making the right decision even if he dies.
I'm the one who will have to live with it.’
Longer school day on cards
EVERY pupil's nightmare is set to come true, thanks to Education Secretary John Patten.
Mr Patten is looking at plans for a longer school day after a Government probe into 15,000 schools in England found youngsters are not getting enough tuition.
Among the moves being considered is a ‘continental-style’ day, starting at eight in the morning.
Alternatively, lessons could finish much later.
Mr Patten, already unpopular with the educational establishment for attacking ‘trendy’ teaching methods and publishing exam results for all schools, is having to review hours after the study found nearly half of all primary schools fall short of Government teaching targets.
Twenty-eight per cent— nearly one in three — of primary schools in the study are shaving up to one hour a week off teaching time.
Nearly one in 50 cut four hours from the week.
By the time some pupils reach secondary school they can be up to a year behind classmates who have had the proper amount of teaching, Government insiders claim.
Pregnant women in Aids test
PREGNANT women are to be offered Aids tests as part of a Government drive to make checks more widely available.
The simple blood test is likely to be offered to women when they first attend ante-natal clinics, usually around the 12th week of pregnancy.
Results will be given as quickly as possible, but some experts fear they could take up to a month if demand is high.
Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley will issue the controversial new guidelines on Wednesday in an attempt to halt the spread of HIV among heterosexuals.
Tests are currently confined to high-risk groups such as drug users and homosexuals.
Anonymous screening for HIV has already been carried out among more than 150,000 pregnant women.
The British Medical Association and the Royal College of Midwives said yesterday that unless cash is allocated for proper counselling, routine testing could put pressure on women at a particularly vulnerable time.
Dr Anne Rodway, of the BMA's medical ethics committee, said: ‘Nobody should be offered a test without comprehensive counselling.’
Child thieves call for help
CALLS from children are swamping a helpline for people facing shoplifting charges.
The charity Crisis Counselling For Alleged Shoplifters has been forced to step up its work from five to seven days a week.
‘We're particularly concerned about the increase in incidents involving youngsters of 11 and 12, especially girls,’ said founder Regina Dollar.
Smile and be healthy
HEALTH and safety campaigners yesterday launched a major drive to fight stress in the run-up to Christmas by urging people to smile.
Smile for Safety Week aims to counteract the effects of stress and tension, the biggest health destroyers and causes of accidents.
James Tye, of the British Safety Council, said: ‘All it takes is a smile, and you're on your way to feeling better and looking younger.’
Excuse me Ma'am, will you sign my copy of the Morton book
Paul Wilenius, Political Editor
IT WAS the moment that laid bare the myth that Princess Diana could ever be Queen.
Not only had she booked a seat on an ordinary shuttle flight from Edinburgh to London, but a fellow passenger even had the audacity to ask her to sign his copy of Andrew Morton's book Diana: Her True Story.
By taking seat 1F on Flight BA4733 she'd abandoned her regal bearing.
Her fellow passenger's action showed she had also lost her royal mystique and air of untouchability — after all, no one would previously have dared ask the future queen for an autograph.
Legs crossed, head bowed and sullenly staring out of the window, Diana was mingling with tourists, businessmen and oil-rig workers.
And all of them were astonished that the most glamorous member of the Royal Family could be so suddenly and publicly brought down to earth.
I was flying back on the 9am British Airways shuttle from the EC Summit on Saturday morning.
Princess Diana had been to a sumptuous EC dinner of salmon and pheasant on the Royal Yacht Britannia.
Now both of us were being served with the same standard British Airways scrambled egg and bacon breakfast.
The Princess — looking very thin again — merely toyed with her food and hardly uttered a word during the hour-long trip.
It is well known that the Princess wanted ‘out’ of the Royal Family, but to her fellow passengers it was also clear she is only now coming to terms with the fact that she really is out — and quite alone.
After a decade when her image shone from a thousands glossy magazines she now looked far from regal in a blue jacket and short skirt, her make-up thick and heavily applied.
On arrival there was no fanfare, no big welcome — just a dash through the tunnel into Terminal One, and she was gone.
Her loss is a devastating blow to the standing of the monarchy.
But as one passenger said: ‘Perhaps it's for the best.
She's the one who will be happier in the end.’
Fire kills teenager after hoax
A TEENAGER died in a blaze at his home after firemen were diverted by a call that turned out to be a student prank.
Daniel Samson, 17, was found slumped unconscious in a smoke-filled living room.
A pan had caught fire after he fell asleep while cooking a late-night snack.
Firemen who arrived at the house in Bath, Avon, after answering the hoax failed to revive him and he died in hospital.
Daniel's mother and his two brothers, aged nine and 10, escaped.
The hoaxers set fire to paper underneath a smoke alarm at a university three miles away.
Police said: ‘This was a stupid prank and probably cost a young man his life.
We are making inquiries.’
A fire service spokesman said: ‘If we had got to the house sooner it is possible this young man may still be alive.
‘We take hoaxes of this sort very seriously and are determined to prosecute anyone who is found carrying them out.
‘Pranksters waste vital minutes which can make the difference between life and death.’
Knife attack on brothers
A MOTHER is undergoing psychiatric treatment following a frenzied knife attack on her sons, aged seven and nine.
The younger boy is recovering in hospital after a kitchen knife was plunged into his chest at his home in Bath, Avon.
His brother was stabbed in the hand but managed to raise the alarm.
Detectives are waiting to question the mother.
Mosque raid: two charged
TWO men were last night charged with arson after firebombs hit a mosque.
In the attack, at Forest Gate, east London, two petrol-filled milk bottles were hurled at a window.
It was the first time a Moslem mosque had been firebombed in Britain during a wave of violence against Asian places of worship.
The attacks followed the demolition of a mosque in India by Hindu fanatics.
Business chief shot in face
SURGEONS in Leeds are battling to save the sight of company chairman Michael Dawson, who was shot in the face while on a game shoot.
Mr Dawson, chairman of electronics group Tunstall Telecom, of Whitley Bridge, North Yorks, was hit by pellets while shooting with a party of businessmen on farmland near York.
Police said they were not treating the incident as suspicious.
Post price freeze as profits double
by Ian Fletcher
POST OFFICE chiefs pledged yesterday to peg prices after doubling profits.
The company made £135 million in the six months to September, compared with £62 million for the same period last year.
The Parcelforce division recorded a loss of £21 million — a Pounds 7 million improvement on 1991.
Savings of £70 million overall were made through increased efficiency.
Chairman Sir Bryan Nicholson, who retires at the end of they year, promised that letter prices would be frozen until April.
The biggest profit came in the Royal Mail division, which made £131 million before tax, up from £62 million in 1991.
Post Office Counters showed a profit of £12 million for the half-year, down from £24 million for the same period last year.
Parcelforce is expected to break even next year.
Last month, the Post Office announced it was shedding 15,000 jobs.
Southall saves his licence
GOALKEEPER Neville Southall saved his driving licence yesterday.
The Everton and Wales star, caught doing 80 in a 50mph area, escaped a ban after magistrates heard about his extensive charity work.
Southall, 34, who drives 140 miles a day between his home in Llandudno, North Wales, and the Everton ground in Liverpool, was trapped by police radar in August.
After he was pulled over in his Volvo estate he said to officers: ‘What happens now?’
Richard Manning, defending, told magistrates in Abergele, North Wales: ‘There was no attempt on Mr Southall's part to say ‘I am Neville Southall, you are not going to do me, are you?’.
‘He did not ask for any special treatment.’
Mr Manning said the crime was not the worst in the courts' calendar.
‘It was not the same as doing 100 mph on the motorway.
He was in a line of three cars.
The one in front and the one behind, which had been travelling faster, were not stopped.’
Mr Manning produced a number of written testimonials from charities and schools telling of Southall's voluntary work.
There was also one from Everton chairman Philip Carter who said Southall was ‘a spendid emissary for the club’.
Southall, who admitted speeding at an earlier hearing, was fined Pounds 700 and given six penalty points.
Angry Mandy to sue over Wyman's sex confession
by Graham Brough
FORMER teen bride Mandy Smith is set to sue rock star Bill Wyman after he went on record admitting having under-age sex with her.
Mandy and her mother Patsy have consulted lawyers on the possibility of taking civil court action against him.
Her family is convinced Mandy's weight problems started when she started taking the contraceptive pill at 14 after the Rolling Stone seduced her in a Paris hotel.They stayed silent for eight years but were angered this week by 56-year-old Bill's decision to go public.
It is believed he thought he could no longer be charged over the under-age sex given the time that had elapsed.
Yesterday, speaking exclusively to TODAY, Mandy revealed how shocked she was by Wyman's decision to speak about his marriage break-up.
Tearful Mandy said: ‘This has come as a total surprise to me and my family.
It is the last thing I expected him to do.
‘Only a few years ago he criticised me for speaking to the press and said I should never do it again.
‘And now here he is pouring out his soul for the whole world.’
Patsy said her daughter had declined an offer to speak to a newspaper.
‘Mandy feels as though she would be prostituting herself to sell her story,’ she said.
‘But what Bill has done is unbelievable.
It amounts to a kiss and tell.
‘There were times when we thought that Mandy was very seriously ill.
We feel that her relationship with Bill was entirely responsible for her sickness.’
Mandy refused to speak to a Scotland Yard serious crime squad when they tried to investigate allegations of under-age sex when the affair came to light six years ago.
But friends said yesterday she now felt she owed Wyman no further loyalty.
An action could force their ill-fated relationship back into the courts just weeks after Mandy received a £500,000 marriage settlement.
Mandy's lawyer Joe Wood said last night: ‘Papers are presently being looked at with a view to proceedings being taken.’
As Mandy was speaking to lawyers, her ex-husband was revealing more of their secrets in a newspaper.
This time he complained of rejection and lack of sex from his 19-year-old bride during their French honeymoon.
‘Her mum arrived on the fourth day of the honeymoon,’ he said.
‘From the moment she arrived I didn't really see Mandy.
Wherever Mum was, so was Mandy.’
He added: ‘We consummated the marriage but it was forced.
She'd been pressured into it by the situation.
It was false.’
Suzy sister knife ordeal
Nick Craven
THE sister of missing estate agent Suzy Lamplugh last night told how she was almost kidnapped by a crazed knifeman.
Lizzie Lamplugh, 22, was threatened with rape and murder before managing to escape.
She used the training given by her mother's Suzy Lamplugh Trust — which gives women advice about safety — to reason with her attacker and offer him her car.
‘My safety was my priority,’ said Lizzie, who bears a striking resemblance to her sister.
Suzy Lamplugh vanished in 1986 after going to meet a Mr Kipper at a house in Fulham, West London.
It was only after phoning for help that Lizzie thought about what happened to her sister.
‘That's when it hit me,’ she said.
‘I wondered if she had gone through the same situation and if she had got into the car.’
Doctor rape case victory
Penny Wark and Russell Jenkins
TODAY won a vital victory yesterday when the Attorney General agreed to look at the case of the evil Harley Street rapist, Dr Tom Courtney.
Yesterday we called for the Attorney General, Sir Nicholas Lyell, to examine Courtney's case following his conviction 15 days ago for two rapes and two indecent assaults.
Courtney was sentenced to just seven years for drugging and assaulting four trusting young women at the Harley Street premises where he practised as a gynaecologist.
TODAY believes that Courtney's sentence is too lenient.
We pointed out that unless an appeal is lodged within 28 days of the sentencing he could be free in a little over two years.
Following TODAY's campaign, it was understood yesterday that the Attorney General had called for papers which would enable him to consider the case.
After Courtney's trial a senior detective revealed that Courtney had probably abused 100 other women.
His technique was to win women's confidence with his charm, and to offer them a spiked drink.
He then assaulted them.
We revealed yesterday that another of Courtney's victims is still too terrified to tell police that he attacked her.
If the Attorney General decides to refer the case to the Court of Appeal, Courtney's sentence could be increased.
Since February 1989 the Attorney General has referred 153 cases to the Court of Appeal for heavier sentencing.
Of the 69 appeals now completed, 56 have resulted in increased sentences.
Teresa Gorman, Conservative MP for Billericay, is leading our campaign in Parliament for a judicial review of the doctor's sentence.
She has written to the Attorney General protesting that the courts have been too lenient on Dr Courtney and she has tabled a Parliamentary Question to Sir Nicholas designed to force a judicial review of the sentence.
She said: ‘The Attorney General should send this case to the Court of Appeal in view of the seriousness of the offences by a professional man.
‘It is extremely serious when someone in a position of trust over women, to whom they go for intimate advice, education and examination, behaves in this way.
‘Dr Courtney was in the position of a professional man, a gynaecologist, whom women would be expecting to uphold a position of trust.
This trust he then, quite literally, abused.
‘I am surprised the judge did not think this matter a great deal more serious than the sentence appears to suggest.’
Mrs Gorman supported TODAY's campaign for tougher sentences for men who carry out violent crime on women.
She called for automatic life sentence for rape.
Yesterday she also tabled a second Parliamentary Question which aims to encourage the Crown Prosecution Service to review its own actions.
She wants the CPS to re-examine its policy towards crimes of rape and domestic violence.
Courtney practised in Harley Street as a gynaecologist even though he has never passed the required exams.
Linda Lamont, director of the Patients' Association, added: ‘Anybody can put up a brass plate and claim to be a doctor in the private sector.
The General Medical Council is looking at ways of tightening up the rules to stop bogus doctors working and European laws will help.’
Threshergate worker goes back to job
David Jones and Matthew Benns
THE off-licence assistant who insisted he served Norman Lamont was dramatically given his job back last night.
Shop deputy manager John Onanuga, who swore Mr Lamont came into his branch in Praed Street, Paddington, on Monday, November 16, was back behind the counter — even though the Chancellor denies being in the shop that day.
Mr Onanuga's colleague, 25-year-old manager David Newton, who now admits he lied over the items the Chancellor was alleged to have bought — champagne and cheap cigarettes — was fired by Thresher.
The decision to allow Mr Onanuga to return to work, revealed after a five-hour private disciplinary hearing at the Thresher HQ in Welwyn Garden City, appears to vindicate him.
Two key questions remain over the entire affair.
IF the 31-year-old Nigerian DID tell a lie that embarrassed not only the Chancellor of the Exchequer but the entire Government, why wasn't he dismissed, too?
IF the entire story of Mr Lamont's visit was invented, why blame Mr Newton alone when he was actually on holiday at the time Mr Lamont allegedly visited the shop, and only embellished Mr Onanuga's version of events?
Thresher insiders believe the company changed its decision at the last minute after TODAY's revelations yesterday.
We disclosed that Mr Onanuga was still adamant Mr Lamont had visited his shop — and that he was backed by a fellow employee.
Mr Onanuga told the other shop assistant a full 10 days before details of Mr Lamont's credit card overspending were published that he personally served the Chancellor.
Even after being suspended 16 days ago, Mr Onanuga said he was certain Mr Lamont paid him £18.36 for three bottles of wine and two packets of Hamlet on the crucial Monday.
He remembers Mr Lamont using a gold Access card and that he signed his name simply Norman Lamont.
We also revealed how Thresher removed rosters, till rolls and security film from the shop.
The company claimed last night that Mr Onanuga and Mr Newton now agreed they made up the whole story of Mr Lamont's visit.
A statement issued by the company's Jayne Bridges read: ‘Thresher has completed its disciplinary process and John Onanuga and David Newton have again admitted today that they fabricated the story of Mr Lamont visiting our Praed Street branch on Monday, November 16, 1992.
‘As a result the shop manager David Newton has left our employment.
In our view he was primarily responsible for the fabrication and for what has taken place since.
‘John Onanuga, the deputy manager, has been disciplined under our disciplinary procedure and will be returning to work at our Praed Street branch.
‘This is an internal matter and we have no further comment.’
After the hearing the two men were smuggled out of the building to avoid journalists.
The Treasury claimed that the firm's decision could only be interpreted as a victory for Mr Lamont.
Summit nets £3m
BRITAIN will make a profit of nearly £3 million from the Euro summit in Edinburgh, John Major said last night.
Visiting politicians, officials and journalists are thought to have spent £12 million.
Setting up the talks cost £6.5 million and security added Pounds 2.6 million.
Norman needs spenders
Paul Wilenius
HOMEOWNERS taking advantage of lower mortgage repayments hold the key to economic recovery, says Chancellor Norman Lamont.
More than 3.5 million families will see their monthly bill plummet by an average of £30 as cuts in interest rates are passed on by building societies.
With the Bank of England base rate slashed to seven per cent, Mr Lamont is hoping for a recovery in the housing market and High Street.
The Chancellor told the Commons House Magazine: ‘Penetrating the gloom of this last year there have been glimmers of good news.
The rising trend in retail sales, record levels of exports, increases in manufacturing production.
‘Everyone agrees that confidence is the magic ingredient needed to spark recovery.
Chancellors cannot create confidence.
But I can create the right conditions for confidence.
‘Businesses now have a lower pound — that means a golden opportunity to invest and export into new markets.
The scene is set for recovery and growth.’
Jobs axe at Ford
CAR giant Ford is expected to announce around 5,000 redundancies this week at its UK plants and factories in Europe.
‘We fear the worst,’ said union negotiator Jimmy Airlie.
‘But our position remains that we will not accept compulsory redundancies.’
Ministers fear a shake-up
SENIOR Ministers face a nail-biting Christmas after Government sources yesterday refused to rule a Cabinet reshuffle.
Chancellor Norman Lamont is expected to be the big loser in a reshuffle with either Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke or Transport Secretary John MacGregor favourites to take over.
Premier John Major said he ‘had not turned his mind’ to a revamp and senior aides given the chance to rule it out refused to comment.
Secret report finds rip-off banks guilty
Paul Wilenius, Political Editor
A SECRET Bank of England report has found High Street banks guilty of ripping off millions of customers.
Chancellor Norman Lamont will today begin hauling in bank bosses one by one to give them a roasting.
The banks were found to have delayed interest rate cuts to individual customers and small businesses to keep up profits.
Not all banks are guilty.
Some have been quick to reduce rates.
Mr Lamont will order the others to fall into line.
He is furious that billions of pounds he wanted freed to put in people's pockets are locked up by the banks' determination to boost profits.
He feels the banks must do their bit to help drag the country out of recession.
Treasury chiefs admitted last night the bosses would be filing in to see Mr Lamont over the next three days.
They refused to give exact details of which chairmen will be going into the Treasury and when.
However, it is known Sir Peter Walters, chairman of the Midland, will be first to face the music.
TSB chairman Sir Nicholas Goodison, who is the industry's chief representative, will follow soon after.
NatWest boss Lord Alexander will also face Mr Lamont and senior Treasury officials.
John Major and the Chancellor are determined to see interest rate cuts passed on as quickly as possible to stimulate economic recovery.
A senior Government source said last night: ‘The report does show that there are problems with some banks not passing interest rates on quickly enough.
‘But there are special circumstances in some cases and we want to take a reasoned judgment on resolving the issue.
‘We want results not rhetoric.
The banks are businesses too and we do not want to see them closed down.’
Tory backbenchers are furious at the plight of small firms which face punitive interest rates, sometimes more than 20 per cent.
With the base interest rate now at seven per cent, most banks still charge around 19 per cent for personal overdrafts.
The probe was announced by Mr Lamont last month when he gave evidence to the Commons Treasury Select Committee.
Investigators spent two weeks gathering evidence and the results landed on Mr Lamont's desk two weeks ago.
Base rates have fallen three per cent since Black Wednesday on September 16 when sterling crashed out of the European Exchange Rate mechanism.
A woman who found £40 on a bank floor has won a three-year battle to have it donated to a baby unit — and the bank has stumped up an extra £10.
Susan Stocks, 37, of Wallasey, Merseyside, was told by her local Midland branch she could keep the cash after three months if no one claimed it.
Six months later, when she asked for it to be given to Arrowe Park Hospital, which saved her son's life, she was told the money was in a ‘suspense account’.
Midland finally gave in when her case was featured on a radio phone-in about bad treatment by banks.
Party time as Fergie say thanks
Charles Rae
FERGIE is throwing a Christmas party for the people who gave her the courage to get over her fall from grace in the Royal Family.
She will host the surprise get-together tomorrow as a thank you to the victims of a fatal muscle wasting disease.
They stood by her after her split from husband Prince Andrew and the topless pictures row.
The party is being held in South London at the offices of the Motor Neurone Disease Association, of which the Duchess of York is patron.
The charity's annual conference was where she chose to make her first public appearance following the controversy and she broke down in tears at the vote of confidence they gave her.
Last night Fergie was hosting another party — this time at Buckingham Palace.
The Queen gave permission to hold the £15,000 bash in the state apartments because Fergie's new home Romenda Lodge at Wentworth is too small.
Prince Andrew travelled from Sandringham to join her and guests including Elton John and Billy Connolly.
Rave dummies on banned list
IMITATION dummies worn as necklaces by teenagers at rave parties were banned yesterday.
Consumer affairs minister Baroness Denton said the dummies, imported from Spain and Taiwan, had no ventilation to prevent choking.
She added: ‘It is vital that these dummies are removed from sale.
They could present serious hazards to babies and toddlers.’
Tiny tots with a big future
Karen Mellor
IT'S the picture to make even the strongest beefcake Gladiator go weak at the knees as the stars of the hit TV series show off their biggest fans, the Gladiatots.
Three-month-old Tyrus, nicknamed Ant, is in the well-developed arms of his dad, Alex ‘Hawk’ Georgijev.
At the moment it's a dead heat in his battle for attention with his five-year-old sister Carly at their home in Caerphilly.
Her heroine on the show is Lightning and she has already christened herself the junior version, Spark.
Pointing the way ahead at the front is 17-month-old Emily, better known as Kitten, sitting on the knee of her mum, Nikki ‘Scorpio’ Diamond.
Along with millions of youngsters, the trio are huge fans of the series which finished at the weekend.
And, with this poise in front of the cameras, it surely won't be long before they are muscling in on mum and dad.
Why you won't see me on breakfast TV, by ITN Tim
Christian Gysin
TELEVISION reporter Tim Ewart told last night how he left ITN for a new career at a rival station and then slowly realised it was all a terrible mistake.
Just weeks after moving to Good Morning Television, 43-year-old Ewart is back in the ITN newsroom at Grays Inn Road, London.
‘I went over to GMTV in October when the new staff were assembled,’ he said.
‘But over a couple of months of pilot programmes, I simply felt I had made a mistake by leaving.
I still regard ITN as the premier television news operation in this country.
‘After a while I simply wanted to go back.
I felt that GMTV wasn't quite for me.’
The new breakfast news station is expected to be similar in style to the TV-am format and much less formal than the BBC's rigid Breakfast News show.
‘I didn't feel comfortable with the lighter format,’ Ewart said.
‘Despite the appalling business of dropping GMTV in it three weeks before they went on the air, it was far better to make a clean break.
‘Better than to prolong it when I wasn't particularly comfortable — and I suspect they weren't comfortable with me.’
GMTV's first broadcast is scheduled for January 1 — hosted by Eammon Holmes and former ITN reporter Fiona Armstrong.
‘They have a style of programme with a very good news service but I didn't feel it was quite the vehicle for me,’ Ewart said.
‘I have been at ITN for a long time and come from a traditional news background.
‘I felt slightly out of place.
That's not a reflection on GMTV.
It just wasn't for me.
I made a mistake, an error of judgment.
‘I am just eternally grateful that ITN were able to accept me back.’
Ewart last made the news himself during the Soviet coup in August 1991.
He and ITN's Penny Marshall were the station's Moscow correspondents.
But when Mikhail Gorbachev was overthrown they were thousands of miles away — on honeymoon in the Caribbean.
The couple were ordered by station bosses to cut short their holiday and hurry back to work.
Tim Ewart's new role with ITN will see him compile the News at Ten's Focus on Britain reports, which are presented by Julia Somerville.
‘I hope to provide two or three reports each week in the series,’ he said.
GMTV refused to comment on Ewart's brief stay with them.
But an insider told TODAY: ‘There was no animosity, no dramatic rows.
It was just that Tim and the new show didn't fit together very well.
‘It's hoped he'll be happier back at ITN.’
My 2 years of hell, by cleared MP
Olga Craig
TORY MP Harry Greenway spoke last night of his relief that bribery charges against him have been dropped.
Mr Greenway, 58, correctwas accused of accepting foreign holidays and gifts in return for using his parliamentary influence to help an Austrian company win British Rail contracts.
But yesterday, more than a year after he and three other men were sent for trial, the Crown Prosecution Service dropped all charges.
‘This has been an extraordinarily long ordeal, but I always knew I would be vindicated,’ Mr Greenway, MP for Ealing North, London, said yesterday.
‘I especially want to thank my wife Carol and other close friends.’
Mr Greenway and three others were due to stand trial next October.
The decision to drop the case against him was made by Director of Public Prosecutions Barbara Mills, after the collapse of another trial involving the same company, Plasser Railway Machinery.
‘The Director has decided that in the light of the learned judge's ruling in the first trial, the second trial should not proceed because there is no longer a realistic prospect of convictions,’ the CPS anounced yesterday.
During pre-trial hearings at the Old Bailey, Mr Greenway's counsel argued that he should be tried by his fellow MPs and not a court of law.
But Mr Justice Buckley rejected the application in April.
He said the charges specifically accused the MP of acting in ‘violation of his public duty as a Member of Parliament.’
Since his ordeal began two years ago, Mr Greenway has shown little sign of anxiety over the case.
But privately, close friends say he has been extremely worried.
He entered Parliament in 1979 in the election which brought the Tories to power, capturing Ealing North from Labour and increasing his majority progressively ever since.
As a former schoolmaster, he has always been outspoken on education issues and a firm supporter of traditional learning methods.
Mr Greenway is also an accomplished horseman and has been a member of the Council of the British Horse Society since 1973.
Accused with Mr Greenway were Plasser executives Norbert Jurasek, 49, of Wargrave, Berks and Michael Brooks, 62, of Ringwood, Hants.
Former British Rail director David Currie, 64, of Tyler Green, Bucks was charged with corruptly accepting gifts.
All four have been on unconditional bail since October last year.
Last night, solicitors Kingsley Napley, representing Plasser Railway Machinery and its two executives, welcomed the DPP's ‘responsible’ decision.
‘The defendants have endured a delay of more than four years, during which these allegations have hung over them,’ a statement said.
‘Throughout, they have not only protested their innocence, but have co-operated with the investigating authority, confident that their names would be cleared.
‘For the individual defendants, this has been a harrowing experience.
‘For the company, the financial cost has been considerable.’
Kidnap girl is set on fire
Andrew Russell
A TEENAGE girl was fighting for her life last night after being kidnapped, tortured and set on fire.
Suzanne Capper, 16, whose blonde hair had been shaved off, was found staggering naked with 60 per cent burns at dawn.
She flagged down dustman Barry Sutcliffe as he drove to work past a golf club near his home in Romiley, Stockport, Cheshire.
‘She was in a terrible condition,’ he said.
‘She had no hair, her lips were burned and there was virtually no skin on her body.
‘It was a horrific sight.
‘She said she had been locked in a flat in Moston for about a week and had been injected with drugs during that time.
‘She had been brought out to Romiley in a car by two men who had poured petrol on her and set her alight.’
Mr Sutcliffe raised the alarm at the nearest house, a detached home belonging to a company director.
The man and his wife carried Susan into their dining room.
‘Her head was shaved and she was totally naked,’ said the director.
‘There were deep scratches all over her face.
‘Her legs and arms were like raw meat and her hands were black, like something from a bonfire.
‘She could talk and kept asking for glasses of water and milky tea.
‘She said she hadn't had a drink in 10 days.
‘Her nose was all bashed in and she had clearly been badly beaten.
‘The ambulance came to take her away she kept thanking us for our help.’
Senior police officers were last night waiting to interview Suzanne in the burns unit of Withington Hospital, Manchester.
Suzanne, who had also been burned by cigarettes, is said to be critically ill.
She has managed to reveal that the two men kidnapped near her home in Moston, North Manchester.
Officers were last night trying to find her parents and discover why she had not been reported missing.
They were also quizzing friends to establish any reason for the ordeal.
They said several men were helping with inquiries.
A senior officer said: ‘We have no reason to doubt the essentials of the girl's story.
‘Why anyone should wish to carry out such an evil and depraved attack on a young girl like this is a mystery to us.’
Lessons of tragic sister Suzy helped save my life
Nick Craven
THE sister of missing estate agent Suzy Lamplugh told last night how she survived a knife ordeal because of what she had learned from the family's nightmare.
Brave Lizzie Lamplugh, 22, ignored the blade at her throat and reasoned with her attacker, offering him her car.
After five terrifying minutes, when she was threatened with rape and murder, she escaped and alerted a neighbour.
The training given by her mother's Suzy Lamplugh Trust — which offers advice to women about safety — helped her to survive.
‘I thought ‘You must be very calm, you must not antagonise your aggressor, just try to be calm and keep sensible, and always think what you are saying before you say it’,’ said Lizzie, of Oxford, who bears a striking resemblance to her sister.
‘I offered him my car because my safety was my priority.’
Her sister's disappearance six years ago had not gone through her mind during the ordeal.
‘My main thought was if I offer him my car how will I get to work tomorrow, and also if I give him the car will I be able to collect the insurance?
‘I was also thinking that I was not feeling very well, I'm tired, I don't want to be here.
I was not thinking about Suzy until later.
I wondered if she had gone through the same situation and if she had got into the car.
‘When I got into my neighbour's house I felt safe.
That's when it hit me.
I can't believe how calm I was when it all happened.
‘It just feels like a complete nightmare and I'm so pleased it's finished.
I ran over it several times in my head afterwards.
It's important to do that.’
Lizzie had just returned home on Sunday evening and was parking her car when the man pounced.
The experience would not dent her confidence or make her fearful about driving alone, she said.
‘I went back to work and just carried on.
If you fall off a horse you get back on it.
I've got to get back in my car.
‘You cannot live your life in fear that someone is going to attack you.
It's very important to carry on as normal.’
She had learned to come to terms with her sister's disappearance.
‘How unlucky can one family be?’ said the publisher, sitting with her mother Diana.
Lizzie was carrying a rape alarm, but it was out of reach in her handbag.
Diana, 56, said that was her only mistake.
‘Lizzie did an absolutely amazing job,’ she said.
‘Her actions were a perfect example of what women should do in those situations.’
A 20-year-old Frenchman is due to appear in court today charged with robbery, making threats to kill, attempted kidnap and possession of a weapon.
She must be dead by now admits mum
Olga Craig
ESTATE agent Suzy Lamplugh has not been seen since she left her office on July 28, 1986, to keep an appointment with the mysterious Mr Kipper at a house.
Suzy, 25, talked to her new client by phone and arranged to meet to show him around the luxurious £130,000 property in Fulham, west London.
She was seen talking to a man outside the house by a neighbour at 1pm, then vanished without trace.
When Suzy failed to keep a six o'clock appointment her worried boss rang police, who later found her purse and straw hat.
Before long they found Suzy's white Ford Fiesta company car abandoned a mile from the house.
Her mother Diana, who five months later set up the Suzy Lamplugh Trust to publicise the dangers of women working alone, fears the worst.
‘I'm sure Suzy is dead, but the awful thing is not knowing the truth about what happened,’ she said.
Last year the police inquiry into Suzy's disappearance was briefly reopened when they searched a disused Army camp near Worcester.
A girlfriend of John Cannan, now serving life for the abduction and murder of newlywed Shirley Banks, said he had talked of Suzy being raped there.
Although car dealer Cannan has always denied any involvement in Suzy's disappearance, several detectives still consider him the chief suspect in the baffling case.
Devoted sister dies in blaze
A BRAVE sister died yesterday as she searched desperately for her brother in their blazing home.
Claire Hughes, 25, who had just returned from Australia for a family Christmas, was trapped with Robert, 26, and widowed mum Kitty, 60.
Neighbours heard Claire screaming ‘Robert, Robert’ seconds before the windows of their terraced house exploded in the searing heat.
Family friend Kenneth Duke said: ‘I could hear Claire shouting for help.
I dashed into my house to phone the fire brigade and then there were these huge explosions.’
Only the family's dog survived as flames engulfed their home in Merthyr Tydfil, Mid Glamorgan.
Cousin and neighbour Nicholas Gutesha, said: ‘Robert had only just decorated the house as a Christmas treat for his mum.’
Mrs Hughes's other daughter, Catherine, 28, was last night too upset to comment.
Firemen believe a new electrical appliance may have started the blaze.
Lords meet over coma boy
LAW lords who must rule on whether to stop feeding Hillsborough coma victim Tony Bland were told yesterday his case was different from any other because he wasn't dying.
Mr James Munby, who is representing 21-year-old Tony's interests, told Lords Keith, Goff, Lowry, Browne-Wilkinson and Mustill that he could live on for decades.
The High Court and the Court of Appeal have decided to let Tony die.
4 die in smash
A WOMAN and her two children, one a baby, died when their car and a van collided head-on and burst into flames yesterday.
A 16-year-old boy who was trapped in the back of the van also died.
His grandparents were taken to hospital with fractures and burns after the accident on the A35 near Dorchester, Dorset.
The boy was from nearby Wareham.
An ambulance spokesman said: ‘There was nothing we could do.’
Put some extra vroom in your stocking
WITH bulging eyes and pounding heart, the young speed-lover gazes admiringly at the object of his desire.
The sleek Ferrari Testarossa is every driver's dream — and hopeful five-year-old David Bartlett, being shown around by auctioneer John Young, thinks this one is just his size.
The model super car, going under the hammer next Monday, would be the perfect stocking filler for any youngster whose dad has £3,000 to £5,000 spare.
Powered by a four-stroke engine, running on unleaded petrol, the junior-sized version doesn't quite match the performance of its 180mph big brother.
But owner John Panteli, 17, from Croydon, South London, loves it just as much.
He won the car in a competition when he was 12, and is selling it to help pay for his further education.
John, who will wave goodbye to his treasured motor at Sotheby's saleroom in Billingshurst, West Sussex, said: ‘I'd love to keep it but there isn't room at home.
‘If I get through college, hopefully I'll be able to buy the full-size version.’
Dear Santa, can I have this toy next Christmas?
Ian Fletcher, Consumer Correspondent
PARENTS can stop worrying about what to buy the children next Christmas.
But they'd better start thinking about how they are going to pay for it.
While the Barcode Battler is expected to sell for just £40, and software comes free, it could add thousands of pounds to the family shopping bill.
To play the game, children run the hand-held electronic device over the barcode of any product.
Each barcode, on a can of baked beans, a packet of biscuits, or even on the back of TODAY newspaper, is worth a different number of energy points.
The more energy you get, the easier it is to beat opponents.
The game is already a best-seller in Japan.
Shopkeepers there were staggered when a particular brand of noodles sold out within days — until they discovered its high score in the barcode points stakes.
In the last 18 months, the Japanese have snapped up 1.2 million Barcode Battlers, which now outsell the hand-held Nintendo and Sega computer games.
‘It's very quickly become the best-selling game in Japan and we are confident of it being a big hit over here,’ said Peter Brown, managing director of toy makers Tomy, which has won the licence to introduce the game in to Britain.
‘One of its great advantages over other games is that all the software is free.
‘Almost every product on sale in this country is barcoded so it provides immense game-play possibilities.
‘Japanese players are still hunting for the ultimate barcode 18 months after the game first went on sale.
It's very compulsive.’
The game, to be unveiled at the London Toy Fair in January, is expected to go on sale in May.
For this Christmas, the battery-operated WWF Wrestlers are proving to be the best-sellers.
That is only because supplies of Thunderbirds did not arrive in Britain quickly enough to satisfy demand, according to toy experts.
Gerry Masters, spokesman for the British Association of Toy Retailers, said: ‘Shops cannot get enough of Thunderbirds.
As soon as stocks come in, they are snapped up.
It is a similar story to 1990 when Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles were sold out everywhere.’
Sales of toys are expected to top £1.3 billion for 1992 — Pounds 700 million of which will be spent at Christmas.
People are paying about the same this year as they did in 1991, according to industry figures.
Overall, parents spent an average of £90 a year on toys for a child, £59 at Christmas.
Some admit to paying more than £200 on toys to fill their youngster's Christmas stocking.
Best seller at top London toy store Hamleys is the Sega Video Games System, followed by the Nintendo system.
Hamleys bosses said yesterday trade has been very encouraging.
There has also been a big run on nostalgia toys this year, says Philip Goodall, who runs three large toy shops in Oxfordshire.
Trolls, the Mouse Trap game, Lego and the ever-present Sindy and Barbie are all among the Top 10 best sellers, shown right.
With the introduction of the Barcode Battler, Christmas and weekly shopping might never be the same again.
TOP 10 TOYS
1.
WWF Wrestlers, Tag Wrestlers and Ring — around £4 for figures and £20 for ring.
2.
Trolls — from £3 to £17.
3.
Barbie — around £11.
4.
Sylvanian Family — Bus around £19, family sets £10.
5.
Electronic Learning Aids, Talking Lesson One Plus — about £49.
6.
Lego Technic propeller plane — around £13.
7.
Polly Pocket — Around £5.
8.
Boglins — Various, from small, £1, to one that glows in the dark, £30.
9.
Terminators — Figures from £5.
10.
Sindy — Dream ballet doll, around £15.
TOP FIVE VIDEO GAMES
1.
Nintendo Game Boy — around £70.
2.
Super Nintendo — £120 to £150.
3.
Sega Megadrive — £130.
4.
Game Gear (Sega)— £130.
5.
Nintendo NES — £50 to £80.
TOP 10 BOARD GAMES
1.
Trivial Pursuit Genus III — £30.
2.
Scrabble — £9.
3.
Screwball Scramble — £11.
4.
Frustration — £7.
5.
Mousetrap — £12.50.
6.
Junior Monopoly — £8.
7.
Pictionary — £25.
8.
Twister — £9.
9.
Giggle Wiggle — £17.
10.
Atmosfear — £22.
All tables compiled by the British Association of Toy Retailers.
Sad farewell to brave Kelly, 11 after she plans her own funeral
Simon Trump
NO ONE was brave enough to grant the last wish of remarkable 11-year-old Kelly Good.
She chose the music for her own funeral and pleaded: ‘Don't let anybody be sad.’
Mourners tried not to cry yesterday, but most failed.
They were too distraught.
Few could have hoped to show a courage almost as strong as Kelly's when she learned that her heart and lung transplant had failed.
She knew she was to die.
Soon.
So she calmly sat down with deaconess Pat Phillips to plan the funeral.
Some of Kelly's classmates lost the fight to hold back the tears as soon as her coffin was carried down the aisle.
The organist spiritedly played Art Garfunkel's Bright Eyes, the theme of Watership Down — her favourite book, but it brought little comfort.
An extract from the story telling how Hazel, the leader of a group of rabbits, comes to the end of his life, was read by the Rev Phillips — again, at Kelly's request.
‘The story tells how he left his body behind yet went on to other things,’ she said.
‘Kelly believed she too would go on to other things God had got planned for her.’
The happy melody of Morning has Broken followed, but the sadness of family and friends choked many of the words.
It was no easier for the mourners, at Kelly's parish church of St Mary's, in Newent, Gloucestershire, with Once In Royal David's City and the poignant The Colours of the Day.
Kelly, a victim of cystic fibrosis, died last Monday, ten months after her St Valentine's Day operation.
She made such a good recovery she was allowed home after just five weeks.
She was even able to give up her wheelchair and return to Picklenash School in early July and take part in the annual sports day.
Headmaster Jim Jones recalled her delight at winning the egg and spoon race.
‘The look on her face of sheer joy and pride that she had won was one I shall always remember,’ he said.
‘It wasn't a case of the other children letting her win — they were really trying to beat her and they couldn't.’
In August, Kelly was thrilled to be picked as the town's carnival queen.
But in the last months her body began to reject the donor organs and she and her parents, Mike and Sandra Good, were told there was nothing more doctors could do for her.
Mr Jones said: ‘Even when she knew she was dying, her concern was for other people, not herself.
She asked me to have two trees planted in the school playing field in her memory to provide shade for children in the summer.
‘The memory of her determination and courage will always stay with us.’
In life Kelly set herself the toughest challenges, and she met them head on.
In death she left that one tough challenge to those she left behind…
‘Don't let anybody cry.’
To lesser people than Kelly it was just too much to ask.
Mick Hucknall
SIMPLY Red singer Mick Hucknall has called off two sell-out concerts on doctor's orders.
He was told he could suffer permanent damage to his vocal cords if he went ahead with the shows at Birmingham's National Exhibition Centre.
Hucknall complained of a sore throat after Saturday's Wembley show.
BBC has touch of Frost too…
THE BBC yesterday launched an £80 million line-up for winter and the New Year.
A sunshine-filled adaption of Peter Mayle's A Year In Provence with John Thaw and Lindsay Duncan is expected to be one of the viewing highlights on BBC1 in the grey months ahead.
David Frost kicks off a new series of Sunday breakfast current affairs shows by interviewing Premier John Major, Clive James hosts a new series titled Fame In The Twentieth Century, and Selina Scott will present show business and media magazine Entertainment Express.
Popular drama includes the thriller Gallowglass by Barbara Vine, pen-name of Ruth Rendell.
BBC2 has scheduled three theme nights, including A Night Of Love on the eve of Valentine's Day.
Clive Anderson defects from Channel 4 to chair the comic panel game Notes And Queries on BBC2.
New comedy comes from Jasper Carrott and Lenny Henry while old favourites include Casualty, Spender, Love Hurts and Lovejoy.
Jimmy Souness dies
THE father of Liverpool manager Graeme Souness has died in hospital.
Jimmy Souness, who was a school cleaner, had a history of heart disease which runs in the family.
His son underwent a triple heart bypass operation earlier this year.
Graeme, above, was last night at the family home in Edinburgh.
Driver beats 2,640ft fall
ENGINEER Windsor Rees plunged half a mile down a mountainside in his Land-Rover and walked away with just a graze.
Windsor, 49, of Mid Glamorgan, was trapped inside the jeep as it toppled over and kept on rolling.
Yesterday he described his ordeal as ‘like being in a tumble drier on full speed’.
A Land Rover spokesman said: ‘Our vehicles are not designed to tumble down mountains but they are built for a tough life.’
Cheap at a glance
MOTORISTS will soon be able to tell at a glance whether it is cheaper to buy their next car abroad.
Makers have been persuaded to publish lists of prices in 10 EC countries.
Euro competition chief Sir Leon Brittan has been pushing for the guide since a survey found British cars were an average 59 per cent dearer than the cheapest Continental prices.
The cost of right-hand drive and extras will also be shown.
Women in ritual death
A WOMAN was sent to Broadmoor indefinitely yesterday for an occult killing.
Tracy Barrett, 20, stabbed black magic follower Ian Clark, 59, several times with six steak knives.
Reading Crown Court heard eccentric loner Mr Clark, of Langley, Berks, may have inflicted the fatal injuries himself.
Barrett admitted unlawful wounding.
20p on gallon of petrol to help save the world
Paul Wilenius, Political Editor
PETROL prices would soar by 20p a gallon under a radical package of measures aimed at slashing pollution in Britain.
Speed limiting devices to stop cars going faster than 70mph and lorries more than 60mph could be fitted to try to cut fuel consumption.
Under the Green crackdown, petrol-guzzling big cars would also be more heavily taxed.
The proposals are the latest stage in the Government's battle against global warming.
Even home owners would be hit.
Gas and electricity bills would rise by at least three per cent as a tax on carbon fuels is brought in.
Burning coal, gas and oil all produces carbon dioxide and adds to the greenhouse effect.
Environment Secretary Michael Howard said the higher prices would be worth paying as climate change was an ‘issue of concern to everybody’.
He added: ‘This is why I have launched, for the first time, a major debate of this scale on an environment issue’.
Interested groups such as businessmen, shoppers and environmentalists will be given three months to give their views.
The Government is under intense pressure from the EC to force more people to think Green.
It must also follow up its commitment to the Climate Change Convention signed and championed by Prime Minister John Major at the Rio Earth Summit in June.
Last night the RAC condemned the plans.
A spokesman said: ‘The emphasis on businessmen, industry chiefs and environmentalists ignores the inherent dependence that ordinary citizens have on their cars.’
The Liberal Democrats' Simon Hughes said the proposals were doomed to gather dust unless they were backed by Treasury money.
Andrew Warren, director of the Association for the Conservation of Energy said: ‘It is vital this consultation is swiftly followed by programmes to cut energy waste.’
Eastern Electricity, the largest regional power company, has signed a five-year deal with PowerGen, which it predicted would help safeguard miners' jobs.
The £100 million-a-year contract is conditional on PowerGen agreeing a parallel deal with British Coal.
Don't shoot me
A GUNMAN screamed for mercy after murdering a teenager in a sports shop, a court heard yesterday.
The lone killer pleaded ‘God help me.
I didn't mean it, I didn't mean it’ when he came under fire himself, Belfast's Crown Court was told.
Anthony Cartmill, 23, of Armagh, denies murdering student Robin Farmer, 19, last December.
It's alleged Cartmill was caught red-handed when his escape was barred by the automatic locking door of the shop in the village of Moy, Co Armagh.
The court heard that Mr Farmer, who was shot four times, died saving his father Robert by pushing him to the floor and shouting a warning when he spotted the gunman.
Robert Farmer called for his shop manager who fired on the gunman using his own legally held pistol.
The killer was not hit but lay pleading for mercy.
The case continues.
Novel note at £66,000
A LETTER by author Charlotte Bronte sold for £66,000 yesterday.
Posted on August 24, 1847, from the Yorkshire village of Haworth, the letter was to publishers Smith & Elder introducing her novel Jane Eyre.
It was signed in Charlotte's male pen name.
A private collector paid more than twice the expected price at the Sotheby's sale.
Boy put in post
BULLY postmen put a boy of nine in a mail bag and threatened to post him.
Lance Rees was set on as he passed the sorting office in Withernsea, Humberside, on his way to school.
His mother Kathleen told an industrial tribunal: ‘The postmen put a sack over his head and threatened to post him to Hull.
‘Lance had trouble getting to sleep after the incident and is now scared of passing the Post Office.’
Postmen Andrew Holt, 23, Jonathan Atkins, 19, and Damon Shearer, 20, all of Withernsea, were sacked for the prank.
They told the hearing in Hull that Lance was pestering them.
Mr Holt said: ‘The boy started kicking and punching Mr Shearer and Mr Atkins.
I picked up a bag and jokingly said, ‘If you don't go we'll bag you up and send you to Hull’.
He then walked out.’
The three are claiming unfair dismissal.
The case continues.
I see 1993 as a year of extreme agony for Diana
Chris Hutchins
Astrologer Penny Thornton's secret meetings with Princess.
THE devastating flames that swept through Windsor Castle did not simply damage part of Britain's heritage.
It was a potent warning of a profound upheaval in the Royal Family — and, most importantly, in the life of Princess Diana.
Astrologer Penny Thornton, who counselled the princess through six turbulent years, says: ‘This time is an enormous test of the health of a woman who is extremely vulnerable to emotional pressures.
In many ways it is unfair.’
Penny fears that the strain could push Diana back into the binge-and-fast agonies of bulimia.
‘We may soon witness the recurrence of all those awful health problems which made Diana so terribly ill,’ says Penny.
‘If that happens then she could be laid up and out of circulation for a very long time.
‘I am not going to get into what kind of therapy she might find herself in, but clearly she would need all the help she could get from whatever source was available.
‘If ever she needed spiritual and therapeutic guidance, it's now.’
Penny, who was the only astrologer accurately to predict the current crisis, five years ago in her book Romancing The Stars, says Diana's astrological chart predicts that 1993 will be a devastating year for her, but just as bad for the rest of the royals.
‘You have the Royal Family sitting in an ivory tower which has not only had its foundations rocked — it's on fire,’ says Penny.
‘The fire at Windsor was an allegory of what is going on in their lineage, in their family.
For goodness sake, how much more of a statement do you need than your house burning down?
‘It had to be Windsor, too — not Balmoral or Sandringham but the castle that goes right back to the Normans — and the Queen's favourite chapel, stripped to a skeleton of its former self.
‘That's an allegory of what will happen.
But the positive point is that when the space has been cleared, new things can come in.’
But before that the Royals are going to have to endure a disturbing time.
‘The Queen, the Queen Mother, Prince Charles, Prince Andrew — even Anne and Philip — all have planets in the same area of the zodiac,’ she says.
‘So we have now got Pluto and Saturn pressing their attentions on those areas of the Royal Family's charts.
‘We are going to see a year of unparalleled crisis in the 12 months ahead.
‘Pluto is renowned for bringing up things that are buried, so we are going to see revealed things that have remained secret for years.
‘Pluto will strip away everything, eliminate everything.
‘But all this has to be seen in the context of what is going to happen to Britain and indeed the world in a climate of great tension between nations.’
Penny's book Romancing The Stars suggested that Prince Charles was finding it difficult to blend his spiritual inner values with his outer role, and that meant he was retreating further into himself and widening the gulf between himself and Diana.
‘While in times past a royal wife would be expected simply to put up with a situation no matter how desperate, the Princess of Wales belongs to a generation that has come to expect greater things from life and certainly from relationships,’ she wrote.
‘Whereas Charles may suffer in silence and put up with an unsatisfactory relationship, Diana's chart shows she cannot live without love.
‘The all-or-nothing flavour to Diana's emotional life suggests that if she were seriously unhappy in her marriage she would have the courage and determination to end it…as far as the astrology is concerned we would be looking towards the early 1990s.’
Penny believes that Diana will survive all these crises — because she is a born survivor.
‘Diana is very good at facing a situation,’ she says.
‘She isn't somebody who seeks a refuge in fantasy or in flattering statements.
She can know the worst.
‘Once she knows that this is the way the cards have fallen she's not going to say ‘I can't do it, I can't cope with it’ and whinge.
‘We are talking about crises here and when the chips are down Diana is a very tough child.
She's capable of doing very well in a major crisis.
‘Yes, Cancerians do whinge and whine.
It's a temperamental thing.
But when the crunch comes she gets on with it.
She's a great survivor.
‘As for these comments about her being an arch manipulator, we can look back on anyone's life and review situations from a certain perpective and see them as manipulative or self-seeking or whatever.
‘But I would say that underneath it all Diana is a survivor and she will do anything to survive.
And I would see that as a quality, not a fault.
‘Because at the end of the day, if you don't survive, what are people going to say —‘What a shame’?
Isn't it surely better to have survived?
‘I think that Diana will do what she has to in order to survive.
‘I would not consider her ruthless in the sense of deliberately hurting anyone, but she will protect her position and protect her children fiercely.
Penny believes that both Diana and Charles have suffered from the break-up of the marriage, and that there will be no ‘winner’ in the battles to come.
She is certain, however, that the separation will end in divorce.
‘There will be no reconciliaton,’ she says firmly.
‘And I suggest that Diana will remarry at some point.
I don't see how she could ever be Queen.
‘But there is nothing intrinsically wrong with Diana's chart, whereas I can look at Charles's chart and say I think there is something that prevents him from making the throne.
‘That isn't to say that he doesn't have qualities of kingship.
But he represents a different style of monarchy, a different style of man from perhaps Prince Andrew, who might have made a much more typical Windsor king.
‘Andrew is much more one of ‘the firm’.
He is also the favourite and in many ways he has more charisma.
He is more conservative with a small c.
‘He would have carried on doing things the same way.
He wouldn't have attacked architects or gone on about ecology.
He's a carpet-and-slippers man who would be happy to run the firm as it has always been run.’
Penny has long resisted pressures to reveal details of her special relationship with the Princess of Wales but decided to do so after other sources inaccurately reported on it.
‘I read ridiculous things like Diana arriving on my doorstep in a pair of jeans which were absolute nonsense and fabrication,’ she says.
‘In fact she has never been to my home.
‘I have always gone to see her at Kensington Palace — well, I wasn't going to see her in a railway siding, was I?
‘Although I tended not to write about her once we got to know each other, she has never asked me not to publish anything.
‘Now I just hope that she manages to get through 1993.
‘It is going to be a colossal year for her and she will need to draw on every positive lesson she has ever learned if she is to get through it.’
Shame of Arsenal star's dad
THE father of Arsenal and England football star Paul Merson conned shopkeepers out of thousands of pounds, a court heard yesterday.
Charles Merson, 59, posed as a salesman for a tobacco firm and persuaded newsagents and off-licences that he could get goods at a discount price, John McGuinness, prosecuting, told Isleworth Crown Court.
‘He would enter their premises purporting to be the representative of a large company which sold cigarettes or alcohol at discounted prices.
‘He had knowledge about the form of such discounts and he was plausible,’ said Mr McGuinness.
‘His victims genuinely believed he could obtain goods at cheaper prices than they got from their usual outlets.
‘He would either go with the victims or meet them at the Macro warehouse in North Acton.
‘He would direct the victim to park and go into the warehouse, showing that he had access.
‘He would come out, indicate that the goods had been ordered and ask the victim for payment in cash.
‘He would disappear again and this time he would not reappear,’ said Mr McGuinness.
‘By the time they became suspicious and went into the warehouse, the defendant had gone.’
Merson, of Wembley, admitted three charges of obtaining money by deception but disputed the amounts.
He will be sentenced next month.
£485,000 for train widow
THE family of bank executive Stephen Loader, 34, who died in the 1988 Clapham rail disaster, was awarded £485,000 damages yesterday.
Widow Gillian Loader, 35, of Chandlers Ford, Hants, shares the High Court award with daughter Sally, 10, and son Timothy, seven.
So far £9.5 million has been paid out over the crash in December four years ago, which killed 35 people.
Firms catch a £6bn cold
COLDS have cost British industry £6 billion this year, it was revealed yesterday.
They accounted for nearly one-third of the £20 billion lost through absenteeism.
A CBI spokeswoman said: ‘The common cold has been a real problem.’
The only people cheered by the figures were cold cure producers — victims spent £172 million on remedies last year.
Detective's affair halts trial of death plot husband
Ian Key
A DRAMATIC revelation of a sex scandal halted the trial of a husband accused of plotting to kill his second wife yesterday.
He walked free from court after after it was revealed that a detective in the case was sleeping with his first wife.
The relationship came to light when a mysterious note was handed to a barrister at an earlier hearing.
Businessman Timothy Tindell was cleared as police launched an investigation into the affair between Detective Constable David Weatherill and Tindell's ex-wife Victoria.
Shaun Spencer, prosecuting, said: ‘It was a complete bombshell when we were informed that the officer had, for a number of months, an affair with the defendant's former wife.
‘Any defendant has a fundamental right to a fair trial.
The integrity of the officer in the case was a most important factor and the impartiality of the officer in this case is rendered, at the very least, questionable.’
The case was so tainted the prosecution could offer no further evidence, Mr Spencer told Leeds Crown Court.
Police had continually opposed bail applications by Tindell who spent a year in custody.
He is is now planning legal action to get compensation.
The prosecution had claimed that the furniture factory boss resolved to kill his second wife Helen when she walked out on him.
He was accused of asking labourer William Coleman to stab Helen, a nurse, to death with a screwdriver as she left work at Pinderfield's Hospital, Wakefield.
Coleman backed out of the deal and tipped his victim off.
While a court was being urged to hold Mr Tindell, 28, in custody in May, detective Mr Weatherill was seeing his ex-wife.
There was ‘deep and continuing’ acrimony between Tindell and Victoria and a dispute over the custody of a child, said Mr Spencer.
Robert Smith, defending, said: ‘This is a very serious state of affairs, not least because the defendant has been in custody for at least 12 months.
The clock cannot be turned back.
‘The facts were not brought to the attention of the Crown Prosecution Service when bail was opposed.
‘There will have to be a very full investigation through the Police Complaints Authority.’
Judge Donald Herrod added: ‘This is a very dramatic turn of events and it is right that this prosecution should not continue.’
Tindell, of Wakefield, had denied soliciting to murder Helen.
A charge of possessing a gun and silencer was ordered to be left on the file.
As he left court he said only that he would be seeking legal advice on a compensation claim.
West Yorkshire police confirmed they would be investigating the case.
Police killer's pal locked up
KILLER'S accomplice Peter Grenfell was yesterday sent to Rampton top security hospital by an Old Bailey judge.
Grenfell was with triple murderer Nicholas Vernage when he stabbed Police Sergeant Alan King and attacked two other officers.
The court heard, Grenfell, 29, of Leyton, east London, who was convicted of wounding the two constables, is mentally ill.
Please tell us where our daughter is buried
THE parents of missing Nicola Payne begged yesterday for news about their daughter — even if it is only a clue to where her body is buried.
It is just a year since Nicola disappeared, leaving behind a baby and a boyfriend.
And her distraught mother admitted: ‘I think she has been murdered.’
Nicola was 18 when she vanished in a fogbound park near her home in Woodend, Coventry, on December 14 last year.
She had left boyfriend Jason Cooke looking after their eight-month-old son, Owen, while she fetched baby clothes from her parents' home.
Nicola was never seen again.
And a huge police search yielded no clues.
‘We won't rest until she has been found,’ her mother Marilyn Payne, 46, said yesterday.
‘I am convinced Nicky was murdered by someone local.
Someone must have seen something.
‘We are desperate for them to come forward.’
Boyfriend Jason, 20, looks after baby Owen, now nearly 20 months old.
‘When little Owen comes to stay, my husband John and I always say ‘Give Mummy a kiss goodnight’,’ Mrs Payne said.
‘He always reaches out and kisses Nicky's photograph.
It's heartbreaking.’
Fanatics bomb squirrel centre
ANIMAL rights activists are thought to have planted fire bombs which wrecked part of a forestry research station yesterday.
Firemen found more than a dozen incendiary devices in the offices near Borden, Hants, used by scientists to study squirrels.
A police spokesman said: ‘Only one went off.
If the rest had exploded it would all have been destroyed.’
£500 fine if children don't belt up
Paul Wilenius, Political Editor
PARENTS face a £500 fine if their children do not wear seatbelts in the car.
All youngsters will have to belt up in cars, vans and lorries from February 2 under tough laws unveiled by the Government yesterday.
It is hoped the lives of four children will be saved each year, and 50 serious injuries avoided.
At present, six children are killed and 400 hurt in a year in crashes because they were not wearing a restraint.
Roads minister Kenneth Carlisle unveiled the measures after six months of consultation with road safety groups.
The rules mean any child under three in the front seat of any vehicle will have to be strapped into a special restraining belt.
Any child under 12 and less than five feet tall will have to belt up in the front or rear.
‘The aim is to make seatbelt wearing compulsory wherever it is practical, with the minimum of exceptions,’ said Mr Carlisle.
‘I am particularly pleased children will now be more fully protected.’
The move came as a new report revealed there are enough vehicles in London to fill a 75-lane M25.
The number is expected to rise, from 2.32 million to 3.4 million by 2011, says the study by the CBI's London region.
It is vital to cut car commuting, according to the survey.
It recommends more park-and-ride schemes, greater flexibility with working hours and increased bus priority areas.
‘Congestion is London's biggest problem,’ said Ian Reeves, head of their transport task force.
Phantom ferry captain jailed
A BOAT skipper who took £100,000 in bookings for a ferry service which did not exist has been jailed for 15 months.
Captain Geoffrey Benstead, 53, accepted money from hundreds of customers, although his British Iberian Line had no ship, no crew and no port.
In October a jury at Winchester Crown Court found him guilty of theft, perjury and fraudulent trading.
They heard how Benstead of Meare, Somerset, spent thousands on brochures advertising the Poole-Bilbao service.
But the bubble burst when he failed to raise the cash for the scheme.
Rovercoats
HUNDREDS of women could be wearing fur coats made from dog skins.
They are being sold as ‘wolf fur’ for about £400 in German shops, but are actually imported from the Far East where thousands of dogs are purpose-bred and then slaughtered, says the Animal Protection League.
Berlin shop owner Kerstin Drobnewski, who has one of the coats, said: ‘It's terrible.
I'll never wear it again.’
Hospital gets the taste for McDonald's
BRITAIN'S first hospital burger takeaway opened yesterday to a cool welcome from the hospital's own catering and nutrition experts.
The £750,000 McDonald's burger bar has been installed at the major London teaching hospital Guy's with the slogan McDonald's Is Good For You.
Guy's senior dietician, Karen Sorensen, said: ‘You may say the dietary director refused to comment.’
Senior hospital caterer Jimmy Kikozi said: ‘I have nothing to say about their food, but I imagine we will now see people wearing happy hats around the place.
‘Spiritually, I hear McDonald's is a most enlightening experience.
Nutiritionally, I would hate to comment.’
But the Guy's Hospital Trust money men who gave McDonald's a lease were more enthusiastic.
‘I don't really believe that eating a McDonald's a couple of times a week, as I do, is bad for anybody,’ said commercial director Lee Soden.
‘We welcome the investment.
The money we make goes directly to patients.’
Trust chairman Sir Philip Harris said: ‘We are very pleased to be the first hospital to work with McDonald's.’
One of the first customers, outpatient Peter Pearson, 60, commented: ‘It's marvellous.’
And McDonald's UK president, Paul Preston, said: ‘The restaurant has been packed all morning.
‘Our food is healthy and low-fat, and we publish all our dietary information.
So it's perfect for a hospital.’
Freeze suicide attempt foiled
RESCUE teams foiled a bizarre suicide bid when they stumbled across a man trying to freeze himself to death.
The 37-year-old took an overdose of painkillers and lay in sub-zero conditions with just a sleeping bag.
But he was saved 12 hours later by fell rescuers who started a search after they found the man's abandoned car.
The unnamed man disappeared from his Darlington, Co Durham, home on Saturday night.
After dumping his Fiesta at a reservoir near Barnard Castle, he trudged to Cauldren Snout waterfall at Teesdale.
Fired for doing too much work
A POLICE car pound supervisor is fighting to get his job back after he was sacked for working too hard.
Tony Adewumi, 53, clocked up huge amounts of overtime, often putting in shifts of up to 14 hours to help him pay of debts, an industrial tribunal heard.
He was fired for serious misconduct when he continued to put in extra hours despite an overtime ban and after bosses at the NCP pound in central London alleged that time sheets had been altered.
Tony, of east London, was reinstated on appeal but claims he was then constructively dismissed.
The case continues.
Tragic boy payout
CRIPPLED teenager Steven Nash won £674,500 damages and the admiration of a High Court judge in London yesterday for battling against ‘grievous disabilities’ and passing eight GCSEs.
Wheelchair-bound and brain-damaged Steven, 17, of Bristol, was deprived of oxygen at birth.
Bristol's Southmead General Hospital admitted liabilty.
Mr Justice Arlott said he was ‘lost in admiration’ for Steven, who is now studying A-Levels.
House agents tell white lies
ESTATE agents have come under fire for misleading advertisements.
Many are ‘blatant untruths’ that are only revealed when potential buyers visit a house.
‘Like the builder who claimed his development was in the ‘quiet countryside’ when it was next to a military base,’says the Advertising Standards Authority in a report today.
It received more than 100 complaints this year.
Juvenile's crime spree
A BOY went on a crime spree after realising he couldn't be locked up.
The offending only ended when he turned 15 and could be remanded in custody.
He was sentenced to a year's detention at Waltham Forest Youth Court, East London, yesterday after admitting 47 charges including burglary, drug possession and assault.
Last rest for tragic lovers
GOLFER Paul Hurring and his sweetheart Charlotte Turtle, who died in each other 's arms in a freak accident, were buried yesterday in the same grave.
Paul, 23, and Charlotte, 21, were killed by boiler fumes as they slept at her mother's home at Horsham, Sussex.
For the funeral attended by 150 family and friends at Crawley, Charlotte was dressed in her favourite ball gown.
‘They had only been together a few weeks,’ said Charlotte's father, nightclub owner Henry Turtle, 47.
‘Now they are together forever.’
Tip school no 2 shut
A SECOND Welsh valley school was shut yesterday over fears of a coal-tip slide.
Governors at Bargoed, Mid Glamorgan, decided on the move until the county council convinces them the tip above Ysgol Gyfun Cwm Rhymni lower school is safe.
Pupils will be taught in the upper school, across the valley, until governors get the council's full report.
A week ago another school, Tredegar Comprehensive, three miles away, was shut after a tip slid into the yard.
Charred curtains hang from the bedroom where the children were found
Safe havens for all
Paul Wilenius, Political Editor
PREMIER John Major is urgently drawing up plans to create safe havens for refugees in the bloody battlefields of Bosnia.
As pressure mounted last night to sanc tion military intervention in Yugoslavia, he was concentrating on protecting thousands of homeless, starving civilians.
Setting up safe havens for persecuted Moslems would be a re-run of his success in protecting the Kurds in northern Iraq, a move which earned Mr Major world-wide credit.
The Moslems would be protected by powerful air power, including RAF jets, rather than troops on the ground.
Defence chiefs were yesterday working out how to flood the area with more troops armed with heavy artillery, radar, and ground-to-air missiles.
Government sources confirmed that Britain would no longer stand in the way of a UN resolution to use military force to police a no-fly zone over Bosnia.
But Mr Major is desperately worried about the safety of the 2,500 British troops escorting humanitarian missions.
He fears they could become targets of revenge attacks if Serb planes are shot down by United Nation forces.
Everything depends on the new UN resolution being worked on by France, the US and Britain.
Mr Major and Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd will make it clear in the coming days that British forces must have protection — or they will be pulled back to safe areas.
All they have to protect themselves are Milan anti-tank missiles and light arms.
Defence Secretary Malcolm Rifkind has warned any offensive ground action would involve more than 100,000 men and lead to heavy casualties.
Mr Major, who held a crisis meeting in Downing Street yesterday, said: ‘We need to weigh the desirability of enforcing the no-fly zone against the possible impact of that on UN humanitarian efforts and the safety of our own troops.
‘If enforcement of the no-fly zone put the UN operation at risk, the main losers might well be the people of Bosnia.’
But he admitted: ‘We have never ruled out a possible need to enforce the zone.’
Labour leader John Smith bluntly told the Commons: ‘The time has now come for effective international action.’
Liberal Democrat leader Paddy Ashdown, in Sarajevo on a fact-finding mission, said: ‘What these people need more than anything else is peace.
The shame of it is we have the capacity to provide them with that peace but we've decided it isn't worth it.’
Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic branded the no-fly enforcement calls as ‘an excuse to embroil western powers in military action in Bosnia’.
He warned that if Bosnian aircraft were destroyed it could provoke open war.
‘Such an attack would end the impartial role of UN forces,’ he said.
‘It is likely that the Bosnian Serb civilian population and parliament would consider it an act of war.’
Chess player Bobby Fischer was last night charged with defying US and UN sanctions by playing against Boris Spassky in Yugoslavia.
Californian Fischer, 49, spat on a Treasury department letter warning of possible charges before the match started in September.
He is still in Yugoslavia.
Bishop quizzed over sex claim
Simon Trump
THE Bishop of Gloucester was in hiding last night after police quizzed him about alleged indecent behaviour towards a novice monk.
The Rt Rev Peter Ball was arrested but later released on bail without charge for the police to continue their inquiries.
He was taken off duty by the Archbishop of Canterbury.
The 17-year-old alleged victim made the complaint at a police station in Brixton, South London, on Saturday.
The bishop's spokesman Canon Andy Radford said: ‘It must be emphasised that no charges have been brought against the bishop and the allegations about him are unsubstantiated.
‘Moreover, the bishop has a proven record of outstanding pastoral work, particularly amongst young people,’ he said.
Canon Radford added: ‘The Archbishop of Canterbury has been informed and has been in touch with Bishop Peter.
As is customary whenever such allegations are made, appropriate inquiries will be conducted by the Church.
‘The highest standards of personal morality are expected of bishops, clergy and all Christians who have personal responsibility for others.
‘Meanwhile, the archbishop has instructed Bishop Peter to take a rest from his official duties and avoid the glare of publicity while these distressing allegations are investigated.
‘The archbishop has Bishop Peter in his prayers at this difficult time.’
The bishop's assistant, the Bishop of Tewkesbury the Rt Rev Jeremy Walsh, said: ‘This is a very great shock.
‘People in the diocese will be devastated that these allegations have been made.
‘I am personally extremely sorry.
They have, of course, been denied by Bishop Peter.
‘The work of the diocese will go on and we look forward to the time when he can be back with us and working amongst us again.’
Bishop Peter is one of the Church's best-known characters.
He refuses to wear the ceremonial purple of a bishop, preferring instead simple monastic robes.
He sleeps on the floor, rises at 4.10am, is in his own words ‘fanatical’ about dusting, and has taken a vow of chastity and celibacy.
As a student at Cambridge he played squash for the University and three years ago he was set to take up stock car racing.
With his twin brother Michael — now Bishop of Truro — he founded a monastic order, the Community of the Glorious Ascension, in 1960.
The twins are still members of the order they founded — making them two of only four bishop-monks in the Church of England this century.
The Community of the Glorious Ascension was horrified last night to hear of his arrest.
Brother Kenneth, Prior of the order, which is based in Telford, Salop, said: ‘Members are called to be chaste and, in modern terms, must not sleep around.
‘If they do not have a lifelong partner, they are not supposed to be sleeping or have sexual relationships with anyone.
‘The two bishops are still part of the order but have been released from certain requirements.
‘They still remain chaste and celibate but they are released from the vows of poverty.’
Told of the allegations, Brother Kenneth said: ‘I don't believe it.
I can't say any more until I've spoken to Peter.’
Bishop Peter has been bishop of Gloucester for just eight months and Prince Charles was among the guests at his enthronement in April.
In his former post as Suffragan (assistant) Bishop of Lewes, Bishop Peter gave the sermon at the funeral of IRA victim MP Ian Gow in front of 650 mourners, including Margaret Thatcher and Sir Geoffrey Howe.
He described the terrorists as ‘discredited and unwanted’ and said it was clear they had only one purpose — the triumph of evil.
During his time in Lewes he prayed in a converted pigsty and gave the chance to young Christians to live in his house while developing their faith.
In an interview in 1983 Bishop Peter said: ‘I have a house full of young people who spend a year with me praying and working in the community to get closer to God, and I let them impinge on my ministry.
‘I sleep on the floor and have a bare house.’
The allegation sent shockwaves through Bishop Peter's diocese yesterday.
Rev Jim Caterer, vicar of Standish, said: ‘I never say something is impossible but in this case I wish I could say just that.
‘He has always been well known for having a good and natural relationship with young people.
‘He does have a natural way of dealing with young people.
‘I think he has their respect.’
Rev Dr John Hunter, minister of Frampton on Severn Congregational Church, said: ‘I'm very shocked.
‘I knew absolutely nothing about this.
‘Bishop Peter is a very unusual person to be a bishop because he is quite unconventional.
‘But he is a very popular bishop and I think he has a lot to give the diocese.’
Sam sues her father for £1m
Nick Craven and Adrian Lee
TOPLESS model turned singer Sam Fox is suing her father Patrick for more than £1 million.
She has issued a High Court writ against the man who guided her career until earlier this year when a family fued drove them apart.
Sam, 26, and her company, Samantha Fox Ltd, claim he owes Pounds 1,057,428.
She also wants property returned and is claiming daily interest on the money due to her.
A lawyer who has seen the writ said last night: ‘It is a typical dispute between two ex-business partners.’
Minister to unveil £1m lottery plan
DETAILS of the Government's £1 million National Lottery will be revealed today.
Heritage Secretary Peter Brooke is also said to be planning a number of smaller cash payouts to keep punters' attention.
The National Lottery Bill has sparked a storm of controversy with charities, football pools companies and bingo halls claiming it will hit their takings.
Rival gambling enterprises fear the lottery, aimed at raising funds for the arts, sport and charities, will cost them more than £1 billion a year.
Liberal Democrat National Heritage spokesman Robert Maclennan said: ‘Some charities could actually find themselves out of pocket if the lottery is allowed to eat away at their income from raffles, lotteries and donations.’
Major hails victory over inflation
PREMIER John Major hailed the start of economic recovery yesterday despite a nine per cent fall in retail sales.
Mr Major based his optimism on figures which showed factory output was rising.
The price of goods leaving the factory is the lowest for a generation.
Mr Major said: ‘I think that is the clearest possible sign yet that we are winning the battle against inflation.’
A Confederation of British Industry survey showed shoppers still were reluctant to spend.
Midland boss defends bank interest rates
MIDLAND chief Sir Peter Walters yesterday defended his bank's record of passing on interest rate cuts to customers.
In a 30-minute meeting with Chancellor Norman Lamont, he warned against ‘unfounded criticism’ of high street lenders by small firms.
They claim the banks are slow to reduce interest rates and impose high charges which threaten business.
Sir Peter, the first of the bank chiefs called to the Treasury to explain their policy, dismissed the allegations, telling the chancellor base rate cuts were passed on to 98 per cent of business customers.
He also claimed interest rate profit margins had declined over the past year.
Bosses of the other three major High Street banks will meet the chancellor individually this week.
Put the brake on car crime
BRITAIN'S car crime epidemic must be brought to a halt, said Labour yesterday.
Shadow home secretary Tony Blair called for a national strategy to tackle the growing problem.
More than 1.5 million car crimes were committed last year, one in five by people under 21, a survey found.
Mr Blair said a recent Government campaign had focused on car security and failed to tackle the central problem of youth crime.
£1bn road work scheme
ROADS across Britain are to be boosted with a £1 billion improvement package.
The plan includes 24 new bypasses and relief roads, 3,400 safety schemes and measures to reduce jams.
Councils will also get £120 million for repairs.
‘This sum is a record,’ said Transport Secretary John MacGregor yesterday as he unveiled the scheme in the Commons.
Give me back my million daddy
Nick Craven and Adrian Lee
SAM Fox once said the thing she was most frightened of was ‘losing mum and dad’.
The former topless model turned singer couldn't have been closer to her father Pat Fox, and mother Carole, at the height of her glamour career.
As the cash poured in, and Sam became the nation's number one pin-up, her 48-year-old father was her biggest fan at first, then her manager.
But earlier this year, their relationship turned sour.
The family feud came to a head on Monday when the 26-year-old issued a High Court writ, suing the former builder for more than £1 million.
Sam and her company, Samantha Fox Ltd, claim he owes Pounds 1,057,428 and also wants property returned.
She is claiming daily interest at 15 per cent a year on the money she says she is owed.
Last night, her solicitor Tony Russell confirmed the writ was filed in the High Court and the case would be heard within a few months.
Sam claims her father breached the trust she placed in him and says he is holding on to her cash.
She is also demanding compensation for breach of trust.
The writ also shows a dispute over a bank account.
She claims more than £176,000 has been withdrawn.
‘It is a typical dispute between two former business partners,’ said a lawyer who has seen the writ.
‘Before it got to this stage there would undoubtedly have been letters flying between the two.
She obviously feels it cannot be resolved without going to court.’
Sam first made the headlines with her 38-inch bust almost 10 years ago when she was one of the winners in a newspaper beauty contest.
She was snapped up as one of the youngest ever Page Three girls but made her last topless appearance on her 21st birthday.
Unlike many former models, she enjoyed real success in the late Eighties as a pop star.
She has had eight Top 40 hits in Britain, but is now more popular in India, Japan and America.
Earlier this year Sam, who has earned up to £500,000 a year from her work, was named as Britain's 179th richest woman.
Her fortune was put at £5.5 million — but she denied it.
The survey earned her a visit from the taxman.
Sam, who lives in a modest £70,000 semi in north London, also has a New York apartment and a villa on Spain's Costa Del Sol.
Sam fell out with her father shortly after the marriage of her parents, Pat and Carole, turned sour.
Before that, he was always there for her — even at the low points.
When Sam flopped as she hosted the 1989 Brit pop awards Pat was her shoulder to cry on.
He was there too when Sam's relationships ran into trouble — at various times she dated Australian bankrupt Peter Foster, ex-reporter Kit Miller and a Spanish bullfighter, Rafi Camino.
And when Sam was snapped topless in Majorca, it was her father who struggled with a photographer to try to save her honour.
The face of hope
FACE shining with sheer joy, brave Nicholas Killen gets into the Christmas spirit with his Santa hat and some early presents.
Nicholas, seven, touched the hearts of the nation when he lost his sight through cancer earlier this year, then was robbed of his home by fire.
The youngster, from Saltaire, West Yorks, was devastated when his toys and treasured mementoes given to him by Michael Jackson went up in flames.
Nicholas, who is living with his family in a tiny flat, hopes the damage will be repaired in time for Christmas.
He said yesterday: ‘I hope Santa brings me lots of nice things — but most of all I want my bedroom back.’
Aids killers let off
AIDS victims who deliberately pass on the HIV virus will not face criminal charges, it was announced yesterday.
Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke said it would be difficult to prove a sufferer, possibly made irrational by the knowledge they would die, infected another person through sex on purpose.
£85,000 for gin heir
GIN heir Anthony Gilbey won £85,000 against Suffolk police yesterday for being wrongly charged with gross indecency in a public toilet.
Outside the High Court after the award of £50,000 damages plus costs, the 59-year-old happily married father of three said: ‘It has been three-and-a-half years of absolute hell.’
I always did my best, says Bill
ROCKER Bill Wyman has admitted knowing his relationship with Mandy Smith while she was still a teenager was ‘morally wrong’.
The Rolling Stones guitarist said he was saddened by her frail health and still cared deeply for Mandy, now aged 22.
‘Deep down inside her is a very decent, caring, sweet person and I don't care what anyone says, I'll believe that until the day I die,’ said Bill, 56.
‘I know what happened in the early years was morally wrong.
But it happened.
I have always tried to do my best for Mandy.
‘I tried everything to make our relationship work.’
£1,100 dung dumping bill
FARMER David Cannon, who sprayed council offices with manure, escaped without a fine yesterday.
But a court at Bedlington, Northumberland, convicted him of criminal damage and ordered him to pay £1,100 for the damage.
Cannon, 63, of Morpeth, dumped the manure in a planning protest.
Brigitte's booby prize
BBC chiefs may cut parts of a chat between actress Brigitte Nielsen and Terry Wogan because it is too raunchy for TV.
In a pilot episode of Wogan's Friday night show the actress is seen grabbing hold of comedian Craig Charles and thrusting his head between her breasts.
‘I nearly suffocated,’ said Charles.
Pools win was foul-up
STUDENT Chris Smith was given £1,000 from a pools company — and then told: ‘Sorry, we've made a mistake.’
Chris, 20, had already decided what he would buy when Vernons admitted the blunder.
‘I couldn't believe it,’ said Chris, of Newcastle University.
Vernons, who have compensated Chris, said: ‘This was a rare occasion.’
Morse goes over the water
INSPECTOR Morse shelves his casebook and becomes a cross-Channel migrant when John Thaw and Lindsay Duncan, above, star in a TV version of Peter Mayle's bestseller, A Year in Provence.
The serial, about an English couple who quit the rat race to live the good and simple life in sunny France, is expected to be one of the highlights of BBC1's £80 million schedule for the winter months.
Thaw plays Peter Mayle, Lindsay Duncan is his wife, Annie.
The Mayle family dog has a walk-on role.
Popular drama will include a new thriller series, Gallowglass, by Barbara Vine — crime writer Ruth Rendell.
Bread writer Carla Lane has a new series, Luv.
Marti Caine is back with Your Best Shot, and Lenny Henry creates a new comic character in The Chef.
Documentaries include a BBC2 series on London Zoo.
Rape doctor delivered my baby, then he attacked me
Penny Wark
ANOTHER victim of evil Dr Tom Courtney has come forward to tell of the horrific ordeal he put her through.
The convicted Harley Steet rapist again misused his trust, drugging and then forcing himself upon a woman whose baby he had delivered.
Frightened Miss F said last night: ‘I opened the door and he stood there blocking my way.
‘He is a big man, a foot taller than me, and he tried to push me back and kissed me.
It wasn't a peck on the cheek, it was a rough, deep kiss.
‘I said, ‘Get lost’, and pushed past him and staggered off down the corridor.
I was shaking and sweating.
When I heard about his trial I couldn't stop shaking.’
Gynaecologist Courtney was convicted 16 days ago of two rapes and two indecent assaults on four young women he had drugged and attacked.
He was sentenced to just seven years.
During the trial seven other women revealed that he had also assaulted them and afterwards a senior detective said that Courtney could have abused 100 women.
TODAY believes Courtney's sentence is not enough.
Yesterday we won a vital victory in having Attorney General Sir Nicholas Lyell agree to look at the case.
If he refers it to the Court of Appeal, Courtney may well spend a proper period in jail.
Unless an appeal is lodged within 28 days of sentencing he could be free in a little over two years.
We have already told of another victim still too frightened to tell police of the day Courtney tried to rape her.
And still the horror stories go on.
Miss F met Courtney at the Royal Free Hospital when she had her baby by caesarean section.
He was a researcher but said he was a top consultant.
‘He delivered my daughter,’ she said.
‘I saw him several times a day and he asked about my baby's father.
‘I told him I had problems and he was concerned.
He kept asking me out.
Then at home he really pursued me.
‘He was pleasant and charming, a nicer man you couldn't meet.
I saw him like a father figure really.
‘After I saw him on a TV programme I phoned him.
He said we should meet for lunch so I went to his office.
‘He offered me a coffee.
I hadn't drunk more than a third of the cup when I started to feel dizzy and hot.
I said I felt ill, and got up to open the door.
‘I was lucky that he was worried about who might see us and allowed me to get away.
I managed to drive out of the hospital but I had to stop the car and was violently sick.
By the time I got back to my parents' house my face was grey.
I was groggy for hours.
‘I couldn't believe he drugged me because I saw him as a caring person, he had got me into his confidence.
He told me he was in a marriage of convenience.
I said I didn't go out with married men and didn't see him in a romantic way.’
She added: ‘At the time I didn't report it to the police because it would have been my word against a doctor's.
‘That made me feel powerless.
But that was 1987.
I hate to think how many women he has assaulted since then.’
Miss F, a London student, is now in her first relationship since the assault.
‘I don't live with my boyfriend now because I don't trust any men,’ she said.
‘You think there is anything sexual about a doctor's job.
But now I'm very conscious that Courtney knows every part of me.
It feels like an invasion.’
Inmates push evil Courtney down stairs
EVIL Tom Courtney was thrown down a flight of stairs after being confronted by angry fellow prisoners, it was claimed yesterday.
The multiple rapist, who has turned down the chance to serve his sentence in the safety of a solitary cell, was attacked at Highdown Prison, near Sutton, Surrey, according to a report on Thames Television.
As he begins his jail term Courtney, like all other sex offenders, is likely to be a target for the hatred of other inmates.
A prison source told TODAY last night: ‘Courtney does not see himself as a sex offender so he has not applied for Category C status.
‘This would mean that he had a solitary cell in a section of the prison with other sex offenders.’
A Home Office spokesman yesterday denied that any such incident involving Courtney had taken place at the prison.
12 days left for sentence appeal
ONLY 12 days are left for an appeal to be made against Tom Courtney's sentence.
He was jailed for seven years on November 30.
The Attorney General must refer his sentence to the Appeal Court within 28 days of that date.
Sir Nicholas Lyell responded to our campaign on Monday by calling for papers on Courtney.
Billericay MP Teresa Gorman is leading our protest in Parliament.
Readers should write to their MP.
Six held over fire torture girl, 16
Andrew Russell
FORENSIC experts last night tore apart a house where a teenage girl was allegedly tortured before being doused with petrol and turned into a human torch.
They were hunting for evidence in the horrific case which detectives have dubbed the worst since child killers and torturers Ian Brady and Myra Hindley.
Officers swooped on the rented terraced house in Moston, Manchester, and arrested four men and two women.
They are believed to include the married tenants.
The suspect house is just half a mile from the 16-year-old victim's family home.
But Suzanne Capper was dumped 10 miles away at a golf course near Stockport, Cheshire.
Suzanne, who left school in July, is clinging to life in the burns unit at Withington Hospital after being stripped, beaten and set on fire by captors who also shaved her head.
‘This was a horrific attack,’ said Detective Chief Superintendent Ron Astles.
‘You have to go back to the days of Brady and Hindley for an incident which compares to the horror.’
The critically-ill youngster had been staying with various people after walking out of home following rows with her stepfather John.
A close friend and neighbour said Suzanne was devasted when her mother Betty left home a year ago.
Brian Langley, who has known Suzanne since she was six, said: ‘Things started going wrong when her mum left.
John tried to hold the family together but it knocked everyone back.’
The blonde teenager, who had set her heart on becoming a hairdresser, was also upset at failing to find a job.
‘It knocked the stuffing out of her,’ said Mr Langley.
Police are puzzled at the motive for the attack.
Detective Superintendent David Higgins said: ‘One wonders at the of mentality of those responsible.
I can't imagine why anyone would do this to another human being.’
Greater Manchester police confirmed that six suspects are being questioned.
Detectives are applying to magistrates for permission to hold them for a further 24 hours.
Lamplugh kidnap charge
A MAN appeared in court yesterday charged with attempting to kidnap Lizzie Lamplugh, sister of missing estate agent Suzy.
Frenchman Anthony Jean Francis Bourgois, 20, of no fixed address, was remanded in custody until December 22 by Oxford magistrates.
He was also charged with threatening to kill Miss Lamplugh, 22, robbing her of a car and possessing two knives and a scalpel.
The offences are alleged to have been committed outside her home in Oxford on Sunday.
Swearing by Shakespeare
PRISONERS are brushing up their Shakespeare so they can learn new insults to hurl in jail.
Popular lines include abuse and curses like ‘You king of codpieces’ and ‘Thou odiferous stench’.
Lecturer Jane Wirgman began teaching the Bard's insults as a way of introducing Shakespeare to remand prisoners at her English classes in Norwich Prison, Norfolk.
Jane, 41, said: ‘I told them, ‘If you are going to swear you might as well do it properly’.
It is a bit of fun and a good way of making Shakespeare available to them.
‘A lot of prisoners would never dream of reading one of Shakespeare's plays because they fear being out of their depth.
But studying his insults can get them interested.’
Governor Bill Stewart said: ‘We are all in favour of prisoners studying the works of great writers.
‘These curses certainly sound better than the more common swearing you tend to hear in prisons.’
Some he may be hearing in future include: Thy food is such as has been breathed on by infected lungs,(Pericles)— useful for insulting prison cooks.
Thou crusty botch of nature,(Troilus and Cressida)— term of endearment to prison officers.
He has not so much brain as ear wax,(Troilus and Cressida)— to anyone slow on the uptake.
They have marvellous foul linen,(Henry V)— abuse of prison laundry staff.
Duke snubs Blandford baby heir
THE country's top aristocrat, the Duke of Marlborough, has still not seen his only grandson and future heir.
The Duke's eldest son Jamie Blandford, father of baby George, will be boycotting the traditional Christmas at Blenheim Palace as the rift deepens.
‘George is over four months old and my father has never seen him, so I can't tell you what he thinks,’ he told Hello! magazine.
Recovering drug addict Jamie, 38, says he is determined to have a good relationship with his son and break the ‘bad luck’ that has cursed the family for years.
But he would not be drawn about the prospect of being reunited with his estranged wife Becky or his affection for former girlfriend Arabella Tait.
Mind your language
START learning German now.
English is finished as a common language, but that's only according to a Frenchman.
‘English is irrelevant, useless.
The German language will spread permanently throughout middle and eastern Europe,’ says linguist Claude Hagege.
Funnily enough, German expert Hans-Martin Ruhe agrees.
‘Britain's influence is much weaker and countries are looking to Germany for a lead,’ he said.
Father of four is mown down
A MAN suspected of drunken driving was under arrest last night after a father-of-four was mown down and killed as he cycled home from work.
The 41-year-old victim died instantly when he was run over by a Bedford van less than a mile from his home in Witney, Oxon.
The driver, aged 31, was taken to the cells at Witney police station.
The cyclist's eldest child was peforming at his school's nativity play and was led off the stage to be told of his father's death.
‘It's a tragedy,’ said police.
Quiz over clean getaways
Ian Fletcher, Consumer Correspondent
A GIANT electrical company faces investigation over a free flights deal for shoppers.
Thousands have rushed to buy Hoover products, lured by an offer of two free air tickets to America for every item costing over £100.
More than 100,000 vacuum cleaners have been snapped up since the promotion was launched last month.
That means a potential 200,000 customers will be jetting off to the States.
The success of the sales gimmick has surprised everyone and led to seven-day working at the firm's Scottish factory.
Many stores have run out of vacuum cleaners — and hundreds are being offered in newspaper small ads at a bargain £60 as shoppers try to sell cleaners they never wanted in the first place.
But trading standards officers and the Consumers' Association are warning customers to scrutinise the small print.
Labour's consumer spokesman Nigel Griffiths has written to President of the Board of Trade Michael Heseltine following complaints over a previous Hoover offer of flights to Europe.
Consumers who were asked to nominate three dates for flying claimed the travel firm handling the offer has now told them the dates must be 30 days apart and to three different destinations.
Mr Griffiths said: ‘It is time the Government laid down proper guidelines to stop the public being duped.’
Trading standards officers in Strathclyde and Lothian regions yesterday reported that they had received dozens of queries over the offer.
‘We are not challenging the offer itself but we are challenging the presentation of it,’ said a spokesman.
‘People must check every line of the list of conditions that are included in the voucher agreements.’
The Consumers' Association said major concern centred on stipulations that the free flight vouchers could not be used with any free accommodation or free ownership offers unless authorised by Hoover.
It fears that may rule out anyone planning to stay with relatives or friends.
Hoover last night denied any restrictions and insisted the promotion was a no-strings attached deal.
‘This is a completely genuine offer and there is no need for customers to be caused any anxiety by misguided attacks,’ said a spokesman.
Mum killed by cancer cure
CANCER victim Jennifer Fowler beat her deadly disease but died from the cure, an inquest heard yesterday.
The radiotherapy treatment killed the cervical cancer in mother-of-four Jennifer, but it burned a hole in her bowel.
The 49-year-old divorcee from Bristol then developed complications with the blood supply to her legs.
Doctors were forced to amputate her right leg, but Jennifer died when a blood clot caused a pulmonary embolism.
Avon Coroner Paul Forrest recorded a verdict of death by natural causes.
Fed-up Fergie lets fly at Major
Charles Rae
THE Duchess of York hit out at Government cutbacks on cash to help people with drink and drugs problems yesterday.
Fergie voiced concern at Premier John Major's £565 million Community Care Bill as she opened a drug rehabilitation centre in London.
It is rare for a Royal to openly criticise Government policy.
The duchess may have discussed her plans to step into the political arena when she had dinner with her private secretary Jane Ambler and two mystery male companions the previous evening.
The cosy foursome spent the meal at a Chinese restaurant in west London deep in conversation.
At the opening of the new Self Help Addiction Recovery Programme (Sharp) project yesterday the duchess discussed the problems of drug and alcohol abuse with clients and other guests including rock star Eric Clapton and his ex-wife Patti Boyd.
She told them: ‘There are more places like Sharp needed particularly as a result of the Government cut backs.’
Critics like the duchess believe the Government's allocation of up to £22 million for care agencies will be heavily trimmed back as local authorities are given the final say on how the money is spent.
Royal prowler fined
AN intruder found in the grounds of Princess Diana's home dashed out of court yesterday refusing to speak about the incident.
Simon Julian, 28, was found just yards from Kensington Palace on Monday night.
He was chased and bitten by a police dog and then arrested for being drunk and disorderly after he became abusive.
‘He was later cautioned and released without charge,’ said a police spokesman.
‘He was not badly bitten.’
The self-employed painter and decorator, of Battersea, south London, appeared before Ealing magistrates on unrelated charges yesterday.
He was fined £100 and given a conditional discharge after he admitted theft, possession of a knife and not surrendering to court on an outstanding warrant.
The pain of a lonely Christmas, by Diana
Charles Rae
PRINCESS Diana came as close as she could to commenting on her marriage break-up yesterday when she made a public vow to continue working for her charities.
‘Whatever the uncertainties the last few weeks may have brought I want you to be certain of this — our work together will continue unchanged,’ she told the 40 charities of which she is patron.
The 250 representatives were called together by Turning Point, which helps people deal with drink, drugs and mental health problems.
Although the London conference was arranged some time ago it became an opportunity for the princess to deliver her pledge in a speech re-written in the past day or two.
Her short address was tinged with sadness when she referred to Christmas bringing ‘its own painful stresses to so many people in need — the sick, the old, the handicapped and the homeless’.
Then, perhaps with some thought of her own Christmas to be spent partly with the Queen at Sandringham she added: ‘The lonely, the confused and the simply unloved, who need your help more than ever.’
It is the first time since the split was announced six days ago that Diana has made any reference to the break-up.
As she sat down, Turning Point chairman Ted Unsworth gave her a huge vote of confidence on behalf of all the charities.
‘Thanks, ma'am, for your example of duty and service, your courageous leadership, your ability to cut through flannel, your compassion and your sense of fun,’ he said.
‘We offer you our continuing support at this time.’
Later Mr Unsworth said that the princess told him: ‘Thank you very much, Ted, for saying those things.’
Princes William and Harry celebrated the end of term with two pals at an American-style burger bar in London's Piccadilly Circus yesterday.
They tucked into burgers and chips after arriving unannounced, with four detectives and two nannies.
Prince William threw off his family worries to join restaurant staff in dancing on the tables.
One diner said: ‘It was amazing.’
Windsor re-opens
VISITORS will be admitted to the fire-ravaged Windsor Castle from next month.
Buckingham Palace said yesterday that most of the rooms normally open in the State Apartments will re-open on January 16.
Perspex screens will allow visitors to see into the worst-hit rooms.
You read the book…
HOLLYWOOD'S version of Andrew Morton's controversial best seller, Diana: Her True Story, is to be shown on British television.
Satellite station BSkyB will screen the £2m movie, starring David Threlfall and Serena Scott-Thomas as Charles and Diana, in two parts in February.
The production will stay close to Morton's book detailing Diana's private grief as her marriage falls apart, and is sure to cause a major row.
ITV and BBC have always steered clear of US-made dramas about the Royal Family to avoid embarrassing the Queen.
ITV executives claim the mini-series is in ‘the worst possible taste’.
But Sam Chisholm, chief executive of BSkyB — part-owned by News International which publishes TODAY — defended the film.
‘It is first class and we are delighted to be showing it,’ he said.
Gummer grilled on ‘gift’
FARM Minister John Gummer faces a Commons grilling after a food firm picked up the £2,600 bill to landscape his garden.
London-based Hillsdown Holdings — which includes Buxted Chickens and Daylay Eggs — paid to have the six-acre grounds planted with trees and the pond tidied up.
In his role as president of the EC Council of Ministers, Mr Gummer hosted a mini-agricultural show for his European colleagues at his home at Winston Grange, near Debenham, Suffolk.
He said the landscaping was part of a conservation display and helped ‘bang the drum’ for British agriculture.
However, Labour agriculture spokesman Dale Campbell-Savours said he would be asking questions about the payout in the Commons.
The show, organised by the Suffolk Agricultural Association, was attended by Prince Charles.
Mr Gummer yesterday dismissed any benefits as ‘piffling’.
‘I did the job for the Government and for Britain and I was left with a lot of disbenefits including holes in the fields and a concrete standing area for lorries which I don't want,’ he said.
Lies test at cinema
CINEMA workers were made to take lie detector tests after thousands of pounds went missing from a 10-screen UCI complex.
Furious staff claim they were even called in from holidays to be grilled by a specialist security firm at the MetroCentre in Gateshead, Tyne and Wear.
One said: ‘No one dared refuse for fear of losing their job.’
A management spokesman said: ‘This is an internal matter involving internal policies.’
Wally, 73 raid hero
A FORMER Marine commando of 73 beat off a masked raider armed, masked raider who burst into an elderly woman's home.
Wally Hammond was visiting the woman in Margate, Kent, when he tackled the intruder who was armed with a knife and snooker cue.
He was hit over the head and broke an ankle but disarmed the 6ft raider and sent him packing.
‘I gave him a good whacking,’ Wally told police as he was taken away on a stretcher.
Beast of the moor ambushes family
THE Beast of Exmoor is believed to be on the prowl again after a giant mystery cat terrified a family on a lonely road.
Susan Stretch was driving home to Chilton Polden with her three girls, and a neighbour and her two children, when the creature sprang against the side of her car.
‘We were terrified.
It was a big black creature with massive teeth,’ she said.
Drink-driver caught a day after binge
A DRIVER drank so much beer and whisky in a day-long binge he was still five times over the limit 24 hours later.
Eric Antonen was arrested when he hit a pedestrian and a car, magistrates at Woodstock, Oxon, heard.
Antonen, 54, of Kidlington, Oxon, admitted drink-driving and was ordered to do 180 hours' community service and banned for three years.
What's happened to my babies
Rob Perkins
A FATHER of four young children returned home from work to find his house destroyed by fire.
Patrick Maughan, 36, jumped out of his van and ran across the road screaming: ‘What's happened to my family.’
He was quickly surrounded by police and taken to a neighbour's house where they broke the tragic news that his four children — Sharon, aged five, and her brothers, Francis, four, Martin three, and Stefan, one — were dead.
The blaze broke out shortly after he left for work.
Officers had tried all day to contact Mr Maughan to tell him of the tragedy.
His wife Debra, 26, had fled from the blazing house in her nightclothes crying: ‘Help my babies.’
Rescuers were unable to reach the trapped youngsters who were overcome by fumes.
They were found in their bedrooms along with their 25-year-old uncle, Mrs Maughan's brother Christopher Finn, who is critically ill in hospital.
Three police officers who tried to save the children were beaten back by the intense heat and smoke.
PC Kim Jordan, 35, said: ‘We crawled up to the landing.
I could hear one of the children crying and shouted to them to get on the floor.
‘We couldn't breathe and couldn't see.
The heat was so intense I could feel the hairs on my hands singe.’
The officers then climbed on to a porch and smashed the windows but were still unable to reach the victims.
Mr and Mrs Maughan — who only moved to the house in King's Heath, Birmingham, a month ago — were being comforted by relatives.
The cause of the blaze is not yet known, but a fire chief warned parents to be aware of potential hazards in Christmas decorations and gifts.
A Rover returns
Vaughan Freeman
WHILE the rest of the car industry steers a course of plunging sales and massive redundancies, there is one big success story — and it's British.
The good times have returned at Rover, and yesterday the company announced it was reintroducing night-shift working at its Cowley plant in Oxford for the first time in three years.
The extra work is needed to cope with demand for its new Rover 800 saloon, which although launched just a year ago is hammering opposition in the executive market.
Rover has sold 16,200 new 800s so far this year, compared to 14,000 of the old models last year.
That compares to Vauxhall Carlton sales of 15,500 against 16,000 last year while Ford Granada sales have collapsed to barely 15,000 from almost 24,000.
And Ford was expected to announce today a further 3,500 job losses at its UK plants.
It is an amazing success story for a company which has known good times — and bad.
Rover began life in the late 1800s, producing first bicycles and then motorbikes.
In 1904 came the first car, and in 1920 Rover hit the headlines when its Light Six saloon raced the Blue Train Continental Express 750 miles across France — and reached Calais 20 minutes ahead of the train.
During the Second World War, Rover employed 21,000 people building everything from aircraft wings to tank engines.
In 1967 the Rover name almost disappeared when it merged with Leyland Motors.
Eight years later there was more name-swapping as the group became British Leyland and then, in 1978, BL.
The Rover Group emerged in 1986 as the old BL was split up, then British Aerospace stepped in to buy Rover.
Three years ago Rover linked up with Honda, which took a 20 per cent stake in the company.
Since then Honda has contributed Japanese production skills to Rover's high-quality British workmanship to put the firm ahead of bigger rivals like American-owned Ford and Vauxhall, backed by General Motors.
Rover executive Paul Kirk said last night: ‘This is excellent news for Cowley.
Over the past three years we invested in new models, new manufacturing facilities and capacity.’
An end to ‘who-does-what’ job rows plus the adoption of Japanese working practices means output at Cowley is now among the highest in Europe.
A disgrace to Grace and Favour
Ivan Waterman
THE former staff of TV's Grace Brothers claim they were snubbed by the BBC at a celebrity party.
Grace and Favour stars Frank Thornton and Wendy Richard were angry that clips of the comedy were left out of a video promoting the BBC's winter programmes.
Frank stormed out of the London lunch muttering: ‘I'm disgusted.’
But the BBC said: ‘Our tape was too long and something had to go.
No slight was intended.’
Boy drowns at pool party
A SCHOOLBOY drowned in a swimming pool after lifeguards tried in vain to save him.
Robert Wade, eight, got into difficulties in just 5ft of water as friends looked on in horror.
Poolside attendants grabbed Robert as he struggled under the surface, dragged him to the side and gave the kiss of life.
Ambulance crews took over but Robert, on an outing to celebrate a friend's birthday, was declared dead at hospital.
‘Everyone tried to save him but it was too late,’ his father Steven said from the family home in Chertsey, Surrey.
Police and council officials have launched an investigation into the tragedy at the Pool In The Park at nearby Woking.
Robert, a keen judo player and cub, died as his father, mother Victoria, 37, and little brother Anthony, six, looked forward to a happy family Christmas.
Mr Wade, a 37-year-old research chemist, said: ‘Christmas doesn't matter after this.’
Moan for a happy marriage
HUSBANDS who complain to their wives after a hard day at work are helping to save their marriage.
Strong, silent types only add to their problems, the British Psychological Society heard in London yesterday.
Although women listen sympathetically, they keep quiet about their own office blues.
‘The mood is better when problems are discussed,’ said psychologist Fiona Jones.
Phone pest next door made my life a misery
A CRANK caller phoned her next-door neighbour up to 10 times a day — and never said a word.
Heather Payne simply listened through the thin wall dividing the houses as her victim panicked.
She kept up her calls for two years, while greeting Norma Todd as normal every day in the street.
The families, from Darlington, Co Durham, got on well together, and Mrs Todd's son Colin, 10, played with Payne's nine-year-old son Derek.
Payne, 30, began the hate campaign after receiving pest calls herself, and wrongly blaming the Todds.
She was caught when Mrs Todd, 50, called in police, and BT engineers put a trace on the line.
Payne, who pleaded guilty at Darlington Magistrates Court to making the calls, was conditionally discharged and ordered to pay £100 compensation.
Chris Morrison, prosecuting, said: ‘There were never obscenities or abuse, just total silence and the family was very anxious.’
After the hearing Mrs Todd, who has lived in the same house for 27 years, said she had no plans to move.
‘We never dreamt for one moment it was the woman next door,’ she said.
‘When the police told me I just cried.
‘It got to the point that if someone looked at me on the street I thought they were responsible.’
Gary Glitter
ROCKER Gary Glitter is hiding a secret heartache.
His uncle John, 72, who brought him up as a son and taught him to play the guitar, has died of lung cancer.
Gary, above, sang his uncle's favourite hymn at his funeral but was back on stage 24 hours later.
John's ex-wife Betty said: ‘Gary's terribly upset.’
Homes demand rises
HOUSING experts yesterday saw hopes of recovery in the depressed market after unseasonally strong activity.
Rising sales continued into this month when demand usually tailed off, said the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors.
Lower interest rates and Chancellor Norman Lamont's Autumn Statement package for growth had brought out buyers.
An RICS spokesman said: ‘This could be the first signs of spring flowers in the beleaguered market and herald the return of confidence.
‘We have the foundations upon which recovery can be built.’
End of road for 27p car firm
A COMPANY which offered motorists the chance of a new car for just 27p a day has been wound up.
TODAY exposed the scandal of businessman Eric Howell and his Greenlake Management Ltd, revealing that he was penniless.
Yesterday the High Court issued an order winding up the company, after a petition from Board of Trade president Michael Heseltine.
The company, which was set up in 1990 and traded as Magna Marketing, operated a scheme which offered cars bearing advertising.
Firms paid between £1,050 and £13,700 for the adverts, while drivers were asked to pay just £100 plus insurance for a year's motoring.
Hundreds of people sent cash but never received a car.
The official receiver has been called in to work out how much the firm, which folded last year, owed.
Major is jeered by Euro MPs
PREMIER John Major was given a rough ride by left-wing Euro MPs in Strasbourg yesterday.
A row blew up as he confirmed that he will obey the German and EC deadline and rush through the Maastricht Bill in the Commons ‘by next summer’.
Socialist Euro MPs jeered and heckled him during his key speech to the European Parliament, in which he spoke of Britain's ‘triumphs’ of the Edinburgh Summit.
At one point he said: ‘I'm beginning to feel quite at home — I've got used to mindless shouting from the opposition in the Commons.’
There were more interruptions as he explained that Britain needed more time to ratify the treaty.
And finally there was laughter when he spoke about economic prospects and job creation.
Afterwards, Mr Major said he was used to political turbulence and the ‘rough and tumble’.
New laws to sack police
INCOMPETENT police officers will face the sack under new powers announced yesterday.
Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke also said he plans to bring in new disciplinary procedures.
Legislation will follow a Government discussion document to be issued in the New Year.
Toyota joy then Ford axes 1,200
by Ian Fletcher and Rob Perkins
TOYOTA'S first cars rolled off a new assembly line in Derbyshire yesterday — as Ford announced 1,180 job losses.
A blue 1.6 Carina emerged from a cloud of dry ice to become the Japanese giant's first ‘made in Britain’ car.
More than 1,000 people work at the £840 million plant, in Burnaston, near Derby.
Two thousand more workers are expected to be taken on and the local economy should get a £100 million boost once production reaches capacity.
‘We have every reason to celebrate,’ said Toyota boss Dr Shoichiro Toyoda.
‘We have a first-rate team manufacturing top quality cars.’
It is hoped 200,000 Carinas will be made next year at the site, which took three years to complete.
Dr Toyoda dismissed fears that their dream of conquering the European market could be destroyed by the recession.
‘We have to expect good and bad times.
Long-term prospects are good,’ he said.
The same cannot be said at Ford, which expects to cut 2,000 more white-collar jobs on top of yesterday's 1,180.
About 660 workers will go at Dagenham, Essex, 470 at Halewood, Merseyside, and 50 at Bridgend, south Wales.
Transport & General Workers' Union deputy secretary Jack Adams warned that his members would ballot for industrial action if there were compulsory redundancies.
The company had assured these would be the last cuts because of lower production levels, he said.
Jimmy Airlie, of the Amalgamated Engineering and Electrical Union, said: ‘Provided Ford don't impose compulsory redundancies, we will cooperate.
We think a new era is before us.
‘We have to be upbeat otherwise we are all finished.
There has to be an upturn in the economy.’
Ford has axed a total of 3,600 jobs this year.
Labour trade and industry spokesman Robin Cook said the announcement was ‘a dreadful Christmas package for the people involved’.
Gun prowler sparks red alert at hospital
A DRUNKEN gunman was arrested after wandering round a hospital at the dead of night.
The intruder, in his early 20s, was stopped by security staff in a private area of the May Day Hospital, South Norwood, south London, yesterday.
‘He was stopped by security staff and while they were speaking to him they were informed that he was earlier spotted with a gun in the hospital's social club,’ said a Scotland Yard spokesman.
He fled but was later caught by police.
A gun was confiscated.
The man was not seen on any of the wards, said a hospital spokesman.
Pits threat to water
TAP water for hundreds of thousands of people could be polluted if pit closures go ahead, an environmental group claimed yesterday.
The abandoned mines would fill with water contaminated with iron, acids and chlorides which could seep through ground waters affecting rivers.
Harvey Wood, of the Clean Rivers Trust, told a Parliamentary launch of the group's report that areas at risk include north Nottinghamshire, South Wales, Staffordshire and Lancashire.
‘In the past, waters from abandoned mines have been managed because they had to be to keep the other mines open,’ he said.
‘When the whole system closes down, there could be a huge problem.’
Children of great courage
BLIND cancer victim Nicholas Killen beamed with joy as he ran his hands over the Christmas tree at Westminster Abbey yesterday.
Nicholas was at a star-studded event to receive one of seven Children of Courage awards.
‘The best thing was feeling the tree,’ said seven-year-old Nicholas, from Saltaire, West Yorks, who received his honour from Norma Major.
The premier's wife sat Daniel Churchill on her lap to hear how he had battled against serious heart problems.
Doctors had warned that Daniel, five, of Sinfin, Derby, could die at any time.
Two others surviving against the odds are Siamese twins Hassan and Hussein Salih, six, of Hounslow, west London.
They were born joined at the hip and are learning to walk with artificial legs after being separated.
Another award winner was Rachel Lambert, seven, of Barnsley, South Yorks, who saved her brother Ryan when he was attacked by a rottweiler.
Phone threat at petrol stations
DRIVERS should switch off their car telephones at petrol stations because of the risk of explosions.
Oil giant Shell UK has offered warning posters to managers at the firm's 2,500 stations after researchers found that phones can produce tiny sparks capable of causing fireballs.
‘It makes sense to tell people of any danger,’ said spokesman James Arnott.
Mystery of injured hiker
A HIKER was fighting for his life last night after being found unconscious in a country lane.
Police have no idea what happened to the man, who is suffering serious head injuries.
The unidentified man, aged about 30, was taken to Hull Royal Infirmary after being found by a motorist near Bridlington, Humberside.
Detectives, who have not ruled out foul play, want to trace the driver of a dark-coloured car who may have spoken to the victim shortly before he was injured.
A spokesman said: ‘The whole thing is a mystery.
The man, who was wearing a rucksack, is thought to have been seen running along the lane by motorists.’
Festive card is in Seine
THE British Tourist Authority is sending out Christmas cards with a charming view of…
Paris.
The cards, featuring an impressionist work by Camille Pissarro — on show in the National Gallery — were intended to highlight Britain's art treasures.
Then it was pointed out that the soft city lights of the painting were The Boulevard Montemarte At Night.
‘How did they make such a mistake…er, choice?’ said the Government's National Heritage tourism spokesman Duncan Stroud.
An authority spokeswoman said: ‘Of course we are not trying to tell people to go and visit Paris.’
Stab vigilante cleared
TWO men were yesterday cleared of murder after a suspected car vandal was stabbed to death.
Window firm director Norman Waller and his neighbour, Peter Fay, clashed with a gang of youths after an attack on a car outside their homes.
After being hit on the head with a bottle, Waller lashed out at Terry Malone, 24, with a chisel.
Mr Malone died in hospital five days later.
Waller, 34, of Gateshead, Tyne and Wear, snapped after a series of crimes against him, Newcastle Crown Court heard.
His car was vandalised several times and he was forced to move his business after it was set on fire.
He was cleared of wounding two other youths, but convicted of affray and was remanded in custody to be sentenced today.
Student Fay, 22, was cleared of wounding and affray.
Tell Sid he could lose a lot on his Gas shares
TWO million shareholders who took the ‘Tell Sid’ advice to buy into British Gas could be in for a shock.
Shares could plummet under plans by the government regulator to split the huge monopoly into two.
Sir James McKinnon has told the Monopolies and Mergers Commission that one part should deal with transport and storage and the other with trading.
Shares of the £11 billion company, privatised in 1986, had already started to slide last night and the market is bracing itself for big falls today.
Kidnap fear for missing fitness teacher
Nick Craven
A MASSIVE hunt was underway last night for an aerobics teacher feared kidnapped.
Joanna Grenside's car was found less than 100 yards from the sports centre where she was due to take a class.
Her Suzy Lamplugh Trust personal rape alarm was lying on the ground a few feet away.
It had not been used.
The discovery sparked a full-scale search by more than 50 police and frogmen in Harpenden, Herts.
Joanna, 25, was last seen by her mother, Penny, as she left home at 6.50pm on Tuesday for the two-minute drive.
When she failed to turn up, her boyfriend, Dennis Davis, who also works at the centre, phoned her mother.
He found her blue Ford Escort in the car park.
The vehicle was locked and the lights off.
Joanna had never missed a class in her year at the centre and was never late.
Her grandfather Christopher Grenside was last night fearing the worst.
‘I can only imagine someone has jumped out on her and dragged her away for some reason.
You hear so much about this sort of thing nowadays.
It's horrible.
‘The path between the car park and the sports centre is quite dark and I imagine it's the sort of place someone could lie in wait.’
Mr Grenside learned of Joanna's disappearance from his son, Christopher, who is divorced from Joanna's mother.
‘The whole family is very upset,’ Mr Grenside added.
‘We are just hoping that it will turn out to be good news but I am terribly concerned for her.’
Police divers drafted in from neighbouring Thames Valley force were yesterday searching an outdoor swimming pool and nearby pond.
The man leading the hunt, Detective Superintendent Ian Whinnett, said: ‘There is nothing in Joanna's background to suggest why she should vanish like this.’
Her distressed boyfriend has been interviewed by police to try to glean any clues about the disappearance.
Detectives contacted the Suzy Lamplugh Trust — set up by the mother of missing estate agent Suzy after she vanished in 1986.
Joanne Redingdon, from the trust, said the five-inch alarm, which has the trust's name on it, emits an ear-piercing 115-decibel screech which lasts three minutes.
‘The police said the gas canister was about three-quarters full, which suggests it had only been tested and never used in earnest,’ she said.
Keith Parker, manager of Harpers Sports Centre, where Joanna was a fitness consultant, said her boyfriend had often warned her about her personal safety after dark.
‘He almost certainly was the one who gave Joanna the personal alarm which she was carrying,’ he said.
‘He was always concerned for Joanna's safety.
She was very conscientious but did not see any danger in what she was doing by walking alone after dark.
‘Jo is a lovely girl who is very popular.
‘Of all the people who have ever worked in the centre, she is most punctual and very reliable.
‘She has never missed a class and she will even telephone if she is going to be two minutes late.
‘We're all beside ourselves with worry.
We just hope this sorts itself out.
We pray it's a misunderstanding.’
Mr Parker said he had asked St Albans District Council in the past to improve the lighting on the path from the car park.
Joanna spent a year in Australia before starting at the sports centre last year.
Her younger sister Lucy, 21, used to run a play scheme there.
Joanna, who has brown shoulder-length hair, was last seen wearing a turquoise and blue anorak over a green sweatshirt with a Harpers logo.
She also had on white, turquoise and yellow Asics trainers and a gold watch.
Anyone with information should contact police on 0707 276122 ext 4206.
IRA double bomb trap
TWO IRA bombs ripped through the heart of London's busy West End yesterday injuring four people.
Christmas shoppers, many in tears, fled for cover after the explosions in a toilet in Oxford Street's John Lewis department store and a waste bin in nearby Cavendish Square.
The area was evacuated for most of the day as police searched for other devices.
No Daddy for Christmas
Bob Graham
THESE four happy boys were eagerly looking forward to a fun-filled family Christmas.
But their dreams were shattered yesterday when they learned their father was dead.
He was run down as he cycled home from the shops.
A man has been charged with causing death by careless driving after drinking excessively.
Christmas was to have been the turning point in a difficult year for the family.
David Adams was out of work and money was tight.
He left the family car in the garage and cycled 12 miles to a supermarket to save 50p on groceries.
David and wife Catherine had scraped together every last penny to ensure their sons, Stuart, Richard, baby Thomas and Mark,(from left in picture) would have the happiest Christmas possible.
But less than half a mile from his home in Witney, Oxfordshire, 42-year-old Mr Adams was knocked off his bike and run over by a van.
He died in the arms of a passing motorist.
A massive TV advertising campaign against drink-driving has warned of just such a tragedy.
Now David Adams is a real-life victim.
The man charged with his death was breathalysed.
He has already received two threats on his life.
Mrs Adams has been unable to speak to anyone since the tragedy.
David's eldest son Richard, nine, was told on the day of his Nativity play at school.
‘He is devastated,’ said Richard's distraught grandmother Pamela Smith yesterday.
‘He just wants to know why it happened.
You can't explain to a child.‘
Stuart, aged five, keeps asking when his daddy is coming home, she said.
‘It is so hard for them to understand.
‘The two little ones have no idea what happened.
They just see everyone upset.’
Mrs Smith, 66, said her son-in-law was a good father and husband.
She and her husband Edward will now try to ensure their grandchildren have as good a Christmas as possible at their home in Corsham, Wilts.
‘I know David and Cath were planning a normal family Christmas at home, the way it has been for several years,’ Mrs Smith said.
The Government's £1.3m Christmas anti-drink drive campaign was launched last week with a brutal advert.
It features actress Denise Douglas, 18, as a hideously injured road accident victim.
Aimed at the 18-35 age group, the advert is so horrific it is only being screened after 9pm.
Stores roll out barrel to beat Sunday laws
Simon Trump and Eben Black
A LOOPHOLE in the Sunday shopping law has opened the way for a free-for-all on booze.
Supermarkets have found they can get around licensing restrictions by selling in bulk.
In the past, stores have only been allowed to sell alcohol between noon and 3pm on Sunday.
Now lawyers for Asda supermarkets have realised it can be sold at any time by the case — that means at least nine litres of wine or 20 litres of beer.
Asda in Bedminster, Bristol, sold 60 extra cases of alcohol using the loophole last week.
‘There are bound to be critics but people clearly want to make these purchases, so we are meeting a consumer need,’ said manager Eric Sortwell.
Opponents of Sunday trading will be upset by the scheme, which comes on top of the Government's refusal yesterday to enforce the Sunday shopping law in general.
The decision followed a European Court of Justice ruling that Britain's ban on Sunday opening does not breach EC statutes.
‘I have decided that the public interest does not require intervention by me at present,’ said Attorney General Sir Nicholas Lyell after the judgment.
DIY giant B&Q had spearheaded the four-year battle to open on Sundays, claiming Britain's laws breach EC free-market regulations.
Spokesman David Ramsden said the law ‘still remains unclear’ until a final judgment by the House of Lords.
Councils have been turning a blind eye to shops opening on Sunday because of the uncertainty over what the Euro-judges would decide.
Now the ruling, which could open the way for new prosecutions, has thrown the issue into chaos.
Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke wants to bring forward plans to change the law in the new year.
He will present MPs with three options — total deregulation, limited opening times, or allowing only shops selling ‘emergency’ supplies to open.
With just one crucial weekend to go before Christmas, big chains were last night intent on defying the law.
Sainsbury plans to open most of its supermarkets and Homebase DIY stores this Sunday.
‘Our customers expect us to open, food supplies are already planned and our staffing schedules have been arranged,’ a spokesman said.
Keep Sunday Special campaigners yesterday urged shops to stay closed.
‘We hope retailers will abide by this ruling and close on Sundays until Parliament decides what to do about the Shops Act,’ said director Michael Schluter.
Roger Boaden, director of the Shopping Hours Reform Council, said: ‘Shoppers want to shop on Sunday, shopworkers want to work on Sunday and retailers want to open their shops on Sunday.’
Norwich City Council, which was involved in the European Court case, said last night the ruling ‘vindicates the stance we have taken’ and prosecutions would go ahead.
Lamont gift probed
CHANCELLOR Norman Lamont could still be quizzed by MPs on why he did not declare an £18,000 donation from anonymous Tory benefactors to help to pay a legal bill.
A Commons committee decided yesterday not to accept Mr Lamont's claim that he did not break any rules by using the cash to evict sex therapist Sara Dale from his London home.
The Treasury paid £4,000 of the £23,000 bill.
But MPs are concerned Mr Lamont did not publicly acknowledge the other cash may have breached the rules governing gifts to ministers.
The National Audit Office is carrying out its own investigation.
Thatcher calls for air strike
Russell Jenkins
BARONESS Thatcher last night called for air strikes against Serbian troops in Bosnia if they refuse to pull out within 48 hours.
Premier John Major and the UN should immediately enforce the no-fly zone to stop Serbian fighters flying against Bosnians, she said.
The former prime minister's intervention was designed to embarrass Mr Major.
She told The European newspaper: ‘We have not been neutrals: we have been more like accomplices.’
The scale of western military involvement will dominate John Major's meeting with President George Bush at Camp David this weekend.
He will continue to stress caution, fearing retaliation against British troops and aid workers.
America's Secretary of State Lawrence Eagleburger said in Geneva the US is determined to put Serbian leaders into the dock for war crimes.
The IRA's deadly double bomb trap
David Jones, Matthew Benns, Emma Campbell, Liz Moore
COWARDLY IRA terrorists set a cynical double bomb trap yesterday to bring fear to the heart of London.
They planted the first device in a West End store packed with Christmas shoppers and the second in a nearby square where the evacuees were expected to gather.
It was only police vigilance which prevented more than the four casualties.
Three deliberately late and confusing warnings mentioned just one bomb.
The callers said it was in Oxford Street where there are hundreds of stores.
A switchboard operator who asked its location was sneeringly told: ‘That's for you to find out.’
Bomb number one rocked a men's toilet in the John Lewis department store while it was still being cleared.
The second exploded a few minutes later in a wastebin in Cavendish Square, where the store's 1,500 staff usually gather during safety drills.
The high number of injuries the bombers clearly hoped for were averted by the caution of the police.
Recalling that a similar ploy was used by the IRA in Manchester two weeks ago, they decided the square was too close and instructed staff and customers to get right out of the area.
As a result only four people received minor injuries, one inside the store and two outside.
Anti-terrorist squad chief Commander David Tucker said it was a miracle there were not far more casualties and dismissed the warnings to LBC Radio and a travel agent as ridiculous.
‘This seems to be the continuance of this obscene game which the IRA wish to play with the police,’ he said.
The explosions came an hour after Ulster Secretary Sir Patrick Mayhew offered concessions to the ruthless terrorists.
Sir Patrick said the Government would be willing to open talks and pull troops off the streets of Northern Ireland if the IRA would renounce violence.
The Government would not stand in the way of a united Ireland provided it could be negotiated by democratic and peaceful means.
‘If they were to persuade the greater number of those living in Northern Ireland to agree with them, then Her Majesty's Government would present no obstacle,’ said Sir Patrick.
An hour later the IRA godfathers gave their reply.
One taxi driver, whose cab was damaged by the Cavendish Square blast, escaped death by 30 seconds.
Emmanuel Levene, 60, from Barkingside, east London, had left his cab parked behind John Lewis.
Half a minute later, as he turned the corner into Oxford Street, he was blown off his feet by the explosion just yards from his cab.
He said: ‘I am lucky to be alive.’
He had ‘nothing but contempt’ for the bombers.
Casualties included a John Lewis security guard shepherding customers out of the store.
He was treated for shock along with another cab driver and shopper.
Another woman was deafened.
Each of the bombs is believed to have contained less than 1lb of explosive but caused panic and paralysed Central London.
An area of one square mile around Oxford Street was sealed off for almost five hours and traders, already hit by recession, lost millions of pounds.
Shocked workers at John Lewis were convinced the bombers intended them to be hit by the full force of the second blast.
Stockkeeper Claude Bedeux, 45, said: ‘The police saved my life.
Normally we go to Cavendish Square but this time it had been cordoned off.
‘The police told me to turn in the opposite direction.
I had just gone down the road when the bomb went off.
‘It was a massive bang, the ground shook beneath my feet and debris flew up in air.’
The staff, like most of their customers, insisted the IRA would never beat them.
Ranjan Gohin, 36, summed up the mood saying: ‘I've been working at John Lewis for 14 years and I don't think this will put me off.
You can't live your life being scared.’
Police sources said the use of bombs little heavier than a packet of butter could herald a new tactic aimed at beating the roadblocks that have been set up in London for the first time.
The devices could easily be hidden in a briefcase, smuggled past checkpoints and planted to cause maximum injury and damage.
The imprecise messages also suggested the bombs were planted by the same cell which targeted north London last week.
Commander David Tucker urged residents and visitors not to let the bombings stop them moving around the capital.
‘Don't be put off.
The IRA campaign is sterile, it won't succeed,’ he said.
‘Tip-offs’ were a callous farce
THIS is how the timetable of terror unfolded:
10.36am: Terrorists phone the first of three misleading warnings to LBC Radio and a London travel agency.
10.37: The police are tipped off and a frantic race to locate the device and warn hundreds of shopkeepers begins.
10.40: Bombers give their final warning — only one bomb has been mentioned ‘in a store in Oxford Street’.
10.45: Some shops begin advising customers to leave.
11.10: The first blast rocks a men's toilet on the third floor in John Lewis's store as customers and staff are leaving.
11.11: Shoppers begin fleeing in panic and an area for one mile around is cordoned off.
11.24: The second bomb explodes in a waste bin in Cavendish Square, outside the back door of the John Lewis store.
2.15pm Streets outside the immediate vicinity of the blasts re-open and shoppers begin to drift back.
3.45: Oxford Street re-opens.
Kidnap cases on increase
JOANNA Greenside did not take any chances.
Punctual, reliable and sensible, she carried a rape alarm in her car for the two-minute drive from home to the sports centre where she worked.
Yet all her precautions do not seem to have prevented the 26-year-old woman from abduction.
In 1991 there were 4,046 rapes, a rise of 17 per cent on the previous year, 766 kidnaps and 411 abductions.
While the majority are carried out by a person known to the victim, random attacks on strangers are on the increase.
In 1990, 11 per cent of female homicide victims were not known to their attackers, and experts believe these figures will increase.
Many women report the total surprise caused by the swiftness of random attack leaves them paralysed and unable to fight back.
‘Surprise is the greatest weapon that an attacker can have,’ says Fred Broughton of the Metropolitan Police.
‘When I talk to people about how best to protect themselves from attack I always tell them that if they can turn that surprise back on to the attacker they have a better chance of making an escape.
‘My advice is simply be aware ALL the time, not just when you think you ought to be.’
Lunch a la parte
Olga Craig and Charles Rae
THE Prince and Princess of Wales went to lunch together yesterday, but arrived separately and sat at different tables.
Charles and Diana handed out final happy photographs of themselves together to their staff, though the meal was anything but a show of unity.
The pair, hosting a Christmas party for their staff at upmarket London eatery Mosimanns, never spoke.
Three coachloads of employees from Kensington and St James' Palaces, and Highgrove, arrived at the Belgravia restaurant at noon.
White lacquer-sprayed branches circled the room, laid with 10 circular tables.
Tall candles burned in the blacked-out windows.
Charles was driven to the restaurant in his dark green Bentley, while Diana arrived 10 minutes later at 1.50pm in her maroon Ford Scorpio.
World-renowned chef and owner Anton Mosimann greeted his royal guests before serving a traditional Christmas lunch of Scotch salmon in a yoghurt and cucumber sauce, barbecued turkey, and his own recipe vegetarian plum pudding.
Afterwards, each of the 100 guests at the £4,000 lunch was given a small album filled with pictures of the couple smiling happily with their sons.
While mum and dad entertained the grown-ups, the princes ate in their favourite London restaurant, San Lorenzo.
William, who has often booked the Beauchamp Place eatery for lunch with the princess, reserved a table for himself, Harry and their nanny.
The adult meal over, Princess Diana gave everyone a present, wrapped in blue paper and tied with a deep blue bow.
Each had Garrard, the name of the royals' favourite jewellers, written on the ribbon and all had a crested note attached which said: ‘With thanks from their Royal Highnesses the Prince and Princess of Wales.’
Prince Charles left at 3.03pm, shaking chef Mosimann warmly by the hand as he climbed into his car.
Seven minutes later the princess, dressed in a navy suit and pink and navy polka dot blouse, came out.
A palace aide said last night: ‘We were all a bit apprehensive about the lunch but when they arrived they put everyone at ease.
‘We just hope there will be a few more in the future — but who knows.’
‘Tories made us axe 3,000 town hall jobs’
Ian Fletcher and Rob Perkins
A CITY council leader launched a bitter attack on the Government yesterday after announcing 3,000 job losses.
Town hall chiefs in Birmingham must save £40 million to stay within charge-capping limits, which they see as part of a Tory vendetta.
Sir Richard Knowles, leader of the Labour-run council, spoke out after announcing savage cuts aimed at meeting the £879.1 million spending target.
‘This will have a profound effect on the city,’ said Sir Richard.
‘They used Birmingham when they wanted a place to hold their summit, now this.
‘They thanked me very much and said how pleased they were to be so well looked after, then they kicked us in the appropriate part of the anatomy.’
All recruitment, except in schools, has been suspended and non-essential spending is to be shelved.
Council bosses fear there will be compulsory job losses among its 54,000 employees, but hope many will take voluntary redundancy or early retirement.
British Aerospace workers' hopes of a revival were shot down yesterday with the news that 650 jobs are to be axed.
Employees at the company's plants in Chester and Filton, Bristol, have been told the redundancies will come early next year.
Bosses at Ford also announced 1,180 job losses on top of an expected 2,000 white collar redundancies.
About 660 workers will go at Dagenham, Essex, 470 at Halewood, Merseyside, and 50 at Bridgend, south Wales.
The company has axed 3,600 jobs this year.
Jimmy Airlie, of the Amalgamated Engineering and Electrical Union, said: ‘Provided Ford does not impose compulsory redundancies, we will cooperate.’
There was one bright spot yesterday as the first car rolled off Toyota's new production line in Derbyshire.
A blue 1.6 Carina emerged from a cloud of dry ice to become the Japanese giant's first ‘made in Britain’ car.
More than 1,000 people work at the £840 million plant, in Burnaston.
Two thousand more workers are expected to be taken on and the local economy should get a £100 million boost once production reaches capacity.
‘We have every reason to celebrate,’ said Toyota boss Dr Shoichiro Toyoda.
‘We have a first-rate team manufacturing top quality cars.’
It is hoped 200,000 Carinas will be made next year at the site, which took three years to complete.
Dr Toyoda dismissed fears that their dream of conquering the European market could be destroyed by the recession.
‘We have to expect good and bad times,’ he said.
Economy forecast brings small cheer
PREMIER John Major was given some Christmas cheer last night when top economists forecast economic revival in Britain next year.
The Organistion for Economic Co-operation and Development in Paris predicted a 1.3 per cent growth, ending two years of decline.
The year after growth will reach 2.4 per cent, they said.
But the group warned that the upturn would not be enough to reverse the rising trend in unemployment.
Workers vote for new super union
A NEW super union was created yesterday when members of Nalgo, Nupe and Cohse voted to merge.
Unison, representing local government, NHS, gas, electricity, education, water, transport and police authority workers, will become Britain's biggest union, with 1.4 million members.
Nalgo general secretary Alan Jinkinson said: ‘This is a historic day for our three unions, for the trade union movement and for Britain's cash-starved public services.’
Stubble trouble in love stakes for the Nineties
Ian Brandes
IF you want to get a girl get a shave.
Women are more attracted to men with clean-cut good looks than their hairier counterparts.
The Eighties look of designer stubble, favoured by stars including George Michael and Don Johnson, is a turn-off, according to a survey.
Instead, nearly seven in 10 said a potential boyfriend's biggest asset was a sexy smile and smooth chin — just like Mel Gibson.
But even that will not be enough to keep a girl if the man turns out to be money-minded, career obsessed and pretentious.
Partners now have to prove they are ‘funny, straightforward and easy-going.’
The slap-down for macho big-spenders came in a survey by the Brut fragrance company.
‘Men with big wallets, like the Eighties cult figure Loadsamoney, can no longer rely on their bank balance to make an impression,’ the report said.
Instead, most women were far more interested in their potential partner's ‘true emotional qualities’, the team of researchers discovered.
Wit wooed the ladies, with nine in 10 women saying a sense of humour was essential in their Mr Right.
Career men were a turn-off to the vast majority of the women surveyed.
Just one in 10 single girls want to marry one, although they like their future husband to have good job prospects.
Most yearn instead for a caring lover who would become a considerate family man in later life.
The poll also gave the thumbs down to male know-it-alls — the pet hate for most women.
But the poll had some good news for men — only one in 10 girls said their partners spend too much time in the pub.
End of the road for 27p car firm
Nicki Pope
A COMPANY which offered motorists the chance of a new car for just 27p a day has been wound up.
TODAY exposed the scandal of businessman Eric Howell and his Greenlake Management Ltd, revealing that he was penniless.
Mr Howell had debts of £500,000 even after everything he owned had been sold.
Yesterday the High Court issued an order winding up the company, after a petition from Board of Trade president Michael Heseltine.
The company, which was established in 1990 and traded as Magna Marketing, operated a scheme which offered cars bearing advertising.
Firms paid between £1,050 and £13,700 for the adverts.
Drivers were asked to pay just £100 plus fully comprehensive insurance for a year's motoring, compared to average running costs of £200 a month.
Hundreds of people said they had sent cash but never received a car.
The official receiver has been called into the firm, which ceased trading last June.
Experts will try to determine the level of the company's debts, its assets and liabilities.
‘It was felt it was in the public interest to look at the company which was already insolvent,’ said a DTI spokeswoman.
Painting of the Queen
CROWDS are flocking to see a painting of the Queen which shows her with grey hairs, worry lines and crows' feet.
The picture, above, in the National Portrait Gallery, London, is so popular it has even surprised the man who painted it, postman's son Richard Stone, 40.
During a recent visit he was mobbed by autograph hunters.
Thug wrecks ballet dream
Ian Key
A TEENAGE ballet dancer who was shot by a thug has been warned one more performance could blind her.
Doctors dare not remove an airgun pellet lodged less than a millimetre from the optic nerve of Nicola Child's right eye and have said sudden movement could blind the 15-year-old.
A sentence of 120 hours' community service on the attacker yesterday was condemned by Nicola's mother Sue.
‘It's disgusting.
He has wrecked her life,’ she said.
The shooting ended a promising future for Nicola who had been recommended for an audition with the Royal Ballet.
The 17-year-old boy who fired the gun admitted causing Nicola grievous bodily harm at Wakefield juvenile court but said he did not think the gun was loaded.
Mrs Child, 43, of Wakefield, said: ‘Nicola has lost 75 per cent of her sight in the eye and he has got away with it.
‘If that is British justice I am disgusted and my daughter is absolutely furious.’
Jeremy Irons and his wife
JEREMY Irons says his wife doesn't worry when she sees him in sexy scenes on the big screen because she knows he's not that good.
‘She doesn't get jealous,’ says the Brideshead Revisited star, above.
‘When she sees me in sex scenes she says to herself ‘Oh, he is only acting.
I know he can't last that long’.’
Bike trip to save pennies at Xmas cost dad his life
Bob Graham
A JOBLESS father-of-four went on a shopping trip by bicycle to save 50p on groceries — and was tragically killed.
David Adams, 42, was knocked off his bike and run over by a van driven by a suspected drink-driver as he made his way home.
The former RAF engineer died in the arms of a passing motorist less than half a mile from his home in Witney, Oxfordshire.
At the spot where he died, on the quiet A4095 near the village of Curbridge, his shopping of cornflakes, bread, butter, milk and biscuits was swept into the gutter.
The cornflakes covered a 40-yard stretch of road.
The milk carton lay flattened.
Mr Adams leaves a wife Catherine and four sons — Richard, nine, Stuart, five, Mark, two, and eight-month-old Thomas.
Former teacher Mrs Adams, 38, has not spoken to anyone since Tuesday's tragedy.
The news was broken to Richard at the Queens Dyke First School, where he was appearing in a nativity play.
‘He is devastated,’ said his distraught grandmother Pamela Smith.
‘He just wants to know why it happened.
It is the sort of thing you can't explain to a child.’
Mr Adams had replied to dozens of job adverts without success since leaving the RAF in January.
Facing a financially bleak Christmas, he scrimped together every last penny to afford presents for the four boys.
Despite owning a D-reg Montego, he cycled 12 miles to a supermarket in nearby Carterton to save 50p on family groceries.
Mrs Smith, his 66-year-old mother-in-law, said he was a good father and husband.
‘He was an ordinary man who did his best for his family,’ she said.
‘After leaving the RAF he had several interviews, but had not been lucky.
‘He was trying very hard, not like some people these days who simply never bother.
‘He tried to set up as a fridge and freezer engineer, but that didn't work.
‘The trouble was his age, although 42 is no age at all these days.
He was desperate to find a job.
‘He was a keen cyclist.
But the reason he went that way yesterday was because it was cheaper at that supermarket.
‘It was partly for financial reasons, of that I have no doubt.’
Mrs Smith said her daughter Catherine had twice been seen by a doctor at her home since the accident.
‘He feels the same as us, that it is best not to sedate her, but let her grief come out now,’ she said.
Mrs Smith and her husband Edward now plan a Christmas for the children at their home in Corsham, Wilts.
‘Richard knows his dad is dead, but Stuart, the five-year-old, keeps asking ‘is Daddy coming home?’ she said.
‘You just keep telling him daddy is not coming home ever again.
It is so hard for them to understand.
‘The two little ones have no idea what happened.
‘They just see everyone being upset.
‘The best thing is to try to make it as good a Christmas as we can — as normal as possible.
‘You can't explain it.
You can't tell them there is any logic to it.
‘I know David and Cath were planning a normal family Christmas at home, the way it has been for several years.
‘Our company and the company of their cousins, aunties, uncles and family is best right now.’
Mr Adams, keen on nature, wildlife and bird-spotting, often went walking with his sons in the Oxfordshire countryside.
An engineer on Harrier Jump Jets, he twice served six-month periods in the Falklands, but not during the war.
He spent the last five years of his RAF career at Brize Norton, five miles from his Witney home.
The Adamses married when he was based in Norfolk 11 years ago.
Neighbours on the housing estate where the family live described Mr Adams as a hard-working quiet man.
‘I saw him at the Jobcentre a lot.
He was always looking for work,’ one said.
‘In the summer, he spent a lot of time painting his house.’
In a similar tragedy three days before Christmas last year, father-of-six David Button, 34, was knocked off his cycle and killed on his way to work from his home in Hedgerley, Bucks.
The driver Mick Thomas, 40, walked back to the scene and moved the bicycle before driving off.
He later gave himself up to police.
Six months later, Thomas, from Burnham, Bucks, was fined £200 for careless driving, £100 for having no insurance and £200 for not stopping to report the accident.
He was banned from driving for a year.
A 31-year-old labourer was yesterday charged with causing the death of Mr Adams by careless driving after drinking excessively.
Witney magistrates remanded him in custody until tomorrow.
Beans with no caffeine
A SCIENTIST is trying to grow caffeine-free coffee beans.
The move comes after health scares over chemical decaffeination.
Dr Rama Sastry, of Leeds University, has crossed an ordinary coffee plant with a low caffeine variety.
Home No 4 for Thaw
ACTOR John Thaw has splashed out £425,000 on a fourth home for himself and wife Sheila Hancock.
He has bought a house in Malmesbury, Wilts, which belonged to former Tory MP Sir Charles Morrison.
‘It's just perfect,’ said the 50-year-old Inspector Morse star.
The couple recently bought a £100,000 farmhouse in Provence in the South of France.
They also own two London homes — one worth £250,000 at Hammersmith, and another at Chiswick, which they plan to sell for Pounds 400,000.
Frozen solid
A FOOT of snow fell in the Scottish Highlands yesterday, bringing chaos to road, rail and air services.
Around 16,000 homes were left without electricity after drifts brought down power lines.
The heaviest fall, of 18 inches, was in Aviemore.
Rain is forecast for Scotland for today, and with the rapid thaw of much of the snow there is a threat of ‘very severe flooding’ for many parts of the north.
Latch-key care plan helps mothers up career ladder
Russell Jenkins
WORKING mothers are to get Government help to pursue their careers with the launch of new care schemes for their children.
Facilities will run after normal school hours to cater for latch-key children.
The scheme announced yesterday means women who now have to collect their children from school can take on more demanding jobs with longer hours.
Millions of working mothers are hampered in their careers because they have to leave work in the middle of the afternoon.
The scheme, costing £45 million over the next three years, will see the creation of children's clubs, childminding facilities and extended classes after school and during long holidays.
The cash will be channeled through the network of Training and Enterprise Councils.
Employment Secretary Gillian Shephard said there had been a lack of ‘good quality, safe, stimulating and affordable’ childcare for the over-fives.
She said: ‘The purpose of the grant is to extend choices for working parents, mainly women since they tend to take most responsibility for childcare.
‘The average full-time job requires 750 hours per year of work when schools are closed.
‘The complexities of childcare often drive qualified women to take a low-skilled but undemanding and convenient local job resulting sometimes in personal frustration and always in a loss of skills to the economy.
People can not work effectively and give their best if they are worried about unreliable childcare arrangements or children who are unsupervised.’
More than half of working men with degree qualifications work in professional and managerial jobs compared to 35 per cent of women.
A recent survey showed one in five parents were promoted once their children were given after-school care.
Allen loses bid to see children
WOODY ALLEN went shopping yesterday after a judge told him he could not see his children for Christmas but could send them presents.
Allen made an unexpected appearance at a preliminary court hearing in New York in his bitter custody battle with long-time love Mia Farrow.
The couple began fighting for the right to keep children Moses, 14, Dylan, seven and Satchel, four, after Mia revealed Allen's affair with her adopted daughter Soon-Yi.
‘I have been excluded from my children for five months and I am very worried that they are becoming isolated from me,’ said Allen, 57, afterwards.
‘I am worried the brainwashing will continue to take effect.’
The main custody hearing is next year.
Mia hopes to put her troubles behind her when she stars with Jack Nicholson in Wolf, say movie insiders.
The film is about a lawyer who turns into a werewolf.
Gun miner free
A FORMER miner who armed himself with a toy gun to protest against pit closures walked free from court yesterday.
Russell Telford, 29, stayed halfway down a pit shaft for nine hours after threatening a lift operator at Markham Main colliery, South Yorkshire.
Telford, of Wheatley, Doncaster, was conditionally discharged by town magistrates after admitting threatening, abusive and insulting behaviour.
Tory ladies suit each other NORMA Major's elegant pink and black ensemble would put most outfits in the shade — except Virginia Bottomley's.
Fortunately the pair were off to different events when they stepped out in the identical £420 jackets.
The Health Secretary was off to a private party.
Mrs Major was on her way to present Children of Courage awards at Westminster Abbey yesterday.
Among the seven brave children was blind cancer victim Nicholas Killen.
The seven-year-old, of Saltaire, West Yorks, lost his sight in an operation to save his life.
The premier's wife then sat Daniel Churchill on her lap to hear how he had battled against serious heart problems.
Doctors had warned that Daniel, five, of Sinfin, Derby, could die at any time.
Seven-year-old Rachel Lambert, of Barnsley, South Yorks, saved her brother Ryan when he was attacked by a rottweiler.
Celebrities including Michael Crawford and Peter Bowles saw her collect her bravery award.
Police swoop on rowdy SAS party
THE shadowy men of the SAS made no secret of the fact it was Christmas party time — neighbours could hear the noise a mile away.
The crack troops' annual knees-up became so rowdy, police were forced to raid it.
Officers stormed the elite regiment's closely guarded HQ after complaints about music booming from behind the razor wire.
In a rare public statement, the tough undercover soldiers — whose motto is Who Dares Wins — have apologised.
A senior officer said: ‘Any inconvenience to the local residents is regretted.
Each complaint is being considered and an appropriate response is being considered.’
One resident said: ‘We could hear the music and we live more than a mile away.
‘It must have been one hell of a party.
We had to call the police.
‘It's not easy to ask your neighbours to turn the noise down when they are the SAS.’
Furious neighbours rang the local Radio Hereford and Worcester to complain.
A caller said: ‘The party went on until 4am.
Music blared out and there was so much noise we were kept awake half the night.
‘I don't mind them celebrating Christmas but it's insensitive to keep it going at that level for that long.
‘It was only when the police asked them to turn the noise down that any of us had any chance of sleep.’
A spokesman for the Ministry of Defence police who went to the party, said: ‘I've been told not to say anything.’
Tipple a day keeps flu away
Nicki Pope, Medical Correspondent
THE best medicine for keeping colds at bay is a daily dose of your favourite tipple.
Teetotallers are three times more likely to develop tiresome winter snuffles than moderate drinkers, researchers have found.
But, with the Christmas party season in full swing, revellers are warned to stop after a few glasses.
Hitting the bottle too hard means the beneficial effect of alcohol disappears.
Psychologist Dr Andrew Smith said: ‘A little bit of alcohol is good for you.’
The head of Cardiff University's health psychology research unit revealed yesterday that 400 volunteers had been given cold virus nose drops.
While moderate drinkers were just as likely to become infected with the germs, fewer became ill with the symptoms.
Fifteen per cent of those who enjoyed a daily drink caught a cold compared to 45 per cent of non-drinkers, he told the British Psychological Society conference in London.
Dr Smith carried out the project, funded by the American government, at the common cold research unit near Salisbury, Wilts, before it closed in 1989.
One possible reason for the cure is that the alcohol may act as an anti-inflammatory agent, stopping symptoms like a runny nose.
If drinkers smoke with their wine or beer, the cold tonic will not work.
‘If you are a smoker, you have trouble with colds whether you are a drinker or not,’ said Dr Smith.
The study also found that people under stress, such as bereavement or divorce, are more likely to become ill.
Half of those suffering from stress caught colds compared to one in four of those who had not had their lives disrupted.
French trippers told to dump duty-frees
TONS of French beer and wine were dumped on the roadside after a crackdown on coaches rolling off cross-channel ferries.
Forty-five coaches stopped at checkpoints on the A2 in Kent exceeded permitted weight restrictions and passengers were ordered to unload duty-frees before being allowed to continue their journeys.
One coach was three tons overweight.
A Department of Transport spokesman said: ‘The trippers wanted the booze left on the roadside so they could come back for it.’
Customer sticks to his guns
A CUSTOMER superglued his arm to a shop counter yesterday in a row over a three-piece suite.
Firemen were called to free the 16st man at Kingdom Of Leather in Lakeside Shopping Centre, Thurrock, Essex.
Store manager Darren Banks, 28, said: ‘He marched in, rolled up his jacket sleeve and glued his left arm to the counter.’
Mr Banks has agreed to repair the suite.
Comic Jim splits from wife
Graham Brough
COMEDIAN Jim Davidson has been banned from his own home after his fourth wife Tracie took out a court injunction against him.
The former topless model took action which led to police being called when Davidson tried to get back in this week.
Fears that the Cockney comic was going to be involved in a bust-up sent officers racing to the 400-year-old luxury mansion he converted into a dream lovenest for Tracie.
By the time they arrived Davidson, 38, had gone to his local pub at Ewhurst, Surrey.
He agreed not to go back to the house and got a friend to collect some of his belongings.
Last night Davidson, host of the BBC snooker game show Big Break, admitted his marriage had broken up after just three years.
‘It is quite upsetting,’ he said.
‘My work broke us up.
‘I moved out to stay in a hotel and I think Tracie preferred it that way.
There is no bad feeling between us.
We just can't live together.
The separation is by mutual agreement.
‘I don't think people take me seriously any more when I get married.’
Tracie, 27, said: ‘I really can't say anything.’
The couple, who have two children — Charlie, three, and nine-month-old Freddie — had tried to keep their troubles a secret.
Davidson moved out of the house a week ago and they decided to separate last weekend.
He said there were no third parties involved.
Tracie is still staying at the £750,000 house with the children while Davidson lives in hotel rooms.
Davidson, who had previously been married for a total of less than five years to three different wives, said after falling for Tracie that she had made a new man of him.
He married first wife Sue Walpole at 17 in 1971 but the marriage ended after 11 months through his flings with other women.
Ten years later Davdison married Julie Gullick.
Five years, one son and two fresh starts later the marriage was over.
Television newsgirl Alison Holloway went down the aisle with Davidson in 1987 but split with him 18 months later because of his womanising.
Jim's spokesman Cliff Elson said there were no immediate plans for divorce.
Davidson will be performing in Wales up to Christmas and is due to entertain troops in Bosnia from Boxing Day.
Drug shame of Eubank cousin
BOXING champ Chris Eubank's cousin was the Mr Big of a £1 million drugs ring, a court was told yesterday.
Earl Eubank, 32, paid for a champagne lifestyle by dealing in crack.
He paid £14,000 cash for a BMW car, wore £500 Italian suits and £70 silk shirts.
And when police officers swooped on his waterfront flat in Bristol after weeks of surveillance, they found £4,000 in a bedside cabinet.
Eubank was found guilty of possessing drugs with intent to supply.
He was remanded in custody and will be sentenced in four weeks.
His mother Enid said after the hearing in Bristol: ‘He has brought shame on the whole family.
Chris will be furious.’
Snooker fan's sick obsession
AN OBSESSED fan yesterday admitted bombarding snooker world champion Stephen Hendry with obscene letters and phone calls.
Gillian Vincent, 26, who has never had a boyfriend, said it began after Hendry's manager Ian Doyle told her not to write anymore.
‘I was devastated,’ the clerical assistant told Sterling Sheriff Court.
‘All I wanted was a signed photograph or something like that.’
Vincent, of Stockport, Cheshire, admitted making offensive and obscene phone calls to Hendry's home.
She also pleaded guilty to posting obscene photos to the 23-year-old star.
Sentence was adjourned.
‘I am happy the matter is finished,’ said Hendry last night.
Care worker Denies affair
A SOCIAL worker who allegedly had an affair with a 14-year-old boy in her care appeared in court yesterday.
Michaela Corkill, 26, denied obstructing police, harbouring an absconder and drink-driving.
When Corkill, of Darlington, Co Durham, was stopped by police, the boy was in her car and she was over the drink-drive limit, Teesside magistrates heard.
The case was adjourned until March.
In a separate case, the boy, from Aycliffe Centre — a care home for Britain's most dangerous youngsters — was found guilty of 14 motoring offences.
He was sentenced to six months in a young offenders' institute.
It was said he was seduced by Corkill, who has resigned.
Hell hath no fury…
A GUN inspector whose jealous wife helped get him the sack was unfairly dismissed, a tribunal ruled yesterday.
Isobel Winick shopped husband Steve, 45, to bosses for taking tools home after she found he was having an affair.
Mr Winick, of Canning Town, east London, was found to have been unfairly dismissed by the Worshipful Company of Gunmakers in Stepney, east London.
But the panel said he was 100 per cent to blame for his sacking.
Ticket to a fortune
Paul Wilenius, Political Editor
LOTTERY tickets like these could win you a £1 million fortune in John Major's Christmas gift to the nation.
At least 52 millionaires will be created each year by the £1-a-go National Lottery unveiled yesterday.
And if Britain is really gripped by flutter fever there will be TWO £1 million top prizes each week.
Just like the New York lottery, punters can win in two ways — scratch cards with instant smaller prizes and a huge weekly draw.
A large slice of the takings will go to the arts, heritage, sport, charities and a fund to celebrate the Year 2000.
‘It will create millionaires and museums,’ National Heritage Secretary Peter Brooke told MPs.
He ruled out huge rolling jackpots of up to £20 million, believing they attract crime.
A special unit will be set up to stop crooks beating the system.
The National Lottery Bill should become law by next summer.
Tickets, likely to cost £1, will go on sale by 1994 in shops and booths linked to a state-of-the-art computer which will be used to draw the winning numbers.
A turnover of £1.5 billion a year would produce a weekly prize payout of £14 million with one top prize.
If it is a runaway success the draw could pull in more than £3 billion, creating at least two new millionaires each week.
Mr Brooke, who still has to decide on the age limit for lottery punters, would not reveal how big a portion of the cash will go to the Inland Revenue.
At least 30 per cent is for good causes.
It will be split five ways between the arts, heritage, sport, charities and the Millenium Fund.
Mr Brooke hopes the lottery will appeal to ordinary people not heavy gamblers.
‘We expect to attract people who are willing to have a flutter knowing that, win or lose, money will go to good causes,’ he said.
‘It opens up a wealth of exciting new opportunities.
There will be a wide variety of games.
Everyone will be able to play and tickets will be available across the country.’
Downing Street declared the scheme was Premier John Major's ‘Christmas present to the nation’.
Pools firms were not so full of festive cheer, warning it could mean the industry cutting 6,000 jobs.
They vowed to fight to the bitter end to stop it.
Vernons chief Malcolm Hughes said the plans went against the Government's free market philosophy.
‘Our proposals to allow the pools industry to compete on level terms with the lottery are fair and reasonable and have attracted the support of more than 100 MPs,’ he said.
‘This Bill will lead to uncertainty and anxiety among our workforce.
‘In the current economic climate this is unpardonable.
‘We will continue to press the Government to honour repeated assurances that the pools industry should not be harmed by the lottery.
‘It is a major disappointment that they have failed to take the necessary initiatives.’
But most people saw the giant draw as a good thing.
Sports Council chief Peter Yarranton said: ‘It is just the ticket’.
He added: ‘The lottery will be tremendously good news for sport.
‘The more people who participate in this new venture the greater the benefits to the good causes.’
Shadow National Heritage spokesman Ann Clywd was also pleased with the Government's plans but warned they must not put pools staff out of work.
She added: ‘It is essential this money is properly spent on the arts, sports and charities.’
Liberal Democrat national heritage spokesman Robert Maclennan gave the lottery announcement a cautious welcome.
His concern was the effect on pools companies.
‘The Bill provides no genuine concessions at all which might protect pools jobs,’ he said.
Voluntary organisations are anxious to ensure the huge prizes do not draw away much needed cash from their work.
The Institute of Charity Fundraising Managers was optimistic.
Director Stephen Lee said: ‘Charities are under enormous pressure to increase their services at a time when fundraising has never been so constrained.
‘We hope the lottery will provide additional income.’
The National Council for Voluntary Organisations said ‘major safeguards’ were needed.
Spokeswoman Judy Weleminsky added: ‘It is an ambitious and bold scheme which should undoubtedly benefit good causes.’
Double life of cheat husband
A HEARTBROKEN widow told yesterday how she uncovered her cheating husband's bizarre double life.
Brian Courtenay died a respected pillar of the stockbroker belt community in Caterham, Surrey.
But on the day of his funeral Jean, his wife of 38 years, found the first of a trail of clues to his lavish hidden lifestyle with a secret mistress.
The 60-year-old former catering company director left more than Pounds 200,000 worth of debt, all of it spent on the other woman.
For more than four years he rented a luxury flat near his home at a cost of £385 a week and showered her with expensive gifts.
Jean, 61, discovered the other life of the man who came home for his supper every night when a debt summons for £6,800 arrived on the day of his funeral.
‘I thought, ‘Oh the poor devil — I'll pay it and no one will ever know’,’ Jean said.
But that night, going through his belongings, she discovered receipts for the flat.
With it was a love letter from another admirer.
In the glove compartment of his car was another love letter, this time written by her husband.
There were also receipts for jewellery totalling hundreds of pounds.
‘I got out a ball gown to lend to a neighbour and found it had been cheaply dry-cleaned,’ she said.
‘He'd obviously lent it to her.’
In an intriguing story of middle-class values poisoned by lies and deception, Jean was to discover her husband had frittered away their entire lifetime's savings on his other woman.
My ordeal, by kidnap Joanna
Nick Craven and Bob Graham
MYSTERY kidnap victim Joanna Grenside spent 36 hours in the hands of a silent monster, she told her family last night.
The fitness instructor described how she was grabbed from behind, blindfolded and assaulted by a man who never spoke.
Joanna, 25, walked into the leisure centre where she works at 7am yesterday after vanishing on Tuesday.
Last night her sister Lucy, 21, emerged from a tearful reunion to tell of the ordeal.
‘She never saw him,’ she said.
‘She was dragged into a car and taken to a house.
‘She thinks it was some distance outside Harpenden from the time it took to get there, but she's very disorientated.
‘Whoever it was that took her never spoke a word the whole time, which made the whole experience worse.
‘She never knew what was going to happen to her.
It was very sinister.
‘She's extremely distressed by the whole ordeal.
It's been awful for me and my mother, too.
‘We are just so relieved she is back.
We did not know what to think last night and we had to fear the worst.
‘The Press helped.
I think that's why he let her go, because it was so well publicised.
That was a blessing in disguise.
‘She was still wearing the same clothes which she disappeared in.
‘He drove her back here this morning and she has now been seen by a doctor.’
Asked if Joanna had been hurt or assaulted, Lucy paused and said: ‘She's fine.
We are all so happy.
It's the best result we could have hoped for.’
Joanna arrived at the Harper's sports centre in Harpenden, Herts, still dressed in her gym kit.
She said she had been released half a mile away on a misty common and had not eaten for a long time.
Within minutes detectives, a police surgeon and her family arrived to begin the task of unlocking the mystery of her disappearance.
Her boyfriend, 38-year-old Dennis Davis, who also works at the centre, rushed there when he heard she was alive, hoping to be reunited with her.
Police told Dennis, who found Joanna's rape alarm close to her locked car after she failed to turn up to work at 7pm, that she would need time to get over what had happened.
After two and a half hours at the leisure centre, Joanna was taken to a police station in Hemel Hempstead.
Just before 1pm she returned home, accompanied by her mother, Penny, and a woman police officer.
Joanna, wearing dark glasses, refused to comment.
Penny said: ‘We are so relieved she is back.
‘It's unbelievable.
I have spoken to her already but she's in a lot of distress.’
Keith Parker, manager of the centre where Joanna works, said: ‘It is absolutely brilliant that she has come back safely.’
Police confirmed Joanna had told them she had been assaulted, but refused to give details.
Several hours after her release police still had not issued a specific warning about the kidnapper.
Detective Superintendent Ian Whinnett, heading the inquiry, said she was in a state of deep shock.
Interviewing her could take several days.
They were still keeping an open mind about the inquiry, he said.
‘I think it is very unlikely that the incident is a figment of Joanna's imagination.
‘If there is someone at large who confronts women, then of course we are concerned.
She is extremely distressed and has been seen by a police surgeon.
‘She will be gently de-briefed by two specially trained women officers.
‘We don't want to put her under a great deal of pressure after what she's been through.
‘She will probably be interviewed at home,’ he added.
Royal yacht storm
THE Queen came under fire last night when it was revealed it costs £369,000 for a day's sailing in the royal yacht Britannia.
Britannia left her home port of Portsmouth only six times last year cruising for just 31 days.
The total cost was £11.4 million.
This spending of taxpayers' cash was a ‘distressing waste’, Labour MPs said last night.
The revelation at the end of the Queen's annus horribilis may lead to serious calls for the royal perk to be stopped.
The royal train was another expensive item, figures showed.
The average cost of a single journey by a royal on the train last year was Pounds 52,000.
The train was used by royals on just 50 occasions in 1991 and 37 this year.
It cost £2.6 million in 1991 and £2.4 million in 1990.
Transport Minister Roger Freeman disclosed the usually secret information after a written parliamentary question from Labour MP Alan Williams.
He wants to put royal spending under the Commons spotlight when MPs return from their Christmas break.
Malcolm Forbes
ON September 14, 1992, TODAY reported that ‘billionaire businessman’ Malcolm Forbes had died of AIDS.
In fact the late Malcolm Forbes died from heart failure.
He did not have AIDS.
We apologise to the Forbes family and are happy to set the record straight.
1,000 chase 1 job
Russell Jenkins
MORE than 1,000 people applied for one £120-a-week job yesterday in a town whose name once epitomised wealthy Britain.
The avalanche of applications for the £8,500-a-year post as a customer services assistant poured in to the Seeboard electrical company at Hove, East Sussex.
One of the lucky ones shortlisted for an interview for the clerical post said: ‘I was told I was one of 33 people to get an interview after more than 1,000 people applied.
‘You don't expect that for a job paying £120 a week take home.
It's not exactly high-powered.’
Seeboard was less surprised.
A spokesman said: ‘Because of the current economic climate it did not come as a shock.
‘We have only advertised two posts in the past year, the previous one attracted 300 applicants.’
Last night the company said it was now looking for four full-time and one part-time person.
The flood of applicants is an indication of record unemployment in London and the South East.
Yesterday the region — once the engine room of the late Eighties boom — saw its jobless total top 10 per cent for the first time since the end of the Second World War.
Nationwide, unemployment figures went up by 41,000, making the total 2,908,900 million.
Half the rise comes from the South East.
In London 11.3 per cent of the workforce are jobless.
Although some Treasury ministers have hinted that economic recovery is in sight, no one on the Government benches has dared predict when unemployment will cease its remorseless rise.
Employment Secretary Gillian Shephard called the figures discouraging.
Announcing an extra 50,000 places on Government training schemes she promised to ‘do all I can to help unemployed people get back to work’.
Unadjusted unemployment increased by 49,657 to 2,864,069 in November, a rate of 10.1 per cent.
The total is now the worst since April 1987.
November's increase, the 31st consecutive monthly rise, means 10.3 per cent of the workforce is now idle.
Shadow Employment Secretary Frank Dobson said: ‘These figures are appalling enough, but the real jobless figure is over four million.
‘That's four million families facing a dismal Christmas, but the misery doesn't end there.
For every person who lost their job, there are another half a dozen who are frightened it will be their turn next.
The worst is yet to come.’
‘The cost of this level of unemployment equals £3,000 for every family in the country.
What a waste of money.’
The picture is grim nationwide.
Unemployment rose consistently throughout all the regions except Northern Ireland.
The South West and the North also suffered big rises in the percentage of workers without jobs last month.
Besides the South East, the West Midlands, Yorkshire and Humberside, North West, North and Wales all have unemployment levels higher than 10 per cent.
Ford calls off New Year's party
FORD bosses have cancelled a lavish New Year's eve dinner because it would have come too soon after 4,200 redundancies.
They had planned to splash out hundreds of thousands of pounds on the champagne evening at a hotel in London's Park Lane.
And singer Lulu had been hired to provide the cabaret.
But the company decided ‘it was not appropriate’ to spend the money when workers were losing their jobs.
The redundancies in Britain — mainly at Dagenham, Essex, and Halewood on Merseyside — are among 10,000 Ford jobs to be cut throughout Europe.
The dinner would have given many motoring journalists their first chance to see the new Mondeo model, which will replace the Sierra.
They will now have to wait until the car's European launch in San Tropez in January.
Ford said: ‘We want to cut costs and make sure money is being spent in the best way possible to promote the new range.’
Labour has a re-think
LABOUR leader John Smith launched a think-tank yesterday to come up with ideas for putting the party into power at the next Election.
The new commission will challenge traditional policies on employment, tax and social security.
Labour's front bench wants the party to appeal more to middle class voters.
But former deputy leader Roy Hattersley has already made a defiant call for a return to traditional Labour values.
Soaps are streets ahead in Top 100
Matthew Benns
And this is what TV viewers have been watching this year…
FORGET documentaries and current affairs — what viewers really want are soaps and compilations of repeats.
The list of the 100 shows which grabbed the biggest audiences in the past 12 months has episodes of EastEnders and Coronation Street in the top five places.
Those two would have filled the entire chart but compilers restricted the number of soaps on the list.
The most watched programme other than a soap was a repeat of Denis Norden's The Worst Of It'll Be Alright On The Night.
More than a third of the population — almost 20 million — watched the compilation of clips from earlier shows, which had already been screened a year before.
‘People do love seeing things go wrong, particularly if the unlucky ones are well known,’ said producer Paul Lewis yesterday.
EastEnders won the biggest audience of the year when 24.3 million people tuned in on January 2 to witness the anguish of Mark, who has the Aids virus.
Second place in Broadcast magazine's list was taken by Coronation Street, which featured the outcome of landlady Bet's Christmas bullying at the hands of her date.
‘The figures show that people do not really watch television to be informed, they watch it to relax,’ said David Graham, whose research company compiled the top 100.
‘This is where ITV's commitment to spending on popular programmes has paid off.’
ITV took spots 7, 8 and 9 with Jeremy Beadle's You've Been Framed, Rowan Atkinson's The Trouble With Mr Bean and The Darling Buds Of May starring Catherine Zeta Jones.
Also in the top 10 was Scottish Television's feature-length version of the police mystery Taggart, which attracted 18.3 million viewers on New Year's Day.
It left The Bill and Inspector Morse trailing in 17th and 18th places with almost 17 million viewers each.
Movies also pulled in big audiences with ITV's Saturday night showing of Three Men And A Baby in February attracting 18.3 million to make it the most popular film at No 11.
Top documentary was Elizabeth R, Sir Antony Jay's BBC celebration of the Queen's 40 years on the throne.
It was the 14th most popular programme in the past year, watched by 17.9 million people.
Crime was the other popular documentary subject last year with BBC Bristol's 999 and ITV's The Murder Squad vying with the soaps and sitcoms.
Most popular lifestyle programme was Wish You Were Here with Judith Chalmers, which appeared at No 20 with 16.3 million viewers.
Top of the consumer affairs programmes was the BBC's Crimewatch UK which had 13.4 million viewers.
Sport made little impact on the list.
The most popular event, Frank Bruno's fight against Jose Ribalta, attracted 13.8 million viewers to make No 46.
This year's FA Cup Final only made No 93.
Top of the game shows, at No 27, was Family Fortunes, with host Les Dennis entertaining 15.2 million people.
Directly behind it were Take Your Pick and The Krypton Factor.
Propping up the bottom of the top 100 was, you guessed it, another compilation of repeat film footage.
BBC1's appropriately titled Television's Greatest Hits attracted 12.2 million viewers.
I can't bear to think what that poor woman must be suffering
Isla Whitcroft
THE death of a father-of-four, mown down as he cycled home from the shops, has brought tragic memories flooding back for a young mother.
Just three days before Christmas last year, Noreen Button's husband was killed in a carbon copy of the accident that claimed David Adams's life on Wednesday.
Both were cyclists, both were devoted family men, both had baby sons, and their deaths left both families in torment.
‘I can't bear to think what that poor woman is going through right now,’ said Noreen, 29.
‘I feel so sick, so sad.
It was bad enough that the anniversary of my David's death was only a few days away.
Now I feel sadness for another family as well.’
David Button, a father-of-six, was knocked down as he cycled from his home in Hedgerley, Bucks.
Not once has the driver apologised to Noreen for the accident that wrecked her life.
For her, the court case, where he was fined £500 and banned for a year, was her lowest point.
‘I felt like screaming at him but I was determined to keep my dignity,’ she said.
‘Instead I bit my finger so hard I had teeth marks in it for two days.’
Last Christmas passed in a blur of despair for the Button family.
This year, Noreen is determined to make the day as happy as possible for the children.
‘David always used to wrap the presents and bake the Christmas cake,’ she said.
‘The kids would wake up early and he would disappear under a pile of wrapping paper.
‘It was his favourite time of year and that is why we must celebrate it properly.
You quickly realise, as Mrs Adams hopefully will, that you must be strong for your children.
‘I laugh but not like I used to and at times like birthdays and anniversaries I have such a lonely feeling.
There are times when you just need your husband.’
A 31-year-old man has been charged with causing David Adams's death by careless driving after drinking excessively.
As Noreen prepares for the anniversary of her husband's death she has a message of hope for Mr Adams's widow, Catherine, of Witney, Oxon.
‘I am determined we will have a good time.
‘I just hope Mrs Adams and her family will remember that in a year's time they might be able to enjoy their own Christmas too.’
B-test officer quits
A VETERAN police inspector caught drink driving after a day out with friends has quit the force, a court was told yesterday.
Kenneth Kelly, 50, will leave his £26,000 job at Brentwood police station on December 31 after 29 years in the Essex force.
Police stopped Kelly, of Chelmsford, and a breath test showed him to be more than twice the legal alcohol limit.
Chelmsford magistrates fined him £2,600 and banned him for 18 months.
Richard Randall, defending, said: ‘It was just one moment that will effect this man and his family for the rest of his life.’
Warders hurt as 4 jailbirds fight free
FOUR remand prisoners were on the run last night after they attacked prison officers and jumped handcuffed through a smashed window of a moving coach.
One of five officers was kicked unconscious and another had his nose broken after a prisoner slipped his handcuffs to lead the assault.
A window was smashed with an emergency escape hammer and six prisoners leapt out as the coach slowed.
Two were recaptured by police but four escaped across fields.
The incident happened near Market Drayton, Shropshire, as 20 prisoners were being taken to Stoke Heath Young Offenders Institution from a remand centre in Wigan, Greater Manchester.
Stoke Heath's principal officer Barry Pierce, 52, said: ‘There was a mobile phone on the coach and one officer raised the alarm.
‘It was one of the most ferocious attacks on prison officers I have ever had to deal with and it is vital these men are apprehended.’
Stone retreat is kingdom for a Morse
Ivan Waterman
THIS is actor John Thaw's dream home far from the madding crowd.
The reclusive Inspector Morse star has bought the £425,000 Cotswold stone retreat in Luckington, Wilts, so he and his wife, actress Sheila Hancock, can get away from the hurly-burly of London.
‘We both wanted to get away to the countryside.
Our careers are both manageable away from town,’ said 50-year-old Thaw last night.
‘I love the tranquil atmosphere.
It's no secret that I don't enjoy people stopping and staring at me.
That's one part of the job I have always found tricky.’
The six-bedroom, 18th Century home has three acres of manicured gardens and magnificent views over the Cotswolds.
Its previous owner was former Tory MP for Devizes Sir Charles Morrison.
The acting couple move in next February and won't be abandoning the capital for good.
They have a home in Hammersmith as well as a Pounds 100,000 farmhouse in Provence in the South of France.
The TV favourite admits Morse could only dream of owning his new spread.
‘I've been very lucky.’
he said.
‘Usually, you're only thinking about whether you are going to be working again.’
Comic Jim hopes to kiss and make up
Emma Campbell
COMEDIAN Jim Davidson is hoping for a New Year reconciliation with his estranged wife Tracie Hilton.
The former Page 3 girl had him banned from their £750,000 mansion after a fiery row and the couple announced they were to split.
Now both say they want to give their marriage another chance.
Jim, 38, star of TV's Big Break, is hoping to celebrate Christmas with fourth wife Tracie and their young sons Charlie, three, and one-year-old Fred.
He told friends: ‘I hope we can get back together and make a fresh start.’
Jim flies out to Bosnia to entertain British troops on Boxing Day and is pinning his hopes on a reunion two weeks into the new year after completing his hectic festive schedule.
The Davidsons' publicist Clifford Elson said last night: ‘Jim's going away for quite a while over Christmas which will give the situation a chance to defuse.
‘After that they can start over again which would be a wonderful way to start the year.
‘They'd both like to see a reconciliation and they certainly have no plans for divorce.
They are still very fond of each other.’
The cheeky comic, currently starring at a club in Usk, North Wales, blamed the break-up on his exhausting timetable.
‘It's a bloody shame, we just can't live together.
Hard work destroyed my marriage,’ he said.
Tracie, 27, took out an injunction last week barring Jim from their luxurious home at Ewhurst, near Guildford, Surrey.
Mr Elson said: ‘It was a domestic row which boiled over and, in the heat of the argument, the injunction came about.
‘It's not a permanent split and there is no one else involved.
‘The question of where Jim is going to live doesn't come into it because he is away.’
Tracie, who wed Jim in February 1990, spent yesterday at home.
She emerged briefly to collect her white Mercedes car with her father but refused to discuss the marital troubles.
‘I can't say anything, honestly.
I'm sorry.
I can't,’ she said.
Jim's previous three marriages all ended in divorce.
He was just 17 when he wed Sue Walpole in 1971.
The marriage lasted just 11 months, producing a daughter Sarah, now 20.
His second marriage to Julie Gullick, lasted the longest — five years.
They had a son Cameron, 11, but finally parted in 1986 after she accused him of giving her black eyes.
In 1987 Jim tried again with Sky TV presenter Alison Holloway but they split after seven months amid more claims of violence.
Janet Street-victor
YOUTH TV chief Janet Street-Porter yesterday won substantial libel damages over claims she was being demoted after a rift with BBC bosses.
The ‘offensive’ article in the London Evening Standard also referred to a nude poster wrongly said to adorn her office wall, the High Court heard.
Publishers Associated Newspapers and journalist Caroline Phillips also agreed to pay costs.
Shoppers defy IRA bomb threat
SHOPPERS in London's West End yesterday showed they were ready to defy the IRA bombing campaign.
At John Lewis — hit by one of Wednesday's two bombs — people queued up before doors opened.
‘If you stopped shopping the IRA would think they were doing the right thing,’ said Susan Wooldridge, 47, of Hungerford, Berks.
‘We are not going to let them drive us away.’
Fashion house worker Lisa Jones, 26, admitted looking in bins for bombs, but added: ‘If you worried all the time, you'd go crazy.’
An American TV cameraman filming in Oxford Street said: ‘We are doing a piece on the great British spirit.’
Bullies torture boy, 8 who refused to shoplift
THUGS poured petrol over a schoolboy and tried to set him alight after he refused to go shoplifting.
Neil Aspden, eight, was beaten and tortured with lighted cigarettes by the 12-year-old bullies.
They made him strip, put a plastic bag over his head and then poured petrol over him.
When it would not light they ran off, leaving the injured boy in a shed near a Leeds shopping centre.
Neil's mother, Sherie, 28, said: ‘I couldn't believe it when I saw him.
He was black and blue all over and looked half dead.’
Neil is now recovering in St James's Hospital after Wednesday's attack.
He was playing alone near his home when he was approached by the boys who wanted him to go shoplifting.
When Neil refused they punched him in the face and dragged him to shops two miles away.
After the beating, Neil staggered to the road where he was rescued by a motorist.
Two boys were remanded in to the care of the local authority by Leeds youth court last night.
Duchess of York at Heathrow
FERGIE and her daughters had to mingle with ordinary travellers at Heathrow yesterday as they waited for her sister to arrive from Australia.
Deprived of her royal privileges, Fergie,— with Beatrice, four, and Eugenie, two — was just another face in the crowd at 6am as she greeted Jane Makim, who is spending Christmas with her.
Charles and the age gap
PRINCE CHARLES told yesterday how he valued conversations with the Queen Mother and his late uncle, Lord Mountbatten.
He was speaking at the Age Resource Awards ceremony in London where he mixed up three of the commendations, much to the amusement of the mainly elderly audience.
The 44-year-old Prince lamented the generation gap but joked that ‘even at my advanced age I can make a muddle’.
Andy awards Gulf heroes
SIX hundred Gulf War heroes were honoured by Prince Andrew yesterday.
He presented 23 soldiers with campaign medals on behalf of the First Battalion the Staffordshire Regiment.
Two of its soldiers were killed during the final offensive against Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein.
The prince, who flew a Royal Navy helicopter in the Falklands War, is the regiment's Colonel-in-Chief.
He told the troops at a ceremony at Chester Castle: ‘Wear your medals with pride.’
BR gets guards on track
BRITISH RAIL wants such high-fliers for its new breed of Euro-train guard it is using psychologists to decide suitable candidates.
The Chunnel run specialists will have a fancy new title as well.
Instead of the boringly 19th Century name of guard, these fast track executives will be known as ‘train managers’.
They will need to speak fluent English and French and a little Flemish.
Another language on top of those — giving an ability to say ‘The buffet is shut’ or ‘This train will be two hours late’in four tongues — would be seen as a distinct advantage.
The new train guards will be assessed on communication skills, self-perception and the ability to work in a team.
‘It's more than a guard’ said a spokesman.
‘The nature of the trains means they must be of a very high standard.’
Despite the rigorous selection procedure, BR has been overwhelmed by applicants for the £17,000-a-year jobs.
Drivers of the Channel Tunnel super trains are also being enlisted.
At £20,500-a-year, the 85 drivers will need French to converse with Gallic colleagues.
Wash line tragedy
A MOTHER was found by her husband throttled to death with a washing line in her garden.
Doctors battled for an hour to save 24-year-old Yasmin Akhtra, but she died in hospital.
Yasmin was mother to a boy aged four and a two-year-old girl.
Her death on Monday was first thought to have been an accident, but a coroner ordered police to investigate.
A 31-year-old man was being questioned in Bristol yesterday.
‘We have spoken to her family to get a picture of exactly what happened,’ a police spokesman said.
7 years for mum rape
A WINDOW cleaner was jailed for seven years yesterday for raping one of his customers.
John Walshaw smashed into the 21-year-old mother's home as she slept and threatened to kill her if she struggled, Leeds Crown Court was told.
The victim's baby was asleep in the next room, said Ray Priest, prosecuting.
Walshaw, 31, of Dewsbury, West Yorks, who pleaded guilty, left his victim bound and gagged when he fled.
Judge Donald Herrod, told him: ‘It was a most serious offence of its kind.’
Gun gang take family hostage
Andrew Russell
AN armed gang ambushed a school caretaker and took his family hostage in a £75,000 raid yesterday.
The thugs pounced as Tony McLoughlin prepared to open up the school shortly after 7am.
With a gun held at his head he was forced to turn off all the alarms.
At the same time, other gang members burst into his family's home in the school grounds, seized his wife and dragged their two sons from their beds.
Sharon McLoughlin was marched with Anthony, 14, and Stuart, 11, across to the staffroom and tied up alongside Mr McLoughlin.
A tense 40 minutes followed as the gang waited for the arrival of a security van, loaded with double Christmas wages for local firms in Blackley, Manchester.
The raiders attacked the guards, headbutting one, before fleeing with £75,000.
The family, shaken but unhurt, were freed by one of the van drivers.
Headmistress Jean Palfreyman last night praised the family's courage.
‘The robbers were very tense waiting for the van to arrive,’ she said.
‘If Tony had attempted to get free I dread to think what would have happened.’
Boss's bonnet bungle
A GARAGE owner lost £4,000 takings after he drove off with it on the bonnet of his jeep.
John Wells parked the vehicle then went to an auction in another car.
John, of Pontypridd, Mid Glamorgan, said yesterday: ‘It wasn't until I came to pay for a car at the auction that I realised what I'd done.
The bag must have slipped off the jeep when I parked it.’
Save our hospital, Mr Major
Adrian Lee
CHILD cancer patients pleaded with John Major yesterday: ‘Please Mr Prime Minister, don't close our hospital ward.’
Thirty children delivered a petition to 10 Downing Street begging the Government not to close Kenton Ward at St Bartholomew's Hospital in London.
Bart's is under threat following the publication of the Tomlinson Report into the future of the capital's hospitals.
Campaigners fighting to keep it open fear children will die if the ward — one of the world's leading child cancer centres — is moved to another hospital without Bart's expertise.
The hospital's children's wards were built with £3.5 million raised by parents and well wishers.
The petition included touching letters written by the young patients, many wearing Santa Claus hats.
One of them, eight-year-old Emma Pengelly, wrote: ‘Dear Mr Major.
When I was born I had cancer in my eye.
‘The only doctors who could help me are at Bart's.
There are lots of other children who needs Bart's.
Please don't close it.’
Edward Hirst, whose 11-year-old son is undergoing treatment for leukaemia, said: ‘Our message to the Government is ‘Come and have a look at the work that is done here’.
‘We cannot afford to lose Kenton Ward.’
Housewife Vanessa MacMahon, 38, whose three-year-old daughter Katharine has leukaemia, said: ‘You can phone Katharine's doctor at any time with any problem and she is only too glad to help.
‘Kenton Ward is like our second home and it would break our hearts if it closed.’
Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley has promised no hasty decision will be taken over the hospital's future.
Rowan Atkinson
COMIC Rowan Atkinson is anything but funny in real life and is convinced people who meet him for the first time think he is a disappointment.
‘People would expect me to come into a room and crack them up,’ Rowan, 36, told Cosmopolitan magazine.
‘But the word is out that I'm not funny and that's a pretty good word to have.’
Would you credit it?
A BUSKER who stole 32 credit cards from the son of crooked Robert Maxwell is on the run from police, a court heard yesterday.
Marka Boljesic, 29, failed to show before magistrates after being arrested with Ian Maxwell's cards.
Boljesic, from Stuttgart, Germany, had been released on bail earlier this month charged with theft, obtaining property by deception and handling stolen goods.
Maxwell, 36, a former Mirror Group executive, was also in court this month, charged with conspiracy to defraud.
Maxwell only discovered his cards were missing after he went into a police station to see detectives.
Boljesic's solicitor, Donald Gordon, told Bow Street magistrates: ‘He left his bail hostel and hasn't been seen since.’
He was arrested trying to use one of the cards in a Pizza Hut restaurant in London's Piccadilly.
Detective Constable Bob McKenzie told the court: ‘He had 32 cards, some ordinary credit cards and some airline travel cards.’
Magistrates issued a warrant for his arrest.
‘I don't know how he got his hands on the cards,’ said Mr McKenzie outside court.
Poll tax bill sent to mud hut
COUNCIL officers chased a man for £37.63 poll tax all the way to a mud hut in Nigeria.
Zoology graduate Nick Coad left the debt when he went to work in the Omo forest three months ago.
Lichfield council got the demand to him via a friend of the family near Lagos and a courier.
Nick's mother Veronica, 48, paid the bill.
Treasurer Eric Turner said: ‘Lichfield council always gets its man.’
Muffet the bearcat
Muffet the bearcat peers out curiously at her new home in London Zoo, where she and new partner Brendan are the first of their species in 20 years.
Keeper Sarah Carter hopes they will breed.
British Rail get £221,000 slander bill
BRITISH Rail were ordered yesterday to pay £221,000 for falsely accusing a businessman of corruption.
Peter Martyn, 56, of Ravenshead, Notts, was awarded £50,000 damages and £171,000 costs for repeated slander by transport police investigating his railway machinery firm Permaquip.
Allegations of corruption were repeated behind his back, a London High Court judge heard.
And the British Rail Board stalled for four years, before admitting there was no evidence.
Mr Martyn said: ‘It became a personal vendetta — a very malicious campaign.
British Transport Police frittered away a million pounds when there was no evidence in the first place.’
Yesterday's award follows the collapse of another BR case in which MP Harry Greenaway had been accused of corruption involving a rail engineering firm.
Six in court over human torch girl
Andrew Russell
SIX people accused of kidnapping a teenage girl and turning her into a human torch appeared in court yesterday.
Security was tight as the two teenage boys, two men and two women stepped into the dock.
The hearing was adjourned for 15 minutes after a relative of 16-year-old Suzanne Capper tried to burst into court screaming abuse.
He was hustled away by some of the extra police officers drafted in for the case.
Suzanne, from Moston, Manchester, is still critically ill on a life support machine at Withington Hospital after suffering 80 per cent burns.
She was found wandering at a golf course, near Stockport, Cheshire, on Monday.
Before lapsing into a coma Suzanne, who had left home after a row with her stepfather, told rescuers she had been held captive for a week.
Before being dumped she had been beaten, stripped and then had petrol poured over her body and was set on fire.
The six accused of her kidnap and attempted murder are Glynn James Powell, 28, Jeanne Powell, 25, Jeffrey Stuart Leigh, 26, Bernadette McNeilly, 23, plus two boys aged 16 and 17.
The court ordered they should not be identified.
None of the six, who are all from Moston, applied for bail and they were remanded in custody until Wednesday.
Oxford gets the blues on research
CAMBRIDGE won the latest battle of the blues yesterday.
The light blues beat Oxford in a report judging the quality of research in 172 universities and colleges.
The next best were University College, London; Imperial, London; Edinburgh; Warwick and Nottingham.
Less fashionable institutions like Birmingham and Lancaster finished ahead of traditional Oxbridge alternatives such as Durham and Bristol.
The Universities Funding Council report assessed research by 43,000 academics in at least 72 subjects.
The results will determine next year's research grant.
Universities received £672 million this year.
‘These ratings should be a shining beacon to the Government to support research and cease their rob Peter to pay Paul policies,’ said an Association of University Teachers' spokesman.
Mary, 81, has crash course in parking
Ian Key
AT the age of 81, Mary Geeson is nothing if not careful with her car.
When she parked her H-reg Austin Montego to go Christmas shopping, she made sure to slip the security lock round the brake pedal and steering wheel.
Unfortunately, Mary then decided her parking wasn't absolutely perfect.
So she eased the car forward a few inches more — but forgot to take off the lock.
The consequence was…
The car, brakes disabled by the lock, shot across the street, mounted the far pavement, crashed through a wooden fence, hitting an Audi saloon.
A solicitor's Audi saloon.
That was just the start.
Mary, thrown forward in her seat, accidentally knocked the car into reverse.
As passer-by Jane King dashed to help, the rogue car boomeranged backwards — and knocked her down.
At that moment, a van driver was moving into Mary's old parking space.
So was Mary — still whizzing helplessly backwards, at a rate of knots.
The driver watched in astonishment as the car whacked into the side of his vehicle.
But at least that stopped the Montego's soaraway adventures.
Mary, shocked and bruised, was treated in a local hospital at Chesterfield, Derbyshire.
So was her would-be helper, Mrs King.
As Mary recovered at home in neighbouring Bakewell yesterday, husband Harold, 85, a retired engineer, said: ‘Mary has been driving for 17 years, and is very good.
‘But so many things happened, in a split second, there was nothing she could do.’
And the car?
It was at the menders' yesterday.
Looking as well as could be expected.
Sex beast flees boy
A BOY of 11 beat off a drunken sex attacker who jumped on his mother as they walked through a churchyard.
The boy kicked and punched the man after he forced his mother to the ground at St Benedict's in Wombourne, Staffs.
He eventually panicked and ran off as the boy screamed for help.
Ram raid! the big raids
MOTHER-of-two Wendy Pearce was trapped in her home for two days by a ram in her garden.
The ‘siege’ in Coleford, Glos, ended when police contacted the owner.
Passenger murdered
COMMUTERS watched in horror as a man was stabbed in the face on a train platform yesterday.
The 27-year-old, from Hornsey, north London, died in hospital after being attacked as he waited for a train with his brother at Finsbury Park Tube station.
A police spokesman said: ‘This was unmotivated.
The man and his brother were standing on the platform minding their own business.’
A man was being quizzed by police at Holloway station.
Watson back home
BOXER Michael Watson has gone home for a family Christmas to help with his recovery.
Doctors said last night Watson, 27, whos suffered head injuries was progressing slowly.
A spokesman for Homerton Hospital, east London, said: ‘These things take time.’
Relatives wept tears of joy as Watson, 27, arrived at his Essex home.
He has been in hospital for 14 months since being knocked out in a fight with Chris Eubank.
DS Roach to leave The Bill
TOUGH guy Tony Scannell is quitting The Bill after eight years as hard-drinking Detective Sergeant Roach, it was announced last night.
‘I think I've gone as far as I can with it,’ said Tony.
Michael Chapman, executive producer of the ITV hit series, said: ‘I'm sad to see the departure of the character DS Roach.
Both Tony and I felt the time was right for a change.’
It has yet to be decided how 47-year-old Tony's character will be written out.
He could leave the way open for a comeback or be murdered by villains.
Tony is currently appearing in pantomime at Reading.
Nigel gets out of Casualty
ACTOR Nigel Le Vaillant is leaving BBC hospital drama Casualty to avoid being typecast.
Heart-throb Nigel, who has played consultant Julian Chapman for three years, said last night: ‘If I carried on playing Julian people would assume I couldn't do anything else.
‘I would also get very bored.’
Nigel helped boost viewing figures to 15 million when he had a screen affair with nurse Sandra Nicholl, played by Maureen Beattie.
His character walks out of Holby General in a row over cash cuts in tomorrow night's episode.
Romeo major is stripped of rank
THE Army Major whose wife ran over and killed his lover has finally been stripped of his rank.
Anthony Dryland resisted resigning and stayed on at his spacious Army quarters in Germany after his wife Christine went berserk in her car.
She was sent for psychiatric treatment in March after a court martial found her guilty of the manslaughter of riding instructress Marika Sparfeld at the military base in August last year.
Major Dryland went on permanent sick leave, still drawing his Pounds 32,000 officer's salary, but aware the Army was expecting his resignation.
‘I can see no reason why I shouldn't keep my job because I have not committed any offence under military law,’ he said at the time.
However, senior officers had it clear in their own minds that the disgrace he had brought to the rank meant he would not be allowed to keep it.
The Ministry of Defence confirmed last night that the Army had finally lost patience and given him a month's notice to quit.
‘I can confirm that Major Anthony Dryland has been requested to resign his commission for misconduct by the Army board,’ said a spokesman.
‘He has a month to hand in his resignation and he has a right to appeal to the Queen.’
After 28 years' service, the 47-year-old major will lose his Army quarters in Soltau but will be entitled to a pension of about Pounds 15,000 a year.
His sacking is a clear message to other officers that they will receive no sympathy for their indiscretions.
Major Dryland refused to comment from Soltau last night.
He told TODAY soon after the tragedy: ‘My only crime is that I fell in love with another girl.’
£370,000-a-day cost of royal yacht Britannia
by Russell Jenkins
THE Queen came under fire last night when it was revealed that taxpayers fork out £369,000 for a day's sailing in the royal yacht Britannia.
Britannia left her home port of Portsmouth only six times last year cruising for just 31 days — at a total cost of £11.4 million.
The spending of taxpayers' cash was a ‘distressing waste’, Labour MPs said last night.
The revelation at the end of the Queen's ‘annus horribilis’ may lead to serious calls for the perk to be stopped.
The royal train also clocked up on average a staggering £52,000 for each journey by a royal last year, figures showed.
It was used by royals on just 50 occasions in 1991, and 37 this year.
It cost £2.6 million in 1991 and £2.4 million in 1990.
Transport Minister Roger Freeman disclosed the usually secret information after a written parliamentary question from Labour MP Alan Williams.
‘The sum of £19 million is the cost to the taxpayer of royal travel arrangements — the royal train, yacht and flights,’ said Mr Williams.
‘I am only sorry that my requests for the Public Accounts Committee to investigate royal travel costs as well as the cost of the royal palaces was not agreed to.’
Britannia is used during the Queen's visits abroad in the hope that its 39-year-old Clyde-built quality will impress export customers.
In 1984, £6 million was spent converting it to diesel and in 1987 it was refurbished at a cost of £22 million.
Ironically it was the former Labour prime minister Clement Attlee who persuaded Parliament to spend £2 million for a new royal yacht, claiming it would double as a hospital ship in war time.
It has never done so — when the Task Force sailed for the Falklands, Britannia was left behind.
The royals have had their own train for 150 years.
Ten or more coaches may be needed for a provincial tour by the Queen when the train becomes her Palace on Wheels.
The train has its own telephone exchange and electricity generating car, plus office accommodations and restaurant cars for the royal entourage.
But now the ‘cloak of secrecy’ must be cast aside from the Civil List, said Mr Williams.
He wants to put royal spending under the spotlight when MPs return from their Christmas break.
Premier flies into TV row with Delors
by Eben Black in Montreal
PREMIER John Major and EC boss Jacques Delors clashed bitterly in mid-air last night — over high-tech TV.
Mr Delors claimed Mr Major had gone back on his word that Britain would help fund the EC-backed High Definition TV, being developed by France and Holland.
Officials were forced to step in to calm the pair as they rowed on board a British Airways flight to a summit in Ottowa, Canada.
Britain, said Mr Delors, had struck a deal at the Edinburgh Summit, promising to contribute £100 million towards the £400 million cost of the ‘super TV’.
‘For me it is part of the agreement we reached in Edinburgh,’ said Mr Delors, the EC Commission president.
But Mr Major angrily denied this, saying the technology was already outdated and any cash put forward would be a waste of money.
The TV is regarded as the next generation of home sets, with a flat screen that can be hung on the wall like a picture.
‘We were looking at the issue but there was no commitment from us,’ said a senior British official.
Tempers flared as the pair arrived 3½ hours late for their high-profile visit to Canadian prime minister Brian Mulroney.
First, Mr Delors — who had earlier sent a furious letter to Mr Major, complaining of Britain's lack of faith over the TV pact — had kept him waiting for over an hour at Heathrow while his flight from Brussels was delayed by fog.
The airport at Ottawa was also closed because of‘zero visibility’, forcing the British Airways flight to divert to Montreal, 2½ hours' drive away.
Before the row, Mr Delors had praised Mr Major's stint as EC President during the last traumatic six months.
He could not deny the success of last weekend's Edinburgh Summit when deals on the future of Denmark and the EC's budget were struck.
‘You know very well British runners and athletes — many times they win because their finish is excellent,’ he said.
‘They are excellent in the last lap.’
Children appeal for cancer ward
by Adrian Lee
CHILD cancer patients yesterday pleaded with John Major: ‘Please Mr Prime Minister, don't close our hospital ward.’
Thirty children delivered a petition to Downing Street pleading for the Kenton Ward at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London.
Bart's is under threat following the publication of the Tomlinson Report into the future of the capi tal's hospitals.
Campaigners fear children will die if the ward, a world leader in child cancer care, is moved.
The petition included letters from young patients.
Emma Pengelly, eight, wrote: ‘The only doctors who could help me are at Bart's.
Please don't close it.’
Jailbirds fight free
FOUR remand prisoners were on the run last night after they attacked prison officers and jumped handcuffed through the smashed window of a moving coach.
One of five officers was kicked unconscious and another had his nose broken after one of the prisoner slipped his handcuffs to lead the assault.
Six tried to break out but two were recaptured by police.
The incident happened near Market Drayton, Shropshire, as 20 prisoners were being taken to Stoke Heath Young Offenders Institution from a remand centre in Wigan, Greater Manchester.
Stoke Heath's principal officer Barry Pierce said: ‘It was one of the most ferocious attacks on prison officers I have ever had to deal with.’
£23m bank raid
Wayne Bodkin
EVIL robbers turned a terrified bank guard into a human bomb and threatened to blow him up before stealing £23 million in cash.
Two men held the night security chief and his family at gunpoint for more than 12 hours after breaking into their home.
The gangsters stayed all day with the family — who were tied up — calmly watching television.
Later, the guard was forced to put on a belt packed with plastic explosives and connected to a detonator.
One gunman stayed to guard the man's family, while the other took him to the Banque de France in Toulon, France, where four others were waiting.
The guard, who has not been named, was told he would be blown up and his family killed if he made one false move.
The robbers opened the strongroom and packed the cash into bags.
Before driving off, they threatened to kill his wife and daughter if he did not wait before getting help.
The raid was the biggest-ever in France.
‘It was carried out with commando-like accuracy,’ said a bank spokesman.
Busker ‘stole’ Maxwell cards
A BUSKER who stole 32 credit cards from the son of crooked Robert Maxwell is on the run from police, a court heard yesterday.
Long-haired Marka Boljesic, 29, failed to show before magistrates after being arrested with Ian Maxwell's cards.
Boljesic, from Stuttgart, Germany, had been released on bail earlier this month charged with theft, obtaining property by deception and handling stolen goods.
Maxwell, 36, a former Mirror Group executive, was also in court this month, charged with conspiracy to defraud.
Maxwell only discovered his cards were missing after he went into a police station to see detectives.
Boljesic's solicitor, Donald Gordon, told Bow Street magistrates: ‘I'm afraid I really have no idea where my client is.
‘He left his bail hostel and hasn't been seen since.’
He was arrested trying to use one of the cards in a Pizza Hut restaurant in London's Piccadilly.
Detective Constable Bob McKenzie told the court: ‘He had 32 cards, some ordinary credit cards and some airline travel cards.’
Boljesic last appeared in court on December 10 when he was released on bail.
Mr Gordon added: ‘He was sent to one bail hostel, then transferred to another in Corfton Road, Ealing, west London, on December 12.
‘But the staff there said he disappeared two days later.
‘They have now let his room go to someone else.’
Yesterday, magistrates issued a warrant for his arrest.
Outside the court, Mr McKenzie said: ‘I don't know how he got his hands on the cards.’
Face to face with my dead husband's lover
Jackie Annesley
WIDOW Jean Courtenay tells today of the moment she confronted the woman with whom, for years, she had unwittingly been sharing her husband.
TODAY revealed yesterday how Jean, right, discovered the guilty passion of husband Brian through the trail of clues he left when he died aged 60, after 38 years of marriage.
She tracked his middle-aged mistress to a caravan-site love nest only two miles from her bungalow home.
In a ferocious encounter, Jean screamed: ‘Get off my property now!’
Gentle Touch
by Nick Craven and Bob Graham
TEAMS of experts and women police officers were last night trying to unlock the tortured mind of fitness teacher Joanna Grenside.
A forensic psychiatrist was called in to help solve the mystery of her disappearance as she broke down under questioning.
Two specially trained women officers twice tried to piece together fragments of the missing 36 hours following Joanna's abduction at knifepoint as she arrived for work.
They used the gentle touch to minimise the pressure on the 25-year-old woman following her horrific experience.
But their task was impossible because of her hysterical state.
Their method has been perfected after years of experience dealing with female victims of violence.
Joanna has been interviewed at her home in Harpenden, Herts, and in a crisis suite at Hemel Hempstead police headquarters, designed to provide a relaxing atmosphere.
As she again became distraught yesterday, Detective Superintendent Ian Whinnett sent for a police psychiatrist.
‘I have halted the interview to give this extremely distraught young lady some breathing space,’ he said.
So far, not a single witness has come forward to throw any light on Joanna's confused account of her abduction on Tuesday night from outside the Harpenden Leisure Centre where she worked.
For two days and nights police have been questioning Joanna.
But because she keeps breaking down the details remain confused.
Two days ago they said she had not been assaulted.
Yesterday they said: ‘We cannot rule it out.’
Last night, as detectives waited to continue their questioning, they said they feared Joanna could have blotted important details of her ordeal from her mind.
Mr Whinnett said: ‘I am not a psychiatrist, but if someone has been through a traumatic experience I have to consider that it could happen.
‘Something has happened to cause her a great deal of distress.
‘She was most certainly subjected to some sort of ordeal.’
He added: ‘If anyone has been through a traumatic experience, it takes a long time to unwind.
We must allow what has happened to come out gradually.’
Police revealed yesterday that Joanna had told them a second man was involved in her disappearance.
She said he was driving the car into which she was dragged after being grabbed from behind.
A blindfold was put on, she said, and remained in place throughout 36 hours of pure terror.
This was the only time Joanna heard her captor's voice as he ordered: ‘Get in the car.’
From these four words she believes the men were white and local.
She sat bolt upright in the back seat during the hour long journey, some of which was on a motorway.
Mr Whinnett said: ‘The vehicle turned into a driveway.
One of the men had a key and she was moved from the car into an empty, damp and very cold house.’
Throughout the night Joanna sat on the floor, too terrified to cry out for help or remove the blindfold despite being in agony as her contact lenses dried in her eyes.
Over the next day and a half she only left the room twice to go to the toilet.
She was given no food, just a cup of tea and water.
Mr Whinnett said: ‘Joanna was in a state of pure terror and, although she sat down for a while, she most certainly did not sleep.’
Her ordeal ended as strangely as it began and without any apparent reason.
Just before dawn on Thursday, Joanna was dumped a quarter of a mile from the spot where she had vanished, right under the noses of police officers searching for her.
Although the blindfold was removed as she was ‘kicked out of the car’, Joanna did not catch a glimpse of her kidnappers or their vehicle.
‘She wears contact lenses and they hurt her eyes,’ said Mr Whinnett.
‘It took her time to adjust to the light when the blindfold was removed, so she saw nothing.’
Instead of rushing to a telephone box less than 40 yards away or walking to her nearby home, Joanna trudged to the leisure centre.
From there she called her mother, Penny, ending the family's nerve-wracking wait.
Gales lash south
A 9,700-ton coaster lies battered and broken after it was hit by gale-force winds and huge waves which lashed the south coast yesterday.
The empty 400ft Demetrius, being towed from Dunkirk in northern France to Greece for scrap, was wrecked after it ran aground at Prawle Point in south Devon.
A Brixham coastguard said the vessel was likely to break up further.
High winds and torrential rains have swept eastwards across the country, prompting warnings for drivers to take extra care.
Crossings between the mainland and the Isle of Wight were disrupted, roads were flooded in Devon, Somerset and Warwickshire and flood alerts were issued on seven Welsh rivers.
A canoeist died when his canoe overturned in the swollen River Ogwen in north Wales.
Make or break in store
HIGH Street stores throw open their doors today and tomorrow for a make-or-break final festive shopping weekend.
They hope families will succumb to the traditional last-minute dash to buy gifts.
For many retailers, particularly jewellers, the days before December 25 are the most crucial.
Hundreds of businesses admit that without a free-spending Christmas they will go under.
But they are confident families will shrug off the threat of IRA bombs.
The Retail Consortium said: ‘Like every year, families want to make Christmas special.’
Interest cut ahead
PROSPECTS of an early New Year interest rate cut rose yesterday as share prices soared by almost £10 billion.
Chancellor Norman Lamont is expected to drop rates from seven to six per cent— if the Germans lead the way.
There was also brighter news on the trade front for Britain yesterday, with a £766 million cut in the trade gap.
Bart's ban
POSTERS in the campaign to save St Bart's Hospital from closure have been banned from London's Underground.
London Transport said they were political and infringed its advertising code.
Meet Robin Hood
Eben Black, Political Correspondent
A FINANCIER who made a billion when the pound collapsed yesterday gave £32 million to charity.
George Soros's donation, thought to be the biggest private gift to a humanitarian cause, will go to aid agencies in the former Yugoslavia.
Hungarian-born Mr Soros, 62, told a London news conference: ‘I don't expect other people to make donations of this size.
I'm doing what I can and I think everybody should do what they can do.’
He is splitting his huge donation between four charities, including UK-based Oxfam and the United Nations High Commission for Refugees.
‘What is going on in Bosnia is genocide,’ he said.
‘I feel it particularly strongly because, as a Hungarian Jew, I was myself a potential victim of the Holocaust.
My heart goes out to the people who are being raped, pillaged and murdered just because they are Bosnian Muslims.
‘The civilised world must protect them if we are to remain civilised.
It we do not, we shall be ruled by terrorism and fundamentalism of all kinds.’
One of the charities benefiting is the UK-based Oxfam will get an initial £637,000.
Director David Bryer said the gesture was ‘magnificent’.
Mr Soros used his donation, a 20th of what he made in his currency speculation, to urge Nato to use military force in Bosnia so aid could reach suffering civilians.
‘The regular army of Yugoslavia will think twice before it decides to wage war on Nato,’ he said.
Mr Soros was dubbed ‘the man who broke the pound’ after speculating against it on Black Wednesday when Britain left the ERM.
His gamble made £666 million.
Meanwhile, Premier John Major was walking a diplomatic tightrope in Washington yesterday to avoid Britain being drawn into a ground war with Serbia.
He was under immense pressure from the US to give in and back no holds barred military action by UN forces in the former Yugoslav republic.
But he is ready to accept the need for air power to be brought into play against the Serbs to enforce the UN no fly zone over Bosnia.
He also wants to create a safe haven for the Serbs' Moslem victims and is prepared to offer increased UN troops to safeguard relief supplies.
Mr Major was going to Camp David last night to urge President Bush to use a softly softly approach to the crisis.
They will announce the final plan to be put to the UN tomorrow.
Major ‘snubs’ Lamont party
by Paul Wilenius, Political Editor
PREMIER John Major snubbed Chancellor Norman Lamont's Christmas drinks party — and went to Lord Archer's bash instead.
Mr Major sent his chief policy adviser Sarah Hogg to represent him at No 11 while he tucked in to shepherd's pie and Krug champagne at the Archers' riverside flat.
The embattled Chancellor had been hoping for a public show of loyalty from the Prime Minister.
But his notable absence has heightened speculation that the pair have fallen out, and that Mr Lamont may be sacked.
Mr Lamont looked uncomfortable and embarrassed at the party, attended by the press, on Wednesday night.
He expected Mr Major to turn up at another party on Thursday night — even sneering: ‘This is the vomit party, tomorrow's is the cream’— but the Premier was flying across the Atlantic for a high-profile visit to Canadian leader Brian Mulroney.
The Treasury inisted last night that Mr Major would not normally be expected to attend.
He did not go last year because he had dinner with Bank of England Governor, Sir Robin Leigh-Pemberton.
Bambi role for love split Tatum
Gerard Evans in Los Angeles
FIERY actress Tatum O'Neal is to star as a killer in her first TV series since splitting with tennis ace John McEnroe.
Tatum, 29, signed for the role of ex-Playboy bunny Bambi Bembenek — who killed her husband's ex-wife -just a fortnight after she revealed she was ending her six-year marriage.
She believes the plum role with US network NBC will give her ‘massive exposure and send a signal to film studios that she's back’, say friends.
Tatum had stayed out of the spotlight to bring up their three children Kevin, six, Sean, five and one-year-old Emily.
She split with McEnroe, 33, after he refused to allow her to return to work.
Tatum, who has always followed her husband on the tennis circuit, last week stayed in New York while McEnroe took two of the children to Fort Worth, Texas, for the Davis Cup tournament.
She will start filming the mini-series Woman On Trial: The Lawrencia Bembenek Story in the New Year.
Bembenek was released from jail on December 9 after serving 10 years for the murder of Christine Schultz.
Emma's trio of triumphs
ACTRESS Emma Thompson yesterday marched towards an Oscar as she picked up her third film award in a week.
The New York Film Critics Circle gave Emma, 33, its top honour after she picked up the DW Griffith and Los Angeles Critics awards for her portrayal of Helen Schlegel in the adaptation of E M Forster's novel, Howards End.
Lowe down on Old Lace
BRAT pack actor Rob Lowe's next role could be the Cary Grant part in a remake of the comedy Arsenic and Old Lace.
Producer Lord Grade wants Lowe to star as a writer whose aunts are using their basement as a mortuary.
Flossie comes home
by Sarah Grady
SCHOOLBOY Robert Airey thought he had lost his best friend forever.
The dog he had raised from a pup went missing 31 days ago after running off on a country walk.
Robert's heart told him there was hope of seeing Flossie again.
His head said not even his faithful border collie could survive a horror like falling down a manhole.
That was precisely what had happened.
Trapped for a month, only the dog's determination to be reunited with her master kept her going.
She had lost a stone and was too weak to whimper when rescued.
But when Robert, 13, rushed to her side, Flossie managed a feeble wag of her tail.
Robert, of Almondbury, Huddersfield, West Yorks, had scoured the countryside for days after she ran off on November 14.
Then builder Reg Senior, 50, who was pigeon shooting near Robert's farmhouse, heard a sound from an open manhole.
‘Flossie was skin and bone.
All the rain had made the walls moist.
She must have been able to lick enough water to keep alive,’ he said.
Mr Senior contacted four farms on Tuesday before finding the right one.
Robert's mother Christine said: ‘Robert was overjoyed.
It's a miracle she survived.’
Cuddling Flossie close, Robert said: ‘I'm feeding her a little bit at a time and she is looking much better already.’
Michael Herrtage, chief officer at Cambridge University Veterinary Hospital, said dogs could survive long periods without food if they had water.
‘There is no reason why she shouldn't regain full fitness,’ he said.
That's the best Christmas present Robert could have.
‘The next time I take her for a walk, I'm not going to let her out of my sight,’ he said.
All week I prayed for a miracle, but it was not to be
Andrew Russell
THE father of human torch victim Suzanne Capper spoke of his grief yesterday after she lost her fight for life.
John Capper revealed how he and 16-year-old Suzanne had planned a lovely family Christmas before she was found wandering badly burned near a golf course.
Former taxi driver John, 55, of Manchester, said: ‘Life is just one big hell at the moment.
‘I would like to shut myself away but I can't.
I have not been able to sleep or eat.
I am totally grief stricken.
I prayed for a miracle all week but it was not to be.’
John had been at Suzanne's hospital bedside since early last Monday when she was found naked with 80 per cent burns in Stockport, Greater Manchester.
Surrounded by Christmas decorations John said: ‘She was in an awful state but I will always remember her as a lovable child.’
Although Suzanne lived with friends, John said they had planned a family Christmas with her sister Michelle, 20, and brother Steven, 14,
‘We had been to Blackpool to do some Christmas shopping last month and everything was going so well,’ he said.
‘We were going to have a nice family Christmas.
I had bought her a watch for a present.
‘Now I just want to get Christmas over with.
But the worst is yet to come.’
‘I can think of no reason for what has happened.
I am totally confused.
It just makes me numb.
‘I will remember Suzanne as a child who was always there for me.’
Suzanne left school eight months ago to look for a job.
‘She just wanted a job.
She would have taken anything,’ said John.
‘Me and her mother split up about two years ago.
It did not seem to hit the kids hard but they did not show their feelings.
‘When she started staying with friends I would not see her for about a week or so, but I was not concerned.
‘I last saw her eight days before she was found.
‘For some reason I became worried after about four days.
I do not know why.
‘I was going to call the police, but I didn't.’
Police said six people already charged with Suzanne's kidnap and attempted murder would be charged with murder at their next court appearance.
Orphans ban
NINETY Albanian children have been refused British visas because they do not hold full passports.
The children, many of them orphans, were to have spent Christmas with 60 foster families in Wigan and Leeds.
Brother killed after reunion
TUBE passenger Jonathan Zito was stabbed to death in front of his brother just after they had been reunited for Christmas.
A crazed killer plunged a knife into his eye as he waited on a crowded platform.
Jonathan, 27, who married just two months ago, had just met brother Christopher, 30, after he flew in from Italy.
One of Jonathan's neighbours in Hornsey, north London, said last night: ‘He was looking forward to a big Christmas.
His family is absolutely devastated.’
The brothers were at Finsbury Park station on their way from Heathrow when a youth, who had been wandering aimlessly, pulled a knife and stabbed Jonathan.
His widow Jane was said to be ‘inconsolable’ as she was being comforted by friends.
A man was charged last night with murder.
Trevor still settling into ITN hotseat
ITN bosses have criticised anchorman Trevor McDonald for his lacklustre presentation since News At Ten was revamped last month.
They say he looks nervous and his performance is not the same as on pilots for the programme.
Editor-in-chief Stewart Purvis says in a secret letter to a colleague that Trevor's poor showing was due to launch nerves and press criticism.
‘We are working hard on rebuilding his confidence,’ he says.
Trevor, 53, won the prestige job ahead of Julia Somerville and former ITN newsreader Alastair Stewart.
Ratings dropped during the first week of the revamped programme, but ITN now claims this trend has been reversed.
A spokeswoman said last night: ‘It is standard practice to review and fine tune all programmes when they are introduced or modified.’
Hoover tries to deflate flights row
VACUUM cleaner giant Hoover has had to employ two extra travel agents to handle more than 200,000 requests for give-away flights.
The firm has been deluged by applications for tickets after it offered two flights to Europe with every Hoover product bought worth more than £100.
The promotion has led to some shops selling out of £120 vacuum cleaners, and the Cambuslang, Strathclyde, factory that makes them has defied the recession by switching to seven-day working.
A spokesman denied the firm would renege on the offer.
She said: ‘We stand by our reputation.’
Godzilla's monster fee
MOVIE monster Godzilla is heading for Hollywood and a multi-million pound budget.
‘We're really eager to see how a Godzilla film made by Americans will turn out,’ said Takashi Nakagawa of Toho studios, the maker of the movie monster's 19 Japanese films, famous for their tacky model sets.
‘It's great news for all Godzilla fans.’
Toho is negotiating with TriStar Pictures, a studio owned by Japan's Sony Corp, to make a £26 million film which could be released by Christmas 1993.
Pricey pints
GUINNESS is going down a treat in Sweden — at £5.50 a pint.
It is the first foreign draught beer in Swedish pubs.
‘The response is fantastic,’ said a spokesman.
What makes a top model cry
The face they show to the public is the icy hauteur and the arrogant pout — the trademarks of the world's top models.
But inside those perfect bodies are emotions and, when the pain is great enough, the mask slips.
It slipped for Tyra Banks, centre, who wept as models gathered at the Black Girls Coalition to attack racism in the fashion industry.
Naomi Campbell, left, and Iman, right, kept their tears in check — and inside.
Judge frees teenage death driver
AN Old Bailey judge was branded a ‘disgrace’ yesterday for freeing a teenage drink driver who killed a 15-year-old boy.
Learner driver James Cook, 19, was almost twice over the legal limit, was speeding and had no insurance when he crashed into a pub.
His friend Amos Boner, a front seat passenger, died of multiple injuries.
Cook, of Sutton, Surrey, admitted causing death by reckless driving.
Recorder John Hugill, QC, placed him on two years' probation after he heard he was now an ‘emotional wreck’.
‘This is another example of how stupid judges can be,’ said Harry Cape, of the Campaign Against Drink Driving.
Double take
MAGICIAN Paul Daniels arrived to greet shoppers in Loudwater, Herts — but the supermarket had vanished.
He should have been in Loudwater, Bucks, 30 miles away.
Odds-on
Emma Campbell and Kevin Murphy
EVERY ticket holder in the new national lottery could become an instant millionaire — but you'd be one in 3.2 million.
A £1 million jackpot will be up for grabs every week for that one person who picks the right six numbers.
That is if the Government opts to follow the Irish national lottery format.
On football pools the odds of becoming a millionare are much better, and they're a virtual certainty compared to the chance of winning the £250,000 Premium Bond prize.
Betting is one of Britain's top leisure activities, even more popular than a trip to the pub or eating out.
Analysts reckon at least two in every three adults gamble regularly, spending more than £12 billion a year.
It is estimated a national lottery could raise £3 billion, of which £1 billion would go to charities.
But how does the cake divide up for the punters?
TODAY looks at the odds in the most popular forms of gambling.
NATIONAL LOTTERY
THE odds of becoming an instant millionaire are 3.2 million to one each week.
The chances of picking up a smaller prize are much greater.
One scratchcard in six is expected to come up with a prize between £1 and £100.
The Irish national lottery has created 19 millionaires since it started five years ago.
FOOTBALL POOLS
MORE than one in three adults fill out coupons in the most popular form of gambling.
But they offer the worst rate of return, paying out around 30p in £1 after 40 per cent in duty and arts fund levy has been deducted.
But the odds of becoming a millionaire are good, about one in 186,046.
Odds of a small win are even better, about one in four.
HORSES: COURSE
HORSES sound a good bet when figures show that 88 per cent of stake money is returned in prize money.
That means for a regular punter, however, that over a period of time, for every £100 staked he or she will end up with £88 in pocket.
More than £1 billion is bet on greyhound racing each year in what is Britain's most popular spectator sport.
BINGO
THE housewife's favourite takes £666 billion in stake money every year.
Of that, 95 per cent goes back in prizes on cash bingo — less for prize bingo — but the individual's chances are low.
The odds depend on how many people are in, and the size and number of prizes.
At least 5 million people play bingo, 80 per cent of them women.
SCRATCH CARDS
ONE scratchcard in six is designed to pay out prizes of between £1 and £100.
The cards are sold on behalf of various councils and charities.
They bring in a similar amount of cash as small, or public, lotteries.
These also raise money for charity and pay out 50p for every £1 worth of tickets bought.
PREMIUM BONDS
THE chance of Ernie picking your number for the monthly Pounds 250,000 prize is 2,400 million to one.
However, a person with a Pounds 100 stake has a 110 to one chance of winning any prize.
Also, premium bonds stay valid for every draw instead of the stake being lost.
Only 6.5 per cent of the £2.3 billion invested is paid out in prizes.
CASINOS
AROUND £2 billion is exchanged for chips in casinos every year — and 97.5 per cent is returned in winnings.
That doesn't mean there is a 97.5 per cent chance of winning.
On roulette, for example, a bet on a colour has a 50-50 chance.
A bet on a single number has a 35 to one chance.
But the bigger the risk, the bigger the payout.
HORSES: SHOPS
THE odds are worse than for on-course betting, with a return of 81 per cent.
Professional punters can make it pay by carefully studying form but the average punter will end up with £81 for every Pounds 100 staked.
It is estimated that more than £12 billion a year is spent on gambling, and at least half of that is taken in Britain's 10,000 betting shops.
FRUIT MACHINES
SUCCESSORS to one-arm bandits, fruit machines have to pay out 70p for each £1 slotted in.
‘If you play lots of games you lose in the end,’ warns Gaming Board secretary Tom Kavanagh.
‘With a short game span the temptation is to chase your losses.’
A million youngsters aged between 10 and 16 gamble £60 million a year on the machines.
SPOT THE BALL
MILLIONS are staked every week but officially this is not gambling at all.
‘It is regarded as a game of skill,’ said Tom Kavanagh, secretary of the Gaming Board.
Punters pay for the numbers of crosses they mark on a picture of a football match.
Top prize in the weekly competition is around £50,000.
Probe into madam's legal aid bill
A MADAM who earned £135,000 a year from a stable of high-class hookers received Legal Aid for her nine-day vice trial.
After being convicted of controlling prostitutes, Sandra Brown, 45, hired eminent barrister Richard Ferguson, QC, to keep her from jail.
Judge Simon Goldstein fined her £20,000, ordered her to pay Pounds 4,691 costs and do 240 hours community service.
He then launched an inquiry into why she was granted Legal Aid.
Mr Ferguson said Brown had a £40,000 tax bill and planned to sell her Aristocats escort agency in Bayswater, west London, and train to be a beautician.
Cheers Ted has ruined my career
CHEERS actor George Wendt lashed out at co-star Ted Danson yesterday for killing off the top rated show.
Danson wants to quit his key role as bar owner Sam Malone, and TV bosses say Cheers can't go on without him.
Wendt, who plays beer-swilling barfly Norm, said: ‘What am I to do, Shakespeare?’
He and other stars who fought to save the show are bitter their Pounds 600,000-a-year roles are finished.
Patten hits back over China slur
GOVERNOR Chris Patten yesterday accused China of undermining confidence by attacking one of Hong Kong's oldest British businesses.
Mr Patten said China's anti-democracy statements against the Jardine Matheson Group — which sent shares in the group tumbling — were self-defeating.
‘One needs to maintain investors' confidence.
I would never attack an important Hong Kong employer,’ he said.
Ox-Bow Dana dies
COWBOY actor Dana Andrews has died in a California hospital of pneumonia aged 83.
He was known for his rugged good looks, and his best roles were in the Forties films The Ox-Bow Incident, Laura and The Best Years Of Their Lives.
‘Diana talks to dead dad’
Jane Holtham in New York
BIZARRE stories about Princess Diana receiving psychic messages from her dead father are appearing in an American magazine.
This time it is not one of the scandal sheets, but the glossy, much-respected New Yorker.
The magazine carries an interview with the Princess's favourite clairvoy ant, Irish psychic Betty Palko, of Surbiton, Surrey, who has given Diana spiri tualist sessions for the last five years.
According to Mrs Palko, Diana nev er sees or hears her father, Earl Spen cer, who died last March.
He just passes messages through the clairvoyant.
But, Mrs Palko told the magazine, Diana is convinced she is being visited by her father's spirit, because of private family details mentioned.
‘He gave me a message of love and understanding for her,’ Mrs Palko, 55, claimed.
‘And he apologised for leaving, at a time when she needed him.’
The late Earl's most recent visit from beyond the grave, Mrs Palko said, came as she was praying.
He had reassuring news for his daughter, in case she was worried about ever becoming Queen after separating from husband Charles.
According to Mrs Palko, Earl Spencer was confident that she would become Queen.
Not only that, the word from the Other Side is that a new man will soon be looming in Diana's life.
And it's not just her father saying so.
Chinese philosopher Lin Soo, also deceased, agrees.
‘Both Lin Soo and the late Earl believe the Princess will have a new suitor in the New Year, and will be very, very happy,’ Mrs Palko said.
all work and not time to rest or play
THE last six months have been tough for John Major.
During a time of extreme pressure on his own Government, he has had the added burden of the presidency of the EC.
In the past two weeks he has made four trips abroad, including the current North America tour.
Mrs Major has also had a busy round of pre-Christmas engagements including Wednesday's Children of Courage awards.
Here is Mr Major's diary for the last 12 days: Sunday, December 6: Flies to The Hague Monday, 7: AM, Breakfast with Dutch Prime Minister Lunch, with Irish Prime Minister in Dublin PM, flies home Tuesday, 8: AM, sees Omani leader Lunch discussing Prime Minister's Questions PM, Commons Evening, Gala Performance Wednesday, 9: AM, meets European TUC Lunch, Israeli leader PM, Commons statement on separation of Prince Charles and Princess Diana Thursday, 10: AM, Cabinet Lunch, flies to Edinburgh PM, meets Delors Evening, dinner with Mr Mitterrand Friday, 11: All day, EC Summit Evening, dinner on Royal Yacht Britannia Saturday, 12: All day, EC Summit Evening, flies home Sunday, 13: Home with Norma Monday, 14: AM, meetings PM, Commons Evening, functions Tuesday, 15: AM, Downing Street PM, Commons questions Evening, audience with the Queen 9pm, flight to Strasbourg Wednesday, 16: AM, Euro Parliament Evening, flies home Thursday, 17: 9.30am, Cabinet
Suicide after sight dashes pilot dream
AN aircraft fitter who dreamed of being a pilot killed himself because his eyesight wasn't good enough.
Benjamin O'Gorman, 20, applied to the Royal Navy after learning that a Gulf War pilot wore contact lenses.
But the careers office told him his poor sight ruled him out, a Winchester inquest heard yesterday.
He was found hanged in his flat in Hedge End, Hants, with Royal Navy brochures and two notes nearby.
Verdict: suicide.
Block on fifth TV Channel bid
TV bosses threw out the only bid for Britain's fifth channel yesterday.
They decided Channel Five Holdings would not be able to keep up its proposed network of city-based stations for the full 10 years of the franchise.
The Independent Television Commission also feared the company would not get enough City investment.
Channel Five Holdings had the backing of the world's largest media group Time Warner, and was led by Thames Television, which loses its current London weekday franchise to Carlton from January.
Its series of city stations would have concentrated on local news, films and music.
A spokesman said the consortium was considering a judicial review.
The commission must still meet its obligation to set up a terrestial channel and the franchise may be re-advertised.
Chief executive David Glencross said: ‘It's too early to say Channel 5 is dead.’
Motorist's throat cut by hikers
TWO hitch-hikers cut a motorist's throat with a Stanley knife before trying to steal his car radio.
Brian Reynolds, 26, of Worksop, Notts, was letting the couple out of his car when the woman slashed his throat.
‘I thought I was a goner,’ he said yesterday.
After struggling free he went to nearby Bassetlaw Hospital where doctors closed the quarter-inch deep gash.
Police are hunting the couple who escaped empty-handed.
For murder victim Julie, tears and a crimson rose
SHE died thousands of miles from home, on a sunscorched South African beach.
And yesterday Julie Godwin was buried in a rainswept corner of an English country churchyard.
Julie's husband Tim stood weeping beside the grave at St Botolph's in Church Brampton, Northants.
He tossed a single crimson rose on to her oak coffin.
He dried his eyes with a silk handkerchief.
Then that, too, fluttered down, carrying his tears to rest with Julie forever.
Julie and her close friend Elizabeth Over, both 30, were hacked to death with panga knives a fortnight ago, on a holiday trip to a remote Indian Ocean beach at Sodwana Bay, in Zululand.
The killers have not been found.
Yesterday's mourners included members of Elizabeth's family and staff from the computer firm Julie and her husband managed at Milton Keynes, Bucks.
The tiny 14th-century St Botolph's was chosen for the funeral because daughter Sophie, now 22 months old, was christened there.
During the 30-minute service the mourners sang Julie's favourite hymn, All Things Bright And Beautiful.
Family friend Stephen Watson spoke of her ‘zest for life and boundless energy’.
And then Julie Godwin was laid to rest.
Among the flowers was a wreath of white lilies from her husband and Sophie.
‘We will love you always and completely,’ the message said.
Woman's city rape ordeal
A WOMAN was raped after she accepted a lift home from a fellow drinker at a City wine bar.
The 22-year-old victim was raped in the attacker's Jaguar car after meeting him while drinking alone at Hatton's Wine Bar in Holborn, Central London.
She was driven to Chiswick where she was assaulted and later dumped.
Detectives believe she had been intending to meet friends at the bar but ended up drinking alone.
Police want to interview anyone who was in the wine bar on Wednesday evening who may have seen a woman drinking with a man.
The attacker was described as 30 years old with short dark hair, slight build and a Cockney accent.
Police warned Christmas revellers to be cautious when drinking alone.
A Scotland Yard spokesman said: ‘If people are going out to drink, they want to do it when they are with friends.
‘It is far better than being prey to anybody who wants to come along and attack you.’
Libel win for Bell husband
ALISTAIR Bell, whose wife was found murdered in a sports centre car park, won undisclosed libel damages in the High Court yesterday over a story linking him with her death.
The High Court heard the story in the Financial Advertiser caused Mr Bell, 45, and his family of Denham, Bucks, ‘considerable distress and embarrassment’.
Apologising unreservedly, publisher FT Business Information Ltd said it never intended to suggest Mr Bell was involved.
Businesswoman Penny was found stabbed in her car in June 91.
Killer jelly toys alert
SAFETY watchdogs have banned a toy which they fear children could mistake for a sweet and choke on.
The coloured golf ball-sized stocking fillers, known as Jelly Balls, can be thrown at walls where they will then stick.
Consumer affairs minister Baroness Denton said: ‘It is far too easy to mistake these products for sweets, and when parents are looking for stocking fillers these items may be very appealing.
But they could be lethal.’
The toys are also marketed as Kung Fu Balls, Splat Balls and Slime Balls.
Store con
THE ex-lover of fitness queen Debbie Moore conned a furniture store out of goods worth £1,114, a court heard yesterday.
Film producer Liam Brennan, who may face extradition to the US on deception charges, admitted using a worthless cheque.
Brennan, 42, of West Brompton, London, was remanded by Horseferry Rd court until December 24.
Comic Joe is cleared over bistro fracas
by Chris Court
COMEDIAN Joe Longthorne was yesterday cleared of an affray charge involving fellow funny man Jim Davidson at a seaside bistro.
Longthorne denied being involved in the disturbance in which bottles and glasses were smashed.
The court dismissed the charge against him when the prosecution offered no evidence.
Longthorne's nephew, Keith Holiday, 23, admitted assaulting restaurant owner William Jackson, his wife Jennifer and helper Michael McNeil.
Holiday's lawyer Rod McCartney said the ‘entirely regrettable’ incident followed a misunderstanding between his client and Davidson at an end of season party in Torquay, Devon.
Holiday was with friends and a lot of alcohol was consumed.
Words were exchanged between the comic and Holiday, said Mr McCartney.
A ceremonial sword was then taken from a wall and held close to Holiday.
‘That caused the misunderstanding,’ said Mr McCartney.
Roger Richards, prosecuting, said Holiday left the Steps Bistro but returned later with Longthorne.
‘Holiday acted like a raging bull, picking up a chair, smashing it on a table and throwing it at bottles behind the bar,’ he said.
He punched Mr Jackson, 55, and Mr McNeil, knocking them out.
Mrs Jackson was hit in the head by a piece of flying glass.
The glass had to be removed in hospital.
The court was told Holiday had acted with ‘gratuitous aggressive violence’.
Holiday, who has since apologised for the incident, also admitted causing £300 damage to bottles of wine, champagne, glasses, a chair and an electric fan.
He was granted unconditional bail until January 15 to allow a pre-sentence report to be prepared.
Later Longthorne, 35, of Maidenhead, Berks, refused to comment.
He was due to appear at Caesar's Palace in Luton last night.
40 years for post raid gang
THREE men who kidnapped Post Office security guards then threatened their families were jailed for a total 40 years yesterday.
The men netted £750,000 in raids using information from the guards, Southwark Crown Court heard.
One victim was told: ‘We've left two blokes and if you mess this up they'll kill your wife.’
Stuart Moore, prosecuting, said there was no-one with the families.
Terry Agombar, 28, of Bexley Heath, Kent, and Mark Cummings, 29, of east London, both got 14 years, and Gary Hutchins, 28, of east London, got 12 years for conspiracy to rob.
John Henry, 26, of Bexley Heath, will be sentenced later for handling stolen goods.
Landmark for winter climbers
Stephen Farrell 18,200ft up Everest
PART-time Paras Mike Smith and John Rennie yesterday became the highest-ever Britons on Everest in winter.
The men of the Darc Star Territorial Army expedition, which is being sponsored by TODAY, pressed ever-nearer to establishing its final pre-summit camp.
For days the team had sat out harrowing gales and -50C temperatures, waiting to go for the top.
At the first sign of low winds yesterday morning, Smith, 31, and Rennie, 28, left the 24,000 ft camp three on the Lhotse Face for the South Col.
They pressed on up to 25,000ft, more than 1,500ft above any previous British winter expedition.
Reporting his progress by radio, Smith said: ‘Up to 25,000ft the going is good, but above that the ropes left by previous expeditions have been swept away.
‘As we went up there were big snow plumes coming off the mountain to the left and right of us but there wasn't much wind.
The surface is frozen snow on top of ice.
‘The going is not too difficult but there has been a lot of avalanche debris left after the monsoon.’
Smith, a TA corporal in 10 Para and Rennie, a TA sergeant in 15 Para, then returned to Camp Three to pick up extra rope and equipment to push the route further at the next opportunity.
Operation leader, Falklands veteran Lieutenant Colonel Philip Neame, 46, is determined to make a final push before Christmas — but all depends on the weather.
Hey, hey…they're back
SIXTIES hit TV pop group The Monkees are planning a comeback tour of Britain next spring.
The group — Mickey Dolenz, 47, Peter Tork, 50; Michael Nesmith, 49, and British singer Davey Jones, 47 — had hits including I'm A Believer.
Pet dog smothers girl
A BABY girl died when her pet dog climbed on to the bed and suffocated her.
The body of Holly-Marie McGarry was found, just three days before her second birthday, by her mother Mandy, 24, in their flat in Grimsby, Humberside.
Grandmother Enid McGarry said: ‘I can't believe it happened.
It was a freak accident.’
The dog, a two-year-old weimaraner, has been found another home.
Bully victim Neil goes home
SCHOOLBOY Neil Aspden has put the horrors of a vicious assault behind him to look forward to a Christmas of a lifetime.
Neil, beaten up and tortured with lighted cigarettes when he refused to go shoplifting, was last night reunited with his sister Claire, nine, and six-year-old brother Daniel.
Doctors treating him at St James's Hospital, Leeds, gave in to the eight-year-old's pleas to be allowed home for Christmas.
And his mum Sherie has promised him the best one ever.
‘He is still very frightened and in pain but the doctors say there will be no permanent damage apart from mental scars,’ said Sherie, 28, of Leeds.
‘Hopefully he can forget about what has happened and have a good time.’
Sherie intends to take Neil on holiday after Christmas to help him over his ordeal — after she has bought him the mountain bike he has set his heart on.
‘He's a brave little lad — he's more or less back to his cheerful self again,’ said his aunt, Debbie Pounder.
Neil had petrol poured over him by thugs who then tried to set him alight.
Two 12-year-old boys have been remanded into the care of the local authority.
Millions go it alone
BRITONS have become a lonelier nation in the last 10 years, according to Census figures.
More than one in four households were one-person homes at last year's count, a four per cent increase on the 1981 figure.
The Census counted 54,888,444 people in Britain — one fifth of them children.
One in three households still had no car.
Over a fifth had at least two.
Thieves drive off mother's car with baby in back seat
by Sarah Grady
CALLOUS thieves dumped a baby in the street after they found her in the back seat of the car they had just stolen.
The 15-month-old girl was abandoned on a pavement in her car seat by two men who took her from a petrol station.
Her mother had left the toddler strapped in the back of the car, with the keys in the ignition, while she went into the kiosk to pay.
To her horror, when she returned the Vauxhall Cavalier had vanished with her young daughter still inside.
The panic-stricken mother phoned police and a patrol spotted the stolen car within minutes.
After giving their pursuers the slip, the thieves abandoned the Cavalier.
When police found it a few minutes later they looked inside expecting to find the baby but the back seat was empty.
One of the crooks was picked up half-a-mile away and he led them to the tot who was sitting unhurt on a pedestrian walkway.
After being reunited with her family in Gateshead, Tyne and Wear, her father said: ‘We are delighted we got our daughter back safe and well.
‘We cannot praise the police highly enough.’
Detectives are not sure whether the girl was deliberately kidnapped or if the thieves simply did not notice her when they jumped into the car.
A Newcastle police spokeswoman said: ‘The fact they dumped the baby may mean they just didn't look in the back until it was too late.
‘The drama lasted no more than l0 minutes but it was a nightmare for the poor mother.’
The child was unharmed by her ordeal.
‘The baby was fine, she was warmly wrapped up and completely oblivious to what had happened,’ said the police spokeswoman.
‘But it was a lucky escape.
The mother was very shocked and distressed, it was a dreadful experience.
Fortunately, they were quickly reunited.’
A 29-year-old man has been arrested.
Police are still looking for the other man.
Bomber is jailed for Mac attack
AN animal rights fanatic who carried out a bomb attack on a crowded McDonald's was jailed for 15 months yesterday.
Christopher Tucker shouted into the kitchens asking if animals were killed on the premises.
Then he sent staff and customers scrambling for cover by hurling a smoke bomb into the chain's restaurant in Kensington, London.
Brave Faik Edaan scooped the device up and threw it out before catching the fleeing Tucker.
The painter from Hounslow, West London, was convicted of affray after a three-day trial in May.
After the decision he was banned from every McDonald's in the country.
Southwark Crown Court heard he had a string of convictions involving animal rights activities stretching back nine years.
Sentencing Tucker, 29, yesterday assistant recorder Timothy Workman said: ‘I accept you have sincerely held views about animal rights but those views can never justify the actions you took.’
Acid eclairs ruin party
CHARITY workers serving a Christmas lunch were given chocolate eclairs laced with mind-bending LSD.
Bernard Pitcock and Ruth Patterson were sick for five hours after the prank by Angela Brown, Newcastle Crown Court heard.
Mother-of-five Brown, 27, of North Shields, admitted two drug charges.
She was said to be upset because she was too old to use the centre where the party was held in Whitley Bay.
She is to be sentenced later.
Santa saves aussie trip
A MYSTERY Santa's honesty has saved a pensioner's holiday of a lifetime.
Dorothy Croft, 68, from Rochester, Kent, had planned to fly to Australia in the New Year to see her son and his family.
But on the way to the bank to buy dollars she lost her wallet containing £400.
After contacting the police, a heartbroken Dorothy returned home to find that someone had pushed the wallet, with the £400 inside, through her letter box.
Thugs attack deathbed doc
A DOCTOR was beaten up by a gang as he made a midnight call to the home of a dying cancer patient.
Dr Benu Choudhouri, 63, was kicked and punched for five minutes during the attack in East London.
The victim, who has worked in the area for 25 years, said: ‘Something must be done to stop these hooligans.’
Switch 'em off
THE sexy female mesmerising customers with a nightly strip to music in the Revenge Club in Rome is a robot called Futura.
You're my husband's mistress: Get off my property now
by Jackie Annesley
SHE stood, hands on hips, on the caravan steps.
Middle-aged, heavily made up.
A ladder in her tights, her fingernails noticeably chewed down.
So this, widow Jean Courtenay thought, this is her.
The other woman in my ‘ideal’ husband's life…
The caravan, one of dozens on a huge site less than two miles from Jean's own home, was the end of a two-week trail of cruel discoveries that began the day she buried 60-year-old husband, Brian, in May last year.
As TODAY revealed yesterday, there had been evidence that for over four years he rented a luxury apartment only 11 miles from their bungalow at Caterham, Surrey.
Evidence that he had bought jewellery and an expensive watch for someone…someone who was not his wife.
In a free-spending secret life, Brian Courtenay, former businessman, local councillor, Tory committee chairman and master of his masonic lodge, had got through £200,000 to £300,000 — leaving the woman who wed him as a virgin 38 years earlier, almost penniless and deep in debt.
And now, at last, one balmy June evening, in this field with its rows and rows of caravans, came the confrontation.
Jean, with a friend, watched as the other woman apparently worked at clearing out belongings.
Then the woman turned round.
And Jean immediately recognised her.
Suddenly, all the pent-up hatred, the anger, the humilation exploded.
She accused her of being her husband's mistress.
‘Get off my property now, you dirty little whore!’ she screamed.
The other woman seemed unmoved.
‘Prove it,’ she said.
Jean's friend, a tall, imposing woman who was usually very mild, joined in shouting at the woman.
And Jean reached for a monkey-wrench that lay nearby.
Suddenly, the woman's smug look turned to terror.
‘I was waving this wrench in front of her face,’ 61-year-old Jean says.
‘I wanted to kill her.
I don't know what stopped me.
‘She was making these excuses that they were just good friends, and all she did was his typing.’
Jean seized the caravan keys from her hated rival, then watched as the woman quickly got in her car and drove off the site.
‘It's odd,’ Jean says, ‘Brian always said he detested bitten fingernails, or heavy makeup.’
Inside the caravan, Jean found relics of her husband's other love-life.
There was a receipt showing that after lack of money forced him to give up the flat, in 1989, he bought a luxury caravan.
He had obviously sold that, then bought the one Jean and her friend now stood in, for £2,000 — the receipt was stuffed into a vase.
‘And we found these pathetic little candles, with I Love You on them,’ Jean says.
‘And there was a candlestick — one of mine, from home.
‘We forced the lock on a cupboard and found a white towelling robe, filthy with orange-juice stains, and lots of pink-and-grey bed linen.
‘It all went in the dump.’
There was also a phone answering machine.
On it, messages left over from a few days before Brian gave up the flat.
Three were from a woman — always the same woman.
In one, she signs off with: ‘Take care.
Love you…’
Jean bitterly asks: ‘Does that sound like Just Good Friends, to you?’
By chance, Jean even has a video of the other woman — dancing at a social event, in a sheer red dress showing a black bra beneath.
Since that caravan site encounter, Jean has met the woman three times, in more restrained mood.
She hoped to get a confession….
‘Once, she came to hand back the keys to the caravan cupboard,’ Jean says.
‘We had a glass of wine, but she refused to admit they were anything more than very good friends.
On other visits, I was equally unsuccessful.
I even had a tape recorder going, hidden behind the chair.
But the dog ended up chewing the thing to bits.’
The last time Jean saw the woman was in the street, three months ago.
In sheer frustration, Jean began calling her names.
‘I wished it was a Saturday, with lots of people around, but it wasn't,’ she says.
‘There were only two old biddies, who took no notice.’
It is 18 months now since the pain began for Jean Courtenay.
A pain hardly eased by the discovery that her best friend and neighbour had always known about the mistress.
‘She had seen them arm in arm one day, several years ago,’ Jean says.
‘My huband pleaded with her not to tell me.
He said that if I found out, I would want to kill them both.
And I probably would.’
Her friend's ex-husband, she found, also knew the secret — and even let Brian use his house to redirect some mail.
But it was the same friend who eventually led Jean to the dead man's ‘passion wagon’ caravan.
Jean had been puzzled to find among her husband's belongings a prize-draw form for Mr B. Courtenay, who had bought a caravan.
A caravan?
Jean and Brian had never been camping in their lives.
Then she remembered a remark by the man next door.
‘He said some of Brian's keys looked like caravan keys,’ Jean says.
And there was the mystifying membership card for the Caravan Club of Great Britain.
Jean told her best friend about the latest puzzle.
And soon afterwards, the friend phoned her.
‘I've found your caravan,’ she announced.
At the caravan site, a warden told Jean the number to look for.
‘He said my husband always came on to the site wearing dark glasses,’ Jean says.
‘That's ironic, really.
When he died, the only parts of his body he gave away were his corneas.’
In all those years of deception, Brian Courtenay, whether as boss of a catering-equipment firm or, later, as a humble taxi-driver, never missed going home to his wife for supper.
And he always shared her bed.
‘I could have forgiven him for the debts he piled up, but the lies, having another woman — I can never forgive that,’ Jean says.
‘I wish he'd at least been honest with me and I could have divorced him.
I'd be better off.
‘But you can't have spent a lifetime with someone and not feel some affection for them.’
She sighs.
‘Deep down, I loved the so-and-so.’
Sleep tramp saved from fire death
A TRAMP was almost burned alive after falling asleep in a rubbish skip.
While Roy Archer snoozed, workmen tipped him into a 60ft bin with tons of waste from a Wolverhampton market.
They loaded the massive bin onto a lorry and drove to an incinerator.
Luckily Roy, 40, from St Helens, Lancs, awoke and was spotted screaming for help by a crane driver who raised the alarm.
He escaped with just a broken wrist and is recovering in Wolverhampton Manor Hospital.
Marquess gives home reprieve
AN eccentric marquess who ordered his brother to quit his cottage home by Christmas Eve has been touched by the season of goodwill.
Lord Bath has given his beleagured brother Lord Christopher Thynne a reprieve ‘for the time being.’
The Marquess of Bath, hippy Alexander Thynn (he dropped the e by deed poll) sacked Lord Christopher, 57, as boss of the Longleat wild life park following their father's death this year.
The marquess, who inherited the £200 million estate, then ordered Christopher out of his cottage, at Horningsham, Wilts.
Clad in his trademark leather jacket and trousers, Lord Christopher, said yesterday: ‘It's all a bit dodgy at the moment and I'd rather not say anything at this stage.
But I will here over Christmas.’
Lord Christopher declined to talk further about the change, saying delicate negotiations about his future on the estate were still underway.
Lord Bath's personal assistant refused to comment on the festive olive branch.
Hero John, 4 lifts car off friend's dad
HEROES don't come much younger than little John Cootes.
The four-year-old freed neighbour Anthony Trueman, 30, after the DIY mechanic's Ford Fiesta toppled off a jack and pinned him underneath, causing minor injuries.
‘John came up to me, asked me if I was in pain then took hold of the jack,’ said Mr Trueman, of Chaddesden, Derby.
The youngster, who had been playing nearby with Mr Trueman's son, calmly replaced the jack and raised the car.
£10bn shares boom in City
Paul Wilenius, Political Editor
PROSPECTS of an early New Year interest rate cut rose yesterday as share prices soared.
Britain was given a big pre-Christmas boost as shares on the Stock Market jumped by almost £10 billion and industry reported order books filling up.
The Stock Market ended the day up almost 50 points and finished within a whisker of its all-time high.
Now Chancellor Norman Lamont is expected to cut interest rates by another one per cent, from seven to six per cent— if the Germans lead the way.
And City experts expect Germany's Bundesbank to cut its interest rates early in the New Year.
This would allow Mr Lamont and the Bank of England to cut our own interest rates even further, without damaging the pound.
Even though the pound is out of the Euopean Exchange Rate Mechanism, a cut at present would be too risky, without a corresponding fall in Germany.
There was brighter news on the trade front for Britain yesterday, with a £766 million cut in the trade gap.
The best performance of the last three months was the £1,066 million balance-of-payments surplus on so-called invisibles — banking, the City and insurance.
But the black clouds are still there, as latest figures from the Bank of England show that people are still paying off their debts and saving, not spending.
Despite interest cuts, the housing market shows no sign of reviving.
Net mortgage lending by building societies dropped 15 per cent to Pounds 1.85 billion last month.
Yet Building Societies Association director general Mark Boleat is convinced there are signs of ‘green shoots’.
And early next year, he hopes to see blossoms.
Britain battles war call
PREMIER John Major was walking a diplomatic tightrope in Washington yesterday to avoid Britain being drawn into a ground war with Serbia.
He was under immense pressure to give in and back no holds barred military action by UN forces in the former Yugoslav republic.
He is now ready to accept the need for air power to be brought into play against the Serbs to enforce the UN no fly zone over Bosnia.
Senior British sources say the situation is moving ‘inexorably’ towards tougher action against Serb aggression in the country.
Mr Major was going to Camp David last night to urge President Bush to use a softly softly approach to the crisis.
They will announce the final plan to be put to the UN tomorrow.
Paddy home from hell
PADDY Ashdown flew home from the Bosnian war zone yesterday full of praise for the Army's forgotten heroes.
A band of British women truck drivers from the Royal Corps of Transport are ferrying supplies to the front line along treacherous mountainous dirt tracks.
The Liberal Democrat leader said: ‘They are on roads I would not drive along in a Land-Rover when I was sober.’
Four die in road crash
THREE men and a boy died yesterday after two cars collided on a village road.
Two survivors — both women — were cut free after being trapped for 20 minutes in the wreckage.
They were taken to the Queen Elizabeth Hospital at King's Lynn, Norfolk.
The A47 near King's Lynn was blocked by the remains of the Ford Sierra and Escort.
600 Jobs go
BRITISH Aerospace is to axe 600 more jobs.
Drug couple snatched new baby
TWO heroin addicts were jailed yesterday after a court heard how they walked unchallenged into a hospital's maternity unit and stole an 11-hour-old boy.
Martin Gallagher, 28, and his girlfriend Jaqueline Boardman, 20, carried the boy past his parents as they waited to show him to relatives.
Twenty minutes later they were stopped by staff in the grounds of Manchester's Withington Hospital and the baby was reunited unharmed with his parents, the city's crown court was told.
Boardman, who has a three-year-old daughter, claimed she was forced to carry out the abduction by an unnamed man and woman.
Sentencing the couple — both of Manchester — to 21 months each after they admitted abduction, Mrs Justice Ebsworth said: ‘You took this baby to draw attention to yourselves.’
Sterling fellow's £35m aid
THE financier who made a billion when Chancellor Lamont lost the battle for the pound yesterday gave £32 million to charity.
George Soros' donation — thought to be the biggest private gift given to a humanitarian cause — will go to aid agencies in the former Yugoslavia.
Mr Soros said: ‘I'm doing what I can.’
He added: ‘What is going on in Bosnia is genocide.
‘I feel it particularly strongly because, as a Hungarian Jew, I was myself a potential victim of the Holocaust.
‘My heart goes out to the people who are being raped, pillaged and murdered just because they are Bosnian Moslems.’
One of the charities benefitting is the UK-based Oxfam which will get an initial £637,000.
Director David Bryer said: ‘It's magnificent.’
Soros, 62, was dubbed ‘the man who broke the pound’ after speculating against it on Black Wednesday when Britain left the ERM.
His gamble made a billion dollars, £666 million.
A joker wild
JILTED comedian Jim Davidson stormed off stage after rowdy fans taunted him about his marriage split.
Cockney Davidson cracked under a string of jibes such as‘Where's the missus Jim?’.
He told the audience in Usk, Gwent: ‘I've had enough, finish it yourself.’
Fourth wife Tracie Hilton, 27, has barred Davidson, 38, from their Exhurst, Surrey, home.
The final charge
Sarah Grady
IT looks like a prosperous Christmas as crowds pack into London's Oxford Street.
Thousands flocked to take advantage of Sunday opening, all thoughts of recession apparently banished.
But Norman Lamont cannot cheer yet.
Many of the people in our picture were only window shopping and kept a tight hold on their cash, according to disappointed traders.
It was a different story around the rest of the country, where business was brisk and supermarkets reported the busiest day of the year.
The Body Shop in Oxford Street was packed — but most were only looking.
Manager Chris Winter said: ‘I think we're doing better than a lot of other shops because customers can spend as little as £2 on a gift.
‘There are a lot of people around but they aren't spending a lot of money.’
A spokesw the under £30 range.
‘Customers are spending less and thinking more before they open their purses.’
Further north, customers flocked to the Arndale Centre in Manchester where manager David Jones said the 200 shops were ‘heaving’.
‘Up here, it seems to be spend, spend, spend,’ he said.
At the 283-shop Meadowhall Centre, Sheffield, trade was on a par with 1991.
A spokesman said: ‘While we haven't had more people in than last year, we are pleased that the number seems to have stayed the same.’
But the MetroCentre at Gateshead on Tyneside stayed closed.
A spokesman said: ‘The centre works on the principle that if one shop opens on a Sunday, they all open.
As they have chosen to stay closed, I can't imagine business is that bad.’
Supermarkets everywhere reported excellent trading as whole families flocked to combine stocking up for Christmas with a day's outing.
The Bristol branch of Asda had all 27 checkouts open to cope with queues 10 people deep.
Manager Eric Sortwell said: ‘We knew it was going to be busy but not as busy as this.’
Tesco in Basingstoke, Hampshire, responded to the crowds by extending its opening by an extra three hours.
In Cardiff, Karen KIng, manageress of Next, said: ‘All the shops in the city seemed to be packed.
It was exactly what we needed.’
Raped on her paper round
Andrew Russell
A BRAVE 14-year-old newspaper girl last night relived a sadistic daylight rape ordeal just 200 yards from her home.
The victim was being coaxed by a trained woman detective at her hospital bedside in the hope that her masked attacker can be identified.
‘She was a very innocent child and is very courageous,’ a police spokesman said.
The girl, who had started her paper round to earn money for Chrismas presents, was grabbed as she walked along an alleyway after finishing her Saturday morning deliveries.
She was beaten unconscious, dragged into a garden and raped before being left whimpering as the rapist fled.
‘This poor young girl was struck repeatedly in the face by the attacker's fist,’ said Det Chief Inspector John Graham, of County Durham police.
‘Her eyes are closed and her nose and mouth are badly bruised.
She took one hell of a beating.
‘There are also bruises on her thigh, which must have been caused by her being stamped on or kicked as she struggled.’
The community of the picturesque village of Lanchester, where the attack happened, kept their children indoors last night.
The girl had just finished her 28 deliveries on her round and was 30 paces into the alleyway when she heard the running steps of the prowling rapist behind her.
The 5ft 5in tall schoolgirl, still carrying her empty fluorescent orange paper bag, half-turned to see a man in a dark ski mask.
He dragged her through a beech hedge into the garden of a bungalow.
The distressed and dishevelled schoolgirl was found whimpering in the garden by the owner of the bungalow.
Last night the youngster was ‘stable’, a hospital spokesman said.
Chief Inspector Graham said: ‘Not only has this child's life been ruined, but also the life of her parents.
‘They are obviously regretting that they let her start the paper round, but there seemed to be no reason for them to object to it.’
He added: ‘We have a dangerous man in this village.
It is imperative that he is caught very, very quickly.
We need help from everyone in Lanchester.’
The rapist is thought to have stalked the girl to find out her routine.
‘The alleyway is so remote that it is unlikely to have been an opportunist crime,’ Chief Inspetor Graham said.
He warned parents to continue to keep a close eye on their children until the rapist is caught.
‘We are dealing with a dangerous individual here,’ he said.
‘I do not want to alarm villagers unduly, but they must be made aware of what has happened and take every precaution.’
The newsagent where the girl worked said last night that both paper boys and girls would now go out in pairs, or with an adult, and only in full daylight.
He said: ‘We are too shocked for words.
It beggars belief that something like this could happen.’
The woman who found the victim in her garden said: ‘I was in bed when I heard her whimpering outside my bedroom.
I took her inside the house and tried to calm her down and called the police.
‘The poor little mite was in a terrible state.
She couldn't stop shaking.’
A neighbour said: ‘This is supposed to be a peaceful, prosperous village, a safe haven for any family.
Is nowhere in Britain safe from this sort of sickening attack?’
Norman's stormin' over Premier's snub
Paul Wilenius
PREMIER John Major is to humiliate his chancellor by taking effective control of the Spring Budget.
Embattled Norman Lamont will hang on to his job, at least for the time being.
Mr Major has let it be known privately that the chancellor will not be moved in the New Year reshuffle.
He will keep his title — but lose the power.
Mr Major will take the final decisions on the budget, which is tipped to put up taxes overall by more than £3 billion.
Personal tax allowances are expected to be frozen and taxes on petrol, drink and tobacco raised.
Treasury officials will also be looking at slapping Vat for the first time on bus fares, water, domestic fuel, books and newspapers.
Although Mr Lamont will have day-to-day control of budget planning, Mr Major will take charge of the overall strategic planning role.
The move will add to the em-barrassment and humiliation heaped on Mr Lamont in recent weeks, and it will only get worse.
The National Audit Office will this week issue a report attacking the Treasury for hiding the £4,700 paid from taxpayers' money to help evict ‘Miss Whiplash’ Sara Dale from Mr Lamont's house.
There will also be a call for a change in the rules to make sure this sort of secret payment is covered by the rules next time.
Then, early in the New Year a powerful committee of MPs will issue a report criticising Mr Lamont for hiding another £18,414 payment from Tory Party funds.
It is little wonder that in an interview yesterday Mr Lamont admitted: ‘I am desperate for a bit of peace and quiet.’
He shrugged off suggestions that he was keen to quit politics for the City.
‘I like politics, I intend to stay in it.’
Now the banks bid for lottery bonanza
HIGH street banks are fighting for control of Britain's £3 billion a year lottery.
They say they have the expertise and nationwide computer systems to make the national flutter a success.
But the move will outrage millions of customers and small businessmen already angry over the behaviour of Barclays, Midland, NatWest and Lloyds during the recession.
There has been a huge rise in complaints about high interest rates, hidden charges and refusal to extend loans.
Control of handing out the £28 million in prizes will be worth several hundred million pounds a year to the successful company.
There are around eight big groups currently considering putting in bids to run the lottery, but by the end of the year Heritage Secretary Peter Brooke will have to choose from many more.
Some of the biggest companies in the country will be bidding fiercely.
The Post Office counters company is keen to get involved.
Merchant bank N M Rothschild is trying to put together a consortium of City firms.
Brewing giant Bass is ‘very interested’.
The merchant bank Hambros, the leisure group Rank Organisation, UK Charity Lotteries and an Australian group are also showing a strong interest.
Even the pools and betting organisations, which have attacked the lottery for so long, now say they would like to run it.
But Ministers are unlikely to give it to either group as Mr Major does not want the lottery to be seen as gambling.
‘We do not want people to have to go into betting shops to buy tickets,’ said one Heritage Department source.
‘We want this to be friendly and accessible, even for housewives.’
The source added: ‘We have been surprised at the level of interest from the banks.’
The longest break ever
MILLIONS of Britons have begun a record Christmas break.
Many companies closed on Friday, giving workers a 16-day rest.
Thousands more shut today and do not return to work until January 7.
The Institute of Directors warned: ‘They may lose that vital order.
Europe gets just Christmas and New Year's day.’
Swop turkey for canaries
THE Canary Islands are the favourite destination for people escaping the tinsel and turkey.
Florida, Spain, Paris and Amsterdam are other hot-spots for the 250,000 Britons heading abroad this Christmas, according to credit card company Access.
‘The recession has not had a major impact,’ said a spokesman.
The 40 years of Christmas that link Al and Whitney
Adrian Lee
SOUL singer Whitney Houston yesterday cemented her place in a galaxy of stars going back 40 years with this year's Christmas No. 1.
She became the first female singer to top the festive chart twice.
Whitney joined a select group comprising The Beatles, Queen, Elvis Presley, Cliff Richard and Band Aid in notching up a double success.
Her song I Will Always Love You is already heading towards selling one million records and the prestigious Christmas No. 1 spot brings the added bonus of thousands of extra sales.
Whitney, 28 — who is due to have a baby in April — was No.
1 in 1985 with Saving All My Love For You.
It is exactly 40 years since the first record sales charts were compiled to determine who was top of the pops.
American Al Martino had the first No. 1 in Christmas 1952 and since then some of pop's most famous, and not so famous, names have joined the seasonal roll of honour.
Some festive favourites, including The Beatles' I Want To Hold Your Hand and Slade's Merry Christmas Everybody were destined to become pop classics.
Others were gathering dust by New Year and forgotten by February.
Whatever the merits of records such as Renee and Renato's Save Your Love and Winifred Atwell's Let's Have Another Party no-one can deny them their place in history.
The chart countdown, performed yesterday by Bruno Brookes, is one of Radio One's most popular shows.
Critics, however, say it has become meaningless and out of touch with young people's tastes and despite the Christmas boost singles sales are slumping dramatically.
Former Top 40 presenter Tony Blackburn said: ‘In the old days I think it meant something to be the Christmas No. 1 and there would be great excitement in the run-up to the last chart.
‘Then it would be the slushy, sentimental records that were No. 1 at Christmas but by the Sixties and Seventies there was more hype by the record companies.
‘I don't think the youngsters are that interested anymore.
‘I've always hated Christmas number ones — I can't think of one I liked.
‘Mull of Kintyre by Wings has always been one of my most hated records.
‘I suppose the one I remember best is Merry Christmas by Slade.
‘I never listen to the charts at all now.
‘But if Whitney Houston is Christmas No. 1 then good luck to her.’
It's diggin' Jack Flash
A QUIET, law-abiding gardener was the inspiration behind the rebellious anthem Jumpin' Jack Flash, it was revealed yesterday.
Rolling Stones guitarist Keith Richards wrote the 1968 classic after years of watching his gardener Jack Dyer — a man so quiet he was terrified of leaving the country estate in Sussex where he worked.
But Richards, 49, refused to reveal why timid Jack was the reason for the record, written during the band's most tempestuous period amid drug trials and the decision of founder member Brian Jones to quit.
‘It was the late great Jack who only went to London once in his life and didn't like it,’ he said.
‘He had the biggest boots in the world — you'd hear him dragging his huge hobnails around.’
Halt sell-off in its tracks says BR boss
Paul Wilenius, Political Editor
BRITAIN'S rail system will be wrecked if the Government presses ahead with its sell-off plans, BR boss Sir Bob Reid warned yesterday.
Fares would soar, services deteriorate and safety be compromised unless ministers rethought their plans, he said.
In the most powerful attack by any serving BR chairman on his political masters, Sir Bob warned the entire rail industry could be wiped out.
‘It will be 12 months or 18 months when people will start being paid off, if not before.
‘It is a major issue for Britain.
Think again,’ he urged.
The Government aims to go ahead next year with a Bill to break BR into two parts — one organisation to own the track and operate the signals, and the other to operate the train companies.
But Sir Bob wants it to build on what BR has already achieved rather than restructure the rail service.
‘If you start to break it up and you disrupt it, you will break the momentum, you will give yourself major safety validation problems.
‘And you will not get a better service for some long time to come,’ he said on BBC radio.
‘People will want to do things in different ways, they will want to run trains at different times, they will want to act competitively, they may want to run a bus service at the end of the train service so they may not be too interested in timetabling together.’
Sir Bob said he believed BR should be a service, not a profit-making machine and demanded an end to ‘stop-go investment’.
The railways needed at least £1.2 billion a year and ‘severe’ Government cash squeezes would mean higher fares and poorer performance next year, he said.
Girl, 5, watches as dad is shot
A FATHER of four was shot dead as he sat in his home with his five-year-old daughter on his knee last night.
The terrified girl narrowly missed being hit as two gunmen opened fire on Catholic Martin Lavery, 40.
Other members of the family were wrapping Christmas presents in another room when the Loyalist killers smashed their way through the back door of the house in Belfast.
Mr Lavery was hit several times as he watched television and died instantly.
The killers' getaway car was later found abandoned.
The outlawed Ulster Volunteer Force admitted carrying out the shooting.
It claimed Mr Lavery was an active member of the IRA.
He was the 83rd victim of violence in Northern Ireland this year.
Grave linked to missing man
POLICE hunting a youth are linking his disappearance with the discovery of an empty grave.
The mysterious hole — big enough to take a coffin — was found three weeks before Jason Price, 21, went missing.
But police now believe it intended for Jason but that his body was dumped elsewhere.
Jason, 21, has not been seen since he got a lift to a pub on December 8 from the home he shared with his girlfriend in Box, Wiltshire.
Pay rises fall to 3%
PAY deals in the manufacturing and service industries fell sharply over the past year.
Manufacturing awards averaged 3.1 per cent, compared with 4.6 per cent a year ago.
Service industry deals fell to 3.7 per cent from 5.6 per cent, a study says.
11-tests boycott
HEAD teachers were today urged to boycott the first pilot tests for 11-year-olds next summer.
The National Association of Head Teachers, which made the protest call, said its concerns about the tests and national curriculum had been ignored.
Bet stars in the big match
Neville Thurlbeck
WEALTHY Lady Alethea Savile never recovered from hearing her lover James Gilbey profess his undying love for Princess Diana, it was revealed yesterday.
In the wake of the ‘Squidgy’ phone tape scandal, Lady Alethea, 29, battled to save her relationship with 35-year-old Gilbey.
But in the end, she dumped him.
‘It was Alethea who took the brave decision to end it all,’ a close friend said.
‘The Squidgy tapes and all the publicity nearly sent her crazy.
It just went on and on and on.
No relationship could survive all the speculation.
‘James was made to look as though he was waiting in the wings, to pounce on his fairytale princess.’
In the 23-minute call, Gilbey was heard saying: ‘Oh Squidgy, I love you, love you, love you, love you.’
Lady Alethea told friends: ‘It was mind-blowing.’
In an attempt to patch up the relationship, she and Gilbey fled to Italy with Diana's brother, Earl Spencer and his wife, Victoria.
Alethea has been in the £500-a-night Sierra Tucson Clinic in Arizona, where patients are encouraged to carry sackfuls of rocks, symbolising the burden of their problems.
Yesterday, she was not at her Chelsea home.
Her father, the Earl of Mexborough, said at his York home: ‘I haven't spoken to her, so I don't know if it's true the couple have broken up.’
Survivor's crash clue
CRASH survivor Mark Hayden could hold the key to an horrific accident in which two of his Army colleages died, police believe.
Mark, 26, Cindy Kibble 27, and Debbie Hunter, 26, were returning to homes in Devon and Cornwall from Germany when their Toyota Corolla went out of control in sleet on the M4 motorway in Berkshire.
Both women died instantly but Mark, who was trapped for almost an hour in the wreckage, was taken to Wexham Park Hospital, Slough, Berks, with severe chest and leg injuries.
A Thames Valley Police spokesman said: ‘We're hoping Mr Hayden can tell us what happened leading up to the crash.’
Mark's brother Tim said from the family home in Trewennack, Helston: ‘Mark missed last Christmas because he was on guard duty so obviously this year he was making a special effort.’
I deserve my £1,800 a week handout to pay for mansion
David Leigh
FLAMBOYANT fallen tycoon Trevor Deaves insisted yesterday that he was entitled to let the taxpayer foot the mortgage bill for his million-pound mansion.
‘I didn't go begging to the DSS,’ said Mr Deaves, 39.
‘They rang me.
They made me an offer I couldn't refuse.’
The Department of Social Security is paying £1,833 a week for the £832,500 interest-only mortgage on Tree Top Farm, set in 66 acres near Haslemere, Surrey.
That beats even the £1,784 a week paid last year for unemployed interior designer Peter Julien's house in Hampstead, London.
Mr Deaves bought the mansion for £925,000, nearly three years ago.
But then he was fired from his £400,000-a-year job as chief executive of the M I insurance group — and his champagne lifestyle collapsed.
Plans for extensive work on the mansion had to be abandoned.
Mr Deaves — said to have paid £300,000 alimony to his first wife, TV presenter Fran Morrison — lives with second wife Jacqui in a guest house in the grounds.
The DSS, he says, made its surprise offer while processing a claim from a former lover, ex-Bunny girl Joanne Eggleton, who has a daughter by him.
‘They rang and asked why I wasn't claiming income support,’ he said.
‘I didn't go cap-in-hand to them.
They've been paying the mortgage interest since July.
I'm told they will continue for up to a year.
‘Anyway, I'm not claiming every penny that was on offer.
They said I could claim for my dog.
I thought that might be pushing things a bit too far.’
At the Guildford DSS office, staff found it a little difficult to grasp the nature of their new client.
‘When it said on the form, ‘What was your salary last year?’
I wrote ‘400K’,’ Mr Deaves recalled.
‘The girl said, ‘You mean £400 a week?
That's a good wage’.
I said, ‘No, £400,000 a year’.
Then she asked what salary I was looking for.
I said £250,000 a year.
And she asked me, ‘Would that be management?’’
Mr Deaves is not ashamed to be taking the state handout.
‘I have paid more than most in taxes,’ he said.
‘Why should I feel guilty?
I'm stuck without a job and with a house I can't sell — like thousands of other people.
‘I had such great plans for that house.
Unfortunately, I've never actually moved in.
Now, I probably never will.’
In the drive are two black Range Rovers, in the garage, an Aston Martin — the last of the 20 cars including Ferraris, Maseratis and Rollers he once owned.
‘The Range Rovers belong to my wife,’ he said.
‘And the Aston Martin is sold.’
At his peak, three years ago, Mr Deaves was reported as saying: ‘If you go bankrupt tomorrow, I'll tell you the upside.
No responsibility.
Loads of people will feed you.
You'll still go to the pictures…’
Mr Deaves still hopes for a settlement from his firm, which sacked him for allegedly taking an extra £387,000 pay — which he denies.
‘I'm living on a huge overdraft,’ he said.
‘But I am trying to get another business off the ground.’
Labour MP Frank Field, who chairs the Social Security Select Committee, said last night: ‘When he is back in work, and can sell the house, he should pay back the DSS.’
Mr Deaves' response: ‘I will happily pay all the money back, as soon as I can.’
Why he can claim
IF Mr Deaves cannot sell his mansion, he could qualify for state handouts for even longer than a year.
As long as he is out of work, seeking a job and unable to draw a pension, the DSS can keep up his mortgage payments.
Mr Deaves is treated just like someone in a one-bedroom flat.
He qualifies because his savings are less than £8,000.
Anyone with savings under £3,000 automatically gets help — between that figure and £8,000, the case is assessed by the DSS before the mortgage is paid.
Mr Deaves began getting income support last July.
For the first 16 weeks, the DSS paid only half his mortgage.
Then he qualified for 100 per cent help.
After a year, payments can be cut.
But, the DSS said: ‘If he still meets the criteria, he gets the money.’
Gilbey loses lover
Neville Thurlbeck
WEALTHY Lady Alethea Savile never recovered from hearing her lover James Gilbey profess his undying love for Princess Diana, it was revealed yesterday.
She battled to save her relationship with 35-year-old Gilbey in the wake of the ‘Squidgy’ phone tape scandal.
But in the end, Lady Alethea, 29, dumped him.
‘It was Alethea who took the brave decision to end it all,’ said a close friend.
‘The Squidgy tapes and all the publicity nearly sent her crazy.
It just went on and on.
No relationship could survive all the speculation.
‘James was made to look as though he was waiting in the wings to pounce on his fairytale princess.’
In the 23-minute call, Gilbey says: ‘Oh Squidgy, I love you, love you, love you.’
In an attempt to patch up the relationship, Lady Alethea and Gilbey fled to Italy.
She has been in the £500-a-night Sierra Tucson Clinic in Arizona, where patients carry sackfuls of rocks to symbolise their burdens.
Yesterday, she was not at her Chelsea home.
Her father, the Earl of Mexborough, said: ‘I haven't spoken to her, so I don't know if it's true the couple have broken up.’
…but Diana is happy
THE Princess of Wales arrived smiling and laughing at a Christmas concert last night.
Diana, who is patron of the National Children's Orchestra, enjoyed an evening of carols and classical music performed by the youngsters in London.
She later met members of the orchestra, aged 10 to 13.
Naked whiz-kid stabbed to death
Tracey Kandohla
THE naked body of a murdered whiz-kid company director was found dumped on wasteland.
Peter Wickins had been stabbed at least four times in the chest.
The 32-year-old was killed after attending a black tie awards ceremony, police revealed last night.
They have appealed for help in finding his clothes and any information about his movements after leaving the dinner.
Detective Superintendent Brian Edwards, who is leading the hunt for the killer, said: ‘It was a very savage attack.’
Bachelor Mr Wickins, who lived alone in a flat in Chelsea's trendy King's Road, in London, spent the early part of Thursday evening with friends.
He left wearing a dinner suit to attend an awards dinner at the Portman Hotel in Marble Arch.
Police believe he was killed early on Friday morning.
His body, naked except for a pair of socks, was found dumped on wasteland near a bus depot in Shepherd's Bush later that afternoon.
Mr Wickins was one of several company directors of the Wimbledon-based Games Ltd firm, which owns a small chain of shops selling everything from board games to computer games.
A colleague said last night: ‘Everybody is very deeply shocked.’
Police are trying to trace Mr Wickins' movements after he left the dinner.
Detective Superintendent Edwards said: ‘If anyone has seen any clothing like that scattered around, we want to hear from them.’
Our Joanna is telling truth
FITNESS teacher Joanna Grenside did not invent the story of her kidnapping, said her family and friends yesterday.
They denied suggestions that her account of a 36-hour blindfolded ordeal was copied from a bogus case in Australia, which was reported while Joanna was working there.
‘These suggestions are horrible and we want to quash them,’ said Joanna's Harpenden fitness centre boss Keith Parker.
Singer Fairlie Arrow was fined £10,000 for faking a two-day abduction to boost her ailing career.
Hertfordshire detectives admit they have contacted Australian colleagues, but dismissed any links between the two incidents as pure speculation.
Mr Parker, 33, denied that Joanna, 25, could have made up the story.
‘Anyone who knows Jo would realise that she's not the kind of person to do that,’ he said.
Joanna's grandfather was also adamant she was telling the truth.
‘She is not the sort to lie about something like this and I can't think of a reason why she would,’ said Christopher Grenside, 85.
Killer's 15 hits probed
DETECTIVES are questioning a prisoner who could be Britain's biggest mass murderer.
The 27-year-old man, already serving a life sentence for one murder, has been charged with another and may hold the secret to other unsolved killings.
He has told police he is responsible for more than 15 violent deaths.
Some were contract ‘hits’ for a few hundred pounds each but others were murdered ‘just for fun’.
The prisoner is serving life for blasting his former girlfriend to death with a sawn-off shotgun because she knew too much about his underworld dealings.
He marched the 22-year-old mother-of-three across fields before telling her: ‘You do not deserve to live.’
Police are already hunting for bodies working on the killer's directions.
So far they have found nothing, but his claims are being taken seriously, police said.
A detective said: ‘Some of the murders he says he committed so long ago that he has difficulty in remembering where the bodies are buried.
He gives us vague descriptions of his victims and how he killed them.’
M25 body horror
A MAN was hit by six cars and two lorries after plunging to his death from a motorway footbridge.
The victim, who has not yet been named, died instantly when he fell on to the middle lane of an unlit section of the M25 between Merstham and Reigate, Surrey.
Chief Inspector Robin Chapman said: ‘It was a very tragic and absolutely horrific accident.’
Wife's plea to Saddam
THE wife of Iraqi hostage Paul Ride yesterday begged Saddam Hussein to release her husband for Christmas.
Julie Ride asked the dictator to allow her son William ‘the love and comfort of a father’.
Mr Ride, 33, of Walthamstow, east London, was jailed for seven years for entering Iraqi territory this summer.
Julie says she has been assured he won't have to serve the full sentence.
Too kind
BIG-HEARTED Frank Gibbs faces a bleak Christmas after giving all his money to charity.
Frank, 44, from Devizes, Wiltshire, gave away his £2,250 savings, then lost his job.
‘I just believe in sharing,’ Frank said.
Car cops licensed to kill
Rob Perkins
POOR training has turned police drivers into potential killers, a top force driving instructor has warned.
Ian Garrett, who is head of the West Midlands police driving school, said: ‘Something has got to be done.
‘These drivers are killing people out on the streets.’
He said officers were being let loose on the roads after three-hour assessments which were little better than the ordinary driving test.
The chief inspector added that he and colleagues at the Halesowen driving school had been pressing senior officers for months to re-introduce the two-week intensive training course dropped in 1989.
‘The force decided we did not have enough drivers to meet public demand and changed the format to push more through.
‘Only a very few failed and they must have been bloody awful.’
About 5,800 of the West Midlands force's 7,000 drivers have undergone tough advanced driving courses allowing them to drive a car with a siren.
But Mr Garrett said others who have taken only the three-hour assessment are responding to pursuits despite force guidelines prohibiting them.
His comments come two days after a Birmingham coroner at an inquest on two men killed when their van was struck by a police car accused force drivers of using TV car stunt tactics
Chief Superintendent Alan Jones, head of West Midlands police training, said: ‘The majority of our drivers are highly skilled and would doubtless be dismayed by these comments.’
Police see red over Bill trick
TOP TV show The Bill is in trouble with the law after a double blunder.
The show's popular Detective Constable Tosh Lines fell foul of the real boys in blue after parking on zebra crossing zig-zag lines in a recent episode.
They saw red when he got away with the offence by waving his warrant card at a traffic warden.
PC Paul Lewis of Leicestershire Police, said: ‘This shows us in an unfair light.
‘Tosh abused his authority.
If he had really done that he would have been dragged before a disciplinary hearing.’
Sergeant Barry Middleton added: ‘Tosh's feet wouldn't have touched the ground.’
DC Lines, played by Kevin Lloyd, would have received three penalty points and a £40 fine, they claim.
Makers Thames TV insisted: ‘It would be unrealistic not to show them to be human on occasions.’
Blaze victim was stabbed
A WOMAN found dead by firefighters in a blazing flat had been stabbed, it was revealed last night.
Scotland Yard launched a murder inquiry after the body was discovered in a ground floor flat in Streatham, south-west London.
Neighbours in other flats at the three-storey detached house raised the alarm at 3am.
They escaped unhurt.
Sober sales
WOMEN are keeping a clear head by cutting their alcohol intake.
The number of women drinking low or no-alcohol lager has doubled in four years to almost 40 per cent, a survey shows.
‘They prefer to stay in control,’ said a Guinness spokesman.
Bank bungle over £9.41 cheque ruined my business
Adrian Lee
CARPET fitter Dennis Stoller was facing ruin last night after a blunder over a £9.41 cheque.
He claimed the TSB bounced the cheque and cancelled his overdraft because he missed a repayment on a personal loan.
But the 59-year-old, who was sick when the instalment was due, had insurance to cover missed payments.
His account was £27.68 in the black when the £9.41 cheque was bounced.
‘They are slaughtering me and my business,’ he said last night.
‘They knew I had insurance because I took it out with the TSB when they gave me the loan.’
Mr Stoller, 59, a customer at the St Albans branch, added: ‘As far as I was concerned I was the model customer.
‘All right, I have an overdraft — but who doesn't these days — and I am well within the agreed limit.
‘What are my suppliers going to think when my business account cheques start bouncing too?’
The fiasco started when a letter was delivered to his home in Barnet, Herts, earlier this week informing him the £9.41 cheque would not be honoured.
The same day another letter arrived cancelling his £500 overdraft.
That means he cannot meet the next payment on his van and could lose his whole business.
‘It appears there has been a breakdown in communications,’ said a TSB spokeswoman last night.
‘We do value our small business customers but generally we could avoid many problems if they did communicate more with us.’
The Bank Action Group has vowed to take up Mr Stoller's case.
The pressure group, made up mainly of small business customers, wants the Government to set up an independent body to investigate cases like his.
‘As an individual you are powerless,’ said national co-ordinator Pat Griffiths last night.
Rugby mother sidelined
A RUGBY fan broke her leg after ending up at the bottom of a ruck which spilled over the sideline.
Ronnie Elphick, 45, of Bovey Tracey, Devon, was trampled by three strapping rugby players as she cheered her 22-year-old son Nathan in the local team.
After spending 10 days in hospital she was back to watch the next home game, but from a safe distance.
‘I can always wave my crutches if I get excited,’ she said.
Hit-run car ride horror
A MAN was fighting for his life last night after being carried for 500 yards on the bonnet of a hit-and-run car.
The driver sped off after the accident with his unconscious victim draped across the front of his red BMW.
The pedestrian only slipped off when the motorist turned sharply into a side street, flinging him to the ground.
The horror ride began when the BMW ploughed into the man on a pedestrian crossing in Streatham, South London.
The unnamed victim was in intensive care at London's Kings College hospital with serious head injuries last night.
A police spokesman said: ‘This is a particularly nasty hit-and-run.
It appears the driver was trying to shake the man off the car.
We believe that's why he swerved off the road.’
Counting cost of true love
CHRISTMAS costs a fortune if you're a true lover — £10,185 to be exact.
Financial consultant Richard Bateman totted up all the gifts in the song The 12 Days of Christmas to come up with the hefty bill.
The partridge cost £9 — just £1 cheaper than the pear tree.
Turtle doves (or fancy pigeons) were £35 a pair, French hens cost £5 for the frozen version, calling birds, alias budgies, were £8.50 and cows £700 each.
Gold rings cost a mere £25, geese were £28 each, and each swan cost £30 to hire.
Richard, of Cornwall, reckons that milkmaids could be hired at £5 an hour because unemployment in farming is so bad.
And the dancers dancing, the pipers piping, drummers drumming and lords a-leaping could be persuaded to perform for charity.
When the lover's list was first calculated in 1973 it cost just Pounds 2,818.60.
Dirty weekend for the Majors
MR MAJOR is having more affairs, a new report into dirty weekends has revealed.
Hoteliers say that while three out of four secretive romantics still register as Smith, one in six now use the name Major.
But the Signpost Hotel Guide survey of 300 hotel owners showed that fewer people are bothering use a false name when they book in for an illicit weekend.
Palumbo faces eviction move
ARTS council chairman Lord Palumbo faces eviction after being accused of living in a house illegally for six years.
Astell Investments, which owns the home in Astell Street, Chelsea, claims Lord Palumbo has paid no rent since moving in to his wife's house in December 1986.
Lord Palumbo said: ‘The matter is in the hands of my solicitor.’
Mother burned to death with son in her arms
Andrew Chapman
A YOUNG mother burned to death in a vain attempt to rescue her toddler from their blazing home.
Nurse Susan Quinn ordered her asthmatic common-law husband David to leap to safety from a bedroom window to avoid the choking smoke.
Then she dashed into their 18-month-old son's bedroom.
Neighbours said she had Christopher in her arms as she tried to open the first-floor window.
But the two of them were engulfed in a rush of flames before she could throw the baby to rescuers outside.
Neighbour George Wynne said: ‘I could hear Susan screaming ‘Somebody help me’.
‘Then there was a whoosh of flame and it went quiet.
‘She hadn't closed the bedroom door and when she opened the window to pass Christopher out it created a backdraught that sucked the fire right through the bedroom.’
The danger of this effect was highlighted in the fire hero film Backdraft.
Geriatric nurse Susan, 23, was killed instantly.
Toddler Christopher, who had burns covering most of his body, died on the way to hospital.
Gail McCaffrey, a work colleague of Susan's staying with the family at their home in Salford, Greater Manchester, managed to climb out of her bedroom window.
She needed treatment for smoke inhalation and minor burns.
Lorry driver Mr Wynne, 47, was woken by screams coming from the semi-detached house next door.
He grabbed his son Mark, 23, and the two men ran out to help.
‘We could see the house was on fire so Mark kicked down the door but we were met by a wall of flames,’ said Mr Wynne.
‘It's such a tragedy because they were a close family.
Susan and David doted on Christopher and were getting ready to really spoil him this Christmas.
‘It's heartbreaking when anything like this happens but at Christmas it seems especially cruel.’
Forensic experts were yesterday examining the wreckage.
Among the items removed was a charred Christmas tree but fire officers refused to speculate on the cause of the blaze.
Grieving David, 23, a postman, was last night being comforted by relatives.
Crash victim wife's baby hope dashed
Jane McCormick
A YOUNG wife whose husband is in a coma after a road accident has been refused permission to store some of his sperm.
She wants to be able to go ahead with their plans for a family even if he dies.
But the woman has been told she would be breaking a law passed two years ago, which prevents sperm storage without the donor's consent.
Her husband was last night still unconscious on a life support machine at London's Royal Free Hospital where he was taken after the accident 11 days ago.
Doctors and lawyers say they want a change in the 1990 Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act, claiming it was never intended to apply in these circumstances.
So far the wife, who has not been named, has decided not to take legal action.
The situation has also prompted criticism of the law by fertility experts.
Professor Ian Craft, of the London Gynaecology and Fertility Centre, said: ‘The law needs to be amended and people need to be aware of the problem.’
Rover in bid to buy out jobs
Rob Perkins
BRITISH car giant Rover is offering its 32,000-strong workforce a Pounds 3,000 cash bonus to take voluntary redundancy.
The offer of three months salary on top of normal voluntary redundancy packages will stay open for the next three months.
It follows the company's jobs-for-life Rover Tomorrow deal signed earlier this year, which ruled out compulsory redundancies.
While the recession has forced most rival manufacturers to slash jobs, Rover has stuck to its voluntary redundancy and early retirement schemes to try to slim down its workforce.
But despite recent improvement in sales the company is still down on its market share for 1992.
Rover spokesman Ian Strachan said the cash offer had been made to white and blue collar workers throughout the group.
‘It would be a nice Christmas bonus,’ he added.
‘It allows us to offer a redundancy package withoput breaking the Rover Tomorrow agreement on redundancies.
‘For some older workers it would make a lot of sense, because together with our ordinary voluntary redundancy payment it is an attractive package.’
Rover had not set a figure on how many workers they expected to take the cash offer, he added.
Tree doctor saves himself
TREE surgeon Robin Teasdill, 34, stopped himself from bleeding to death by holding the main artery of his leg together for 15 minutes.
His left leg was almost severed when it was caught in the whirling blade of a tree stump cutter.
Surgeons spent four hours sewing the leg back together at Wycombe General Hospital, Bucks.
Look swell with no smell
GARLIC pills can help you to lose weight without losing friends, scientists said yesterday.
Tests showed the pills cut the amount of fat absorbed from a meal by up to 35 per cent.
The pills recommended by the scientists in Leipzig, Germany, don't make your breath smell, either.
Garlic can prevent heart attacks by stopping cholesterol from blocking arteries.
Torchlight RAF rescue
A CLIMBER was saved from freezing to death by the light of his pencil torch.
The thin beam waved by Victor Kurlos was spotted at 3am by a team in an RAF Sea King helicopter hunting for him with night sight goggles.
Mr Kurlos, 41, of Perth, Scotland, was attempting the 3,340ft Carn an Tuirc in Aberdeenshire when he became lost as temperatures sank below zero.
Hunt for murder victim's clothes
POLICE hunting a businessman's killer appealed yesterday for help to find his clothes.
Company director Peter Wickens' body was found, clad only in socks, on wasteland in west London.
He had been stabbed in the chest.
Mr Wickens, 32, whose firm owns several games shops, was wearing a dinner jacket and black tie as he left an awards dinner at a Marble Arch hotel.
‘If anyone has seen any clothing like that scattered around, we want to hear from them,’ said detective superintendent Brian Edwards yesterday.
Police believe Mr Wickens was killed early on Friday morning and his body dumped near the Shepherd's Bush bus depot.
He is not thought to have returned to the flat in Chelsea where he lived alone.
Di phone pal loses his lover
By Neville Thurlbeck
WEALTHY Lady Alethea Savile never recovered from hearing her lover James Gilbey profess his undying love for Princess Diana, it was revealed yesterday.
In the wake of the ‘Squidgy’ phone tape scandal, Lady Alethea, 29, battled to save her relationship with 35-year-old Gilbey.
But in the end, she dumped him.
‘It was Alethea who took the brave decision to end it all,’ a close friend said.
‘The Squidgy tapes and all the publicity nearly sent her crazy.
It just went on and on and on.
No relationship could survive all the speculation.
‘James was made to look as though he was waiting in the wings, to pounce on his fairytale princess.’
In the 23-minute call, Gilbey was heard saying: ‘Oh Squidgy, I love you, love you, love you, love you.’
Lady Alethea told friends: ‘It was mind-blowing.’
In an attempt to patch up the relationship, she and Gilbey fled to Italy with Diana's brother, Earl Spencer and his wife, Victoria.
Alethea has been in the £500-a-night Sierra Tucson Clinic in Arizona, where patients are encouraged to carry sackfuls of rocks, symbolising the burden of their problems.
Yesterday, she was not at her Chelsea home.
Her father, the Earl of Mexborough, said at his York home: ‘I haven't spoken to her, so I don't know if it's true the couple have broken up.’
More money than scents among men
STYLE conscious men are splashing a growing fortune on making themselves look and smell good.
Gone are the days when the average man would be happy with soap on a rope in his Christmas stocking.
Now he is more likely to ask for a body spray or shower gel.
Men's toiletry sales are the fastest growing sector of the market and are expected to peak at £337 million this year, more than double that spent in 1987.
Attitudes have changed as men have become more conscious of their appearance.
More than half now spend between five and 20 minutes a day on personal grooming.
Their tastes are also becoming increasingly sophisticated as shown by booming sales in luxurious fine fragrances, according to a survey by Mintel.
‘Men are looking towards a prestige image,’ said a spokesman.
Those with extra cash are treating themselves to costly colognes and aftershaves.
Jazz and Kouros by Yves St Laurent are favourite.
Old Spice still heads the mass fragrance market, ahead of Insignia and Mandate.
One of the biggest successes is all-over body sprays.
Sales have rocketed by 213 per cent since they were first brought out by Lynx in 1985.
While aftershaves and fragrances are still the most popular products, body sprays and shower gels are catching up.
Shaving gels are selling well to those interested in caring for their skin but foams hold the lion's share of the market at 59 per cent.
Skincare, including cleansers and moisturisers, are expected to be the next big growth area.
The Scots are the most smell-conscious.
More than 70 per cent regularly use aftershave, compared to 61 per cent of Londoners.
They also slapped on the most handcreams, cleansers and moisturisers.
Shower gels sell best in London.
Time Lord ‘sexist’
DR WHO is dead, but it was not the Daleks that got him, it was his own sexism.
A report blames the extended absence of the good doctor from BBC television screens on the fact that he alienated millions of potential women fans.
Researcher Alison Inman says female viewers were incensed by the bimbo behaviour of scantily clad female assistants best known for screaming and cowering in terror.
In a report, Stories For Boys, she wrote: ‘The programme is not only largely produced by men, but is also, in the main, a massively sexist affair.’
Earlier this year fans said they would be keen to see Joanna Lumley in the title role.
Mel bares his bottom
HOLLYWOOD hunk Mel Gibson's bare bum is expected to add £6 million to the takings of his latest film.
Gibson, 37, appears in his longest ever nude scene in Forever Young.
Producer Curt Hamilton said: ‘You've heard of the six million dollar man — this is the 10 million dollar bum.’
Australian Mel denied using a double for the scene, adding: ‘You feel weird doing it, but nobody gives a damn.
I haven't got anything that no-one else has.’
The film, which also stars Jamie Lee Curtis, will be released in Britain in the spring.
Fury over Queen's post perk
By Paul Wilenius
ANGRY Labour MPs are demanding an inquiry into the secret deal which gives up to 100 members of the Royal Family free postal services.
The cost of Christmas cards, free parcels and telegrams is costing the taxpayer millions of pounds, it was claimed yesterday.
Peter Hain, MP for Neath, said last night: ‘This is another nice little royal freebie.
‘It is understandable the Queen should have her official correspondence paid for.
‘But it is totally wrong for personal postage to be subsidised for her and even the most obscure royals.’
The latest embarrassment comes after revelations that it costs £19 million a year to run the royal yacht and train and £60 million to staff the royal household.
Mr Hain will demand details of which royals benefit, and at what cost, from Trade President Michael Heseltine.
Beware gift of deafness
PERSONAL stereos given as Christmas presents may lead to terrible hearing problems, a charity warned today.
Loud music ‘can give a savage and damaging pounding to the ears’, sometimes for life said Jo Hazelby of the British Tinnitus Association said Some 200 people become sufferers from tinnitus — a painful ringing in the ears — every day.
Family rescued from blazing car
A MOTHER and her two young children were rescued by brave passers-by after their car burst into flames.
Angela Chew, 43, from Leighton Buzzard, Bedfordshire, and her sons Rowan, eight, and Simon, one, were trapped in the burning Citroen after being hit by a lorry whose brakes had failed on the M4 interchange in Pontardulais, South Wales.
Party goes on — at 115
BRITAIN's oldest person Charlotte Hughes, 115, had a hearty Christmas tuck in yesterday.
She breakfasted on fried bread and bacon, and tea with four spoons of sugar, before a full turkey dinner with the other 33 residents at her nursing home in Redcar, Cleveland.
A nurse said: ‘She's a really good eater, and she's thoroughly enjoying herself.’
Charlotte, who has seen more than 20 prime ministers come and go in Britain since she was born in 1877, received her 15th telegram from the Queen.
She married an Army captain when she was 63.
He died 12 years ago aged 103.
Do come to stay — just not with us
Charles Rae
FERGIE'S invitation to join the Queen for Christmas will see her banished to a lonely farmhouse while the rest of the royal family whoop it up two miles away at Sandringham.
The duchess flew into a rage when she was told that the Queen had person ally ruled that she and children Beatrice and Eugenie should stay at Wood Farm on the edge of salt marshes in the village of Wolferton, Norfolk.
She threatened not to turn up and only agreed after demanding that her mother Susan Barrantes and sister Jane Makim should be allowed to join her.
Fergie's clan will arrive on December 22 at Wood Farm — where Anne and Tim are understood to have stayed last week — and stay until December 27.
She is due to join the other royals, including estranged husband Prince Andrew, at Sandringham's Christmas church service.
A royal source said: ‘The duchess is extremely unhappy over the way she has been treated.
‘The Queen felt it would not be right for the duchess to stay at the main house, even though there is room, because of the marriage split.
‘She was however keen to see her grand-daughters at Christmas and she came up with this solution.’
FERGIE'S four-year-old daughter Princess Beatrice will be king today when she takes to the boards in the nativity play at Upton House school in Windsor, Berks.
The duchess, who helped make Bea's purple robes, will be there to watch, and Prince Andrew is also expected to go.
As one of the wise kings in the play Little Angels, she also gets to wear a huge crown emblazoned with a dazzling plastic jewel.
6 held in $9m forgery swoop
SIX people have been arrested and nine million dollars of fake notes recovered in a police raid.
Detectives are holding five men and one woman at Dover, Kent, after a tip-off led to Tuesday's swoop.
Regional Crime Squad officers kept the operation secret until yesterday.
80 staff — and 1 bottle between them
EIGHTY factory workers were looking forward to a very merry Christmas — until their boss gave them just one bottle of whisky between them.
The offering for staff at Evertidy Furniture in Wolverhampton, West Midlands, worked out at less than half a pub measure each.
Angry workers have refused the gift and told manufacturing director John McCrostie it was an insult.
‘It's disgusting.
You wouldn't even taste it,’ said worker David Genner.
Diana ‘gets messages from the late Earl’