

THE SOUTH METROPOLITAN ELECTRIC TRAMWAYS & LIGHTING COMPANY, LIMITED
The Areas Served
It is usual to begin an account of this nature, with a brief description of the area served by the undertaking concerned.
In the case of the South Metropolitan Company, this does present a certain difficulty, since it served not one, but three distinct areas, each with its own particular character.
From its terminus in Tamworth Road, West Croydon, the company had a route running to Mitcham and Tooting, while another ran to Wallington, Carshalton and Sutton.
Separated from these by three miles of Croydon Corporation track, were two more routes in the Urban District of Penge, and these were, in fact, the first part of the company's system to be opened to traffic.
Penge, which includes the area known as Anerley, was the smallest Urban District in the Greater London area, it was, until 1855, a detached part of Battersea.
It then became a part of Lewisham, but obtained a separate entity as an Urban District on the 15 May 1900.
A large part of its small area is taken up by the grounds of The Crystal Palace and by a residential school.
For its size, Penge has quite an imposing Town Hall, erected in Anerley Road, between the station and the aforementioned school, in 1879.
Although mentioned by Conan Doyle as a quiet village to which one of Sherlock Holmes' clients retired, and the birthplace of Mrs. Beeton, of cookery fame, Penge owes its development mainly to the re-erection of the Crystal Palace at the top of Anerley Hill, in 1854, when it was removed from the Great Exhibition of 1851 in Hyde Park.
The three main streets of Penge, Croydon Road, Anerley Road and the High Street are of ample width, and while the two former are lined with Victorian houses, many of which are now, sadly in want of repair, Beckenham Road and the High Street form a compact but well appointed shopping centre, with street markets held in the adjoining Maple Road, and until the war Penge Empire Theatre.
There is also a shopping centre in Upper Norwood, which although partly in Croydon and partly in Lambeth, adjoined the Crystal Palace terminus of the trams.
Historians say that Anerley Station was named after a villa owned by a Scots merchant and meaning ‘Lonely’ and the area is said to have been developed between 1853 and 1858.
Thornsett Road, near the Selby Road boundary, where the present writer was born, was developed entirely by Thomas Crapper, inventor of the lavatory cistern.
To return to the lines on the other side of Croydon, the Tooting line, on leaving Tamworth Road terminus ran through the older part of the town in very narrow streets, until it passed the barracks in Mitcham Road.
After this, that thoroughfare became wide and straight and was not built-up until the 1920's apart from the provision of a cemetery near the borough boundary.
On leaving Croydon, the road pursued a straight course over the wide expanse of open scrubland known as Mitcham Common.
After about a mile, a humped-backed bridge crossed the L.B.S.C. Railway and the road entered the old township of Mitcham, then still part of the Croydon Rural District, which was not disbanded until 1914.
Mitcham which contains a number of interesting Georgian houses, is now a separate borough and is well known for its historic cricket green and its lavender factory.
After passing the Fair Green with its small clock tower, the tramway negotiated a rather narrow section of street, with shops, before crossing Figges Marsh, an open space of lesser proportions than Mitcham Common.
Although the company's cars proudly carried the destination ‘Tooting’, they in fact only reached the fringe of the area of that name.
Tooting itself lies within the Metropolitan Borough of Wandsworth, in the County of London.
The boundary at the point in question was on the North side of the humped-back bridge at Tooting Junction Station.
The tramway to Wallington, Carshalton and Sutton left the Mitcham line at Elis David Place at the western end of Tamworth Road, West Croydon, and after negotiating two rather sharp corners in Church Street and passing Croydon Parish Church, ran along Epsom Road, flanked on one side by the railway as far as Waddon Station.
From this point onwards, the tramway did not follow the existing road to Carshalton, which was in places very narrow and winding.
Instead it kept to the south thereof serving roads whose development was contemporary with the construction of the tramway.
In later years, Croydon by-pass was crossed and the ugly black corrugated iron north wall of the aerodrome followed soon after passing Waddon station.
From here on, until the old road was rejoined at the ‘Windsor Castle’, Carshalton, the area served was entirely good-class residential housing, much of which was not built until after the 1914–18 war.
Park Lane, Carshalton, was still open country in 1917.
The line terminated at the ‘Grapes’ public house in Benhill Street, Sutton, at right angles to the High Street and some little distance from the town centre.
The reader will recall that the British Electric Traction Co.
Ltd., a powerful group controlling many tramway systems throughout the country, were thwarted by an injunction from obtaining control of the Croydon Tramway Co. at the turn of the century when electrification was first proposed.
However, the B.E.T.
did succeed in persuading Croydon Corporation to let them work their tramways on a lease and shortly afterwards, they had the opportunity to take over two new tramway schemes, outside but adjoining Croydon boundaries.
In 1901, soon after the B.E.T.
had commenced working the Croydon Corporation system, the Croydon Rural District Council (a separate authority controlling areas surrounding the Borough), submitted the Mitcham Light Railway Order to Parliament for approval.
This comprised three street tramway lines based on Mitcham, one of which was extended to the Croydon Borough boundary.
Fortunately, this scheme was approved in its entirety on 6 November and the three lines were:—
Railway No. 1
— 1 mile exactly, double line.
Commencing in London Road, Mitcham, at its boundary with Tooting Graveney (Tooting Junction Station), across Figges Marsh to London Road, Mitcham, at Upper Green (now known as ‘Fair Green’).
Railway No. 2
— 3 furlongs 3.78 chains, double line.
Commencing at the terminus of Railway No. 1 at Upper Green and continuing along London Road, Mitcham, to a point 5.6 chains south of the junction with the Causeway (Cricket Green).
Railway No. 3
— 1 mile 6 furlongs 3.0 chains double line.
Also commencing at the terminus of Railway No. 1 at Upper Green and continuing along Upper Green, Commonside West, Blue House Bridge and Croydon Road, Mitcham Common to the Croydon Borough boundary.
As approved, these lines would be isolated from any other tramways, but it was hoped that at some future date, the L.C.C.
would build a line to connect with the Tooting Junction terminus and Croydon Corporation would consent to Railway No.3 being extended to the centre of Croydon.
No. 2 was a short branch to Mitcham Vestry Hall and the Cricket Green.
It was intended to be the first part of a lengthy tramway to Sutton and beyond.
Railway No. 3 was to run for over a mile across the open space known as Mitcham Common and was intended as a link between Mitcham and Croydon, with little expectation of intermediate traffic.
Having obtained legal powers to build itself a tramway system, Croydon Rural District Council then discovered that legislation at that time made no provision for a Rural District Council to own, operate, or perhaps more important, to raise the necessary finance to construct a tramway system.
Therefore, after due consideration, the Council sold their powers in the Mitcham Light Railways to the British Electric Traction Co. for £1,000 on 15 January 1902.
The B.E.T.
saw the Mitcham Light Railway as one step in the large tramway system they intended to build around Croydon and followed this acquisition by presenting a Bill to Parliament, containing their own proposals for the area.
It was entitled the Croydon & District Electric Tramways Bill 1902.
If accepted, this would enable them to construct a continuation of Light Railway No. 3 from the Croydon Boundary to the centre of Croydon.
It was to be linked to a line from Croydon to Wallington, Carshalton and Sutton.
There would also be a lengthy continuation of Light Railway No. 2 from Mitcham to Sutton and Belmont, making a large triangular system to the west of Croydon.
There was also to be a small separate system in the Urban District of Penge, connecting the Croydon boundary at Selby Road with Beckenham and Lewisham.
There were hopes that the London County Council would extend their lines in Lewisham to link up and Beckenham Urban District Council was currently formulating plans for a tramway system.
One of the Penge termini was to be at the top of Anerley Hill, by the Crystal Palace, then in use as a large exhibition centre, which it was hoped would attract much traffic to the trams.
Since Croydon Corporation's tramway system was leased to the B.E.T., the fact that the Penge services and the Mitcham/Sutton services would be separated by about two miles of Corporation owned track was thought to be of little consequence and it was intended to work the whole system as one with lengthy through services, under the ‘Croydon & District Tramways’ fleet name.
Unlike the Mitcham Order, the 1902 Bill did not pass through Parliament unscathed and when it became effective as an Act, on 31 July 1902, many sections had been deleted, largely because of the very narrow roads named in Carshalton.
The narrowest, Pound Street, passed between a lake and an overhanging church wall (both features still exist in 1982 — the roads to have been served were largely those served currently by London Country buses).
There was also a low railway bridge in Wallington and some very narrow streets and awkward corners in the old part of Croydon, where the Sutton and Mitcham routes were to meet.
The S.M.E.T. track layout in the Pitlake area, West Croydon, showing buildings to be demolished and those actually taken down.
Although the sections through Carshalton were thrown out, strangely enough, the equally difficult sections in Croydon were accepted, provided that certain demolitions were carried out.
In the case of Penge, apart from one low and narrow railway bridge, there was no difficulty with narrow roads, since Penge had been developed much later than Croydon and its main roads were of ample width.
There were some steep gradients, particularly Anerley Hill, leading up the Crystal Palace.
The Act provided for a route commencing at the top of Anerley Hill, descending past Crystal Palace (Low Level) Station to Thicket Road, a turning on the left, which led through to the top end of Beckenham Road, Penge.
The route was to proceed along Thicket Road and Beckenham Road as far as the Penge/Beckenham boundary.
Another route was to start at Selby Road, the Croydon boundary and proceed along Croydon Road and Green Lane, Penge where it met a small enclave of Beckenham before the Lewisham Boundary.
The two routes would cross at right-angles at Penge Police Station at the junction of Beckenham Road, Croydon Road and Green Lane.
There were railway bridges close to the Beckenham boundaries, that at Beckenham itself being too low for double deck cars.
There was subsequent correspondence with the Board of Trade, enquiring whether Parliamentary Powers and an inspection would be necessary for those lines which led to depôts and on which a public service would never be provided.
The Board's reply said in effect, they do not require authority, but we would like to know about them.
It was intended to construct a depôt in Aurelia Road, West Croydon, not far short of the Mitcham boundary and one in Torr Road, Penge, by the railway bridge, before the Lewisham boundary.
That for the Sutton route would be entered directly from the running track.
There was a good deal of discussion in December 1902, as to who was responsible for the cost of road widening, the B.E.T.
or Croydon Rural District Council.
Mr. Sidney Morse, the B.E.T's solicitor, reminded the Council that the company had paid £1,000 for the Mitcham Light Railway Powers and that in his view, that specifically exempted them from the provisions of the road widening clauses contained in the Bill.
Croydon Corporation were entitled to object to Tramways Nos. 10, 11 and 20, which lay within the Borough and were granted protective clauses.
That relating to No. 20 in South Norwood was described in the Corporation Chapter.
The Company were permitted to construct Tramways Nos. 10 and 11, but under Section 43 of the Act, they retained the right of compulsory purchase at a later date.
If this right was exercised, then the Corporation must lease the lines back to the Company and grant them full through running rights.
They must also reimburse the company for any widening and road improvement carried out.
Owing to the large amount of work demanded, this would be quite a considerable sum.
The Corporation demanded to see and approve all drawings.
They also said ‘The position, design and colour of all posts, standards, brackets and attachments and the positions of all feeder cables constructed by the company, within Croydon, shall be subject to the reasonable approval of the Corporation’.
With so many sections refused in the Act and the various restrictions imposed by the local authorities, the B.E.T.
and their Parliamentary advisors took a long hard look at the powers which they held and decided that the 1902 Act as it stood, could not make a viable tramway system, even when grafted onto the existing Corporation system.
There were also some doubts about the link up with other tramways in Beckenham and Lewisham.
In the circumstances, another Bill was presented to Parliament, entitled The Croydon & District Electric Tramways (Extensions) Bill 1903, offering alternative routings to those thrown out in the 1902 Act.
(The separate ‘Tramways’ enumerated in the 1902 and 1903 Acts are set out in Appendix B).
Between Sutton and Wallington, the route now proposed was to avoid the centre of Carshalton, by following new roads to the south, some of which were not yet constructed; although this routing was opposed by some frontagers in Sutton, the company was assured the co-operation of the Carshalton Park Estate Company, who were developing the area at the time.
Although there had been correspondence with the Beddington and Wallington Council about the low bridge in Manor Road, Wallington, the new routing avoided that too.
In Penge, the routing via Thicket Road was convenient for a direct service from the Crystal Palace to Beckenham, but if that did not materialize, Thicket Road was too roundabout for a direct route from the Crystal Palace to Croydon.
Therefore, the new Bill contained provision for a continuation of the line down Anerley Hill and Anerley Road to meet the Croydon Road line at the ‘Robin Hood’.
However, the line would cross Croydon Road and continue down Elmers End Road to the Beckenham boundary, but there would be connecting curves at the Robin Hood.
There was provision for any line constructed under both the 1902 and 1903 Acts, shown as single track on the Deposited Plans, to be laid as double track, provided that certain necessary road widenings were carried out.
A very wise provision, under which practically the whole South Metropolitan system was laid with double track.
Agreements were reached between the Company and Penge Urban District Council concerning the construction of tramways in Penge, on 29 September 1902 and 21 August 1903.
Like Croydon, Penge U.D.C. had the right to purchase its tramways in each seventh year on granting six months' notice, but if it did, it had to lease them back to the Company.
The whole of the 1903 Act was passed.
In the meantime, Beckenham U.D.C. did apply for powers to construct a tramway system.
It asked for powers to use animal or electric traction and trams or motor buses.
If electric, the tramway was to be worked by overhead wire or slot conduit systems.
The Council wished to borrow £55,000 to pay for their construction, and the tramways were to be leased to the B.E.T.
for 28 years, under the terms of an Agreement dated 21 October 1902, which also mentioned the use of buses.
The three Tramways described in the Bill were:
Tramway No. 1
— 1 mile 75 chains, commencing at the Penge boundary in Beckenham Road and continuing to a point in Beckenham High Street at the west end of Manor Road.
Tramway No. 2
— 53.9 chains, a continuation of the B.E.T.
line in Green Lane, Penge, along Thesiger Road and Kent House Road to the Lewisham boundary at Sydenham.
Tramway No. 3
— 13 chains entirely within the Borough of Lewisham, to continue along Kent House Road to its junction with Sydenham High Street.
The London County Council opposed Tramway No. 3, but agreed to permit through running if they constructed such a tramway themselves.
The Act of Parliament permitting the construction of Tramways Nos. 1 and 2 received Royal Assent on 11 August 1903.
Thus, under the umbrella title ‘Croydon & District Tramways’ the B.E.T.
was now in a position to build up a large network of tramways centred on Croydon, which it was hoped would attract passengers and business from a wide area to Croydon.
Unfortunately, as already described, Croydon Corporation saw things rather differently and thought they would stand to lose financially.
Their objection came to a head on two points in particular.
Tramway No. 20 of the 1902 Act, entirely within the Borough, they insisted on building and owning themselves.
On 15 June 1905, they refused the B.E.T.
permission to enlarge Thornton Heath depôt to accommodate the additional cars which would be necessary to work the enlarged system and to provide an entrance in Whitehall Road.
Although Tramways Nos. 2, 3, 4 and 5 of the 1902 Act, the Mitcham Sutton line, were accepted, there was much objection from frontagers, particularly at the Sutton end and it appeared that single track would be necessary at Rose Hill, where the road was in a cutting.
In the end, Sutton Council withdrew their support and no work ever started on the Mitcham — Sutton — Belmont route, except for the short stub, Mitcham Light Railway No. 2.
The Company had to pay Croydon Corporation £1,000 towards the rebuilding of Pitlake Bridge in the old part of Croydon.
It has recently been discovered that the Company purchased a small plot of land on the north-east side of the bridge for use as a permanent way yard.
It was not track connected.
(Details only came to light in 1972, when London Transport received a compulsory purchase order, in connection with a further rebuilding of the bridge.)
The Company had to contribute £3,000 (and no more) towards the cost of rebuilding and widening Goat House Bridge in South Norwood and the bridge over the road near Selby Road; although both were on Tramway No. 20, within the Borough of Croydon and claimed by the Corporation.
Penge U.D.C. asked the Company to pay about £250 for widening the bridge at Anerley Station but it eventually cost £1,750.
The Company had to pay £4,600 toward road widening in Penge and Anerley.
As the intentions of the British Electric Traction Company became clearly known, relations between them and Croydon Corporation became strained.
It was thought that the existing arrangement by which the B.E.T.
retained direct control of the ‘Croydon & District Tramways’ might not work well if the new lines had to be separated administratively from the Corporation system, so they decided to set up a subsidiary company as they had done in other areas.
The County  of Surrey Electrical Power Distribution Co.
Ltd. was registered on 19 April 1899; it had very widespread objectives, but was not yet operative.
The B.E.T.
obtained control and by a special resolution on 3 August 1904, the name of the Company was changed to the ‘South Metropolitan Electric Tramways and Lighting Company Limited’, the longest name of any tramway undertaking in the London area.
(The title ‘South Metropolitan Railways Co.
Ltd.’ had already been registered as a subsidiary of the London Tramways Co. in 1879, but came to nothing.)
The Company already had powers to provide electric lighting throughout the Sutton and Cheam districts and to it were made available the powers conferred by the Mitcham Light Railway Order and the Croydon & District Tramways Acts of 1902 and 1903.
The B.E.T.
appointed C. G. Tegetmeier as Chairman and James Devonshire, Emil Garcke and George Offor as Directors.
Mr. G. Ratcliffe Hulme was appointed Manager in April 1905.
The original Capital was £50,000 in £10 shares.
This was increased to £200,000 on 29 March 1905 and increased again to £400,000 in May 1906.
The Company had a generating station built in Wellesley Road, Sutton, some distance from the proposed tramways.
This was to supply the lighting network and part of the tramways.
Although Beckenham U.D.C. had powers to construct a tramway system, which they might have leased to the B.E.T., and had built a power station in Churchfields Road, they now had second thoughts about tramways and were thinking in terms of permitting the B.E.T.
to run buses in their area.
(Beckenham appears to have been the only municipal authority in the London area to have held motor-bus powers.)
Nevertheless, they did conclude an Agreement on 15 June 1905 to supply electric current to the Company's Penge tramways at 2 pence per unit from Churchfields Road Power Station.
Current within Croydon was to be supplied from the Corporation's own power station in Factory Lane off Mitcham Road.
During 1905, there was a constant flow of correspondence between the B.E.T., the Board of Trade and the various Local Authorities concerned, about the widening of roads.
Croydon Corporation were reluctant to permit double track in Stafford Road by Waddon Station and in Tamworth Road.
To the latter, the company replied that as Tamworth Road was to be used by both the Mitcham and Sutton routes, single track there would slow up the whole service.
The Board of Trade were of the opinion that the Corporation's permission to lay double track was not necessary.
The Rural District Council wanted ‘single pole’ construction.
The B.E.T.
replied, ‘We cannot agree to single pole construction, from which we presume you mean bracket arm construction, in place of span wires.’
The B.E.T.
hinted that the Council were too late to object, as span wires had already been approved by the Board of Trade, who objected to bracket arms over 16 feet in length, which might be necessary if the roads were widened.
Plans were put on view at the Parish Office, Vestry Hall, Mitcham on 13 May 1905.
There were very strong objections from one landowner and frontager and much pressure was brought to bear on him by both the company and the Rural District Council, who announced on 9 September that he had accepted their conditions.
The road across Mitcham Common was to be widened on the north side only.
Like the horse tramways, the company had lengthy arguments with the local authorities as to where the road surface should be paved with stone setts and where wood blocks.
Croydon Corporation were insisting on specially dressed stone setts.
In June and October 1905, there were proposals in other quarters to build tramways from the Crystal Palace to Thornton Heath and from the Crystal Palace along Crystal Palace Parade.
No more was heard of these schemes, but on 9 August Croydon Corporation served notice on the B.E.T.
that it intended to terminate the Lease of its tramways and henceforth work them itself.
The leasing arrangement was to end on 1 June 1906.
With regard to the contretemps over the connecting link between South Norwood and the Penge lines at Selby Road (Tramway No. 20), the Croydon Corporation Road Surveyor announced on 9 November, that he had now started work on this line by direct labour.
Thus encouraged, the B.E.T.
set about a campaign to try and persuade the Croydon voters to get the termination of the lease reversed.
They offered to increase the rental paid to £4,000 per annum, lobbied householders and produced a coloured map of the intended complete tramway system, all of which was of no avail.
A site in Aurelia Road, near West Croydon Cemetery, was sold to the Company by West Croydon Estate Co. for a depôt on 14 December.
During 1905, work was commenced on the various lines which were to form the South Metropolitan system, starting first on the Selby Road ‘Robin Hood’ Penge High Street section, then the Mitcham Light Railways.
Penge U.D.C. were quite happy with the proposed double track throughout, as they thought it would help if there was ever a prospect of through running with the London County Council.
They demanded bracket construction for the overhead wires, but this was turned down for the same reasons as those in Mitcham.
An Agreement for wood block paving was reached with Penge U.D.C. in 1905.
Although the Board of Trade had been notified that the company proposed to construct a depôt in torr Road, Penge, this site turned out to be on a section of route which it was no longer intended to construct, so another site had to be found.
The company entered into negotiations for the purchase of a site in Raleigh Road, Penge.
Access would have been through Southey Street, a narrow alleyway leading off the High Street close to the ‘Crooked Billet’.
(Part of Beckenham Road had now become High Street, Penge.)
In June 1905 an older was placed with the Brush Electrical Engineering Company (which was associated with the B.E.T.), for thirty two cars on long wheel-base radial trucks.
They were thought to be suitable for working on any part of the system.
One pole at the Crystal Palace was in Lambeth.
The only important road works that had to be carried out on the Penge lines comprised widening and strengthening the bridge over the railway at Anerley Station, cutting back the forecourts of Penge Police Station and property adjoining Penge Station (I.B.S.C. Railway).
Here the main London Bridge — Brighton railway crossed over the road on a very low four track bridge, under which the roadway had to be considerably lowered, but the pavements were not lowered and were protected by railings.
It was impracticable to widen the road here and interlaced track had to be laid.
This started at the centre line of Crampton Road and although most of the interlaced track was in Tramway No. 15, the first few yards were in Tramway 16.
Where the track became double again, there was another bridge carrying the Crystal Palace — Sydenham branch line over the road.
This bridge was a high brick arch viaduct, well clear of the tramway.
A few yards beyond this, the tramway turned left to terminate a few yards into Thicket Road, by the Penge entrance of the Crystal Palace grounds.
Apart from this short terminal stub of single track and the interlaced track, the whole of the Penge system was laid with double track.
No track was ever laid along the rest of Thicket Road, thus dividing Tramway No. 15 into two separate parts.
Unfortunately, the negotiations for a depôt site in Raleigh Road fell through and at the last minute, the company had to seek another site.
One was found in Oak Grove Road, near the ‘Robin Hood’, where some new development was in progress.
This site was acquired on lease from a Mrs. J. Clarkson on 8 February 1906.
Dick, Kerr Ltd. were asked to build a depôt on the site with all possible speed.
Oak Grove Road slopes down sharply from Croydon Road and houses had already been built nearly half way down.
A gateway and single storey office block were built adjoining the road and the depôt itself stood well back parallel to the road.
Later, more houses were built obscuring the building from the street and the position of the office block prevented passers-by from seeing inside.
As it was on such a steep gradient, a large basement was built under the rear end to give a level floor for the tracks.
The freeholder demanded  a clause in the lease precluding unnecessary noise, to which the company replied that there should be no noise, as the depôt was to be used only for the storage of tramcars.
In fact, maintenance was carried out there and in later years the basement was used as a rifle range for the staff and brass bands used to rehearse there for competitions at the Crystal Palace.
The agreements with Penge Council required the company to contribute £6,100 towards the reinstatement of pavements and any road widening necessary and to pave the whole width of the road with wood blocks in front of all places of worship.
The Council agreed that the company should not be held to the requirement to construct the line from the ‘Robin Hood'’ down Elmers End Road to the Beckenham boundary, unless Beckenham U.D.C. constructed a continuation to Elmers End Station.
In the meantime, Tramway No. 20 was opened by Croydon Corporation on 14 December 1905 and was worked as a short extension of the South Norwood line.
The contract for the construction of the lines on the Penge side of the boundary was awarded to W. Griffiths & Co.
Ltd., and the laying of underground conduits and cables for the power supply to British Insulated and Helsby Cables Ltd., but in an agreement dated 25 September, it was arranged that the B.E.T.
would supply the manhole covers.
The work was supervised by the Company's Engineer (Charles Wright Durnford).
The rails and overhead wires were joined at Selby Road, but there was a marked contrast between the surroundings; from the Goat House Bridge to Selby Road, there was single track with one passing loop in a narrow road between three storey terraced houses and a few converted to shops, between the over-bridge and the boundary.
The road widened suddenly at Selby Road and from there up the hill to the ‘Robin Hood’ and to Penge Police Station, there was double track, between fairly large mansions with front gardens.
Holy Trinity Church stood on the corner diagonally opposite the ‘Robin Hood’.
Span wire construction of the overhead suspension was used throughout (except in Oak Grove leading down to the depôt).
The section of tramway from Selby Road to the ‘Pawleyne Arms’ just before Penge Police Station was ready for inspection on 7 February 1906 (Tramway No. 21) and Penge U.D.C. was the only local authority involved.
It was inspected by Lieut.
Col. P. G. von Donop on 10 February.
Afterwards, he expressed surprise that the Post Office had not been invited to send a representative.
When advised, they did insist on guard wires at several points.
The Colonel pronounced the route fit for public service on 13 February.
The Company had been under an obligation to complete the line by 15 August 1905, but obtained an extension of time when it was discovered that the power supply from Beckenham would not be ready until I April 1906.
Evidently the section breaker at Selby Road, to separate the two undertakings, must have been temporarily bridged and current drawn from Croydon since the line opened without ceremony immediately following receipt of the certificate.
As the lease still had a few months to run, this section was worked as a further extension of the South Norwood line, using Croydon Corporation Milnes four wheelers.
In the meantime, in order to prepare to work the system themselves, the Corporation wished to be rid of the fifteen cars that were the property of the B.E.T., and asked them to remove them forthwith.
The Corporation had ordered fifteen new cars to replace them and to make space in the depôts, took the B.E.T.
cars one at a time on horse drawn flat trucks, along Canterbury Road and Mitcham Road to dump them on the site in Aurelia Road, which the company had purchased for a depôt.
As many as possible were covered by tarpaulins.
To everybody's embarrassment, the first eight new cars which the Company had ordered, were then delivered to Thornton Heath Depôt.
They were long wheelbase four wheeled cars in a dark green and ivory livery.
As none of the Company's depôts was yet ready, they pleaded that they had nowhere to put them and after discussion, the Corporation agreed to let them remain at Thornton Heath until their own new cars arrived, provided that they were permitted to use them in service on their main  line, to compensate for the mileage worked by Corporation cars in Penge.
The waist panels of the eight South Metropolitan cars were covered by chocolate coloured boards, which were lettered ‘Croydon Corporation Tramways’, concealing the B.E.T.
magnet and wheel device.
The Company's own lettering had not yet been applied to the rocker panels.
By the time the Corporation's new cars were ready for delivery, Penge depôt in Oak Grove Road was sufficiently advanced for the cars to be stored there, together with the remaining eight of the first batch.
S.M.E.T. No. 13 on the terminal stub in Thicket Road Penge with Col von Donop on the platform.
Note ‘Croydon Corporation Tramways’ on board fixed to waist panel.
Courtesy Penge Public Library
The difficulty over these cars had arisen because the Brush Co. had demanded an appropriate charge if they were expected to store them at their works in Loughborough.
In the correspondence arising therefrom, it was agreed that the next sixteen cars which the South Metropolitan Co. would require should be of a smaller type, making a saving of £58 per car.
This was agreed in February 1906 and at the same time the order for a further 14 cars of the smaller type, to work the Sutton route, was cancelled when it was realized that the fifteen ‘Croydon & District’ cars dumped on the site of Mitcham Road Depôt (Aurelia Road) would have to be taken into the South Metropolitan fleet.
One of a batch of large bogie cars, delivered to Gravesend where they were found to be too large, also found its way onto the Aurelia Road site, to be tried out when the line opened.
It did prove suitable for the Mitcham route and in due course three more were acquired.
On 7 April 1906 it was announced that current could now be obtained from the Beckenham Power Station and that guard wires as required by the Post Office had now been fixed near Penge entrance to the Crystal Palace.
There was disagreement with the Corporation as to whether the track in Tamworth Road, Croydon, common to the Mitcham and Sutton routes, should be connected with the Corporation rails on West Croydon Bridge.
The Corporation protested to the Board of Trade, who replied on 27 April, ‘Although we disagree with your views, we will not press for a junction with Station Road.
To avoid being unfair or unjustified, we will instruct the company to terminate Tramway No. 10 a few yards short of the junction.’
(In fact about one yard!).
Col. von Donop visited the area again on 10 April, to inspect the rest of the Penge system.
In his report delivered the next day, he observed that the road surface was not yet completed and that only drivers with at least six years' service could  be employed on Anerley Hill.
Cars 11 and 13 were used for the inspection which included braking tests on Anerley Hill.
Both these cars were fitted with Spencer track brakes, which could be wound down onto the rails when descending the hill.
It is not certain whether all cars of this batch (Nos. 1–16) were delivered with track brakes, but most probably were.
The inspection commenced at the Penge entrance to the Crystal Palace grounds, where the Colonel was welcomed by Mr. P. W. Greetham, Chairman of Penge U.D.C.
The lines were opened for service the next day, 12 April, from the ‘Pawleyne Arms’, along Penge High Street to the Thicket Road terminus and from the ‘Robin Hood’ to Low Level Station.
The steep section on Anerley Hill could not be opened until the company had persuaded sufficient drivers with at least six years' service to transfer from other undertakings.
This was achieved and the line up the hill opened on 28 May 1906.
A Mr. Tremlett transferred from the police and was appointed Inspector covering the Penge area lines, a task which he performed efficiently throughout the life of the trams.
While the Penge lines were being completed and opened, work was already in hand on the Mitcham route.
The line commenced on the Mitcham side of the London/Mitcham boundary, immediately beyond the hump-backed bridge on which Tooting Junction station was located.
The Tooting shopping centre was over half a mile away and was the terminus of the first L.C.C.
tram route to be electrified in 1903.
The depôt in Aurelia Road, West Croydon, always referred to by the Company as ‘Mitcham Road Depôt’ was built round the cars dumped on the site, by W. Taylor & Co.
It was to hold 26 cars.
The construction of both the Tooting Junction and Sutton lines was undertaken by the Brush Electrical Engineering Co.
In the meantime, as predicted, Croydon Corporation terminated the lease and from 1 June, the service provided by their cars was cut back to Selby Road on the South Norwood route.
Using their radial trucked cars (1–16) the Company then provided services Crystal Palace — Robin Hood — Selby Road and Crystal Palace — Robin Hood — Penge.
The triangular double track junction at the ‘Robin Hood’ made this possible.
There were close links between the Brush Electrical Engineering Co.
Ltd. and the B.E.T.
Group.
J. S. Raworth, who was a director of both, invented a system of regenerative control, by which a car descending a steep hill, could use its motors as brakes and generate current which passed back into the overhead wires to be used by other cars ascending.
It necessitated cars used on the route to be fitted with special controllers and other electrical equipment.
One of the radial trucked cars was appropriately fitted out and performed trials on Anerley Hill on 25 June, in front of an invited audience of senior representatives of the tramways industry.
It was stated that the car on a 9 ft. 6 in. truck was carrying 58 passengers and weighed 12½ tons loaded.
It was fitted with two 40 horse power motors.
It was also stated that in future, the Penge routes would be operated by sixteen cars, eight with regenerative equipment and eight without, but all would have track brakes as required by the Board of Trade for Anerley Hill.
Regular regenerative working would have to await the fitting of more cars.
The ex-Croydon & District cars reposing at Mitcham Road depôt were renumbered and the B.E.T.
badge replaced the Croydon Coat of Arms, but they were not repainted and remained in the chocolate and ivory livery.
The ten small Milnes four wheelers became Nos. 17–26 and the bogie cars, both ex-Croydon & District and ex-Gravesend were numbered indiscriminately between 27 and 35.
The smaller Bush four-wheelers on order were to be 36–51.
The Company's accounts state that Nos. 36–43 were to be delivered with track brakes but without regenerative equipment and cost £617 10s. each.
(In fact they were delivered in September or October without track brakes and received them later.)
Nos. 44–51 were to have regenerative equipment and track brakes and cost £707 each.
Regular regenerative operation on Anerley Hill must have awaited the delivery of these cars, probably in December 1906.
The water car transferred at the same time was not numbered.
Work continued on the construction of the Mitcham route and the Company notified the Board of Trade that Mitcham Light Railways and part of Tramway No. 11 was ready for inspection on 11 May.
It was inspected by Lt. Col. von Donop on 18 May, from Tooting Junction to Mitcham and Canterbury Road, Croydon.
He also inspected the Cricket Green branch in Mitcham.
He commented on the fact that a representative of Croydon Corporation was not present, although part of the line was in the Borough.
He did not permit the line to open until several telegraph posts which had been left standing in the roadway when the road was widened, were removed.
The company reported on 30 May that this had been done.
However, the Colonel had not waited for this confirmation in writing and issued his certificate on 24 May, so the line opened on 26 May without ceremony, the company taking their pick of the 19 cars stored in Mitcham Road depôt.
The remainder of Tramway No. 11 was inspected on 7 July and the Colonel asked about the gradients on the approaches to Pitlake Bridge.
After consultation, the representatives of the Company told him that the gradients were 1 in 18.9.
On the Croydon side of this bridge, at the foot of the approach, there was single track in the very narrow Lower Church Street.
For the time being, this single track was to be used as a terminus for the service.
A representative of the Corporation was present on this occasion and objected strongly, saying that cars waiting in this narrow street would cause obstruction.
The company explained that this was necessary until the line was further extended into Tamworth Road.
Cars had to use the single line to cross over from one track to the other when reversing.
To this, the Inspecting Officer concurred, provided that not more than one car ever stood in Lower Church Street.
This was accepted and the line opened to passenger traffic on 14 July.
This temporary terminal arrangement was in use for about three months.
Some demolition of property and setting back of frontages was completed, but by no means as much as provided for in the Act.
An old Market Hall remained, with small minaret-like towers at each end and the adjoining small house was made into the Company's office.
(114 Lower Church Street).
The remaining demolition was carried out in 1978!
The Market Hall was demolished at that time, exposing the flank wall of No. 114, on which was sign-written the times of cars to Mitcham and Sutton.
The track in Tamworth Road, to be shared with the Sutton route, was completed and inspected on 9 October enabling cars from Tooting & Mitcham to reach their ultimate terminus opposite West Croydon Station.
The Company were not permitted to construct Tramway No. 10A, the connecting curve with the Corporation's main line, nor a line crossing North End to join the Norwood service in Station Road.
The connecting curve from Lower Church Street continued as single track to join the down track from Croydon in Tamworth Road and there was a crossover for up cars to rejoin their correct track.
This very awkward junction was signalled with three lamps in a small wooden box on the first traction post in Tamworth Road and another in Lower Church Street.
As originally laid there was also a single line curve from Lower Church Street towards Sutton, but it was rarely used and removed after a few years.
In accordance with the Protective Clause in the Act the traction posts within Croydon had bases, scroll work and finials like those used by the Corporation, with the coat of arms on the former and were mainly of bracket construction.
Those used on the remainder of the system were of a rather heavier design.
In the meantime, work was proceeding on the Croydon — Sutton line and the time limit specified in the Act was due to run out by the end of the year.
As already indicated, the Brush Electrical Engineering Co. was the contractor for the construction of this line and with regard to the haste with which it had to be built,Brush Budget , their house magazine, had the following to say, ‘For legal reasons it became necessary to build the line very quickly and the Brush Company laid ten miles of track in six weeks.
The first rails were rolled on 20 June, the first car ran on test on 8 August, followed by the Board of Trade Inspection on 10 August.
Since the tracks were not completed into Croydon, a   car had to be taken by lorry to Wallington and off-loaded onto the track there’.
Presumably ‘10 miles’ refers to single track, as the whole route was not ten miles long.
The car was No. 25, one of the small Milnes cars and in those days a ‘Lorry’ was a flat truck drawn by horses.
No. 38 off the Crystal Palace route, at the ‘Windsor Castle’, Carshalton Note wall of convent school which had to be set back.
A site for a depôt was leased from A. Ross on 23 July 1906 and work was put in hand at once by Dick, Kerr Ltd., to erect a building capable of holding 60 cars.
As Mitcham Road and Penge depôts were each built for 25 cars, the South Metropolitan company spaciously provided accommodation for double the number of cars its fleet ever reached, presumably with other extensions still in mind.
The depôt was located on the north side of Westmead Road, just short of the Carshalton/Sutton boundary, but always known as Sutton depôt.
It was entered through an arched gateway, with single track curves in both directions directly from the running track onto the depôt fan.
The section completed for the Inspection on 10 August ran from Croydon/Wallington boundary to Ruskin Road.
There was some difficulty over widening in Stafford Road, which was already partly built up with houses and shops where it passed through Wallington.
Beyond, the line turned right into Boundary Road, crossed over the railway on the Wallington/Carshalton boundary, where the bridge had to be widened.
Beyond the bridge, the road descended as Park Lane on a steady gradient.
There was a sharp left turn at the bottom into Ruskin Road.
At the time, neither Ruskin Road nor the following Beynon Road had been made up or developed and for some time, the trams ran on what in effect was reserved track.
At the far end of Beynon Road, opposite the ‘Windsor Castle’ public house, the high wall of a convent school had to be set back.
At the top of the next gradient, the line crossed over the railway by some timbered cottages and then turned right again and descended Ringstead Road which was narrow and on a steep gradient.
It was laid entirely with interlaced track.
As the maximum gradient was 1 in 12, the Inspecting Officer said he was entitled to insist on the use of cars with track brakes, but as the road flattened out before the bottom, he would not insist on this occasion.
Two bogie cars were not allowed to pass each other on the curve at the top of Ringstead Road.
They were not normally used on the Sutton route, but had to use the depôt for overhaul facilities.
The next section from the Croydon boundary through Waddon and the working class district around Croydon Parish Church to join the Mitcham route in Tamworth Road, together with the section from Ruskin Road to the depôt in Westmead Road, were inspected on 10 November.
Once again a representative of the Post Office demanded guard wires and in subsequent correspondence, the Board of Trade enquired which was Elis David Road and which was Lower Church Street, as they were too small to show clearly on the map.
On receipt of the Colonel's verbal assurance, the Company was able to provide a service the next day.
from West Croydon terminus to Sutton depôt and it was hoped to complete the final section to the ‘Grapes’ in Benhill Street, just off Sutton High Street by Christmas.
In the meantime, the first eight of the smaller Brush single track cars had been delivered to Sutton depôt (without track brakes).
They were numbered 36–41.
Work continued apace and Colonel von Donop appeared again on 21 December to inspect the final section, which he did in car No. 36.
He assured the Manager that all was well and that his certificate would be posted without delay, so the public service commenced later the same day, thus the whole South Metropolitan system was opened in 1906, making 13.36 route miles.
Before the year was out, small Brush cars Nos. 44–51 were delivered to Penge Depôt.
They were identical to 36–43 except that they were fitted with track brakes and regenerative equipment, for regular use on Anerley Hill.
The Raworth regenerative system could only be properly tested if the whole service was worked by regenerative cars and this was now possible.
The service from the Crystal Palace alternately to Penge or to Selby Road had not proved suitable to public requirements, so from early 1907, services were provided, Selby Road — Crystal Palace with cars 44–51 and from Selby Road to Penge using some of Nos. 1–16.
The rest were moved to Sutton depôt to work on the West Croydon — Sutton service.
As the tracks were not completed at West Croydon, such transfers proved rather difficult and cars had to be moved at night, using temporary rails to bridge the gap at the top of Tamworth Road.
Agreements were reached with Croydon Rural District Council on 26 November and Penge U.D.C. on 13 September 1906 for rails and drain boxes to be cleaned out regularly for £45 and £15 per annum respectively.
On 9 April 1907, Mr. Durnford, the Engineer, reported on the working of the Penge system.
He said the radial trucked cars were causing excessive wear on the junction and curves at the ‘Robin Hood’.
The regenerative cars had not shown the expected economies and indeed they were responsible for excessive current consumption.
Consequently, Nos. 1–16 were removed one at a time to Sutton depôt, where the track brake gear was removed and fitted to 36–43, which took their place at Penge depôt.
Regenerative working ceased and the equipment was gradually removed from Nos. 44–51 and they were provided with ordinary equipment.
The regenerative equipment was all removed by 1909 after which Nos. 36–51 were identical.
From then on, Nos. 1–16 always worked on the Sutton route, where Nos. 36 and 51 were retained for short workings sometimes assisted by one of the Milnes cars.
Unfortunately, one of these Milnes cars working on the Sutton route, was the victim of the South Metropolitan's only really serious accident.
On Easter Monday, 1 April 1907, No. 19 was running as an extra car to Sutton with a full holiday load of passengers, when it got out of control on Wallington Railway Bridge and ran away down the gradient in Park Lane.
It overturned on attempting to take the sharp corner into Ruskin Road and fell on its side in front of a doctor's house.
Two people were killed and thirty injured.
The accident occurred at about 3.30 p.m.
Naturally, the Board of Trade held a searching inquiry and issued a report on 4 July.
Major J. W. Pringle reported that he had examined the car and found that the body had separated from the truck and there were a number of deep  chips on the outside edges of the tyres of the wheels.
He estimated that the car must have been doing at least 18 miles per hour on the curve where it overturned.
The conductor stated that there were 22 passengers inside the car and 33 outside, plus an unknown number of children.
The driver, who was normally employed as a fitter, but had some driving experience with the Corporation, was acting as a relief driver and was found to be principally to blame for the accident, because of his lack of experience, which resulted in his letting the car take the curve at too great a speed and the conductor for applying the hand brake at his end so as to lock the wheels; he had received no instruction on the proper procedure.
It became evident to both the Corporation and the Company, that the Selby Road frontier was of little use as a terminus for either.
Relations between the two having improved in the meantime, an agreement for through running was reached on 14 April 1907.
From 24 June, a service was provided with Corporation cars running from West Croydon to Penge terminus and a service from West Croydon to the Crystal Palace, using only South Metropolitan cars, which had the track brakes demanded for Anerley Hill.
From then on, South Metropolitan cars only ran to Penge on odd occasions, usually as football extras on Saturday afternoons, or for track maintenance.
The Company produced a new rule book, instructing crews that when working over the section from Selby Road to West Croydon, they must avoid altercations with Corporation staff at all costs and behave as though they were employees of the Corporation themselves.
A multi-coloured array of through tickets was devised (see Chapter on Fares and Charges).
Unlike joint services in many other places, the crews seem to have got on well together.
Eight cars were provided by each undertaking and gave a five-minute service from West Croydon as far as the ‘Robin Hood’.
Later a crossover was installed in Anerley Road and extra cars ran in peak hours from the ‘Robin Hood’ to the Crystal Palace, from 1912.
Turner's Automatic Points were installed at the Robin Hood junction, and cars coasted to take the corner for Anerley, but continued under power for the straight road to Penge.
There was a cabinet on the pavement beside the traction pole, in front of Holy Trinity Church, with a cable emerging from a hole in the top, which passed over a pulley near the top of the post and worked the overhead point, in conjunction with the rail point.
There was a skate on the overhead wire where the driver had to cut out to turn and another one round the corner to reset the points for the straight road.
Because of the slight gradient, these points often gave trouble, when drivers misjudged when to cut out and sometimes ran back.
The conductor would then leap down and tug at the wire on top of the cabinet.
When the apparatus functioned properly, it did so with a loud clonk that the writer could hear from his home near Selby Road.
A Turner's Controller was also installed at Pitlake junction at the bottom of Tamworth Road and was interlocked with the signal lights on traction posts in Tamworth Road and Lower Church Street.
As the depôt was near the ‘Robin Hood’, in the mornings, one would often see drivers' small children waiting with a blue enamelled jug of steaming tea and sandwiches in a red handkerchief, for their father's breakfast.
The stop sign at Low Level Station was inscribed ‘Last Stop before the Crystal Palace’ and on passing here, the driver would set his controls to climb the hill and sit on the stairs to consume his repast.
It was fortunate that the longer wheelbase cars had been removed to work on the Sutton route as they were longer and of larger capacity than the Corporation cars and would certainly have given trouble on the section between Selby Road and West Croydon, which was all single track with short passing loops.
Owing to the difficulties of transfer, full maintenance facilities were installed in Penge depôt, as well as Sutton.
On 13 October 1907, the London County Council opened a branch line from their Streatham — Tooting line to Tooting Junction.
Their tracks met those of the company end on but were not connected.
In any case the L.C.C.
used the slot conduit system and the Company used overhead wires.
In March 1908 a crossover was laid near the top of Tamworth Road, so that a second car could reverse when one was standing on the terminal stub.
On 4 June the Company introduced a parcels carrying service, using the front platforms of Mitcham & Sutton cars.
Light Railway & Tramway Journal says the following: ‘The S.M.E.T. made a new departure on Tuesday by inaugurating a Tramway Parcels Express, in connection with the service of cars between Tooting and Penge, Croydon and Wallington, Carshalton, Sutton and Mitcham.
Conductors receive packages at any of the recognized stopping places, or they may be left with certain agents and they are dealt with by special messengers in uniform.
The rate for collection and delivery within half a mile of any part of the lines vary between 7 lb. for 3d. and 56 lb. for 7d.’
The Manager, Mr. Ratcliffe Hulme, resigned and was replaced in July, by A. V. Mason from Devonport, who became Manager and Engineer of the S.M.E.T. C. W. Durnford, the S.M.E.T. Engineer then became Manager at Devonport.
So far, the British Electric Traction Co. had held all the capital and completely controlled the expenditure and policy of the South Metropolitan undertaking, just as it had when it worked the Corporation system.
However, from 1 November 1908, the B.E.T.
legally assigned the rights in the Mitcham Light Railways and the Croydon & District Tramways Acts of 1902 and 1903 (excluding the benefits of Tramway No. 20 of the former) at a book value of £43,500 to the South Metropolitan Electric Tramways & Lighting Co.
Ltd.
The company was then permitted to act as an autonomous subsidiary of the B.E.T., like the many other systems which they controlled throughout the country and abroad.
All management decisions were then left to Mr. Mason, at 114 Lower Church Street, Croydon.
On 21 September 1909 an agreement was reached with Penge U.D.C. for the carriage of parcels in their area, in exchange for permitting the Council to fit gas lighting attachments to the traction posts.
(The drawing attached to this document, showed a traction post quite unlike those used by the South Metropolitan!
It did resemble those used on certain other B.E.T.
subsidiaries.)
On 26 September 1910, Penge U.D.C. granted the Company a Temporary Building Licence for a passenger shelter at the top of Anerley Hill.
It was a small timber building against the back edge of the pavement on land belonging to the Crystal Palace authorities and was set level with the scissors crossover now installed at the terminus.
There were two doors in the front with a window between them.
Inside there was a cabinet against the window with a clock facing outwards so that it was visible from the cars and a telephone in direct communication with the depôt.
The seats arranged round the three sides of the interior, were slatted benches like those on the cars and above them were picture frames carrying the Company's advertisements and notices.
Above the doorways there was an enamelled iron plate on a board, proclaiming ‘S.M.E.T. TRAM SHELTER’.
An agreement was signed with Penge U.D.C. on 14 November, for cleaning out the shelter for £1 per annum.
This shelter was in use throughout the life of the trams and trolleybuses and was subsequently used as an office by the author of the ‘Fares & Tickets’ chapter of this book.
In 1965 it was condemned as unsafe and locked up.
It was destroyed by vandals in August 1980.
An open fronted shelter was also erected in 1910, on Mitcham Common opposite the ‘Blue House’(now ‘Ravensbury Arms’).
There is still a shelter on the site.
In July 1911, the All Red Railway was opened in the Crystal Palace grounds.
(See Appendix B for details).
The parcels carrying service proved unsatisfactory and was given up on 31 December 1911.
In January 1912, A. V. Mason was promoted to General Manager and Engineer, and A. E. Wray became Assistant Manager.
Following complaints from the Local Authority, repairs had to be carried out on the paving between the rails on the Tooting line, early in 1912.
In April 1912, the possibility was considered of running trolleybuses between the ‘Angel’ Benhilton and the ‘California Arms’, Belmont, part of the route originally proposed and vetoed by Sutton Council.
However, Sutton Council objected again.
Nevertheless, as the law then stood, their consent was not necessary for motor buses.
It was proposed that seven 13.
A.T.
buses be ordered to work a route Mitcham — Sutton — Belmont, covering the whole of the discarded tram route.
A site was sought for a garage, but before the matter could be taken further, there came news of a possible change in control of the company and things were left in abeyance for the time being.
S.M.E T. No. 24 at Fair Green, Mitcham in late 1920s.
Note staff uniforms.
(Left The Lycett & Conaty radial gear, with which S.M.E.T. Nos. 1–16 were originally fitted and (right ) the Warner gear which replaced it in the 1920s.
(’ Tramway & Railway World’
THE LONDON & SUBURBAN TRACTION CO.
LTD.
In 1912, as well as controlling the South Metropolitan Electric Tramways and Lighting Co.
Ltd., the British Electric Traction Co. also controlled the Metropolitan Electric Tramways Co.
Ltd., with its subsidiary bus undertaking.
It operated a large tramway system in North-West London, with over three hundred cars.
Although the B.E.T.
had a controlling interest in many important tramway systems throughout the country, their only other interest in the London area was a small motor-bus company using the fleet name ‘British’.
Apart from the London County Council and the various municipal tramway systems, the all powerful organization in the London area, was the UndergrounD Group (Underground Electric Railways Co. of London Ltd.), who as well as controlling all the underground railways except the Metropolitan and Waterloo & City lines, controlled the London United Electric Tramways Co. in South West London and from January 1912, controlled the huge London General Omnibus Co.
Ltd. which even then operated several thousand buses all over the London area.
This group had few interests outside London.
The B.E.T.
at first tried to compete by introducing its own motor bus services, but then managed to conclude a non-competing agreement with the UndergrounD Group, so a new tramway holding company was set up, in which both would hold shares.
This was the ‘London & Suburban Traction Company Ltd.’ registered on 20 November 1912.
The B.E.T's holdings in the Metropolitan Tramways and the UndergrounD Group's holdings in the London United Tramways were transferred to it forthwith.
The South Metropolitan Company's turn came later and it was transferred with effect from 14 June 1913.
Mr. Mason remained in management at 114 Lower Church Street, Croydon, with A. E. Wray as Superintendent.
It was not long before the South Metropolitan Company's omnibus proposals came up again and ten Daimler double deck buses were ordered in 1913, but Daimler were unable to complete them on time and ten L.G.O.C's ‘B’ type chassis with Brush bodies were substituted in July.
They were painted dark blue, with the fleet name ‘SoutherN’.
One advantage to the S.M.E.T. of becoming a member of the UndergrounD Group, was that their tram routes were protected from competition from the ‘GeneraL’ buses of the L.G.O.C. (Thomas Tilling had a working agreement with the GeneraL).
The same applied to the country services operated by ‘East Surrey’, who had a service from Croydon, passing through Carshalton and Sutton, but followed different roads to the trams (largely those rejected by the 1902 Act).
This was important, as by this time good class housing was developing in Wallington and Carshalton.
When delivered ready to start running on I August 1913, the ten ‘SoutherN’ buses were integrated with the L.G.O.C. fleet and allocated to Streatham Garage, from which they normally worked on route 59,(Oxford Circus and South Croydon) which competed directly with Croydon Corporation trams, emphasising Croydon's weakness in not having through running powers to work to London.
After a letter of protest from the Corporation, the buses were transferred to Twickenham Garage to work on routes which did not come anywhere near Croydon.
In due course GeneraL buses worked between Mitcham, Sutton and Belmont.
(The road from Sutton to Belmont is still a tree lined avenue not completely built up, in 1982.)
No change was made to the livery of the cars at this time.
On 6 May 1914, a Tilling bus collided with a Carter Paterson's lorry in front of the Crooked Billet, Penge and overturned.
It held up tram traffic for several hours, while the police investigated the cause.
Directorship of the three London Tramway companies was shared among the existing directors of the B.E.T.
and of the UndergrounD Group.
A. L. Barber of the B.E.T.
became Secretary of the London & Suburban Traction Co.
In April 1914, Mr. Wray left the S.M.E.T. to become Manager of the Gravesend & Northfleet Tramways.
He was not replaced immediately.
In June, the L.C.C.
became interested in a proposal to ask the Company for through running facilities for their cars to Mitcham, but because of the outbreak of war soon afterwards, it did not reach the stage of a definite request to the Company.
In March 1915 at a discussion between London Tramways Managers, Mr. Mason said he did not think women were suitable to conduct large open top cars, but in the New Year, the Company had to employ them, as so many men were being called up in the forces.
For the use of women staff, wooden stools were provided on the platforms and canvas screens fixed against the stairs to keep out draughts.
In December, the fitting of side lamps on all vehicles, including trams, became compulsory and the Company's cars were modified similarly to those of the Corporation.
Head lamps were obscured and a simplified livery adopted.
(Still green and ivory).
An event of greater importance occurred in December 1915, when an aerodrome was opened at Waddon alongside Stafford Road, just beyond the Croydon/Wallington boundary on the Sutton route.
It was on the site of two farms and became the London Area Headquarters of the Royal Flying Corps.
From then on, Stafford Road was flanked by a long black corrugated iron fence.
 Subsequently , a munitions factory was erected on the Croydon side of the aerodrome, with both railway and tramway sidings leading into its yard.
The railway crossing was protected by imposing level crossing gates where it crossed the tram line.
When the factory came into use, a special tram service was provided, using the bogie cars which displayed the destination ‘Waddon Workman’.
(National Aircraft Factory opened May 1918.)
In March 1916, it was announced that the S.M.E.T. had contracted with the County of London Electricity Supply Co. for bulk supply of current, both for lighting and for that part of the tramways which they supplied.
Henceforth, part of Sutton Power Station became a substation and the rest was leased away.
The Crystal Palace and its grounds became a Training Centre for the Royal Navy.
The service on the Penge route was curtailed at the ‘Pawleyne Arms’ and the Cricket Green service at Mitcham was given up.
From 7 April 1916, South Metropolitan staff came out on strike against the employment of women drivers.
It spread to the Corporation staff but was over by 20 May.
Starting on 10 August, Beckenham had a bus service, Route 109 (now 227) from the ‘Crooked Billet’, Penge to Beckenham, Bromley and beyond.
It was worked by petrol-electric single deck buses, which because of varying agreements, appeared at different periods either lettered ‘GeneraL’ or ‘Thomas Tilling’.
The Market Hall at Pitlake, Croydon, still not demolished, was leased to two gentlemen with foreign names as a cinema, the ‘Electric Theatre’.
The Head Office of the London & Suburban Traction Co. was established at  Electric Railway House (now 55 Broadway, Westminster) in 1916 and W. M. Wright became Secretary of the S.M.E.T. As a wartime measure, it was suggested to Croydon Corporation, that local routes in the area should be given service numbers and evidently they were offered the numbers 1–3 for their local routes.
The services in which the Company were interested were numbered thus:—
Route 4
— West Croydon — South Norwood — Penge (Corporation Cars).
5
— West Croydon — South Norwood — Crystal Palace (S.M.E.T. Cars).
6
— West Croydon — Mitcham — Tooting Junction (S.M.E.T. Cars).
7
— West Croydon — Wallington — Sutton (S.M.E.T. Cars).
The Corporation ignored this scheme and the company did not display the numbers on the cars, but they were shown on the folder maps issued by the three companies from 1916.
The Metropolitan Electric Tramways already allocated class letters to their cars (always referred to as ‘Type’ letters); the other two companies were brought into line as follows:—
Type J
— Nos. 1–16 Brush radial truck cars.
K
— 17–26 Milnes single truck cars.
L
— 27–29, 31–35 Brush bogie cars.
M
— 36–51 Small Brush single truck cars.
O
— 30 & 32–34 ex-Gravesend Bogie cars.
The letter P was used later and these Type letters were painted on the solebars on one side of the car only.
Time schedule running letters were introduced and displayed as red letters on white enamelled iron plates on the rearmost window pillar of the cars.
Because of the difficulty in placing a trolley wheel on the wire during the blackout and the risk of knocking passengers' hats off or worse, when pulling the pole down, or the risk of a broken spring inside the trolley mast, one of the J Type cars was fitted with metal hoops over the ends of the upper deck in August 1916.
In due course they were fitted to all the rest of the fleet and gave quite a distinctive appearance to South Metropolitan cars.
In 1917, bogie car No. 31 derailed in Tamworth Road and ran into the front of a house.
A case was heard in Croydon Magistrates' Court on 6 December 1917, described in the press as ‘Boy's dangerous prank’.
Some boys had been jumping on the backs of trams, when the conductor's attention was distracted, giving the emergency bell signal, stealing cash boxes and jumping off.
Mr. Mason was called to give evidence.
In the autumn of 1918, following the resignation of Mr. A. H. Pott, the Manager and Engineer of the Metropolitan Electric Tramways and the London United Tramways, C. J. Spencer, the Bradford Manager, currently absent on war service with the Admiralty, was invited to take over the management of the three London tramway companies.
From 1 November, he was appointed Manager of the Metropolitan and London United undertakings.
He could not take over the South Metropolitan until a suitable post had been found for Mr. Mason.
This came about on 18 December, when Mr. Mason accepted the post of Assistant Manager and Engineer to the three companies.
No doubt Mr. Spencer was pleased to note that S.M.E.T. Nos. 36–51 were equipped with track brakes which he had invented many years ago at Bradford.
On 28 January 1919, Mr. Spencer was promoted to General Manager, Tramways.
Soon afterwards, J. B. Mackinnon was appointed Traffic Superintendent and E. Boys, Secretary of all three Companies.
Penge Urban District Council asked for the electrification of all suburban railways.
A regulator's box was erected on the corner of Croydon Road and Elmers End Road opposite the Robin Hood, in the front garden of No. 103 Croydon Road in accordance with an Agreement reached with Mr. S. G. Gee, the owner of the property, on 16 May 1918, for £5 per annum.
It was like a sentry box, with half doors, so that a regulator could stand inside with the top half open and note the passing of the trams.
It was surmounted by a small clock and like the shelter at the Crystal Palace, was in direct telephone communication.
Diminished revenue was reported on the trams, but increasing profits on the lighting side.
There was also a report that Metropolitan Vickers had a large financial interest in the Company.
(Most companies in the UndergrounD Group were heavily mortgaged.)
On 12 December, the Company obtained freehold ownership of the site of Penge depôt from W. Clarkson for £960.
The MetropolitaN tramways in North London had evidently over-estimated the number of single deck cars required to serve Alexandra Palace and offered two on loan to the South Metropolitan Co. in 1920.
On 1 August Nos. 145 and 150 were transferred and pushed across the gap in the rails at Norbury, whence they were able to travel under their own power to Penge depôt.
They arrived, painted in a red and white livery, bearing the coat of arms of Middlesex and the legend ‘County Council of Middlesex’, as part of a fleet which the M.E.T.
worked on behalf of that County.
When the news got back to them, on 27 September, the County Council were extremely annoyed that two of ‘their cars’ should be loaned outside the County and demanded their immediate return.
This was not done, but the arms and title were obliterated before they went into service.
Early in 1921, No. 150 was used on the Robin Hood — Crystal Palace short workings and 145 was transferred to Sutton depôt for short workings from there.
For reasons explained in the rolling stock chapter, they were not entirely satisfactory and were returned at the end of 1923.
In 1920, Croydon Aerodrome became a civilian airport, operated by Imperial Airways (the local Council thought it should be called Wallington Airport).
From 1920 onwards, the B.E.T.
began to relinquish its holdings in London and Suburban Traction Co. which eventually became an entirely UndergrounD Group subsidiary, in 1928.
(The B.E.T.
itself became a subsidiary of Government Stock and Other Securities Investment Co.
Ltd., in 1920.)
On 10 November 1921, a new agreement was drawn up between the Company and Croydon Corporation for maintenance of track within the Borough and to permit the construction of a curve at the top of Tamworth Road, only to be used for the transfer of cars.
This replaced an agreement of 15 May 1907.
(a) For the first year the Company will pay the Corporation £2,532 14s. 10½d. and sums calculated by the Borough Surveyor in subsequent years (with certain safeguards).
For this the Corporation would maintain the whole of the surface of those roads in the borough served by the Company's cars.
(b) The Corporation would construct a single track connecting curve between their own tracks on West Croydon Bridge and the Company's tracks in Tamworth Road.
It would then be regarded as the property of the Company who were then permitted to run cars over it, only between the hours of 9.00 p.m. and 9.00 a.m.
They must not carry passengers or goods except the Company's own stores.
(c) South Metropolitan cars must not remain unnecessarily on Corporation tracks.
(d) Twenty-four hours' notice must be given to the Corporation of any proposed movement of cars across the West Croydon Junction.
The Company had hoped to be allowed to run cars across in service, but this would have necessitated Parliamentary Powers, which were not needed if a line was never to be used for passenger carrying.
A curve branched off the terminal stub, less than a car's length from the end of the track and joined the Corporation's main line on West Croydon Bridge.
The connecting curve was laid in and usable by September 1922, making it possible to maintain the whole South Metropolitan fleet at Sutton depôt, so the equipment in Penge depôt was dismantled.
Nos. 36 and 51, retained at Sutton for short workings, were transferred to Penge, as any car from that batch could be sent to Sutton at short notice when required.
A start was now made in painting the company's trams and buses in the UndergrounD Group's red and white livery.
In December 1921, the L.C.C.
proposed to extend their route from West Norwood to the Crystal Palace, but this was strenuously opposed by Lambeth  Council and came to nothing.
The Company was always alive to the traffic potential of sporting and other events, not only at the Crystal Palace and as well as running extra cars on Saturday afternoons between the ‘Pawleyne Arms’ Penge and Selhurst for football traffic, all spare cars available from both depôts were pressed into service between West Croydon and ‘Cold Blows’, Mitcham Common, when Mitcham Fair took place each year.
In July 1922, the Company enquired whether either of the other two companies had any covered top cars to spare, which they could borrow, to see if their own cars could be fitted with top covers.
Unfortunately, they had none to spare.
While at Bradford in 1911, Mr. Spencer had been a pioneer with trolleybus development and with his permission, the Associated Equipment Company (another UndergrounD Group subsidiary), demonstrated a single deck trolleybus of quite modern appearance for the time, somewhere on the South Metropolitan system during 1922, presumably with one trolley on the wire and towing a ball and chain.
A. C. Ingram became Assistant Secretary to the three tramway companies in 1922.
There was an accident on 16 March 1923, when a steam traction engine pulling a very large boiler on a flat truck, collided with and overturned a tram in the narrow part of London Road, Mitcham.
There were no serious injuries, but other traffic was very much delayed.
Also in March, the L.C.C.
wrote to the Company, proposing through running between their two systems, but the Company was not interested.
However, on 2 June, the Town Clerk of Mitcham (which was now a separate borough) wrote to the Company complaining that although Tooting Broadway was the nearest large shopping centre to Mitcham, there was no direct tram service to it.
Shoppers were forced to go to Croydon, which was much further, in fact over two miles away.
He asked if, in the circumstances, the South Metropolitan service could be extended to Tooting Broadway, only half a mile beyond the Tooting Junction terminus.
On 8 June the Company sent a copy of this letter to Mr. Bruce, of the L.C.C., asking for his observations.
No agreement was reached between the two parties on this occasion, but discussions continued throughout 1924 and into 1925.
In August 1923, the ‘Southern’ bus fleet was augmented by the transfer of three K type open top buses and one S type from the L.G.O.C. and several of the B type were withdrawn.
At midnight on the first Saturday in August, Inspector Charles Binfield, who was in charge of the paying-in office at Mitcham Road depôt, was attacked by two men and knocked unconscious.
They stole £97 12/5d.
An agreement was reached on 5 January 1925 between Croydon Corporation Beddington & Wallington Urban District Council and the South Metropolitan Company for the reconstruction and widening of Stafford Road, Waddon.
The two authorities each promised to reimburse the tram company for the realignment of the rails in its own area.
In June 1925, the Ministry of Transport (which had replaced the Transport Department of the Board of Trade in 1919) took note of the poor condition of the track and road surface on the Cricket Green spur at Mitcham, which had not been used since the war.
The Company's management evidently came to the conclusion that the only effective way to avoid the expense of lifting the rails, was to come to a speedy agreement with the L.C.C.
for through running and persuade them to use the spur as a terminal stub.
The question of through running with the L.C.C.
was a matter which exercised the other two companies, particularly the Metropolitan, who had quite a number of through services to various L.C.C.
terminals in North London, mainly over conduit equipped track.
Terms and policy were discussed at regular meetings between the UndergrounD Group and the L.C.C.
The matter of through running to Mitcham was raised at a meeting on 8 June, attended by Messrs.  Spencer and Mason, for the Companies and Messrs. Bruce, Croom-Johnson and F. Scothorne for the L.C.C.
It would be necessary to bring the tracks of both authorities into line and join them at Tooting Junction, but there remained the hiatus over the different methods of current collection and the L.C.C.
thought the South Metropolitan Company should bear the whole cost of £1,650 for installing a changeover point.
(See Croydon Corporation, Chapter 3, for details of change-over procedure.)
It was eventually agreed that each would pay half this cost and as the junction between the two systems was on a rather narrow section of road at the foot of a hump-backed railway bridge, the boundary was not a suitable place for a change point.
Consequently the change point was to be constructed several hundred yards back on L.C.C.
track at a widening of the road, where a new police station was under construction.
This did present a problem, as of the three services which the L.C.C.
had terminating at Tooting Junction, only one was to be extended through to Mitcham and it would not be practicable for the cars on the other two to change over to trolley operation for such a short distance.
Therefore, a special change point had to be designed, incorporating a point blade in the conduit, which by the operation of a lever, could either deflect a plough onto the change point or permit it to pass unhindered to the old terminus.
The overhead wires were extended from the South Metropolitan side to just beyond the change point, making a section of dual equipped road, on which through cars would use the overhead wires and cars terminating would remain on the conduit.
No 23 at Fair Green Mitcham.
Note Clock Tower and track to right leading to the Cricket Green, just beyond the block of shops.
(Commercial postcard, Courtesy ‘Len's of Sutton’
It was agreed that as the company had no cars suitable for running on conduit track, a service to the Cricket Green was to be provided only using L.C.C.
cars.
The Company was, therefore, to curtail its service from Croydon to Mitcham Fair Green and the L.C.C.
would virtually take over completely, the section Cricket Green — Fair Green — Tooting Junction, providing the cars and crews that worked over it as part of a through service from a central London terminus.
The Company was to provide power and maintain the track.
Each Authority was to fix the fares in its own area and receipts taken on the section concerned were to be divided equally between the L.C.C.
and the Company.
The Agreement was for five years and matters of detail were to be settled between the respective managers.
While these negotiations were going on, the General Strike occurred in June 1926.
The Trade Unions did not have quite the grip on the economy that they have today and its effects were not absolute.
The South Metropolitan tramways were not brought completely to a standstill and Sutton depôt kept cars on the road.
The track to Mitcham Cricket Green was refurbished and the traction poles painted silver, while span wire replaced bracket suspension, in readiness for the L.C.C.
to take over.
It appears that the L.C.C.
made some trial runs to Mitcham on 1 September.
Victor Matterface, the Brakes Inspector of the Metropolitan tramways, who later became a well-known Tramway Engineer elsewhere, describes how he was called on to visit South Metropolitan depôts as well as in the 1920's.
He was told about Sutton and Penge depôts which he visited and found well run, particularly Penge for fear of losing face with the Corporation, who maintained high standards.
Quite by chance he heard that they had another depôt off Mitcham Road, West Croydon and on visiting that found quite a different state of affairs.
Conditions were quite chaotic and standards of maintenance were poor.
Moreover, he noticed an electric lighting cable passing over the wall to an adjoining house, which he found was occupied by a senior official.
Mr. Matterface made a report to Head Office and the official was dismissed.
With the curtailment of the service provided by the Company, at Mitcham, there would be the opportunity to make a number of economies.
The original Milnes four wheeled cars were now getting very decrepit and it was found that the nine bogie cars would be quite sufficient to provide the normal service between West Croydon and Mitcham, so a number of Milnes cars were stored away in the back parts of the other two depôts.
It will be recalled that Sutton depôt was built to house 60 cars, but up to now had rarely held more than 20, so even with the overhaul facilities, there was plenty of space to spare.
Therefore, the nine bogie cars and a few four wheelers were transferred to Sutton and worked the Mitcham line from there.
Mitcham Road depôt closed on 5 October 1926.
It was offered for sale and although the Corporation, who were always short of depôt space, were approached, they rented it as a mortuary.
At the same time, most of the office work was concentrated by the Group at Electric Railway House (now 55 Broadway).
The Company's office at 114 Lower Church Street was closed and leased away to Reeves the furnisher, together with the adjoining Market Hall, which the Company was supposed to have demolished for road widening in 1906!
Two bays in Sutton depôt were screened off and such office work as still had to be done locally was done there.
From 22 September 1926, all cars on the Penge route ran right through to Thicket Road.
Through running by L.C.C.
cars to Mitcham commenced on 4 November 1926.
Their service 8 was extended, becoming Victoria — Tooting — Mitcham (Cricket Green).
The extension was one mile long and required five extra cars.
It was worked by ‘standard’ E/1 Class cars, like those used on the service to Croydon and Purley and sometimes by the slightly older but almost identical E Class, using 15 cars per hour in each direction.
The Company then provided a service from West Croydon to Mitcham (Fair Green), with a car every nine minutes and a twenty minute journey time, normally using the bogie cars.
At the same meeting as the through service was decided upon, the possibility of through running over each other 's tracks for access to overhaul works was also discussed and mutually beneficial arrangements worked out.
As the Kingsway Subway had not yet been deepened, except for single deck cars, the L.C.C.
system was effectively divided into two parts, North and South of the Thames.
Their main overhaul works was at Charlton in South-east London and North London cars had to be maintained separately.
The UndergrounD Group also wished to centralize overhaul facilities.
The Metropolitan Tramways had a well-equipped works at Hendon and there was a connection at Acton with the London UniteD tramways who had a slightly less well-equipped works at Fulwell.
The South  Metropolitan undertook such maintenance as they could in Sutton depôt.
It was agreed that North London L.C.C.
cars be permitted to make the lengthy journey out to Finchley and back down the other road to Cricklewood and Willesden, where they met other L.C.C.
tracks at Scrubs Lane, which connected with South London and so to Charlton Works.
Likewise, South Metropolitan cars were permitted to make the journey to Hendon Works over L.C.C.
tracks.
Of course, it was necessary for S.M.E.T. cars to be towed over L.C.C.
conduit tracks and conversely, some L.C.C.
cars did not have overhead gear.
Advance notice of car movements had to be given, but no charge was made by either party and at last S.M.E.T. cars could be thoroughly overhauled at Hendon.
London United 278 on loan, crosses Mitcham Common.
On 18 June 1927, there was a collision between two cars (presumably L.C.C.
cars) in London Road, Mitcham, when they met on temporary track where relaying was in progress.
There were no serious injuries, but one passenger was cut by flying glass and traffic was held up for over an hour.
One month later, the Company was able to purchase twelve cars from Croydon Corporation, with spare parts at the bargain price of £700 for the lot.
The original intention was that they should replace the Milnes cars which were worn out.
However, with the S.M.E.T. service cut back to Mitcham, it was found that only four would be required, so the best four were sent to Hendon to be slightly modified to resemble other S.M.E.T. cars.
Soon the remaining six B-Class buses were withdrawn from the SoutherN fleet and were replaced by more ex-L.G.O.C.
K Class buses.
During 1927 and 1928, most of the South Metropolitan track was relaid and as far as possible wood-block surfaces were replaced by tar-bound macadam.
A small steam roller with a vertical boiler between twin rollers was used in Penge and Anerley.
Other equipment was loaned by the L.U.T.
When the cars were sent to Hendon for overhaul, most lost their enamelled iron advertisements and received short term paper displays instead.
(See Appendix A.) Several received other minor improvements, such as cushioned seats but Nos. 17, 21 and 47 were condemned as unfit for further service.
The first two ex-Corporation cars to be put into service were numbered 52 and 53 at first, but with the withdrawal of the three cars mentioned above, three ex-Corporation cars appeared numbered 17, 21 and 47.
It is believed that 53 was renumbered 17 and 52 remained as an addition to the fleet.
(See Rolling  Stock section.)
Although they resembled the M Type they were usually found on the short workings on the Sutton and Mitcham routes.
They were designated ‘Type P’.
(They lacked track brakes.)
The Company's ‘SoutherN’ fleet of open top K type buses was now outdated and in urgent need of replacement and at a Board Meeting of the UndergrounD Group, it was decided that SoutherN fleet should be liquidated and in their place, ten more buses of a modern type be added to the bus subsidiary of the Metropolitan Electric Tramways.
The ten K type buses were taken off the road one by one from 1 January 1928.
Early in 1928, the short workings from the Robin Hood to the Crystal Palace, were extended back to Selby Road in peak hours.
These had always done quite well as buses were not then allowed on Anerley Hill.
Both the Corporation and the Company had always turned trolleys with a hooked bamboo pole.
One was kept at each terminus and at the Robin Hood, hung from a large hook near the top of a traction post.
Like the city gentleman's umbrella, trolley ropes were kept neatly furled round the trolley pole, only to be undone in cases of dire emergency.
Apparently the Company did not possess an additional bamboo pole for Selby Road, and the one from the Robin Hood had to be carried there resting on the backs of the seats of the upper deck of a car when required.
Later, these short workings were numbered 5A.
(When on his way to school, the writer was once asked to change seats!)
On 19 July, the L.C.C.
withdrew service 8 from Mitcham and diverted their service 6 there in its place.
It connected Mitcham with the City, instead of Victoria.
Thus, the Company's service 6 and L.C.C.
service 6 met at Mitcham Fair Green and the passenger was encouraged to think that one was merely an extension of the other.
The combined maps issued by the three tramway companies used a symbol to indicate through services, under the description ‘Services are operated’, and the intending passenger might have been forgiven for expecting to see Company's cars working on them.
The service from Mitcham to London was shown with this symbol, but so was a service from Tooting Junction to Willesden, over which the Company's cars had to run ‘dead’ to reach Hendon Works, but could not have run in service.
Really serious attention now had to be given to the reconstruction or replacement of the Company's rolling stock and although the ex-Croydon cars were in better condition than their own, it was decided to rebuild the J type cars on the Sutton route and not to commission any more ex-Croydon cars for service.
No. 16, which because of the poor condition of its body, had already been re-pillared with five windows, was sent to Hendon in August or September 1928, stripped right down and rebuilt with flush sides, two and one reversible cushioned seats inside and a number of other improvements.
On the return of No. 16 to Sutton, the remainder of the J type were sent to Hendon one at a time and similarly rebuilt, except that they retained four windows.
Some other cars in the fleet were then less extensively refurbished, with long cushioned seats.
A model of a proposed new type of car was submitted to Lord Ashfield, but it was not approved.
The railway line between the Crystal Palace (Low Level) and Beckenham, which had been closed during the 1914–18 war, was electrified and reopened in 1929.
This was the railway which crossed over the Corporation tramway just short of the Selby Road boundary.
A new station called Birkbeck, was built where it crossed Elmers End Road, but was not sufficiently near the tram route to affect their traffic.
Just beyond the station, Elmers End bus garage was built and opened, also in 1929.
As overhauled cars returned from Hendon, route boards were fitted just below the saloon windows, where they were more accessible than in the old position on the upper deck.
The new boards showed about five points with a route number in small figures at each end (the only place where route numbers were ever shown on South Metropolitan cars).
Since the UndergrounD Group took over, the Company's cars had carried the statutory lettering at the bottom  of the rocker panel, but had displayed no badge or fleet name.
I ate in 1929, the fleet name ‘SouthmeT’ began to appear in gold letters on the waist panel.
Crew's duties were signified by running numbers instead of letters and the livery was slightly simplified.
S.M.E.T. No 16 returns to Sutton Depôt after rebuilding.
In January 1930, the L.C.C.
entered into discussion with the Company about a huge housing estate and a very large hospital, which they were then building ‘out of County’ at St. Helier between Mitcham and Sutton.
The L.C.C.
wished to persuade the Company to build the Mitcham — Sutton line included in their original powers and then permit them to run over it as far as St. Helier, as an extension of their Mitcham service.
The Company was not really interested and explained that their powers had long since lapsed and costly new Parliamentary Powers would be needed.
They were only prepared to consider the proposal if a bridge in the outskirts of Mitcham and some road widening were included in the scheme.
On 1 July 1930 the Agreement with Croydon Corporation for the supply of electricity in their area was renewed.
At a Board Meeting of the S.M.E.T. on 5 February 1931, it was proposed to increase the capital of the Company from £500,000 to £600,000 by the creation of 100,000 new ordinary £1 shares.
This was carried.
A Bill before Parliament to unify public transport in London, received its second reading on 23 March, amid great opposition from the independent bus operators and the trade unions.
On 27 August, the air liner Normandie of Imperial Airways, overshot the runway at Croydon Aerodrome and crashed through the fence onto Stafford Road, narrowly missing SouthmeT tramcar No. 15.
Also on 7 August 1930, a firm was given the contract to repave the roadway between the rails, between Fair Green and Cricket Green at Mitcham.
Unfortunately, the firm went bankrupt before the work was completed and another firm had to be called in to finish it,(Carpave Ltd. 1 June 1933).
Twenty five signs inscribed ‘To the Trams’ and bearing an arrow pointing in the appropriate  direction, were fixed to lamp standards in streets adjoining those served by the trams.
(One such sign was observed by the writer in the forecourt of Penge East Station in 1944, ten years after trams had ceased to serve Penge!)
The question of borrowing covered top cars came up again in the autumn of 1931.
Neither the Sutton or Mitcham route was crossed by any overbridge and it was stated that covered top cars would be a boon when crossing Mitcham Common in winter.
This time the S.M.E.T. was more lucky, as the London United tramways had some in store.
They had recently converted their Kingston area routes to trolleybus operation and had obtained some of the new Feltham type cars for their Uxbridge route.
Ten of the London United ‘U’ type covered top bogie cars were transferred to Sutton Depôt to work the West Croydon — Mitcham route.
They were ungainly vehicles with double-flight stairs and short canopies, but they had top covers and Brill 22E bogies, which were more reliable than the Brush bogies under their own cars.
Being only on loan, they retained the L.U.T. livery and fleet numbers.
They normally worked on the Mitcham route, but had to run over most of the Sutton route to reach the depôt.
When they were installed to start working on 24 October 1931, the Company's nine bogie cars and one or two Milnes four wheelers were then taken into store at the L.U.T's Fulwell Depôt, never to turn a wheel in service again.
The Company suffered from the industrial depression of 1931 and at a meeting of the directors in May, the following proposals were considered:—
1
To abandon the Penge section, which suffered heavily from bus competition.
(Bus routes 12 and 75.)
2
To lease the remainder of the Tooting route, i.e. Mitcham — West Croydon, to the London County Council, to be worked as part of a through route.
3
To convert the Sutton route to trolleybus operation and to make an agreement with Croydon Corporation for the working of the Crystal Palace route.
However, as it now seemed certain that the Company would be taken over by the new authority that was to unify public transport in London, before very long, these projects were left in abeyance.
Nevertheless, Mr. Pybus, the Minister of Transport, announced in February 1932, that the London Transport Bill was dead and he had no intention of forcing it on an unwilling House of Commons.
However, another slightly amended Bill was soon prepared.
On 1 July 1932, the electricity undertaking of the South Metropolitan company was handed over to the London & Home Counties Joint Electricity Authority, who already supplied the current in bulk.
Mr. Mason, who was Chief Engineer to both the electricity and tramway departments, claimed and received heavy compensation for severance.
Mr. Mason remained with the Tramway companies, but the three electric-lighting offices and show rooms were handed over to the new authority.
They were at:— 52 High Street, Sutton; 47 Woodcote Road, Wallington; The Square, Carshalton.
The Wallington Office had a direction sign, like an UndergrounD Group stop sign pointing to it.
Flushed with the success of his trolleybus venture in the Kingston area of the London United Tramways, Mr. Spencer obtained permission in July 1932 to apply for powers to run trolleybuses on the Sutton route of the South Metropolitan company, so that he could implement the third item of the proposals put forward in 1931.
However, the days of the South Metropolitan Electric Tramways and Lighting Co.
Ltd., were now numbered.
It had already been stripped of the lighting side of its business, the more profitable side, and now the tramway undertaking was to be absorbed into the unified transport system, of which so much had been heard.
THE LONDON PASSENGER TRANSPORT BOARD
As early as 1929, Herbert Morrison of the London County Council was pressing for the L.C.C.
to take over all public transport in the London area and placed a Bill before Parliament early in April, to enable this to happen.
Later he moved over and took his seat in Parliament, where he was able to exploit even grander notions, that public transport be nationalized and another Bill was placed before Parliament, with this in mind, at least in so far as London was concerned.
The uncertainty caused by this atmosphere put a damper on further developments of public transport in London, as those desiring to make improvements felt that the fruits of their endeavours would pass to others.
A Bill of Parliament received its second reading on 23 March 1930, but by February 1932, there had been a change in the government and Mr. Pybus, the new Minister of Transport, decided to drop the Bill.
However, by then things had gone so far, outside Parliament, that some change was necessary.
A new Bill was presented, on similar lines, but instead of handing everything over to the L.C.C.
or the State, everything was in effect handed over to the UndergrounD Group, under a new name.
Lord Ashfield remained Chairman and Frank Pick, who had become Managing Director of the Group in March 1928, became Deputy Chairman.
John Cliff, a former Trade Union leader, was to be the member nominated by the L.C.C.
These and others were named as Members of the new London Passenger Transport Board in May 1933, but moves had been taking place behind the scenes from the beginning of the year.
Each tramway undertaking in the London area was sent a questionnaire, asking for details of operating methods, rolling stock, fares and tickets, and other assets such as depôts and any other properties.
These questionnaires were much resented and the L.C.C.
refused to complete theirs.
Tramways belonged to eleven local authorities and three companies, but not all the local authorities operated their tramways themselves.
The ‘appointed day’ when all tramways had to be handed over to the Board, was 1 July 1933.
The major bus undertakings and the UndergrounD railways (including the Metropolitan) were also taken over on that day, and the minor bus operators were drawn in one at a time later, but the main line railway companies (including their suburban services) were excluded.
There was some sort of pooling arrangement with them.
We are only interested in the tramways operated by the London County Council, Croydon Corporation and the South Metropolitan Company.
In the case of Croydon Corporation, on the night of 30 June, a fresh coat of grey paint was applied covering the gold title ‘Croydon Corporation Tramways’ and a small red label inscribed ‘London Passenger Transport Board, 55 Broadway, Westminster S.W.I.’covered the name of the Manager.
The municipal coat of arms and fleet numbers remained for the time being.
The South Metropolitan cars carried similar labels, but black on while.
Otherwise, as the Company was already part of the group, it was not thought necessary to signify the change of ownership, in any other way.
The Board assumed legal ownership of all rolling stock, track, depôts and other assets on 1 July.
Operating staff were transferred automatically.
Administrative staff were to be offered equivalent posts to those they now held, but Corporation staff did have the opportunity of transferring to other departments of the Municipality.
Miss Doris Allcorn, the Manager's Secretary, elected to do this.
Other people at the Town Hall only spent part of their time working for the Tramways Department.
Croydon Corporation handed over to London Transport 55 tramcars, 1 welding car, 1 tower wagon, 2.24 miles of single track and 7.04 of double.
The staff handed over comprised 11 administrative staff, 2 cash receivers, 1 depôt inspector, 6 inspectors, 4 regulators, 41 motormen, 32 conductors, 1 composite (could drive or conduct) and 20 workshop staff.
The above were all covered by the Corporation Superannuation Scheme, but there are believed to have been more motormen and conductors who had not been long enough with the Corporation to qualify.
(New uniforms ordered in January 1933 for 19 inspectors and regulators and for 201 motormen and conductors.)
The Administrative staff were:
Mr. Stanley was moved to an engineering appointment at Chiswick Works.
Mr. Morgan was given an administrative post in the Traffic Development Office (see Appendix C for biographies).
Mr. Troake was moved to the stores at Charlton Works and Mr. Tiller went to the Fares and Charges Office at 55 Broadway.
From subsequent events, it would appear that Mr. Marriott was given an appointment in electrical engineering.
Very little information is available concerning the movement of ex-Company staff, who probably numbered fewer than those of the Corporation, but it is known that S.H.
Weatherhead, the clerk at Sutton depôt, subsequently received an administrative appointment in Operating (Central Buses) at 55 Broadway.
(All the above named were also named in a staff list of 1922.)
Croydon Corporation celebrated the parting with its tramway responsibilities by calling a meeting of the staff, at which the Mayor stated that their interests would be protected.
Exactly what powers he had in that direction was not clear, but the Board did promise that no former member of the staff of an undertaking taken over would suffer any reduction of salary or conditions of service.
However prospects of promotion were reduced.
It was said that the ex-L.C.C.
Tramways and Metropolitan Railway staff had the best conditions of all.
Later ex-Croydon staff found to their cost that if they accepted promotion, they then came under London Transport conditions, which followed closely UndergrounD Group practices.
After a few weeks, a small letter E was applied after the fleet numbers on the dashes of ex-Croydon Corporation cars.
Soon afterwards, the letter S was applied similarly to ex-South Metropolitan cars.
The new Board was known to hold strong views about the replacement of tram services, particularly those where there was single track in narrow streets or worked by outdated rolling stock.
They were much impressed by Mr. Spencer's success with trolleybuses in the Kingston area of the ex-London United Tramways.
Plans were prepared for trolleybus conversion on a large scale.
In order to find suitable positions for two very experienced and well respected tramways managers, the tram (and trolleybus) system was divided into two areas, with a General Manager over each.
C. J. Spencer took charge of ‘North and West’ and T E. Thomas, General Manager of the L.C.C.
Tramways since 1930, took ‘South and East’.
Geography was somewhat manipulated as Mr. Spencer's empire included the Metropolitan Electric Tramways, the London United Tramways, the South Metropolitan and Croydon Corporation Tramways, while Mr. Thomas had the L.C.C.
Tramways and the other municipalities.
Although this arrangement was short-lived, it did prolong the separate and different practices of the L.C.C.
and the UndergrounD Group, as North and West cars continued to be overhauled at Hendon and South and East cars at Charlton, for some long time afterwards.
In October 1933, Mr. Spencer resigned and was appointed Resident Director to the North Metropolitan Electric Power Supply Co.
Ltd., formerly part of the UndergrounD Group, but which London Transport could not take over.
Before taking up those duties, he made a prolonged visit to South Africa to advise transport undertakings in Johannesburg, Bloemfontein and other places.
J. C. Mitchell, Secretary to the Board, was appointed liquidator of the UndergrounD Group and there were early reports of ex-Croydon and Walthamstow tramcars to be seen in a red livery similar to that of the L.C.C.
(Croydon 34E and 55E then due for a repaint) Following Mr. Spencer's resignation, T. E. Thomas became General Manager (Trams and Trolleybuses) covering the whole system.
Frank Pick was a very large man, well over six feet tall and broad shouldered.
He only liked large men around him and must have looked askance at small Welshmen like T. E. Thomas and G. D. Morgan.
A map issued in November 1933, showed the trolleybus routes that the Board was to include in a Bill to be put before Parliament.
These covered most of the ‘North & West’ area, including Sutton — Croydon — Crystal Palace of the former SouthmeT.
They also included Bexley- — Erith — Dartford.
One of the first major changes to tram services, was to affect the Croydon area.
Notices were posted on the sides of the cars, stating that the following changes would take place on the night of 6 December:—
(a)
Route 4 — West Croydon — Penge was to be abandoned and competing bus services 12 and 75 were to be strengthened.
(b)
Route 5 — West Croydon — Crystal Palace to be strengthened to a five-minute service by extending the former Robin Hood and Selby Road short workings through to Croydon.
(c)
Route 6 — West Croydon — Mitcham to be replaced by an extension of ex-L.C.C. route 30, now to run Willesden — Tooting — Mitcham — West Croydon.
(d)
Former L.C.C.
route 6 to be cut back to Tooting Junction and the Mitcham Fair Green — Cricket Green section to be given up.
This made route 30, now over 14 miles in length, the longest tram route in London.
About 40 cars were required, most of which were E Class cars from Hammersmith depôt at the other end of the route.
However, Thornton Heath depôt had to supply seven cars and for this purpose cars of the 552–601 batch of E/1s took the place of the Penge open toppers there.
These were in fact the old single deck Subway cars rebodied.
As route 30 was regarded as an outer belt route with no severe gradients, both batches were ‘slow motored’ cars.
This was the only period when the connecting curve at the top of Tamworth Road was in regular use.
The far destination at College Park, was shown on the blinds of the cars as ‘near Willesden Junction’, but was in fact some distance short of that important railway station.
In order that the Crystal Palace service could be strengthened, to the 15 cars available (36–51s, less 47s) were added three ex-Croydon Corporation cars, Nos. 11, 21 and 31, which because of the reversal of numbers of the single  truck cars at the 1927 renumbering, they were the newest.
They were quickly fitted with track brakes and put back into service on the Crystal Palace route still in Croydon Corporation livery, in which they ran for several weeks, before being sent to Hendon in turn for repainting and renumbering.
Ex-Croydon Corporation No. 370 in Brigstock Road.
The use of small suffix letters after the fleet numbers of the cars from municipal fleets, was only regarded as a temporary measure and it was decided to renumber them, either in gaps in the L.C.C.
fleet numbers or above the highest L.C.C.
number.
Most of the ex-municipal cars were accommodated in the former part, but Walthamstow and the three companies were given numbers in the 20005 above the highest L.C.C.
car.
Croydon cars were allocated the numbers 345–399.
NOS. 2 and 3 were sent for repainting first and they carried the numbers 346 and 347 in small plain gold figures.
NO. 1 was sent away a little later.
It was renumbered 345.
NO. 5 was evidently repainted at Charlton, fitted with magnetic track brakes, numbered 349 and transferred to Erith.
NO. 19 was retained at Thornton Heath and fitted with fixed snow brooms.
Although later painted red, it was not renumbered and remained 19E.
Nos 5, 4, 6–18 and 20 were taken to Brixton Hill depôt for scrapping without being renumbered, but the trucks under some of then reappeared later under other cars (see Chapter 7).
Because of their unusual livery and high standard of maintenance, they stood out proudly among the motley collection of cars, mainly ex-Bexley and Erith, awaiting the hammer at Brixton Hill depôt.
Before long, the old Croydon bogie cars on the Greyhound — Thornton Heath route were painted London Transport red and cream and renumbered 365–374.
At the same time they were given standard L.C.C.
combined tail lamp and route number stencil carriers fixed under the landings of their double-flight staircases.
For the time being these carried the route number 2.
When the turn of the modern bogie cars came to be repainted, they took the numbers 375–399 and retained their colourful enamelled iron advertisements.
NO ex-South Metropolitan car was ever renumbered, although a number were repainted in the official London Transport livery.
The ex-London United cars which had been working on the Croydon — Mitcham route were now transferred to the Sutton route, to work alongside the J type cars (1s-16s), four of which were withdrawn and sent to Brixton Hill.
In due course, several of the ex-L.U.T. cars were renumbered in the 2000s, as though still working as part of that fleet.
Route 16/18, Embankment — Croydon — Purley was not affected by any of the changes going on.
In December 1933, London Transport came to an agreement with the various local authorities for the lifting of rails on sections of tramway abandoned.
In February 1934, George F. Sinclair, ex-L.C.C., was appointed Rolling Stock Engineer (Trams and Trolleybuses).
He had designed L.C.C.
car No. 1, the modern car, which was to have been the forerunner of a new fleet.
In May it was announced that the fleet name ‘London TransporT’ would be used and it began to appear on the waist panels of cars as repainted.
The livery for trams was to be red and cream similar to the L.C.C.
style.
One of the matters brought to light by the plans to operate trolleybuses, was the need to rationalize electric current supply and with that in mind a new agreement was drawn up with Croydon Corporation.
The main points of this agreement reached on 17 January 1934, were:—
(1)
The sub-station at Thornton Heath depôt to be given up.
(2)
Drovers Road sub-station, South Croydon, to be retained.
(3)
Croydon Corporation to build a new sub-station in Tennison Road, Norwood, and lease part of it to London Transport at a peppercorn rent.
(4)
Croydon Corporation to contribute £4,500 towards new high tension cables to Mitcham and Sutton.
The new sub-station at Tennison Road would be suitable for the trolleybuses when they materialized.
It was built without delay, a short distance into Tennison Road, alongside a small market garden.
The Bill authorizing the conversion of a number of tram routes to trolleybus operation received Royal Assent on 31 July.
This included Sutton — Croydon — Crystal Palace.
Although bus route numbers had been regulated by the police for a number of years, there were still several separate numbering systems among the tramway undertakings taken over.
The L.C.C's system predominated, using odd numbers north of the Thames and even numbers to the south, with pairs of even numbers for routes making the loop round the Embankment.
In theory, local routes in the Croydon area were numbered 1 to 7.
As already noted, until about twelve months earlier, there had been two routes numbered 6 meeting at Mitcham.
Thus a scheme was worked out by which any route which duplicated a number in the L.C.C.
series would be renumbered, into what was then a gap in the L C.C. series on 3 October 1934.
The only change affecting the Croydon area was the Greyhound — Thornton Heath route, which had lately carried the number 2.
It became 42.
At the same time it was decided that single deck bus services would be numbered in the 200s (Route 109 at Penge became 227) and trolleybus routes would be numbered in the 600s.
(Later some numbers in the 500s were used as well.)
Croydon Corporation was not satisfied with the compensation which it received for the loss of its tramways and went to arbitration.
This was decided on 29 October, by Joshua Scholefield, K.C. Land adjoining Purley depôt, which had been acquired for an extension which did not materialize, was to be excluded from their considerations.
The Corporation was awarded £7,674, of which £5,000 had already been paid.
There were outstanding loans of £198,599 3/2d. on the assets of the transferred undertaking, which had to be paid by London Transport.
In March 1935, it was announced that the Sutton — Croydon — Crystal Palace route was to open in October.
London Transport decided to standardize on a 70 seater six-wheeler, but the first batches for the Croydon area and Bexley area, were to be slightly smaller and 60 seaters.
They too were six-wheelers.
Those for the Croydon area route were ordered from Leyland, with Birmingham Railway Carriage & Wagon Co. bodies.
In June, one of the few remaining sections of single line on the main road in Croydon was doubled, that between Aberdeen Road and Parker Road, South  End.
This still left the more notorious section of single track at Crow Hill, between North End and High Street.
The Crystal Palace tram terminus was on a gradient and it was ruled that if the crew wanted to take their break there, in the busmen's canteen round the corner on the Parade, they must go one at a time and not leave the car unattended.
However, a car was left on 25 October 1935 and began to run away down Anerley Hill.
It was stopped by a passenger, Mr. Leonard Tofield, of Elmers End Road, who strained his wrist applying the hand brake.
Another passenger jumped off and was slightly injured.
This event was in contrast to the exemplary record of the South Metropolitan Company, who never had an accident on Anerley Hill, despite the steep gradient.
The contract for erecting the trolleybus wires between Sutton and the Crystal Palace was awarded to Messrs. Clough, Smith & Co., who claimed that it would be necessary to renew 80% of the traction poles.
In spite of the trolleybus programme, it was announced in August that 250 trams of the E/1 Class were to be modernized, i.e. fitted with windscreens, flush-panelled sides and inset route and destination boxes.
There were to be no mechanical or electrical improvements.
They have often been referred to as’ Rehabilitated ’ cars or ‘Ashfield rebuilds’, but neither term appears to have been recognized officially.
In fact, only 154 cars were treated thus, but these did include four ex-Croydon cars.
Trolleybus replaced the trams on the West Croydon — Sutton route on 8 December 1935.
The rest of the J type cars joined the four which had already been withdrawn, at Brixton Hill depôt, where they were scrapped, but the lower saloon seats retained for further use.
Six of the London United cars were moved to North-West London.
Although it had been intended to convert right through in one operation, the Crystal Palace section was not ready.
In order to find suitable locations for turning loops, the route was extended slightly at both ends.
In Sutton, the wires came out into the High Street and ran a short distance to the right to run round a small green at Bushey Road.
At West Croydon, the wires crossed over the main road into Station Road and terminated in a loop at a triangular widening at the entry to St. Michael's Road, opposite the old station building.
(At the time there was a church on the corner, now there is a Bus Station.)
This extension, overlapped the Crystal Palace tram route by a few yards.
The new 60 seater trolleybuses were numbered 64–93 and although full-fronted, the driver sat in a half-cab inside, with a single passenger seat over the wheel-arch alongside him.
This arrangement was soon found to be unpopular with the staff, as a passenger sat there could distract the driver.
(At their first overhaul, this batch were given full internal bulkheads and an extra seat was squeezed in on the top deck.)
There were insufficient vehicles in the first delivery to work the whole service between Sutton and Croydon and several of the earlier 1–60 batch ex-L.U.T. trolleybuses, known as ‘Diddlers’ because of the clicking noise their contactors made, had to be used during the first few weeks.
Sutton depôt was completely rebuilt to hold 40 trolleybuses, with a combined traverser and turntable.
The arched gateway disappeared and an office block was erected alongside the entrance.
When the opening of the Sutton — Croydon section was announced, it was stated that the route would be extended to the Crystal Palace, ‘when certain works were completed’.
In fact, there was still quite a lot to do on that side of Croydon.
There was some pretty rough weather during December 1935 and the writer recalls seeing ex-Croydon Corporation No. 19E sweeping snow at Selhurst Station, while work was still going on erecting the double overhead wires.
One effect of wiring for trolleybuses was that the two pairs of wires were accommodated in troughing under the bridges at Selhurst and Selby Road.
They were located above the centre of the road instead of being drawn out to one side, as they had been for the trams.
The high destination boxes of the three  ex-Corporation cars just cleared the troughing under these two bridges, but the hoops of the ex-SouthmeT cars did not and had to be sawn off and the upper deck lamps were wired onto the handrails.
The following instruction was issued to the staff:—
‘Drivers must stop their cars immediately before passing under railway bridges at Selhurst Station and Selby Road and conductors must mount the stairs and ascertain that all passengers are seated and warned of the danger.’
Several trial runs were carried out on Anerley Hill, to test the special anti-run-back brakes, with which they were fitted, using trolleybus No. 65, which was purposely dewired several times on the hill to make sure that the brake really worked and for the benefit of the press.
A roundabout was built at the top of Anerley Hill to provide a run-round loop and was said to be located partly in five different boroughs.
(Lambeth, Croydon, Penge, Beckenham and Lewisham.)
Although span wire overhead construction was used for most of the route, bracket suspension, using peculiar curved bracket arms, was used in Northcote Road and on the approaches to Goat House Bridge.
At last the trolleybuses commenced running through to the Crystal Palace on 9 February 1936.
The whole service was provided from Sutton depôt and the trams were broken up where they stood in Penge depôt.
The agreement for their sale to Cohens was dated 12 October 1935, and must have been signed while it was still hoped that the line would open right through from Sutton to the Crystal Palace in one operation.
When their last remains had been cleared away, the depôt was leased to a potted meat manufacturer on 29 September 1936.
(Sold to him 4 January 1946.)
The new trolleybus service was numbered 654 and for the first time there was a through service crossing the main road at West Croydon.
Route 30 continued to serve West Croydon with trams and Tamworth Road now had both trams and trolleybuses, the trams using the trolleybus positive wires.
The conversion of tram routes to trolleybus operation continued in North and West London and London Transport set up its own team of experts to undertake the overhead wiring work, instead of letting it out to contract.
This team was largely drawn from the former municipal tramways and included G. V. Stanley and L. Marriott from Croydon Corporation.
Unfortunately, while working at Southall in 1936, both were knocked down by a private car and seriously injured.
(See Biography of G. V. Stanley.)
Mitcham Road depôt in Aurelia Road, West Croydon, remained closed and empty, the connecting curve, which joined the main road towards Mitcham had been taken out on 8 December 1935.
It was now decided to use this depôt for breaking up some of the cars displaced by the trolleybus conversions and the connection was reinstated on 2 June 1936, but this time facing towards Croydon.
A number of London United cars were broken up including at least one still in blue livery.
There were also some L.C.C.
E Class cars from North London.
In October, they were joined by the ex-Croydon old bogie cars Nos. 365–374.
They were replaced on route 42 by ex-L.C.C. cars.
(See Rolling Stock Chapter 7 for details.)
In September 1936, London Transport purchased five more B/1 type 60 seater trolleybuses.
Several of them were used to supplement 64–93 on the Sutton — Crystal Palace service.
They were numbered 489–493 and could be distinguished from the earlier batch by their black rubber rear wings.
In spite of being wholeheartedly committed to trolleybus conversion, there were still some minor improvements to the tram facilities.
The terminus at Thornton Heath was at the busy junction where the High Street met Grange Road and Whitehorse Lane.
A few yards of the old Whitehorse Road line were brought back into use and a crossover installed at Talbot Road, so that cars could stand clear of the busy road junction, as from 17 November.
A major disaster occurred in the next month, when the Crystal Palace was burned to the ground on the night of 5 December, when over 500 firemen were   required.
The trolleybuses were unable to get up the hill for much of the next day.
There was no intermediate turning loop, so a reversing triangle was later installed into the mouth of Versailles Road, the turning opposite Thicket Road.
In fact, the gradient favoured a trolleybus reversing and they could be seen performing the exercise without putting their poles up on the wires.
It had been intended to provide turning facilities at the Robin Hood, but no suitable place could be found.
Nevertheless, short workings to Versailles Road showed ‘Anerley — Robin Hood’ on the destination blinds.
When the writer protested, this was altered to ‘Anerley via Robin Hood’.
The loop at West Croydon was retained for short workings and one was installed round a small traffic island at Boundary Road Corner, Wallington, also at Waddon Station.
One other event in the summer of 1936, which temporarily affected the tram service on route 30 was the rebuilding of Blue House Bridge, Mitcham.
One carriageway and parapet was built first alongside the old bridge and a single tram track laid on it, reached by temporary crossovers and single track on the grass verge of the bridge approaches.
The ‘half-bridge’ was available to trams and pedestrians only.
Cycles had to be pushed.
Other traffic was diverted.
The old bridge was then demolished and the other new half erected in its place, with a second tram track.
It is said that as route 30 was high on the list for trolleybus conversion, the rails on the new bridge were laid in shallow troughs, from which they could easily be removed, when the tram route was abandoned.
Now that trolleybuses were established on the Crystal Palace route, the regulator's sentry box at the Robin Hood was no longer required and the lease of the site was terminated on 24 May 1937.
The houses on the corner of Elmers End Road were pulled down and a large block of flats erected on the site.
Soon afterwards, it was announced that although no more trams were to be ‘rehabilitated’, the light timber framed windscreens, devised for these cars, would be fitted to other cars as overhauled.
In due course they were fitted to all the ex-Croydon E/1 type cars, which by this time were the only ex-Croydon cars still in service.
With the spread of trolleybus conversions across West and North London all the older ex-L.C.C. and ex-Metropolitan types of car were scrapped and everything from the London UniteD Tramways was scrapped except the Feltham type modern cars.
These had originally been delivered in two batches, 46 to the London UniteD and 54 to the MetropolitaN tramways.
They were externally identical, but had different electrical equipments, the only obvious difference was that the MetropolitaN cars were equipped with conduit plough carriers and the London UniteD cars were not.
These latter worked on route 7 to Uxbridge and a few weeks before that route was to be converted to trolleybus operation, they were each fitted out with plough carriers and the necessary switch gear for conduit operation, so that they could make their own way under power to whichever depôt they were sent.
All ex-L.C.C. depôts had traversers instead of track fans (except Brixton Hill).
The only depôt which had sufficient clearance without obstructions either side of its traverser to accommodate the Felthams which were longer than any other London cars, was Streatham (Telford Avenue) and it was here that they came.
They were able to work on all the routes allocated to that depôt, including 16/18.
So, they were to be seen regularly in Croydon from then on.
They were capable of a good turn of speed on the straight stretch between South Croydon and Purley.
They had front exits and were of slightly lower seating capacity than the E/1s.
They had spacious vestibules at both ends to give a large standing capacity, which regulations never permitted to be used to the full.
The Uxbridge route was converted on 15 November.
Ex-L.C.C. tram route 6, which had been cut back to Tooting Broadway on 6 December 1933, was re-extended to Mitcham on 30 May 1937, but as the Cricket Green branch had already been lifted, it terminated at the Fair Green.
However, this was to be short lived as on 12 September, there was another trolleybus conversion, which involved route 30.
It was replaced by trolleybus route 630, which ran from the existing loop at West Croydon to College Park, Harlesden, still described as ‘Near Willesden Junction’.
Part of tram route 12 was also  converted and extended, running as 612 from the ‘Prince's Head’ Battersea to Mitcham, Fair Green, largely over the same roads as 630. 612 made a loop round the Fair Green as a terminal.
Route 630 was operated by 32 of London Transport's standard 70 seat trolleybuses, all based on Hammersmith depôt.
Now that Aurelia Road depôt was cut off from live tram track, it was cleared of the cars being scrapped there and closed on 22 November.
It was subsequently sold to Croydon Corporation and used by their Refuse Department.
As Thornton Heath depôt no longer had to supply cars for the Mitcham Road, it could take all the cars necessary for routes 16/18 and 42 and Purley depôt was closed.
The 70 seater trolleybuses experienced no less difficulty in negotiating Pitlake Corner into Lower Church St. than the bogie trams had done and the signal lights were retained until replaced by ordinary traffic lights.
The conversion of route 30 saw the end of the SouthmeT tramway system.
In March 1938, the former L.C.C's blue painted car No. 1, was transferred from Holloway to Telford Avenue depôt and painted red.
Henceforth it was to be seen from time to time on route 16/18.
The Light Railway Transport League made history on Sunday 15 May, when No. 1 was hired and made the return trip from Waltham Cross to Purley, with a tea break at Purley.
At the time this was the longest journey which could be made by tram in London and owing to rapid trolleybus conversions, the last occasion on which it was possible.
In June 1939, Mr. Sinclair was appointed Chief Engineer (Trams & Trolleybuses) on the retirement of Mr. Mason and J. H. Parker became Chief Electrical Engineer; he had been with Croydon Corporation in 1915.
During 1939, following the trolleybus conversions in North London, a number of rolling stock changes were made.
The ex-Croydon Corporation E/1s continued to provide the Thornton Heath complement on route 16/18, but ex-L.C.C.
E/3 all-metal cars began to appear on the Thornton Heath route 42.
The ex-MetropolitaN Feltham cars followed their ex-L.U.T. brethren to Telford Avenue and some were allocated to Brixton Hill depôt which was now regarded as an annexe to Telford Avenue and had no traverser.
These cars already had conduit gear and did not need modification.
Telford Avenue was now practically cleared of ex-L.C.C. cars and the few remaining spaces there were filled by ex-Walthamstow cars, contemporary with the ex-Croydon E/1s and closely similar to them.
(See Chapter 7).
War broke out on 3 September 1939 and had a very speedy and profound effect on London's tramways.
It overshadowed two other events; A. L. Barber, former Secretary of the London & Suburban Traction Co., retired and J. B. Mackinnon, the Schedules Superintendent, died suddenly on 13 September.
Blackout precautions were introduced almost immediately and on the trams, side lamps were rendered ineffective and the headlamps masked.
These masks only allowed a small amount of light to escape through a central slot, which could be covered by a red slide to convert it to a tail lamp.
Interior lights were hooded.
Later the collision fenders were painted white to be seen in the blackout and sticky netting fixed to the window glass to prevent splintering; there was a small diamond shaped hole in the centre, through which passengers were expected to discover where they were.
The London Passenger Transport Board was put under the direct control of the Government through the Railway Executive Committee.
There were no immediate changes to the tram services, but they gradually assumed greater importance as fuels for other forms of transport became more scarce.
Just as in the 1914 war, the first effect to be felt was that of large numbers of operating and engineering staff joining the forces and London Transport had its own Territorial Unit who went to camp in August 1939 and were sent straight overseas without returning to work.
The remaining operating staff had to work long hours preparing and implementing an evacuation programme  for school children, an exercise in which the trams played their part in getting them to the main line railway stations on the first part of their journey away from London.
In spite of the war, trolleybus conversions continued for the time being in other parts of London, but did not affect the Croydon area directly.
Some men conductors were trained as drivers and women conductors were first recruited in October 1940.
Frank Pick retired in May.
Purley depôt was put into use as a store for war damaged cars, plus a few cars in running order, which had not yet received windscreens to the driver's platforms.
Also to be seen there in 1940, were Works Cars 014 and 015, together with Snow Brooms 031, 032 and 034, these latter still in the old L.C.C.
dark lake and cream livery.
Ex West Ham No. 328 was there too.
Being in a direct line between the coast and London, Croydon and Penge were early among the places to suffer from heavy bomb damage.
The through service to London was interrupted on 10 and 11 September 1940, by bomb damage outside Croydon, and a shuttle service was provided by Thornton Heath depôt running as far as Norbury Station.
The service was interrupted again on 17 September.
On Thursday 3 October, a bomb caused a large crater in London Road, Thornton Heath, between Dunheved Road North and Dunheved Road South, cutting the depôt off from the rest of the Croydon system.
Cars from London terminated at Thornton Heath Pond and all other traffic was diverted.
A shuttle service was provided after two days, just south of the crater, to Purley, using four of the unvestibuled cars stored in Purley depôt; they were Nos. 1484, 1741, 1765 and 1776, all standard ex-L.C.C.
E/l type cars.
One track was relaid across the gap by 15 October.
The overhead wires at Warwick Road, in the same area, were damaged on 18 October.
Both tracks at Dunheved Road were restored by 20 October.
A high explosive bomb fell in Thornton Heath High Street near the Clock Tower, damaging the eastbound track on the night of 5 November and the service was curtailed at the Clock Tower, for several days, with one car providing a shuttle service in the High Street.
There were several other incidents in Streatham and Brixton which interrupted the through service to Croydon and Purley and occasionally cars had to be lent to other depôts.
It is said that two Feltham type cars, cut off from Telford Avenue depôt, had to spend a night in Thornton Heath depôt.
Another bomb fell in front of the bus garage at South Croydon on 10 May 1941.
Ex-Croydon Corporation car No. 396 was destroyed and the conductor killed.
On more than one occasion, Telford Avenue depôt was cut off.
There were few air raids in 1942 and 1943 and a more or less normal tram service could be maintained in Croydon.
Their contracts evidently having run out, the distinctive enamelled iron advertisements were removed from the ex-Croydon cars in 1942.
Supplies of bright red paint ran out in 1943 and several cars appeared painted ‘indian red’, this was a red oxide, that rather resembled the oxide used for trucks by many other undertakings.
Croydon 391 is believed to have been one so treated.
In December 1943, T. E. Thomas became General Manager (Operation), taking charge of the Central Bus as well as the Tram & Trolleybus Departments.
Mr. W. H. Troake former Stores Superintendent of Croydon Corporation Tramways, retired from Charlton Works in 1943.
Until removed to another site during the recent redevelopment in Croydon, the ‘Greyhound’ public house stood on the east side of the High Street, not far from the Crown Hill intersection.
Since the introduction of through working on the main line in 1926, cars on the Thornton Heath service had shown the destination ‘Greyhound’ as their southern terminus, but had in fact reversed at the Davis Theatre (a large cinema) a little further down the High Street, near South End.
Even this was in quite a congested area and from 25 October 1944, the cars carried on, out of service to the Coombe Road crossover and reversed there.
It was found that one additional car was required on route 42, to cover the slightly extended journey time.
At the same time, three serviceable E/l Class cars were allocated to Purley depot, for use on route 16/18.
The allocation of cars on 25 October 1944, was as follows:—
The short workings were mainly from the London end, hence their allocation to Brixton Hill.
This arrangement lasted only until June 1945, when the three cars allocated to Purley were moved to Telford Avenue depot.
A few more war damaged cars and non-standard cars for which spare parts were not available were moved into Purley depot.
On 8 May, the war in Europe came to an end.
T. E. Thomas retired in October 1945 and the title General Manager (Operation) was allowed to lapse.
Goathouse Bridge was widened in March 1946.
Experiments were carried out at Pitlake junction with an electric induction frog setting device, from 18 January 1947.
From 16 August 1946, the extension of route 42 to Coombe Road was officially recognized and passengers carried, but this again necessitated the use of one more car.
In November 1946, the pre-war decision to get rid of the trams was reaffirmed, but they were to be replaced by motor buses and not trolleybuses.
However, the existing bus fleet was if anything even more worn out than the tram fleet and would have to be replaced before the tram conversion could commence.
This might take 5 years.
On 26 December, 114 Lower Church Street and adjoining properties which had been leased to W. A. Reeves, the furnisher, since the offices were given up by the South Metropolitan Company, were sold to him.
In March 1947, T. W. Towers replaced T. J. Tilston as Operating Manager (Trams and Trolleybuses).
Both were ex-L.C.C. men, but UndergrounD Group terminology continued to prevail.
Around this time, as it was evident that the trams in London would have to be kept going for a few more years, visible external truss rods and other strengthening devices began to appear on many of the cars.
A few, including ex-Croydon No. 391, received flush external panelling, without the other accoutrements of ‘Rehabilitated’ cars.
However, London Transport was unwilling to go to the expense of refitting proper external lighting and the headlamp masks were never removed, as they incorporated red slides for display at the rear end of the car and the combined side lamps-tail lamps and route numbers had been removed or rendered ineffective at the beginning of the war.
In 1947, Government was in the hands of the Labour Party and in August they brought in a Bill to nationalise all public transport, including the main line railways, the larger bus companies and London Transport.
The Act of Parliament received Royal Assent and from I January 1948, the London Passenger Transport Board became the London Transport Executive as one of the integral parts of the British Transport Commission.
From then on all legal powers, etc., were held in the name of the Commission and not by the individual executives.
(This led to some very difficult unscrambling more recently when the Commission was dissolved.)
Lord Ashfield became a Member of the Commission and Lord Latham took his place as Chairman of the new 
L.T.E. Apart from the change in the official title in small letters on the sides of the vehicles, there were no noticeable or immediate changes.
The fleet name ‘London Transport’ was retained and preparations for the tramway replacement programme continued unabated behind the scenes.
However, it gradually became apparent that from now on, London Transport was to be ruled by politicians, rather than by people who had any knowledge or experience of how to run a public transport undertaking.
In March 1948, Croydon Corporation had discussion with London Transport about plans for the widening of the main road at the corner of North End and Crown Hill, so that the tram track could be doubled at this last remaining section of single track on the main line.
The ‘Crown’ public house on the corner opposite the Alms Houses lost its licence and became an emporium for ‘Surplus Stores’on a short lease, so that it could be demolished without delay when the go-ahead was given.
However, there were no further developments during the remaining life of the trams and the road was not widened until 1967.
The overhaul of trams to catch up on wartime neglect was taking longer than anticipated and it was decided that Purley depôt, still standing out of use, should be cleared of the war damaged cars collecting dust in its interior and be brought back into use as an annexe to Charlton Works where painting and certain other work could be undertaken.
Doors were fitted and it came into use on 7 September.
A minor event during 1948, in connection with a series of experiments in overhead current collection, three cars were fitted with carbon skid trolley heads like trolleybuses.
They were Nos. 378, 382 and 387, all three ex-Croydon Corporation cars.
They remained on the cars for about a year, working regularly on route 16/18.
At the end of the experiments, ordinary swivel trolley wheels were refitted.
During 1949 as the first stage of the tram scrapping programme was drawing near, V. J. Matterface, formerly of the Metropolitan Electric Tramways and now Tramways Engineer to Leeds City Transport, was able to persuade his new masters that the modern Feltham cars might be a good buy when London Transport had finished with them.
No. 2099 was taken out of service and removed to Charlton Works for preparation for the journey and left for Leeds on approval on 20 September.
That City's coat of arms was applied, but it retained its number and London Transport shade of red.
Late in 1949, it was decided that Thornton Heath depôt with its narrow entrance and awkward shape, would be quite unsuitable to convert as it stood to a bus garage.
It was therefore to be demolished, together with the two adjoining houses, which Croydon Corporation had used as offices.
A new bus garage would then be built on the cleared site and would have to be ready for use by the time the trams in Croydon were abandoned.
Purley depôt was deemed to have completed its task as an annexe to Charlton Works by 29 November 1949 and was available to take the cars now housed at Thornton Heath.
There was only one difficulty, apart from the various standard cars overhauled there and put back into service, there were seven Feltham type cars awaiting spare parts.
They were Nos. 2067, 2091, 2130, 2163, 2165 and 2167.
The last two were non-standard cars.
There must evidently have been some panic to get the depôt clear in time to reopen for service cars.
No other home could be found for these cars at short notice, so Cohen's men were called in with oxy-acetylene torches to break them up on the spot.
The pieces were deposited in Purley Station goods yard.
At least three of these cars would have been useful to Leeds, when the remainder were sold to them, if only as a source of spare parts.
A small canteen was installed in the rear part of the depôt, slightly reducing its capacity for tramcars and the building was ready for occupation by 1 January 1950.
During the preceding night, the trams moved from Thornton Heath to Purley depôt, the move of stores and equipment being effected by three  lorries and the tramcars themselves.
In all, 35 tramcars, 100 crews and 50 mechanical staff were affected.
Purley depôt was then called upon to provide on Monday-Fridays, 10 cars on the 16/18 through service, 6 cars on 16/18 short workings and 13 cars on route 42.
Because of the now limited capacity of Purley depôt, West Norwood depôt was called on to provide two cars daily on the 16/18 short workings.
These were invariably ‘rehabilitated’ cars, with which that depôt was largely equipped.
They came into service via Effra Road, Brixton.
By this time, Telford Avenue and Brixton Hill were regarded as one depôt for administrative purposes, they were not very far apart and were no longer shown separately in car allocation lists.
The war memorial tablet on the wall of Brigstock Villa was removed to a place of safe keeping before tram operation from Thornton Heath ceased, but as soon as the depôt was cleared of cars, demolition contractors moved in.
A newspaper reporter described the scene at Thornton Heath on 3 February.
‘A bulldozer, a mechanical shovel and a gang of highspeed demolition workers have turned Thornton Heath tram depôt in a matter of hours into something resembling a blitzed site.
All that remained of Brigstock Villa, shortly after work started last week, was a pile of rubble’.
There was no intention of converting Purley Depôt to a bus garage, as although of a more regular shape, its only entrance was on a busy part of the main Brighton Road and over the years there had been a number of near misses with other traffic, when trams were entering or leaving and the local press had conducted a campaign against its dangerous location.
In the meantime, work was pressed forward as quickly as possible in providing a modern purpose-built bus garage on the site of Thornton Heath depôt and Brigstock Villa.
When remarking that it was to have an entrance from Whitehall Road, we may recall the  strenuous objections by the Corporation when the B.E.T.
wanted to provide this facility for the trams.
In connection with the Festival of Britain Exhibition that was to be held at South Bank in 1951, some major road works were carried out between Westminster Bridge and Waterloo Station, streets in that area being made ‘one way’ at the same time.
This did affect route 16/18.
From 11 June 1950, the service was diverted (towards Croydon).
On 22 October, corresponding alterations were made for trams and other traffic proceeding towards the Embankment.
As a prologue to the final abandonment of trams in London, the separate operating departments of ‘Trams and Trolleybuses’ and ‘Central Buses’were amalgamated under one Operating Manager, J. B. Burnell on 12 July 1950.
From that date, certain tram and trolleybus depôts and bus garages were renamed, in cases where there had been one of each bearing the same name.
In the area in which we are interested, there was a ‘Sutton Garage’ and a ‘Sutton Depôt’, the latter actually being located a few yards across the boundary into Carshalton.
So from the above-named date, it became ‘Carshalton Depôt’.
Buses had always carried code letters alongside their running numbers, to indicate the garage to which they were allocated.
For historical reasons, Sutton bus garage used the letters ‘A’ and the use of these letters was now extended to trolleybuses, Carshalton depôt using ‘CN’.
It was not thought worthwhile extending the practice to trams, which continued to follow the L.C.C.
practice of using a white number on a small blue plate hung on the first window pillar.
In the same month it was announced that the abandonment of the trams would take place over two years, in stages, by groups of routes working from West to East, so that Charlton Works and the nearby tram graveyard at Penhall Road could remain open until the last stage.
It was originally stated that there would be eight stages.
At each stage there was to be a reshuffle of cars in depôts, so that the worst cars in the fleet were scrapped first and the better cars from a depôt closing were moved to another one.
This included bringing in ex-L.C.C. cars to replace the Felthams as they were moved to Leeds.
Although an accident caused one isolated abandonment before the scheduled date of commencement (damage to Battersea Bridge), the first official stage of abandonment occurred on the night of Saturday 30 September 1950 and affected the Wandsworth and Battersea areas.
This did affect the Croydon area indirectly, by the withdrawal of tram route 12.
This route which had formerly run from London Bridge to Tooting Junction, had been divided when route 30 was converted to trolleybuses and had become tram route 12 London Bridge — Battersea — Wandsworth and trolleybus route 612 Battersea — Wandsworth — Tooting — Mitcham.
The replacing bus route 44 reinstated the through facility from London Bridge to Mitcham.
At first this bus route ran a few yards further than the trolleybuses, which had run round the Fair Green, and terminated on a small patch of prepared ground alongside the pond at the beginning of Mitcham Common.
612 was the only trolleybus route to be abandoned with the trams and before 1959.
Leeds Corporation having agreed to purchase 92 Feltham type cars, they were taken out of service and moved to Charlton Works one at a time, so that conduit equipment could be removed and an articulated aircraft carrier lorry was specially adapted to carry each of them to Leeds.
2109 and 2113 had been war casualties and written off, five standard Felthams scrapped at Purley depôt as already described and in November 1950, while the move was in progress, Nos. 2144 and 2162 caught fire and were burned out.
Their remains were dumped on the site at Penhall Road, near Charlton, which London Transport had leased as a graveyard for its tram fleet.
It is believed that their bogies were sent to Leeds as ‘spare parts’.
To replace them, it was agreed that car No. 1 should go to Leeds, when the Croydon routes were abandoned.
Work started on rebuilding Telford Avenue depôt late in 1950, but for the brief remaining period, the Felthams as they came out of service were replaced by E/1 and E/3 class cars displaced by other route abandonments.
The Feltham cars were sold to Leeds at £720 each.
The second stage of the conversion scheme took place on the night of 6 January 1951 and involved routes serving Tooting and Wimbledon.
This resulted in a reduction of trams on the London — Brighton road north of Streatham.
Croydon's turn came in the third stage on the night of Saturday 7 April 1951.
This of course involved the trunk route 16/18, from the Embankment via Kennington, Brixton and Streatham to Croydon and Purley, which still carried very heavy traffic.
Croydon was the last ex-municipal system to be abandoned in the London area apart from the L.C.C.
and included the Thornton Heath branch, the last bastion of typical suburban routes with its sections of single and interlaced track and bracket overhead suspension, the clock tower and a typical suburban high street.
However, on the last day, the Light Railway Transport League hired car No. 1 and 70  members made the journey from Highgate in North London, through the Kingsway subway, out onto the Embankment and via route 18 to Croydon and Purley.
On the return journey, the Thornton Heath branch was covered and at Telford Avenue depôt, the party changed to another car and No. 1 had completed its last public journey in London, to be prepared for sale to Leeds.
The tour continued on ex-Metropolitan Feltham No. 2079 to Southwark, Embankment and Victoria before returning –o Telford Avenue depôt.
Two days later 2079 left Charlton Works for Leeds.
During the evening, the Streatham Chamber of Commerce hired car No. 947, ex-L.C.C. and Croydon Chamber of Commerce hired 839 for tours.
This latter was actually the last car to leave Purley terminus, following the official last car.
The proceeds were given to the Croydon branch of the Infantile Paralysis Fellowship, the fare being 5 shillings.
The official last car was E/3 Class, No. 1941, which left Purley terminus at 11.24 p.m. crowded to capacity and there were crowds all along the road.
R. M. Harmer, author of the Corporation section of the first edition of this book, placed himself in such a position as to be issued the last ticket (for a 6 pence fare).
Among the passengers was Mr. W. H. Troake, former Stores Superintendent of Croydon Corporation Tramways, who is said to have ridden on the first electric   car in Croydon.
The driver was Mr. W. S. Stout, who had joined Croydon Corporation in 1909 and the conductor, A. G. T. Allen.
As mentioned, 1941 was closely followed by 839, decorated overall, with wreaths and bunting and carrying some civic dignitaries of Wandsworth.
Older cars were used because of the fear of souvenir hunters and vandalism, which did in fact occur when the cars stopped outside Thornton Heath depôt.
The ex-Croydon Corporation E/1s were still in sound condition and lived to see another day; they were transferred to New Cross depôt.
Several of the Feltham type cars were in use to the end and were driven to the demolition site at Penhall Road, temporarily, while awaiting transport to Leeds.
The new bus garage at Thornton Heath was sufficiently advanced in construction for the bus service to start from there the next morning, using London Transport's then standard RT type buses.
It had been intended to number the main service 109B and 109W, for Blackfriars and Westminster respectively, as had been done in the case of the Wimbledon services, but there was a change in heart at the last minute and the buses were delivered with blinds numbered 109 only.
(The B.&W. disappeared from the Wimbledon buses soon afterwards.)
The Thornton Heath service was numbered 190 and has undergone various extensions at the Croydon end in more recent years.
Unfortunately, the 12.35 a.m. tram journey on route 16/18 was not replaced by a corresponding bus journey from Westminster to Purley.
Purley depôt stood empty until 23 November, when it was sold for £20,000, passing subsequently to Messrs. Schweppes Mineral Waters as a store.
It has changed hands again recently and has received a new facade.
The cast-iron gate posts with the coat of arms have disappeared, but the main structure of the two buildings remains.
The 23 remaining ex-Croydon cars were soon put into service on the various routes based on New Cross depôt, but 396 had been a war casualty and 376 damaged beyond repair in an accident just after the war.
Nos. 384, 387 and 398 were taken out of service at the fifth stage of the conversion on 16 October 1951 and the rest survived until the sixth stage on 5 January 1952, when they were scrapped at Penhall Road.
The trolleybuses on routes 630 and 654 continued to operate without change but in May 1952, the Electricity Board closed Beckenham Sub-Station.
This was the former Churchfields Road Power Station which had continued to supply the Selby Road — Crystal Palace section.
London Transport attempted to have its closure postponed and there was great consternation.
Eventually they were able to obtain a small site in Bourdon Road, off Elmers End Road, not far from the old Oak Grove Road depôt and built a temporary sub-station using second-hand equipment.
The final abandonment of trams in London took place on 5 July 1952 with a closing ceremony at New Cross depôt by Lord Latham.
W. R. Robertson the Public Relations Officer, was in attendance, assisted by G. D. Morgan, ex-Croydon Corporation and the present writer.
Trolleybus routes 630 and 654 continued to operate unhindered and without modification until 1958, when it was announced that as many of the vehicles were now over 25 years old (including those on route 654), they needed replacement and what better than the ‘more flexible’ motor bus.
In fact, because of Police and Trade Union restrictions, a motor bus running in London is allowed very little more flexibility than a trolleybus.
Work started late in 1958 on the removal of the traverser from Carshalton depôt and the installation of fuel tanks, but it was not found necessary to alter the construction or layout of the building again.
It was intended to use the new ‘RM’ type buses to replace the trolleybuses as they were larger than their predecessors and almost comparable in capacity.
Although displaced by 70 seaters in the Bexley area, the 60 seaters were retained to the end in the Croydon area, Nos. 64–93 and latterly all of the 489–493 batch.
These were the only trolleybuses fitted with the special ‘run-back’ brakes for Anerley Hill.
A scotch was kept near the shelter at the top of Anerley Hill, and put under the front wheel when the crews took their break in the Crystal Palace canteen.
The vehicles were definitely wearing out now, Nos. 64 and 72 had already been withdrawn in 1955, 490 was withdrawn in June 1957 and 71 in May 1958, followed by 489 in September 1958.
This must have left Carshalton depôt with insufficient vehicles to cover emergencies and on 9 September, following damage by flooding, several of the remaining trolleybuses were put out of action.
Therefore four 70 seaters, Nos. 1049, 1050, 1051 and one other were borrowed from another depôt.
Croydon Airport closed in 1959.
Trolleybuses ceased to run on route 654 on the night of Tuesday 3 March 1959, when an official last run was made at the instigation of the Wallington and Carshalton Advertiser.
No. 65 was used for this run; it was the one which had made the trials on Anerley Hill before public service commenced.
This time it made the trip from West Croydon to Sutton and passengers included the Mayors of Sutton and Cheam and of Beddington and Wallington.
The conductor was Mr. L. Lambert, who had started conducting with Croydon Corporation in 1919 and for many years had been their union representative.
A tower wagon was waiting at the Lower Church Street corner to remove the junction in the overhead wires as soon as the last trolleybus had passed and replace it with plain wires leading only in the Mitcham direction.
The trolleybuses were replaced by two motor bus routes, 154 and 157, which ran from the Crystal Palace beyond Sutton to Morden and 157 continued to Raynes Park.
154 followed the same routing as the trolleybuses, but 157 covered different roads between Wallington and Morden.
In addition, for a short time bus route 64 was extended from West Croydon to the Robin Hood and to Elmers End Garage, but there proved not to be a demand for this service and it was soon cut back again.
London Transport did not wait for the delivery of the RM class buses and used the existing RT type for several years.
In April 1981, route 154 was diverted to a new estate on the site of Croydon Aerodrome and only 157 serves South Norwood and Anerley.
For the time being, route 630 continued to run between West Croydon and Harlesden, but its turn came on 20 July 1960, when it was replaced by bus route 220, with the same routing.
This time RM type buses were used.
With the same conversion, bus route 64 which had been running between West Croydon and Addington, was extended from Croydon to Tooting, supplementing route 220.
At first it was worked by a mixture of RT and RM type buses.
With a later reorganization of services, Carshalton Garage was closed on 28 January 1964 and its buses redistributed between Sutton and Merton garages.
It was offered for sale at £13,500, but was eventually leased away as a small factory, which it remains.
More recently, bus route 220 has been cut back to Tooting, leaving 64 alone to serve Mitcham and Croydon.
Hammersmith trolleybus depôt disappeared in a redevelopment programme of that area.
No. 5 Bourdon Road was leased to Vickers from 18 March 1975 to 25 March 1977.
Thus ended an era of electric street transport in Croydon which had lasted sixty years.
With its disappearance there have been many changes in the face of Croydon and changes are continuing.
The first changes were brought about by war damage; for example, the ‘Gloster’ public house was destroyed and was replaced by a new building bearing the name ‘Gloucester’in full .
Once war damage had been repaired, the rebuilding programme gained momentum, largely when the Whitgift School moved away from behind North End and was replaced by a large shopping centre, backing onto Wellesley Road, which has been widened, with a fly-under where it crosses George Street.
The ‘Greyhound’ and other enterprises with well known names, such as‘Turtle's’, ‘Stockwell & Oxford’, Wilson's Coffee House and others have moved to streets nearer the shopping centre.
Very recently the Pitlake area has been redeveloped and a large housing estate built on part of the former Croydon Airport.
Stephenson horse car Information about the horse cars is on page 26.
ROLLING STOCK LISTS
Croydon Corporation Tramways
Nos. 1–35
Built by G. F. MILNES & Co., at Hadley, Shropshire, in 1901.
These were the original fleet of cars delivered before the opening of the system.
They cost £650 each and Nos. 1–5, 7, 9–11, 13–22 and 25–35 were delivered to Pitlake Generating Station (bodies only) in April 1901, while Nos. 6, 8, 12, 23 and 24 were delivered later directly to Thornton Heath depôt, where in due course all were fitted out and mounted on their trucks.
Sixteen were mounted on Peckham cantilever trucks and nineteen on Brill 21E trucks indiscriminately.
The Peckham trucks are said to have given the better ride, but being built up from a number of separate parts, required more frequent maintenance than the Brill trucks, whose main component was a solid forging.
When a report was made just after the 1914–18 war, Nos. 1–8, 11, 12, 15, 23–26 and 35 were mounted on Peckham trucks, while 9, 10, 13, 14, 16–22 and 27–34 were on Brill trucks.
The saloons with three side windows with opening lights above, were of conventional design for the period, with lincrusta flat ceilings and long bent plywood benches for eleven passengers each side.
Small holes were drilled in the plywood making large circular patterns and there were panelled kicking boards under the seats.
The side windows had curtains which could be drawn in sunny weather and above them the opening lights had radiused outer corners and yellow ‘Cathedral’ glass (i.e. crinkled glass).
The internal bulkheads were quite ornate, with a mirror in the top left-hand corner and a hole for a red ‘bull's-eye’ lens to act as a tail lamp in the right-hand corner.
The lintel board was in the form of a bevelled panel with a beaded edge.
It was supported by elaborate capitals, running down the door sides.
There was a single sliding door each end, with very rounded top corners and probably a Milnes maker's transfer on the panel immediately below the window.
There were the usual bevelled panels on the lower part of the doors and bulkheads.
Lighting was provided by a main bulb in a brass-rimmed glass bowl in the centre of the ceiling, with other bulbs along the edge, one being placed conveniently near the bulkhead to illuminate the tail lamp bullseye.
Electric signalling bells were fitted.
The upper deck was reached by wide sweep reversed stairs and there was two and two seating with single seats by the trolley mast.
The seats against the stair well and at the end of the canopy were fixed, but the others were reversible.
The trolley mast was of the Blackwell ‘Dublin’ type with an exposed hinge and swivel at the top.
At each end there was an ‘oyster’ lamp on a stanchion to illuminate the upper deck.
The platforms were reached by ‘Stanwood’ fixed steps and were closed at the driver's end by ‘Bostwick’collapsible gates.
As delivered, these cars were fitted with ‘Providence’ spring steel lifeguards, which were very large and cumbersome.
They had to be folded up at the rear end.
There was the usual headlamp in the centre of the dash.
Modifications
When the Inspecting Officer first visited Croydon's electric tramways, he was none too happy about the ‘Providence’ lifeguards — and at the second inspection, they were condemned as unsuitable and they were replaced by Wilson & Bennett wire mesh gate and tray lifeguards.
In later years, many of these were again replaced by Tidswell lifeguards, having a gate of two wooden slats.
The ‘Dublin’ trolley masts which did not have caps over the swivelling tops, were found to let in water and the top parts were soon fitted with waterproof canvas socks.
Loose canvas seat covers were also carried on the upper decks.
The electric signalling bells did not give satisfaction and were gradually replaced by cord operated bells.
The cords ran in brass eyelets above the saloon windows and on the batten separating the saloon windows and opening lights, there was painted an arrow and the inscription ‘When travelling in direction of arrow, pull cord this side to stop car’.
After the 1914–18 war, the Bostwick gates were replaced by leather covered chains, which hooked onto the saloon corner grab rail.
As delivered, these cars did not carry any destination equipment, but new cars delivered in 1906 and subsequently, had wooden destination boxes on tall stanchions above the ends of the upper deck.
These cars were then similarly equipped.
As these boxes had a small square opening at the back, glazed with opal glass, the Oyster lamps were removed.
It is said that Nos. 25 and 34 were taken out of service and loaned to the War Office for use as Searchlight cars.
Subsequently they were  cannibalised to provide spare parts for other cars of the class.
At the end of hostilities all cars of this class were in need of a major overhaul.
In the case of Nos. 13, 25, 34 and 35, this amounted to a complete rebuild, including strengthened solebars.
Nos. 25, 34 and 35 received normal half-turn stairs like the later cars, with revised seating on the upper deck.
No. 35 was then mounted on a Brill 21E truck.
No. 34 was repillared.
Disposal
All cars of this batch were withdrawn from service with the reorganization of services in the summer of 1927.
They had to be disposed of quickly to make room in the depôts for the new cars on order to work on the main line.
The four heavily rebuilt cars, 13, 25, 34 and 35 were included in a batch sold to the South Metropolitan Company.
In May 1927, 25 cars were sold to T. W. Ward & Co. for scrapping and are thought to have included most of those remaining from this batch.
During the 1970s, the body of No. 8 was discovered, in use as a garden shed in Sutton.
It was acquired by enthusiasts for preservation, but on examination by an expert, was found to be rotten beyond repair and scrapped.
Nos. 36–45
Built by George F. Milnes & Co., at Hadley, in 1902.
Although numbered in the same series as the original cars, this batch in fact belonged to the B.E.T.
and not to the Corporation.
The bodies were similar to Nos. 1–35, but contained a number of small improvements.
Because the Metropolitan Police were objecting to reversed stairs which obstructed the driver's vision to the left, 36–45 had Milnes ‘Exhibition’ staircases, which took a wide sweep in what is now known as the ‘Normal’direction, i.e. the bottom step just behind the controller and the top step close to and at right angles to the bulkhead.
The sweep was wider than that of most of their imitators.
They had Tidswell lifeguards.
They carried the headlamp on the front of the canopy instead of on the dash and B.T-H.
‘B/2’ trolley masts on which the pole could be turned through a full circle.
Destination boxes were not fitted until just before their transfer elsewhere and there was a deck lamp on an upright stanchion near the stairheads.
With the break-up of the Corporation/B.E.T.
Agreement in July 1906, this batch of ten cars was transferred to the new South Metropolitan Company, who over the years carried out a number of modifications on them.
They are therefore described in detail in the section dealing with that company.
Nos. 46–55
Built by G. F. Milnes & Co., at Hadley, in 1902.
Later Class B/2.
During 1902 it became evident that larger capacity cars would be needed for the main Norbury — Purley line and fifteen were ordered, ten to belong to the Corporation and five to the B.E.T.
Those for the Corporation were ordered in February 1902 and delivered later in the year, costing £825 each.
They had long saloons with six side windows with two opening lights above each.
Like Nos. 1–35, these lights had radiused outer corners.
There were twin sliding doors in the end bulkheads, with a concealed chain over the top so that they opened and closed together.
Seating in the saloon was again on perforated plywood benches.
The double saloon doors had very rounded outer corners and were surmounted by large lintel boards with ventilation slits.
There were mirrors on the upper panels of the bulkheads.
The ceiling was of maple veneer, supported by ornamental brackets which carried lighting fitments as well as supporting grabrails with leather straps.
On the outside of the bulkhead, under the half-canopy there was a glass bullseye lens with a red slide so that it could be used as a tail lamp.
It was illuminated by a small bulb between the two thicknesses of the bulkhead.
The body was supported on channel steel solebars.
There were curtains in the windows.
As it had been suggested that these cars should resemble the London United bogie cars, they had short canopies and double flight stairs, changing direction at a small landing half way up.
This arrangement necessitated long platforms.
There was 2 & 2 seating on the upper deck, with a single seat at one side of the trolley mast.
These cars had wooden roller blind destination boxes mounted on  stanchions which curved outwards over the ends of the half canopies.
As there were lights on the backs of these boxes, the cars did not have stairhead lamps.
Like Nos. 36–45, they had B.T-H.
‘B/2’ type trolley masts whose heads could be turned through a full circle.
These cars ran on Brill 22E bogies, a well tried design with the driving wheels nearest the ends of the car in the conventional manner.
Axle-boxes were of the ‘Empire’ roller bearing design with circular covers.
There were fixed platform steps and Tidswell lifeguards with two slats to the gates.
They had ‘Bostwick’ platform gates as delivered.
The driver's platform beyond the stairs was completely open and unprotected and in all these were large ungainly looking cars, but typical of the turn of the century idea of what a high capacity bogie car should look like.
Although insufficient to provide the full service, these bogie cars were worked hard on the main line and sometimes worked to Thornton Heath but never to Addiscombe or Penge, where they might have been too long for some of the passing loops on these lines.
Modifications
Being the main work-horses of the fleet and later being regarded, misguidedly, as suitable for through running to London, these cars underwent a number of modifications during their long lives.
First of all, wire mesh gates were fitted between the bogies in 1903, no doubt on Police instructions.
In later years these were replaced by wooden slatted gates.
Then the ‘Empire’ roller bearings evidently did not live up to expectations and were replaced by plain axle boxes.
In 1910, the electric signal bells were giving trouble and were replaced by cord operated bells.
With this arrangement, there was a push rod on the upper deck near the head of the stairs, which the conductor could use to operate the bell.
When in 1916, the Metropolitan Police insisted on all trams being fitted with side lamps, the remainder of the Croydon fleet had them fixed in small wooden boxes under the edge of the canopy.
The bogie cars were unsuitable for this arrangement and the small boxes were hung from the top edge of the dash either side.
The off-side one had a red bulb behind a white one, for use as a tail lamp.
Around the same time, metal panelling was fitted round the stair landings.
Later the bell push rod appears to have been replaced by a cord in a tube, with the top of the cord tied to the handrail.
In order, as they thought to render them suitable for through running to London, No. 55 was experimentally fitted with Westinghouse air brakes in August 1924.
There were brake shoes acting both on the wheels and on the track.
The equipment was removed at the conclusion of the experiments.
In February 1926, following experiments with a four wheeled car, No. 48 appeared with 2 and 1 grey moquette cushioned seats in the saloon.
There were transverse seats for two in each corner, reducing the seating by four.
The moquette was of the same design as used by the UndergrounD Group (q.v.).
In March new electrical equipment was ordered from B.T-H. for these cars and new trucks were considered, but turned down.
As reconditioned they had new B.T-H. 509c motors and line switch attachments fitted to the controllers so that they could be used interlocked with air brakes.
Air brakes were fitted to all ten cars in July 1927, this time acting on the wheels only.
In that condition No. 47 was renumbered 22 and painted in the red and ivory livery and classified ‘B/1’.
In 1928, following the success of the new L.C.C.
type cars, it was decided to fit top covers to these cars.
No. 55 was chosen for trials and a top cover only covering the saloon was fitted and had six windows each side to match the lower saloon.
There was a small balcony at each stairhead, on which there was a small wheel and rod to open and close the upper saloon windows.
The upper roof extended over the end balconies with deep valances which incorporated the destination boxes.
The seating was reduced to 32 and the existing seats were cloth covered, but not padded!
They were painted red and grey and renumbered 21–30.
They were reclassified ‘B/2’.
All had 2 and 1 cushion seats inside.
Because both ends of the Thornton Heath route on which they now worked were in congested streets, two trolley poles were fitted, one for each direction of travel.
No further alterations were made until after they passed to London Transport in 1933.
London Transport Days
They retained the Croydon classification ‘B/2’ in white on the solebars.
No. 21E (formerly 46) is recorded as being sent to Charlton Works for an annual overhaul in October 1933 and returned to Thornton Heath in ‘L.C.C.
Standard Red’ and the fleet number 365.
At the same time a few modifications were made to bring these cars into line with standard practices, for example, the positions of the route board holders under the saloon windows were slightly altered to take L.C.C.
type boards.
The two side lamps on the dash were removed and replaced by a single side/tail lamp holder, with provision for a route number stencil, fixed to the underside of the stair landing.
Before long the remainder of the class were overhauled, repainted and renumbered in the 365–374 series at Charlton.
As ‘London Transport’ fleet name transfers did not become available until May 1934, it is probable that they did not receive them until their next annual overhaul.
They received hooks for L.C.C.
type blue and white running number plates on the first window pillar behind the stairs.
During subsequent overhauls, Nos. 369 and 373 lost the rubbing strips between the waist and rocker panels and had them replaced by plain metal bands.
373 also had its solebars plated over.
In the meantime, trams in North London were being replaced by trolleybuses, making a large number of the earlier low powered ex-L.C.C.
‘E/1’ Class cars available for disposal.
London Transport held very strong views in favour of standardization, so when in 1936, the ex-Croydon cars were due for an annual overhaul and  relicensing , they were withdrawn one at a time and replaced by E/1 Class cars between October 1936 and January 1937.
As they came out of service, they were driven to Mitcham Road depôt for Cohen's men to break them up as quickly as possible.
Croydon No. 55 at Purley.
Note ‘Empire’ Roller Bearings and wire ‘dog guard’between bogies.
Croydon Corporation No. 38, after fitting with air brakes, two and one cushioned seats, channel steel underframes and ‘torpedo’ side lamps, otherwise in original condition.
Nos. 56–60.
Built by Brush Electrical Engineering Co.
Ltd., in 1902.
Nos. 56–60 were the B.E.T.
complement of bogie cars in the Croydon fleet and had bodies almost identical to the Corporation cars 46–55.
However, there were a number of minor differences.
The proportions of the decency panelling over the short half-canopies were different giving them a squarer appearance.
There were no looped grabrail on the corner of the dash and there were typical Brush corner brackets supporting the landing half way up the stairs.
They appear to have had metal destination boxes at first, soon replaced by wooden ones like 46–55.
Trolley masts were of the B/1 type.
These cars had Wilson & Bennett wire mesh lifeguards.
The greatest difference between these cars and 46–55 lay in the trucks.
The former had conventional Brill 22E bogies with the driving wheels towards the ends of the car.
Nos. 56–60 had Brush's own design of bogies, their ‘B’ type, with the driving wheels towards the centre of the car.
These proved less satisfactory than the Brill bogies.
While in use on the Croydon system, these cars normally worked on the Thornton Heath — Purley service and like 46–55 were probably too large for the Penge or Addiscombe services.
However, in July 1906, together with Nos.  36–45, they were removed from service in Croydon, taken and dumped on the site in Aurelia Road, off Mitcham Road.
In due course they were put into service on the South Metropolitan system and their subsequent history is therefore described in greater detail in the section dealing with that undertaking.
Nos. 36–45
(Second Series).
Built by Brush at Loughborough in 1906.
56–60 (Second Series).
Built by Brush at Loughborough in 1906.
61–70 Built by Brush at Loughborough in 1907.
71–75 Built by Brush at Loughborough in 1911.
Later Class W/1.
Nos. 36–45 and 56–60 were the cars which replaced those taken away by the B.E.T.
in 1906, while 61–70 and 71–75 were purchased as additions to the fleet as traffic grew.
All were virtually identical, certainly in so far as bodywork was concerned.
By that time, G. F. Milnes & Co. had gone out of business and they were all built by Brush.
Although of very traditional design and similar in appearance to Nos. 1–35, they were of rather more robust construction.
They had three window bodies with two opening lights above each.
The only feature of the original 36–45 which impressed the Corporation, was the ‘Exhibition’ stairs with which they were equipped.
Consequently, the Corporation instructed Brush to fit staircases to the new cars, as nearly as possible like the Milnes stairs.
As they came rather close to the dash, they had extra stringers above the normal ones, to protect passengers mounting the stairs from passing traffic.
They cost £521 10s. each.
The saloons had perforated plywood benches like the Milnes cars, maple veneer ceilings with lighting along the sides only.
There was a single sliding door at each end of the saloon, with only slightly radiused corners.
There were ornate lintel boards above the doors, with ventilation slits.
On either side in the upper part of the bulkheads there were mirrors.
Both half bulkheads had windows, with a hinged opening part in the bulkhead nearest the platform step, which was of the Brush folding type.
The head lamps were in the conventional position on the dash and there was a mirror under the canopy edge so that the driver could view the interior of the car without turning round and another just above the stair opening in the canopy, by which he could view the upper deck.
Signal bells were operated by cords just above the saloon windows.
There was two and two seating on the upper deck, except for two single seats by the trolley mast.
All could be turned over except that by the stair opening and at the end of the canopy.
They had three plank solid backs, but the seats were made of thin laths set on edge and not quite touching, so that rain water could pass between them.
The trolley masts were of the Brecknell, Munro B/l type, but a late version which could be turned through the full circle.
Destination boxes were set on high stanchions above the ends of the upper deck and had glazed openings in the back, so no deck lights were required.
As delivered, Nos. 36–45 and 56–60 were mounted on Mountain & Gibson 7 ft. 6 in. 21EM trucks, which were intended to be a copy of the Brill 21E design in defiance of American patents.
Nos. 61–70 had genuine Brill 21E trucks and 71–75 had a Brush version of the same type, all to the same wheelbase.
The Mountain & Gibson trucks appear to have been slightly less satisfactory than the other two types.
They had Griffin 31 inch chilled iron wheels.
These were sturdy little cars and although used mainly on the Norbury — Purley and Thornton Heath lines in the early days, they could and did work anywhere on the system.
Modifications
Five more Brill 21E trucks were purchased immediately after the 1914/18 war and fitted to Nos. 36–40 in place of the Mountain & Gibson trucks which were disposed of.
On all of these cars the small wooden side lamp boxes were replaced soon after the war, by neat metal side lamps, pointed at the rear end like a torpedo.
Those of Nos. 1–35 that were rebuilt also received this type of side lamp.
In 1914, No. 36 had the plywood benches replaced by cushions, still running the length of the car.
In 1924, Nos. 37 and 38 had their Westinghouse 200 motors replaced by B.T-H. 200 and B.T-H. 509 types respectively.
In 1926, Nos. 38 and 39 were fitted with 2 and 1 cushioned seats in the saloon, thereby reducing their capacity to 18.
The ceilings, bulkheads and window frames were painted white with black lettering.
The seats were upholstered in Johnston's grey moquette like the bogie cars.
They and No. 58 were mounted on channel steel solebars.
In April and June 1927, Nos. 36 and 38 were fitted with Westinghouse air brakes acting on the wheels and on the track so that they could be used on the Thornton Heath route and run in conjunction with the bogie cars that were being similarly equipped.
Presumably cars from 36–40 were chosen for these experimental features as they were on the newest trucks.
In June 1927, together with the four rebuilt older cars, eight of these, Nos. 43, 44, 62, 63, 64, 66, 67 and 69 were sold to the South Metropolitan Company at £700 the lot with spare parts.
(See S.M.E.T. section for further details).
Nos. 41 and 57 which must have had some defects, were sold to T. W. Ward for scrapping at the same time.
From then on, as they were repainted in the new red livery, the remainder were renumbered 1–20, in the reverse order of their old numbers.
Hence, 75, 74, 73, 72 and 71 became 1–5, 70 became 6, 68 became 7, 65 became 8, 60, 59, 58 and 56 became 9–13.
Nos. 45 became 14, 42 and 40 became 15 and 16. 39 with 2 and 1 cushion seats became 17, 38 also with cushion seats and air brakes became 18.
No. 37 with Westinghouse controllers replaced by B.T-H.
Croydon No. 5 (formerly 71) in red and ivory livery passing the Constitutional Club Croydon Road, Penge.
Most of these cars received hardly any modifications but remained in good condition.
Ex-Croydon Corporation No. 40E, with London Transport stickers on the rocker panel.
200 type became 19 and Nos. 36 with air brakes and long cushion seats became No. 20.
From then on, Nos. 1–17 normally worked on the Penge route, 18 and 20 were the Thornton Heath route spares and No. 19 a general spare.
They were classified ‘W/1’ and nine received second-hand ventilated motors in 1932.
No. 19 received magnetic track brakes, in 1927.
Disposal
No. 1–20 passed into the hands of London Transport and for the next few months continued to work as before.
The small suffix letter E was soon added to their fleet numbers.
Just before the Penge route closed one car was taken away to Charlton works, overhauled and repainted in the L.C.C.
style.
It is believed to have been No. 11 E, then renumbered 355, with the L.C.C.
style figures with black shading.
(According to L.T. overhaul and inspection lists.)
At the same time, Nos. 1E, 2E and 3E, were taken out of service for a short time, to receive a small modification — they were fitted with spare sets of track brake equipment, so that they could subsequently work to the Crystal Palace.
They were not immediately repainted or renumbered.
No. 5E was also sent to Charlton, repainted in the L.C.C.
style and renumbered 349.
It was fitted with magnetic track brakes, so that it could be tried out at Erith, where the local cars were in poor condition.
(There  are reports that in fact No. 17 was substituted for No. 5 and became 349, because it had cushion seats.
London Transport records are conflicting on this point.)
When the Penge route closed on 6 December 1933, Nos. 1E, 2E and 3E were transferred to Penge depôt and took their place on the Crystal Palace route augmented service.
After a few weeks, they were sent away one at a time to Hendon Works for repainting and returned renumbered 345–347.
London Transport adhered very strictly to annual inspection of cars and overhaul as necessary, ready for relicensing as Metropolitan Stage Carriages.
As there were cars to spare, if one was found with a defect, for which a replacement part might cost more than the cost of a licence, it was withdrawn particularly if the route on which it worked was nearing its closure.
Thus, Nos. 4E and 7E evidently failed their inspection and were delicensed on 11 August 1933.
The others were delicensed on abandonment of the Penge route.
19E was delicensed on 17 February, but instead of being put into store like the others, it was painted plain red and fitted with primitive snow brooms, which were no more than boards with bristles attached, fitted in place of the lifeguard gates and it was used for sweeping snow in the Croydon area until 31 March 1937.
Nos. 345, 346 and 347 (1E-3E) survived until the Crystal Palace route closed and were delicensed on 14 February 1936. 349 (5E or 17E?) remained available for service at Erith and with that system's own cars was transferred to Abbey Wood depôt, where it was delicensed on 28 March 1935.
London Transport's records show Nos. 5E-16E and 18E, 20E as being sold to Cohen's for scrapping on 9 May 1934.
Nos. 11E, l8E and 20E were available for Cohen's men to inspect first at Thornton Heath depôt and the others in store at Brixton Hill depôt where all were to be broken up.
4E followed on 2 October.
For some reason 17E did not follow until 12 June 1935 and 19E presumably some time in 1937.
The three cars on the Crystal Palace route were sold to Cohen's at Thornton Heath depôt on 12 October 1935 and were to be broken up at Hampstead depôt, but they had to be held back until Crystal Palace route closed belatedly on 8 February 1936, when presumably they were broken up in Penge depôt with the South Metropolitan cars.
Nos. 11E, 18E and 20E with four others were sold to Cohens without trucks which were then used to replace unsatisfactory trucks under the seven Erith covered top cars, which were to remain in service a little longer.
In fact, these Croydon cars were broken up at Brixton Hill, standing on Erith trucks.
Nos. 31–55
(Third Series) Class E/I 1927–1928
Built by Hurst, Nelson & Co.
Ltd., at Motherwell, Scotland.
By 1926, the London County Council were insisting that any new cars purchased by adjoining undertakings and intended for through running over their tracks, must conform very closely to their own standard design, namely their ‘E/1’ Class.
At the time, their latest cars were a large batch numbered in the 1700s and 1800s, some built by Hurst, Nelson and the rest by Brush, all delivered in 1922.
The L.C.C.
was quite ready and anxious to permit their drawings for these cars to be used in order to ensure that the design would be at least up to their standard and no doubt both Hurst, Nelson and Brush held sets of copies of these drawings.
Walthamstow Corporation ordered twelve    such cars in August 1926, closely followed by Croydon Corporation for ten cars in January 1927, only differing in small details from the Walthamstow cars.
Croydon ordered fifteen more identical cars in January 1928.
They were numbered 31–40 and 41–55 respectively.
The car bodies had four side windows on each deck and the upper deck canopies were enclosed, but not the lower deck, in deference to police regulations enforced in the London area at that time.
The body framework was made of teak with mahogany panelling and walnut interior panelling.
The interior trim was in light coloured oak, giving a bright cheerful interior.
There was seating for 27 passengers in the lower saloon, with seats for three in each corner and two and one turnover seats for the rest, upholstered in UndergrounD Group style grey moquette.
There was similar seating for 42 on the upper deck, 2 and 2 seats with curved seats in the canopies, all upholstered in grey moquette like the lower saloon.
There were the usual pairs of opening lights over each saloon window, all each side being opened or closed together by a small lever.
The upper deck windows could also be opened and closed together, with a rack and pinion device.
There were two flat ‘Venturi’ ventilators on the car roof.
Upholstery and furnishings were supplied by G. D. Peters & Co.
The seating capacity was slightly less than on their L.C.C.
counterparts (69 instead of 73) and consequently it was more comfortable.
Ceilings were matchboarded light oak.
The lower saloon was closed by the usual single sliding door at each end.
There was a perforated sliding ventilator above the window in the door.
A partition and hinged door closed off the head of the stairs at each end.
Lighting was by means of 38 lamps with ‘Silvalux’ 40 watt bulbs.
Air operated ‘Numa’ signal bells were provided by the Equipment & Engineering Co. in the saloon and on the platforms.
Each bell push was surrounded by a red enamelled iron ring.
Destination equipment had to be interchangeable with L.C.C.
equipment, particularly in regard to such matters as route board brackets and the destination boxes on the ends of the car were of the L.C.C.
standard ‘two line’ type.
However, Croydon did introduce one or two improvements in advance of the L.C.C.
There were large opal glass plates against the front upper deck windows to which route number stencils (larger than those used by the L.C.C.
at the time) could be fixed to show service numbers 16 and 18, with later 2 for the Thornton Heath service.
Provision was made for L.C.C.
standard side boards to be carried below the windows of both saloons.
There were also, L.C.C.
type combined tail lamp and service number stencil carriers on the underside of the canopy against the head of the stairs, which were of the quarter turn direct type.
The bodies of these cars were carried on channel steel underframes and there were steel platform bearers.
In conformity with later L.C.C.
E/1 cars these Croydon cars had folding platform steps, on the backs of which were side lifeguards, which came into position when the steps were folded up.
There were the usual Tidswell type three slat lifeguards and Philipson type guards on the offside.
The bodies weighed eight tons.
Hurst, Nelson supplied Mountain & Gibson type Maximum Traction bogies as supplied to the L.C.C.
as their ‘Type 4’.
They were of longer wheelbase than the older Croydon bogie cars (4 ft. 6 in.) with cast steel side plates and swing bolsters instead of bogie pins.
Springing was provided only on the bolsters and above the axle boxes giving a comfortable ride but a tendency to roll.
Each bogie had a set of magnetic track brakes and the conduit plough carrier was fixed to an extension of one of the bogies with sufficient clearance to take the L.C.C.
later type plough with sliding contacts on top.
A changeover switch for conduit/overhead was fixed under the stairs at each end of the car.
All electrical equipment was supplied by the General Electric Co. and included fog lamps suspended under the front edge of the canopy (prior to fog lamps being adopted by the L.C.C.) There were two trolley poles, one for each direction of travel.
These were robust powerful cars, well suited to the trunk route from Croydon to London, but as noted elsewhere, they sometimes ran to Thornton Heath at weekends.
To emphasize the similarity with L.C.C.
cars, they carried ‘Class E/1’ in small white letters on the solebars.
Modifications
Very few modifications were carried out on these cars while in the ownership of Croydon Corporation.
By 1930 the L.C.C.
had found that plough carriers mounted on one of the bogies tended to throw the ploughs about, particularly if the pony wheels were worn or had flats.
To cure this trouble, they began to fit the plough carrier on brackets from the underframe of the car with adjustable bolts to allow for wear of the wheels and keep the plough head at the desired height above the rail.
Croydon followed suit and began fitting body mounted plough carriers to their cars.
Those on the Croydon E/1s differed from the L.C.C.
ones in having side plates with large oval holes in them, which gave quite a distinctive appearance.
By the time London Transport took them over in 1933, all but two had been so modified.
Nos. 44 and 48 passed to London Transport still with bogie mounted plough carriers.
When taken over by London Transport in July 1933, at first these cars became 31E-55E still in Croydon livery.
Nos. 34E and 55E were due for their annual inspection, servicing and  relicensing , which took place on 15 and 27 July respectively.
While at Charlton Works, they were repainted in the L.C.C.
style of red and cream with the fleet numbers 378 and 399 in large gold figures shaded black.
Nos. 36E, 38E and 54E followed in September while the remainder of the class were inspected between November 1933 and June 1934.
The later ones received the new style small gold unshaded numbers and from May 1934, they received ‘London TransporT’ gold transfers on the waist panels.
As they so closely resembled the later ex-L.C.C.
‘E/1s’, hardly any modifications were necessary.
In the meantime, the L.C.C.
had adopted fog lamps, fixed to the side of the destination box and in due course, these replaced the Croydon lamps under the canopy edge.
When 44E and 48E were overhauled on 1 March 1934 and 12 April 1934 respectively, they received L.C.C.
type underframe mounted plough carriers without the additional side plates with oval holes, so characteristic of the ex-Croydon cars.
They became 388 and 392.
London Transport was inconsistent in applying the class title ‘E/l’ to these cars and in general did not apply class letters to cars acquired from the smaller undertakings.
(Dates quoted in this paragraph refer to the official list of annual inspections.)
Four ex-Croydon cars were included in the London Transport ‘Rehabilitation’ programme in 1936, when they received flush panelled sides to both decks, inset route and destination boxes, white painted hardboard ceilings and one or two other refinements.
Croydon cars already had cushioned seats of the highest standard on both decks and chromium plated handrails, so that they required less modification than the ex-L.C.C. cars rebuilt at the same time.
Nos. 376 (32E), 379(35E), 380(36E) and 398(54E) were rehabilitated in November/December 1936 and returned to Purley depot.
When the remainder of the ex-Croydon E/1s were next overhauled, they received higher dashes and light timber framed vestibule windscreens like the rehabilitated cars, but were not otherwise altered.
All ex-Croydon cars had windscreens by the outbreak of war.
Inspections and overhauls were carried out at less frequent intervals during the war, as and when possible.
Car No. 396 was destroyed by a bomb outside Croydon bus garage on 10 May 1941 and its remains dumped in Purley depot, to be officially written off on 30 November 1945.
No. 376 caught fire on the Embankment on April 1945 and was officially withdrawn also on 30 November, reducing the Croydon rehabilitated cars to three.
Like the rest, the ex-Croydon cars took on the visible signs of war, headlamp masks, white collision fenders and protective netting on the windows.
With the side lamps, the side route number stencils against the stairs were removed.
All London trams were in dire need of a major overhaul after the war and many of the ex-Croydon cars emerged from this with various strengthening devices, including external diagonal trusses on the saloon sides.
No. 391 (47E) was inspected and overhauled on 13 January 1948 and reappeared with brush panelling on both decks, that on the lower deck leaving the steel solebars exposed.
It retained its old destination boxes and other appointments.
Nos. 378, 382 and 387 received carbon skid trolley heads in March 1948, which they retained for twelve months.
With the closure of tram routes in Croydon on 7 April 1951, the Croydon E/1s were transferred to New Cross depôt, to work on routes in South East London and only the two war casualties 376 and 396 were missing.
However 384, 387 and 397 failed their annual inspections on 12 October 1951 and on 9 January 1952, the remainder were withdrawn and moved to Penhall Road scrap yard to meet their fate.
The B.E.T.
Works Car
Unnumbered Water Car built by Brush Electrical Engineering Co.
Ltd., in 1902.
This was a standard street spraying car, supplied to many B.E.T.
Group tramways in the early days to deal with the problem of the very dusty streets which were to be found in most towns then in summer.
No doubt in winter it could be fitted with snow sweeping equipment.
Ex-Croydon No. 386 at Thornton Heath terminus, after the track had been slightly extended by London Transport.
It belonged to the B.E.T.
and therefore its stay in Croydon was short.
It was removed with the rest of their stock to the South Metropolitan system in the summer of 1906 and its stay there seems to have been no longer.
No   photographs of this particular vehicle are known to exist.
(See the South Metropolitan section for further details.)
The Croydon Corporation Works Car
Unnumbered Water Car built by United Electric Car Co.
Ltd., at Preston in 1907.
When the B.E.T.
took the other car away, the Corporation ordered another in July 1906.
It was delivered early in 1907 and cost £619 10s.
It comprised a platform raised on baulks above the truck on which was mounted a rectangular water tank.
There were dashes without headlamps at each end with access by climbing irons each side.
Just ahead of each tank, there was a wheel operated valve for releasing water.
Collision fenders were bracketed a few inches below the ends of the baulks.
A domed roof was supported on steel pillars above the tank, concealing a small gantry which supported a B/1 type trolley mast.
There was a lamp in a small box under the edge of the roof at each end.
The truck was of the usual Brill 21E design with truss rods, but carried an additional pair of wheels under the motor springs at one end with rail brushes.
In 1914, this vehicle was covered with slogans and coloured lamps for use in a recruitment campaign (see Chapter 2) and toured the system.
In 1916, it was rebuilt as a welding car to carry equipment for track welding at night.
The water tank was removed and a matchboarded body built in its place, with a sliding door and two windows each side.
A fixed platform step was provided below the sliding door with a ladder alongside it on one side only, for access to the roof and trolley mast.
A curious looking hand rail was fixed to the roof above the ladder.
Tidswell lifeguards with three slat gates were fitted and the lamp was removed from below the roof; it was replaced by small side lamps in boxes like those on the bogie cars, but lower down on the dash.
The vehicle appears to have remained in this condition for the remainder of its ownership by Croydon Corporation, but was rarely seen in daylight.
When London Transport took over and 19E was transformed into a snow broom, the welding car was moved to West Ham depôt to replace one of their two works cars.
It remained painted grey and was numbered 056.
It was given a small head lamp in place of the Croydon side lamps.
It was sold to Cohens with another works car on 9 June 1937 for £40 for the pair and removed to Walthamstow depôt yard for breaking up.
It was seen there and photographed still intact by D. W. K. Jones on 12 December 1937.
The Tower Wagon
Late in 1917, to replace a horse drawn vehicle, Croydon Corporation purchased a set of parts from which to construct a battery powered electric tower wagon, costing £921.
The mechanical and electrical parts were supplied by Edison Ltd., and the tower was supplied by Rawlinson & Son of Blackburn.
The chassis and body were fabricated in the Corporation's works at Thornton Heath.
It was mounted on four solid tyred wheels and is believed to have been painted dark blue.
It had an Edison A6 battery.
It was in regular use until London Transport took over in 1933.
There was also a horse drawn pole planting wagon and a Ford van.
SOUTH METROPOLITAN TRAMWAYS
Nos. 1–16
Built by United Electric Car Co.
Ltd., at Preston, in 1906. (for Brush Electrical Engineering Co.
Ltd., Loughborough).
Later Type J
The Company's initial order was to Brush for 32 cars of this type, but was cut down to 16 large cars and 16 smaller cars before the order was completed.
Owing to pressure of work, Brush evidently purchased sixteen body shells from U.E.C. for the larger cars, which they fitted out and trucked themselves at Loughborough.
In appearance they resembled the larger cars supplied by Brush to a number of undertakings around that time, with all the usual distinctive Brush features, such as canopy corner brackets, looped stair hand rails, cup shaped air extractors in the cantrail, swan-neck stairhead lamps and destination boxes under the canopy edge.
They also had Brush's own design of upper deck wire screens with the wires crossed top and bottom, but parallel between.
The late Walter Gratwicke remarked that although apparently standard Brush cars, their detailed dimensions differed from any others supplied by that firm.
(John Price discovered their U.E.C. origin after his death.)
He also noted that they had narrow bodies, as the B.E.T.
preferred to play safe and order bodies which could be transferred to a narrow gauge system if the standard gauge system for which they were ordered proved a failure.
Hence there was very little ‘tumble home’ to the rocker panels.
The contract price quoted was £605 per car, but the South Metropolitan company's accounts show £551 18/0d. per car, paid to Brush during 1906 and £388 6/0d. paid to B.E.T.
Car Services on account of Nos. 1–16.
They were mounted on long wheelbase trucks fitted with Lycett & Conaty radial gear in which the axles pivoted about the motors and there were no motor support springs, but there were very large protruding axle-boxes.
The body was supported on three-quarter elliptical springs at the end.
By later standards they were rather slow cars, but the trucks gave a smooth ride on straight track.
As they were built for use on the Crystal Palace route, they were fitted with Spencer track brakes, with a single pair of hard oak shoes under the centre of each truck and a brass wheel concentric with the hand brake staff on the platforms.
Nos. 11 and 13 were used for the inspection of the Crystal Palace route and these cars took over the working of the Penge route as soon as the Corporation cars were withdrawn in June 1906 and in the same month, one of them was fitted with Raworth regenerative equipment for a demonstration on Anerley Hill for tramway engineers.
Unfortunately, they were found to cause excessive wear on the sharp corner at the ‘Robin Hood’ and confined to the Penge route, until Croydon Corporation took over its working again.
Some of the smaller cars were delivered to work the Crystal Palace route as soon as possible.
From then on, Nos. 1–16 were transferred to the Sutton route in 1907, and on which they were employed exclusively for the rest of their days.
The track brakes were gradually removed, but No. 10 retained them until after 1917.
The interior decor of these cars conformed to the usual Brush standard with oak trim.
There were full length slatted benches and maple veneer ceilings in four panels, each with an elaborate gold transfer pattern in the centre and in each corner.
A large brass rimmed glass bowl in the very centre of the ceiling contained the main  light bulb, with six other unshaded bulbs disposed along the edge of the ceiling.
There were also brass brackets supporting wooden grab rails with leather straps and eyelets for the bell cords.
The car's number in gold shaded black and a maker's transfer appeared in the left hand upper panel of the bulkhead balanced by a glass bullseye in the right hand one, over which a red slide could be moved to act as a tail lamp.
The left hand bulkhead window was blanked off to take a fare-table frame.
(When fitted, these frames were somewhat narrower than the space provided.)
There was a single sliding door at each end of the saloon.
These cars had folding platform steps and there was a small mirror on the back of the destination box so that the driver could observe the interior of the car without turning round.
Because the bodies were designed for a narrower gauge, two and one seating was provided on the upper deck of Nos. 1–16.
The double seats were all along one side and the single seats along the other with the trolley plank forming the gangway.
The seats were all reversible except those at the canopy ends, which were fixed; they had three plank solid backs to foil pickpockets.
The Brecknell-Munro ‘B/1’ trolley mast was slightly offset towards one side and one end, although identical in appearance to those on Corporation cars, these could only be turned to one side and small arrows had to be painted on the bulkheads (later inside the headlamp.)
Modifications
Apart from the removal of the track brakes, few modifications seem to have been made to any of these cars before the 1914–1918 war.
Like the Corporation cars, several of these had the right hand side bulkhead window modified with a hinged opening light at the top.
In August 1916, a car of this class was fitted with large hoops over the ends of the upper deck to protect passengers from being struck by the trolley pole when being turned in the blackout or from a broken spring.
The stairwell lamps were transferred to the hoops and their stanchions removed.
In due course, all South Metropolitan cars were fitted with these hoops, which gave them a distinctive appearance.
Those on Nos. 1 and 6 had flatter tops than the others.
By the end of the war, the bodies of these cars were found to be very worn and loose.
Angle irons were fitted in the top corners of the windows and diagonal truss rods in the bulkheads.
Evidently No. 16 was in worse condition than the others and was repillared with five windows instead.
It was reclassified ‘Type J/1’(reports that No. 11 was similarly treated appear to be unfounded).
‘Philipson’ side lifeguards were fitted under the platforms.
The Lycett & Conaty radial gear had not proved satisfactory and it seems that ‘Warner’ radial gear was obtained from M & G Truck & Engineering Co. to replace it by 1912, but was not fitted to the cars until 1922 or 1923.
The large protruding axle boxes were replaced by very small ones each supported directly on two coil springs without pedestals.
They were found to be more satisfactory.
(The earliest photos of cars on ‘Warner’ radial gear, are of Nos. 1, 11 and 15, taken in 1924.)
Rebuilding
By the late 1920s these cars were really in need of drastic rebuilding and from 1927, it was possible to send them away to Hendon for this to be done properly.
No. 16 was sent there early in 1928 and was gone for some time.
When it returned it was completely transformed in appearance.
The separate waist and rocker panelling were replaced by plain panelling, all painted red.
A deeper dash was fitted and the upper deck wire mesh screens replaced by metal sheeting from the cantrail to just below the top deck rail, above which the destination box was fitted.
It had a plain glazed back to illuminate the upper deck at night and the lamps were removed from the hoops.
Long narrow destination boards with route numbers in small figures at the ends, were slotted into brackets just below the saloon windows, replacing those on the upper deck screens.
Later an information  board of triangular section was fixed under the canopy, where the destination box had been and the mirror for viewing the interior of the car fixed on a bracket behind it.
Instead of lining, a metal band about one inch deep and painted black, extended right round the side and dash just below window level and another just above the solebar level.
The statutory lettering and ‘Type J/2’ were in white and at a later date the title ‘SouthmeT’was applied to the centre of the side panel.
As dash mounted advertisements would have spoiled the general lines of the car, they were removed, but later replaced by an advertisement board against the staircase, just above the dash.
The ‘airscoop’ extractor ventilators were removed from the cantrails.
No. 16 was remotored with DK.31H motors.
The interior of the car was also transformed.
The long benches were replaced by two and one reversible cushioned seats, with longitudinal seats in the corners.
They were upholstered in Johnston's grey moquette with a green and black mesh pattern, of which the UndergrounD Group must have purchased many miles in its time (also used at Bristol, Glasgow and no doubt many other places).
As there was no longer room for the resistances under the seats, they were placed in metal cabinets under the stairs.
The ceiling was painted white and the central lamp bowl replaced by a disc of plywood.
More powerful bulbs were put in the other positions.
In place of a separate bell cord for each direction, a single cord was run along the centre of the ceiling to a bell on each canopy.
For the benefit of the conductor, a short length of cord was spliced on and hung down over each doorway.
Following the evident success of No. 16, 1–15 were sent away in turn to Hendon and similarly treated, except that they retained the four window arrangement and classification ‘Type J’.
They remained allocated to the Sutton route.
They received B.T-H.
‘B/2’ trolley masts with sloping caps which could be turned through the full circle.
(No. 16 did later).
Disposal
When London Transport took over, they remained confined to the Sutton route.
The ten London United cars on the Mitcham route were displaced by an extension of route 30 to West Croydon late in 1933 and being shedded at Sutton, they took over a number of workings on the Sutton route, but not all.
No. 9 evidently failed its inspection in March 1935 and was withdrawn and stored.
Nos. 10, 11, 12 and 15 were withdrawn in October and stored in Brixton Hill depôt.
When the Sutton route was replaced by trolleybuses, the remainder joined them at Brixton in December 1935, but the contract with Cohens for their scrapping had already been signed on 12 October.
They were broken up on the spot and only the saloon seats retained for further use.
Milnes, maker's transfer on doors of S.M.E.T. Nos. 17–26
Nos. 17–26
Built by George F. Milnes & Co., at Hadley, in 1902.
Later Type K.
This batch of cars was transferred onto South Metropolitan tracks in 1906, from the ‘Croydon District Tramways’ system, having run since 1902 as Croydon Corporation Nos. 36–45, although always the property of the B.E.T.
They were closely similar to cars supplied to Bath and the South Lancashire systems at around the same time, three windowed double deck cars with flat internal ceilings.
They were marginally more modern than Croydon Corporation's Nos. 1–35 supplied earlier by Milnes.
As the Milnes company had recently come under German ownership, this batch of cars, together with the similar Bath, South Lancs.
and some other cars were mounted on rigid two axle trucks of German design, made at the parent factory at Bautzen in Germany.
Their main distinguishing feature was the solid pressed steel side frame, with a flange round the edge.
There were the usual semi-elliptical springs at the ends supporting the body.
The saloons had polished plywood benches and backs, with patterns perforated in small holes.
Like Nos. 1–16, they had maple veneer ceilings with patterned corners and a large brass rimmed lighting bowl in the centre, together with six unshaded bulbs along the sides.
The lintel board over the door was more elaborate than those of Nos. 1–16 and supported on ornate capitals.
There were similar capitals on each window pillar.
A mirror formed the left hand upper panel of the bulkhead and the right hand panel carried a power consumption meter and a bullseye to form the tail lamp.
Like Nos. 1–16, these cars carried a narrow fare table board in the left hand bulkhead window position and some cars had a hinged opening light in the top of the right hand bulkhead window.
There were very rounded top corners to the single bulkhead sliding door, which carried the Milnes gold transfer just below the window.
The upper decks were wide with two and two seating, except for a single seat by the trolley which was slightly offset.
The mast was of the newly designed B.T-H ‘B.2’ design with a sloping cap; its principal advantage was that it could be turned through the full circle without damaging the internal cable.
The canopies were wide and rather flat ended, with the headlamp mounted in the centre thereof, instead of on the dash.
A small lamp was mounted on an upright stanchion near the head of each staircase.
As the Metropolitan Police took exception to cars with reversed stairs, these had the new Milnes ‘Exhibition’ staircases, which were almost half-turn in the normal spiral direction, but took a wide sweep and were almost as easy to climb as the reversed stairs.
They were even an improvement on the normal spiral stairs supplied by other manufacturers, some of which made an uncomfortably tight spiral.
The front of the canopy was supported by a stanchion, just to the left of the controller, with an enormous fancy bracket on top.
The stair handrails extended to this stanchion, there was no upright rail at the corner of the dash, but the grab-rail at the centre of the platform step had an equally large fancy bracket on top.
There was a fancy grille like a wrought iron gate at the rear end of the dash under the stairs.
The platform steps were of the fixed type and roller blind destination boxes were mounted at each end above the upper deck rails.
The screens were of ordinary wire mesh.
When the S.M.E.T. accounts were separated from the B.E.T.
Group General account, the cost of these cars was put at £495 6/8d. each.
After the Carshalton accident in 1907, the staff were evidently rather reluctant to use these cars on the Sutton route and they spent the rest of their working lives on the Croydon — Mitcham — Tooting section, which had no gradients.
Modifications
Within a few years of transfer to the South Metropolitan system, all these cars had the headlamps moved from the canopy front to the usual position on the dash, one reason being that it enabled them to carry advertisements in the same positions as the rest of the fleet.
Just after the 1914–1918 war, hoops were fitted over the ends of the upper deck and at the same time, the destination boxes were placed under the canopy edge.
On these cars it was not possible to remove the stanchion which had supported the stairhead lamp as it was integral with those carrying the deck screens.
Nos. 19, 20, 23, 24 and 25 received flat topped hoops like Nos. 1 and 6.
These were the oldest and smallest cars in the South Metropolitan fleet, were rather slow and because the Milnes trucks could not be lengthened, they were very subject to tail-wagging.
By the late 1920s when it became possible to send cars away to Hendon for a thorough overhaul, they were all in really tired condition.
They were sent away in turn in 1927 and No. 17 was at once declared to be beyond economic repair.
It was withdrawn from service and probably scrapped.
The others were at least made to look presentable again.
Several were rebuilt to various extents, where necessary receiving replacements from the large stock of spare parts for Metropolitan cars, held at Hendon Works.
Nos. 19, 20, 24 received new dashes and apparently new brake gear, with longer handles to the hand-brake, which necessitated a dash corner hand rail cranked outwards to clear it.
Other cars received straight hand rails and folding platform steps.
No. 22 received Brush staircases similar to the ‘Exhibition’ type and evidently taken from one of the ex-Croydon cars, which became a Metropolitan Works Car.
No 21 was more seriously  modified , receiving complete new ends including platform bearers, collision fenders, dashes, headlamps and complete canopies, all of the MetropolitaN company's standard design.
Even the staircases were replaced by the direct quarter-turn pattern, necessitating a rearrangement of the upper deck seating and stair hand-rails.
Although drastic, this rebuilding was not a success, as presumably the main body structure was weak and the car was soon dumped in the back of Penge depôt ‘out of service’.
One report says that No. 26 was even more thoroughly rebuilt and re-classified ‘Type K/2’,(the writer has seen no photographic evidence, but confirmed in official list).
Before work had been completed on the whole batch, it became clear that it might be cheaper to obtain replacement cars if any could be procured second-hand at a reasonable price.
That opportunity arose sooner than expected in the Autumn of 1927, when twelve cars were obtained in good condition from Croydon Corporation.
With the arrival of these new cars, Nos. 20, 24 and 25 were dumped at Fulwell depôt of the London United Tramways and the others in the back part of Penge depôt.
The company's accounts state that Nos. 17 and 21 were to be broken up in 1927 and although No. 17 had disappeared without trace, Walter Gratwicke saw two cars numbered 21 side by side in Penge depôt in 1932!(i.e. Milnes Car No. 21 and the ex-Croydon car which replaced it).
Although not further modified, No. 19 was later used as a breakdown towing car at Sutton depôt, still in full livery, but delicensed, with most of the paper advertisements peeling off.
None of the others appear to have turned a wheel again.
No. 19 survived long enough to become 19s, of London Transport.
Nos. 18–26 passed into the hands of London Transport in 1933 and their records show that they were sold to Cohens for scrapping on 17 May 1934, Nos. 18, 21, 22, 23 and 26 in Penge depôt and 20, 24 and 25 at Fulwell, where No. 19 followed on 2 October.
Cohen's men broke them up on the spot.
S.M.E.T. No. 29 at Mitcham Fair Green in the late 1920s.
Nos. 27–29, 31 and 35.
Built by Brush Electrical Engineering Co.
Ltd., in 1902.
Later Type L.
Like Nos. 17–26, this batch of cars was transferred to South Metropolitan tracks in 1906, having been built for ‘Croydon District Tramways’ in 1902, and run as Croydon Corporation Nos. 56–60.
Valued at £623 6/8d. each.
Although built by Brush instead of Milnes, the bodies of these cars were almost identical to those of Corporation Nos. 46–55.
There were minor differences in the arrangement of the hand-rails, they lacked the loop at the end of the dash top rail and there were typical Brush brackets supporting the stair landings.
They had six windows each side and the interior arrangement was similar to their predecessors, with long perforated plywood benches, etc.
Unlike all other cars in the South Metropolitan's own fleet, they had double-opening doors to the saloon, with a concealed chain over the top so that the two always opened and closed together.
As these doors gave a wide opening, the flanking bulkhead windows were correspondingly narrow.
(It may be for this reason that all South Met.
cars had very narrow fare tables.
For the sake of standardization the London Companies always worked to the lowest common denominator!)
Like most cars with double-flight stairs, these had very short half canopies, with wooden roller blind destination boxes, each mounted on three stanchions above the end hand rail.
Presumably there was a glazed aperture in the back to illuminate the upper deck.
Upper deck seating was arranged two and two, except that there was a single seat beside the trolley mast, which was of the Brecknell, Munro & Rogers ‘B1’ type, and slightly offset towards one side.
There was no stairhead lamp and the wire mesh screens were of the Brush standard design.
There were originally Wilson & Bennett wire mesh lifeguards under the platforms, but no guard between the bogies.
These cars had channel steel sills to the underframes.
The biggest difference from the corresponding Corporation cars lay in the bogies, which were of Brush's own design and were reversed with the driving wheels nearest the centre of the car.
They were not entirely satisfactory and had a tendency to derail on the very sharp corner at Pitlake.
This was thought to be due to the fact that the smaller wheels were leading, but the Metropolitan Electric tramways which had some similar cars on almost identical bogies, turned the bogies round on one of their cars (No. 25) and it made no appreciable difference.
It was subsequently noticed that the corresponding Corporation cars and the ex-Gravesend cars which ran on Brill 22E bogies did not suffer from so many derailments, even though the bogies of the latter were reversed.
A special feature of the 22E truck was the Weight Transfer Device, which consisted of a specially shaped rubbing plate attached to the body of the car above the centre spring post.
The latter was depressed slightly due to the movement of the truck, when rounding a curve; this increased the load on the pony wheels by approximately 20%.
The Brush trucks did not have this feature.
(We are indebted to Walter Gratwicke for this explanation.)
Modifications
These five cars received the least  modifications of any of the South Metropolitan fleet and in fact it was many years before they were even repainted, running in deep chocolate and ivory, with only the fleet numbers and badges altered.
The wire mesh life guards were soon replaced by the Hudson & Bowring slatted type and slatted gates fitted between the bogies.
Under the Defence regulations in 1916, sidelamps in little wooden boxes were fitted to the top of the dash, like their Corporation counterparts.
In the early 1920s, the destination boxes were lowered to a position at the top of the end  decency panels and hoops were fitted over the canopies, these were all of the flat topped type and carried a stairhead lamp.
When sent away to Hendon, a few more modifications were made.
The dash-mounted sidelamps were replaced by London United type lamps extending on tenuous stalks from the half-canopy and the stair landing hand rails.
Folding platform steps were fitted, Philipson side life-guards under the off side of the platforms and the ‘B.1’ type trolley masts replaced by the B.T-H.
‘B.2’ type.
One small feature which must have worried the authorities at Hendon, was that there was no wire screen over the stairside end decency panel.
Nos. 28 and 31 were fitted with MetropolitaN metal scrollwork and 35 with solid panels in this position.
Walter Gratwicke states that the original Brush ‘B’ type bogies were replaced at Hendon, by almost identical bogies from the Metropolitan stock of spare parts, but hardly any difference is discernible in photographs.
They probably had GE58 motors.
No further modifications were made to these cars.
When in October 1931, the SouthmeT received on loan, ten similar cars from the London United tramways, but with covered tops and Brill 22E trucks, the South Metropolitan L Type cars and others took their place in store at Fulwell depôt.
They never ran in service again.
After London Transport took over they were sold where they stood to Cohens for scrap on 9 May 1934.
No. 31 was the last to be broken up in July.
Nos. 30 and 32–34.
Built by Electric Railway & Tramway Carriage Works Ltd.
(Predecessors of United Electric Car Co.
Ltd.) at Preston, in 1902.
Later Type O
A batch of ten large bogie cars built for the Gravesend and Northfleet tramways in 1902, evidently proved too large for that undertaking and between 1904 and 1906, they were offered for sale to other undertakings in the B.E.T.
Group at £560 each, by advertisement in the B.E.T.
Group magazine.
The South Metropolitan Co. accepted one early in 1906 and it took the number 30.
It evidently proved suitable to their requirements and another was acquired later in the year.
Early in 1907 the SMET enquired whether any more were available, and received the reply that only two were left out of the batch of 10, the others having been disposed of to Swansea (4), and Jarrow (2).
The remaining two cars became 33 and 34 in the South Metropolitan fleet.
They were long cars with five window saloons, full length canopies and were the only cars with reversed stairs ever owned by the Company.
The saloons were closed by single sliding doors and the internal decor was of Dick, Kerr's standard design.
The maple veneer ceilings were divided into four panels with designs in the corners (less elaborate than on the Brush cars).
There was a large ceiling support bracket on each window pillar, an ornate lintel board over the door (later covered by a small notice board) and a perforated ventilation board in the top of the door over the window.
A mirror formed the left-hand upper panel of the internal bulkhead and when on the South Met.
system, there was a circular hole with red glass in the right hand one, the large oil lantern used at Gravesend, having been replaced by a hinged opening vent.
There were eight unshaded light bulbs distributed along the edges of the ceiling.
The saloon seats were long slatted benches, but the backs were in perforated plywood.
Other internal fittings were similar to those on the remainder of the fleet.
Seating on the upper deck was two and two, with a single seat near the head of the stairs at each end.
Like other South Metropolitan cars, these seats had solid backs.
The Blackwell enclosed spring trolley mast was placed at the centre of the upper deck.
Large ‘two line’ tinplate destination boxes were fixed on stanchions above the ends of the upper deck and the deck screens were of close mesh fine wire.
These cars ran on Brill 22E bogies, which unusually for that type were reversed with the pony wheels outwards.
Modifications
Before going into service on the South Metropolitan, only those modifications necessary to make them suitable for working on that system were made.
Gravesend used a cumbersome lever operated track brake, these were not required and were removed before the cars went into service on the S.M.E.T. The fixed trolleyhead was replaced by a ‘Wood's’ swivelling head as standard on the South Met.
and a wire mesh ‘dog guard’ fixed between the bogies.
These were the only modifications made on these cars before the war.
Standard South Met.
destination blinds were fitted into the existing boxes.
In 1916, sidelamps were fixed under the canopy edge, as with other cars in the fleet.
Later the metal destination boxes were replaced by wooden ones in the same positions.
The ‘Leather's Patent Ventilators’ between the opening lights projected and were gradually removed.
Rebuilding
In the late 1920s, No. 32 was fitted with lengthened platforms and quarter turn stairs at Hendon.
At the same time it received a B.2 trolley mast, hoops over the end of the upper deck, folding platform steps and slatted gates between the bogies instead of the wire cages.
The new platforms increased the overall length to 36 feet and the seating had to be re-arranged on the upper deck, reducing it by one.
In 1930, all four cars were sent in turn to Hendon, where in addition to being brought into line with No. 32, they were rebuilt similar to the six ‘M Type’ cars (which see).
They received higher dashes, and high metal sheeting round the upper decks and probably long cushioned seats inside.
No. 34 retained the wire mesh ‘dog guards’ between the bogies.
However, in October 1931, with the arrival of the London United cars these four cars followed the L Type into store at Fulwell depôt.
Like them London Transport sold them to Cohens for scrap on 9 May 1934.
No. 34 was the last to be broken up in June.
S.M.E.T. No. 19s, de-licensed and in use as breakdown car at Sutton Depôt.