

LOWEST OF THE LOW
Disillusioned with the ministry before he had even entered it, Vincent now said damningly that to trade in religion was on a par with trading in art or tulip bulbs.
That, one would have thought, was an indictment sweeping enough to settle the matter once and for all.
But it was not.
He still burned to preach the Gospel to the poor and to help them.
Back again at the parsonage at Etten, he must have pleaded with sufficient eloquence to convince his father that he should be allowed to try.
His stay at home coincided with a visit from the Reverend Jones of Isleworth, who had kept in touch and was now a friend of the family.
The two clergymen went with him on a trip to Laeken near Brussels.
Vincent's father knew of a school there for training mission workers.
It was an establishment that placed more emphasis on public speaking than on a knowledge of the classics, and the course was shorter and more intensive than anything comparable in Holland.
So on 25 August 1878, the failed scholar, bookseller, and art dealer arrived in Laeken to start a three-month trial period.
In his first letter from there he makes a significant little admission to Theo, and encloses a sketch: ‘I should like to begin making hasty sketches of some of the many things I meet…but as it would probably keep me from my real work it is better not to start.’
Poised to begin his ‘real work’ as a missionary among the wretched of the earth, a holy man at last, he is paralleled in time with Tolstoy.
In this same year, 1878, by an extraordinary  confluence, their spiritual paths crossed, though they were travelling from opposite directions.
Vincent would move on from evangelist to artist, and the great Russian, determined to live a life modelled on Christ, was beginning to regard all art as frivolous.
In July, the month in which Vincent was enrolled at the mission school, a desperate Tolstoy and his friend Stakhov set off on a pilgrimage to the Optina Pustyn Monastery not far from Moscow.
Tolstoy, uneasy about his wealth, wanted to reject violence in all its forms and live like a peasant.
Vincent would soon see the struggle to turn himself into what he called a Peasant painter as his prime aim.
In a diary started in the spring of 1878, Tolstoy wrote: ‘Read the Gospels.
Christ says everywhere that everything temporal is false, and that only the abstract is real.’
The terms would not have been Vincent's, but the note of absolute certainty could be his.
The religion Tolstoy was to advocate was remarkably like the only one Vincent could wholeheartedly contemplate, ‘a practical religion, not promising future bliss but bliss on earth.’
Close to the end of his life, Vincent referred approvingly to Tolstoy's My Religion , and spoke of his hopes for a ‘private and secret revolution in men from which a new religion will be born…something altogether new which will have no name, but will have the same effect of comforting, of making life possible, which the Christian religion used to have…’.
His probationary period nearly over, he was suddenly hauled before the committee on evangelisation and told that he was unsuitable.
Vincent was shattered.
His state was serious enough for his father to be called.
He had failed because of a lack of talent for impromptu speaking, considered essential for the task he was contemplating.
He was also, it seems, notably short on humility.
Two of Vincent's instructors later described their impressions of this eager novice who ‘did not know what submission was’.
According to one report, Vincent was as dismissive of academic study as he had been in Amsterdam.
A master asked him on one occasion whether a word was nominative or dative, and back came his answer: ‘I don't really care, sir!’
Another time, in a French lesson, when the word falaise (cliff) was being discussed, he jumped up and asked if he could illustrate the word by drawing a cliff on the blackboard.
The master said no.
At the end of the lesson the excitable Dutchman got hold of a piece of chalk and began to draw a cliff on the board.
One  pupil, laughing behind his back, tugged at his jacket to distract him.
All at once Vincent swung round.
His face contorted with rage, he lashed out, shocking everyone with his show of violence.
Clearly he had little aptitude for meekness either.
Where next?
While at Laeken he had seen miners, strange grisly beings to him.
He made a sketch of the inn they frequented, adjoining a big coal shed.
They would call in for a glass of beer on their way back from a shift.
Enclosing this sketch in his letter Monshe mentioned a district he had heard about, called the Borinage.
It was possible that even a reject like him could be of use in such a godforsaken spot.
He made enquiries.
Yes, he could go there if he wished as a lay evangelist.
Fired with enthusiasm he wrote to Theo: ‘Experience has shown that people who walk in the darkness…like the miners in the black coal mines, for instance, are very impressed by the works of the Gospel, and believe them, too.’
The Borinage, desolate and impoverished, was a coalfield in the south-west of Belgium near, a region of flat blasted lands surmounted by slag heaps of waste, One assumes that his father financed this latest venture.
He probably thought it would be short-lived.
In fact Vincent spent twenty-two months in this terrible black country, a period nearly as long as his stay in France.
For thirty Belgian francs a month he lodged with a pedlar by the name of van der Haegen who lived at Paturages, not far from Mons (the house was demolished in the early 1960s to allow for road widening).
As soon as he got there he set to work.
He visited the sick, taught his landlord's children, and gave Bible readings in the locality.
He was as shocked here as he had been by the scenes he had witnessed in London's East End.
These were the realities of grinding poverty, the price paid in human terms for that age of worldwide industrial expansion into which he had been born.
It festered here under his nose.
And somehow, in a setting that had once been rural, it seemed yet more dire.
The place was indescribably filthy and hopeless.
The miners were emaciated, old before their time, and so were their bedraggled, staring women.
At the centre of all that lived and moved in this ghastly universe was the mine.
Around it clustered the settlement of miners' huts.
Dead trees stuck up, together with blackened thorn hedges, dunghills, heaps of worthless coal.
In the middle of his harrowing report he let  slip a sentence, and we hear from that monster of objectivity inside every artist who sees everything as grist to the mill.
‘Maris,’ he wrote, ‘could make a wonderful picture of it.’
It was a hell of human vileness he had fallen into, a great raw wound crying out to be bandaged.
But what was one person able to do here?
So many sickly and feverish people were wandering about, some of them half-maimed, some burned from explosions.
All were trapped in something inhuman, into which they had dumbly delivered themselves.
The only real life, curiously enough, was underground, in the pit of hell itself.
Out on the surface the villages struck him as being stunned, dead, and forsaken.
The men themselves could hardly bear to be above ground; at least down below they had each other.
Vincent asked to be wound down to the pit bottom.
He saw the weird underworld life for himself, and heard the horrible drip of water leaking through.
Children, boys and girls, were loading small carts to be dragged along by old horses.
Vincent spoke almost enviously of the miners' darkness, and the chance it gave them to reclaim the light.
He soon came to appreciate their special character, their solidarity and mutual trust, their innate hatred for anyone who was domineering, their intelligence and quickness in spite of being unable to read or write.
Above all he was impressed by their bravery, and the haunting mournfulness of their deep-set eyes.
Winter was soon upon him.
It gladdened him to see how even these degraded surroundings were touched by a curious beauty, as he watched the little gangs of miners making their way home, black as sweeps, in the white snow at twilight.
Their houses, no more than huts, were scattered along the sunken tracks or half hidden in woods, or else perched on the slopes of the low hills.
You could see the candlelight flickering through the small-paned windows, under roofs covered in moss.
It was somehow medieval and hushed, in the shadow of the pit and its fiendish machinery.
These squat, frank men, working skilfully and terribly hard, who said little but had quick nervous responses, were not his equals — he saw them rather as his superiors.
How could his role, safe on the surface with the women, be compared with theirs?
Everything here fed his masochism — as he had known instinctively that it would when he applied for a similar position in the  English coalfields some years before, only to be told that he was not mature enough.
Now there were other motives being satisfied, and scores being subtly settled.
Vincent's father spent more time ministering to the Catholic majority than to his own Protestant flock in the Brabant.
Vincent, in Catholic Belgium, although emulating his father once again was also mocking him, by going to the limit in a way that passed judgement on his parents' safe Christianity, while putting himself beyond criticism.
Christ would surely have acted as he, Vincent, was doing.
Therefore he was the true follower of Jesus Christ.
Instead of lagging woefully behind, he had surpassed them.
He had come to the Borinage as his parents' representative, dressed correctly in the approved manner, his accents refined, and ‘showed in his appearance all the characteristics of Dutch cleanliness.’
But not for long.
Spiritual instruction was the last thing these downtrodden people needed, he argued.
Instead of Bible teaching, he ought to be translating fine words into deeds.
He changed direction almost overnight.
Then in January 1879 the Mission School committee relented and informed his father that he could have a temporary post after all.
Vincent was sent to near-by Wasmes and given a salary of fifty Belgian francs a month.
Overjoyed at having a recognised part to play, he taught the Scriptures, but spent most of his time assisting the poor and the ailing.
Even in this hell-hole he found a kind of salvation.
Being a combination of social worker, medical auxiliary, and teacher to these miners and their families meant that he was able to break out of the prison of his hateful loneliness.
Besides, it was fitting that he should serve a people who were so obviously more admirable as human beings than himself.
His compulsion to be of service and to act from his feelings had found its outlet.
He had been pressing for the opportunity to abandon himself, free of dogma, and here it was.
He was his own master, dedicated only to Christ, who had asserted the brotherhood of man.
If he neglected his physical body, there was no one here to reprimand him, for the whole community was woefully neglected.
His heart was appalled by what he saw, but in his heart also there lurked a triumph.
This hell he had entered could be his heaven.
Soon, whatever he did, no matter how hard and long he worked, it was not enough.
Apocryphal stories abound.
Like  Walt Whitman, who became a wound dresser in the American Civil War in order to draw closer to the simple young soldiers he adored and whom he wished to tend, Vincent sought to draw nearer to Christ.
First he threw off his respectability, exchanging it for ‘an old soldier's tunic and a shabby cap’.
Nothing was enough.
Nothing satisfied his urge to descend lower, until he was low enough to identify with these men who lay entombed in cramped cells, and crawled on all fours in the dark.
Through them he would know Christ.
In Wasmes he lived at first with a baker called Jean-Baptiste Denis and his wife Esther.
Then he thought he was being pampered, so he moved into a dirty hovel, ‘where he lay on straw like a beast’.
His habit of Dutch cleanliness was no more.
He stopped using soap.
What he wanted was to be as dirty as the miners, covered in coal-dust like them.
In the end he was even dirtier than they were.
Following his own desires and urges he lay on straw in his freezing barn, after giving away his bed, his decent clothes, and his sound shoes.
When Madame Denis asked him why he went to such lengths, he answered, ‘Esther, one should do like the good God; from time to time one should go and live among His own.’
Monsieur Bonte, a pastor recently installed in the neighbouring village of Warquignies, saw nothing odd in his amazing behaviour, which, he said, ‘revealed the originality of his aspirations’.
However, less flattering reports were beginning to reach the Mission School and also Vincent's family in Etten.
And there was worse to come.
A series of firedamp explosions shook the mines, causing fearful injuries — though the high accident rate was a commonplace in these parts.
Vincent was involved in one disaster at the Marcasse mine.
He worked frantically to help the casualties, tearing up what was left of his linen for bandages and soaking them in olive oil and wax to apply to bums.
Having got rid of his shirts in this way, he was reduced to replacing them with crude garments made out of sacking.
Tralbaut mentions an old woman who knew Vincent well, and who told him, many years ago when he began his researches, ‘There aren't men like that nowadays.’
Vincent would enter houses and tell exhausted women to go and rest, and then take over the family wash.
There are even rumours of near miracles he accomplished, such as the conversion of a foul-mouthed old  alcoholic, hurt in the Marcasse pit disaster, who told him in no uncertain terms to clear off, he didn't want rosary-mumblers around him, and then was converted by Vincent's sanctity.
The more tender-hearted biographers have pictured Vincent as a St Francis, lifting straying caterpillars from the ground and placing them gently on branches, leaving cheese and milk for the mice while he starved on bread and water.
In the words of others he springs into action as a political firebrand, marching into the coal-owners' offices and demanding justice for their exploited work-force, only to be told that the coal seams were too meagre and the profit margin too small to provide improvements in safety standards.
Contradictory stories tell of Vincent coming into his own as a pacifier, quelling an uprising of vengeance-bent miners by persuading them that violence only begets violence.
The truth seems to have been less dramatic.
At no time during his life did Vincent show any sign of wanting to involve himself in the socialist movements of his day.
A J Lubin does suggest that his experiences in the Borinage fostered a revolutionary spirit in him.
This was no doubt true.
In the coalfields he read as avidly as ever, including in his reading books about the French revolution by Michelet and others.
Lubin comments that ‘Shyness probably made concrete political action impossible, for this would have required direct action with other people.
But in art the revolutionary in van Gogh could find a place.’
As he went on abasing himself in this extraordinary fashion, the Synodal Evangelisation Committee were taking steps to dissociate the Church from his unseemly conduct.
It was decided that he was bringing them into disrepute and should be dismissed summarily.
The Committee's 23rd report refers to the failure of the experiment of accepting the services of a young Dutchman, Mr Vincent van Gogh, and goes on to cite his spirit of self-sacrifice, his admirable qualities in aiding the sick and wounded, and his devotion, ‘of which he gave many proofs’.
Unfortunately he was, in their opinion, such an indifferent speaker as to render ‘an evangelist's principal function wholly impossible’.
But nothing could stop him now.
He was living on dry crusts and frost-bitten potatoes.
Somehow his constitution, always incredibly strong, held up.
He was indistinguishable now from the ragged half-starved men, women, and children he struggled day and night to help.
The sufferings he saw everywhere piled  up more and more tasks and threatened to overwhelm him.
At night he was heard weeping in his miserable hut.
It may seem strange to suspect such a man of inflation — the psychoanalyst's term for a tendency to grandeur, the obverse of a patient's self-denigration and depression.
A famous example nearer to our own time is that of the Christian martyr Simone Weil, who joined the Renault workers on the assembly line so as to share their debasement, and worked on the land for the same reason, absurdly so in view of her frail physique.
In England during the war, she literally committed suicide by refusing her food rations, thus expressing her solidarity with the starving of Europe.
In both cases, a strong sense of shame is combined with the arrogance of a person who insists on suffering more than anyone else, and justifies such action by invoking the name of Christ.
From being despised, feeling inferior, wanting to be invisible, one is lifted up in full view on a cross of one's own devising.
None of this would have mattered, of course, to the crushed but undefeated people he was trying so hard to help.
So as to be like his fellows who had been turned into slaves, he slaved tirelessly himself.
The Decrucqs were one family who could never get over the loving care he lavished on their small son when he fell desperately ill with typhoid fever.
A portrait he drew of Madame Decrucq coming home from the pit has since vanished.
Theo's salary was a small one, but out of it he managed to send Vincent a pittance from time to time.
As soon as he received it, the holy man who now looked like a scarecrow gave most of it away.
Struggling to survive the discouragement of another rebuff, Vincent walked on foot from the Borinage to Brussels to plead his case with the Reverend Pietersen, one of the more sympathetic members of the committee which had just sacked him.
The door was opened by the clergyman's daughter, who ran off terrified when she saw the fearsome-looking tramp standing docilely on the pavement.
Nevertheless, it seems that the journey was worth making.
Pietersen, a kindly man, invited the apparition in and made him welcome.
An amateur artist himself, he was intrigued by the drawings Vincent had brought along with him.
No one until then had considered these subjects suitable for art.
The man wrote to the young man's parents that their son ‘strikes me as someone who stands in his own light’.
This was shrewd  comment, to say the least.
He urged Vincent to go back to the Borinage and continue with his work there, though without promising to intercede.
And he could hold out no hope of any financial assistance.
Back once more, Vincent moved to another village, Cuesmes, where he lodged in a house divided in two.
In one half lived the miner Charles Decrucq and his family, and in the other a fellow evangelist of whom nothing is known, except that his surname was Frank.
Theo was about to travel from The Hague to Etten, en route for a new post in Paris, and Vincent pressed him to ‘leave the train’ on the second leg of his journey and stay with him for a day or two.
Then he could show him the dismal landscape, and drawings he had done recently, some of which he had shown the Reverend Pietersen.
One of these early pictures may have been Miner with Shovel on his Shoulder , a clumsy Expressionist drawing in black chalk and wash.
It hits us with that familiar thump of veracity we experience before one of the ‘dark’ paintings of Josef Herman, an exiled artist of this century who made his home in Britain and painted the miners of the Welsh valleys.
Vincent's figure, head shrouded with a sack, leans forward to attack a steep hill.
Encased in work before the workplace is even reached, the striding man is so grainy that he seems made of coal particles.
Describing this drawing or another like it, Vincent said he had tried to reveal ‘something touching and almost sad in these poor obscure labourers — of the lowest order, so to speak, and the most despised.’
His choice of words shows how thoroughly he has identified with his subject, and for what reason.
In drawing a miner he has made a self-portrait.
In his letter asking Theo to come he mentioned a novel of Dickens,Hard Times , as one which had particularly impressed him.
‘Excellent: in it the character of Stephen Blackpool, a working man, is most striking and sympathetic.’
He often draws far into the night, he tells Theo.
Mr Tersteeg, his ex-employer at The Hague, has sent him a box of paints and a sketchbook.
Already he has half-filled the pages.
Are we to assume then that he had now switched over from being an evangelist and was a deliberate artist in the making, out in the open for all to see?
Things are rarely that simple — and for a van  Gogh, never.
Theo did break his journey and came to spend a day or so with him.
Vincent — partly because of exhaustion — had not written to a soul in months.
Sunk in religious doubts, he was being supported by a father whose profession he had ceased to respect.
And was Theo for or against him?
Brooding over it all in his weakened condition brought him low, in a dangerous state of depression.
Theo's visit was intended by both brothers to heal a rift which had developed between them.
To judge by Vincent's subsequent letter of 15 October, it did at least bring them back into contact.
But a closer reading tells a different story.
From start to finish it is a bitter refutation of whatever advice Theo had seen fit to give him.
They hadn't clashed openly.
It seems that on reflection it wasn't so much what Theo had said but how he had said it that had generated such despair and fury in him.
His letter, veiled and angry, makes clear how violently disturbed he was, hating his whole family and Theo most of all.
He had felt betrayed by the visit, after hoping to be lifted out of his crushing depression by it.
Rather than swallow any more of what to him was the worst kind of mealy-mouthed claptrap, he gave up the vital therapy of letter writing and lapsed into total silence.
The falling-out lasted eight months.
Forced to reply the following July to acknowledge a sum of fifty francs from Theo, he said grimly that he was writing ‘with some reluctance’ because ‘you have become a total stranger to me, and I have become the same to you.’
What was this half-smothered vituperation all about?
After all, grievances had been aired before, plenty of times, usually with Theo acting as peace-maker.
Well, it was the last straw, apparently, to be told by this cultivated, clean, excessively reasonable, and controlled favourite son, in these hideous surroundings, that Vincent really shouldn't have come here; that it was more foolishness, another dead-end, when he could have gone to university and made everyone happy, including himself.
How could he, Theo, have forgotten what it was like for him in Amsterdam?
The whole enterprise was a terrible joke, misguided, utterly stupid.
‘I still shudder when I think of it.’
It was the worst time he had ever lived through.
Compared to that unspeakable calamity his days here in the  Borinage, for all the filth and hardship, had been almost pleasant.
If he followed more of their so-called ‘wise advice’, where would he end?
Theo insisted that he should concentrate on improving his life — whatever that meant — and that he seemed intent on doing the opposite.
Vincent retorted that he did wish to be better than he was, and feared stagnation, but was ‘even more afraid of remedies that are worse than the evil itself.’
He was searching for the right doctor — he meant a doctor for his soul — and kept falling into the hands of quacks.
At some point it seems that Theo made a most fatuous comment.
Wasn't it unwise — that word again — for Vincent to spend his days idly?
Wouldn't he become fond of idleness if he wasn't careful?
Surely it was better to follow any occupation, even a baker's, a barber's, a librarian's, than commit the cardinal sin — for a Dutchman —.
of doing nothing .
Vincent's reply was heavily ironic.
‘May I observe that this is a rather strange sort of idleness…’ and he went on to admit that, although it was difficult for him to defend his present way of life, there was purpose in it, even if that purpose was an obscure one.
It was certainly obscure to Theo, who had gone off sadly shaking his head.
For Vincent, it rankled most that his sensitive brother had defected to the other side, seeing him as the cause of discord and anxiety at home, just as ‘they’ did.
The realisation left him with a feeling of anguish so great that it threatened to engulf him.
Perhaps, he concluded, in his letter terminating their correspondence for months to come, it was all just a terrible nightmare which would only be understood later?
Another cruel winter was about to start.
He had done all he could here, but instinct warned him that it would be a mistake to go home.
Instead of being condemned to death he felt condemned to life, like these worker-convicts in the rain and cold and mud of a no-man's land.
He belonged with them, They were like him, as undernourished in one way as he was in another.
He would go on living on scraps like they did.
He would freeze in hell with them.
Somehow he managed to end his onslaught — like so many of his attacks it was also an apologia — on a note of hope.
The bitter frost would last interminably, and then suddenly, ‘with or without permission’, it ended.
There was a change, a thaw.
He would hang on for that.
The following July, 1880, he got the fifty francs from Theo and made reluctant contact again.
The one and only period of estrangement in their short lives was over: the frost had ended.
Theo's fears that his brother was on a self-destructive course must have been at least partly eased by this letter.
But A J Lubin is mistaken in thinking that he now announced his intention to become an artist.
There was no announcement.
What artist — or writer or composer — ever makes it?
The whole question is hedged about by doubts.
Does he have the ability, is he fooling himself?
Usually someone sneaking towards an artistic niche does so in a sideways, disguised fashion, and under cover of darkness, like a smuggler.
And artists are not the only ones to take a roundabout route.
One of Isaac Bashevis Singer's characters in a short story tells the narrator-author: ‘You once wrote that human nature is such that one cannot do anything in a straight line.
You always have to manoeuvre between the powers of wickedness and madness.’
Nevertheless, his letter was crucial and marked a real turning point.
Vincent declared that as a man of passion he was prepared to try anything.
Here in the Borinage, he admitted, he was ‘often homesick for the land of pictures’, uniting in the same phrase his love of home and his longing to see paintings.
Here too occurred the first mention of the beneficial effects of what he called ‘active melancholy’.
His passion for books still raged, and so did his desire to study, to instruct himself.
But he had to be untutored, a tree agent.
He swung back again to the imputation of idleness that had so hurt him.
He had been more or less unemployed for five years, wandering about.
Did this mean he had deteriorated, fallen apart?
No, he had been moulting, like a bird.
Out of the moulting stage a bird emerged renewed.
This is the nearest we get to an announcement that his long hibernation has transformed him.
He has gained a new identity, but its nature is unclear to him.
Interrogating himself, he asks: Do I have a definite aim?
The answer is not forthcoming.
Instead, he rambles on some more, to ask why he is still unemployed when he feels such a sense of renewal.
‘It is simply that I have different ideas than the gentlemen who give places to men….’.
In the same letter he mentions his fondness for Dickens' Sydney Carton, and for Kent in King Lear .
‘My God, how beautiful  Shakespeare is!
Who is mysterious like him?
His language and style can indeed be compared to an artist's brush, quivering with fever and emotion.
But one must learn to read, just as one must learn to see and learn to live.’
So this is what has kept him employed through these ‘misspent’ years: he has been learning to see, and to live.
‘Maybe for a short time somebody takes a free course at the great university of misery, and pays attention to the things he sees with his eyes and hears with his ears.’
Doing this, ‘he will perhaps have learned more than he can tell.’
What he had learnt in the Borinage was that human suffering of the most basic sort somehow activated his creative energies, as well as enabling him to gain access to the depths of his own nature.
He loved the superb art of the Dutch Golden Age, but he wanted to master a different, rougher, Adamistic art, purposely naive, one that satisfied his demands for simplicity and truth and vindicated his distaste for luxury.
It had to be an art that did not separate him from the uncultured poor but was founded in them, gathering them to him in a home of art they could all share, a home that sheltered and consoled; a warm place.
How this would come about was as yet unclear.
For all that, it was a key letter and sounded a new note, and it was his first written in French, as if to underline his sense of liberation from the worst aspects of things Dutch — their narrow-mindedness, their lack of joy.
Back again to the fundamental question of whether or not he was idle, he worried at it like a terrier, then laid down a challenge.
Perhaps Theo could tell him the difference between the two types of idleness, he asked slyly.
There is the fellow who is idle from weakness, born idle as we say, a lazy character, and there is the idle man whose idleness imprisons and tortures him, because like a caged bird he longs to fly.
His idleness is involuntary; he dreams of actions he can't perform.
Because in the cage ‘he does not possess what he needs to become productive…’.
This was spelling things out with a vengeance.
He ended with one of his most beautiful and profound utterances: ‘Do you know what frees one from this captivity?
It is every deep, serious affection.
Being friends, being brothers, love, that is what opens the cage by some supreme power, by some magic force.
Without  this, one remains in prison.
Where sympathy is renewed, life is restored.’
He didn't as yet quite dare to imagine himself as a real artist.
To move over from religion into art with his newly liberated soul, he badly needed a bridge — a Dutch bridge.
The bridge was Rembrandt.
Didn't great art lead to God? he asked himself.
‘One man wrote or told it in a book (the Bible), another in a picture.’
Furthermore, ‘there is something of Rembrandt in the Gospel, and something of the Gospel in Rembrandt.’
He had closed the circle.
Now he could begin.
The picture we have of Theo as a man is extremely hazy.
Like an angel, he is not easily seen.
Always attendant, from now on he will occupy a position that is centre stage, yet invisibly as it were.
What is his story?
Vincent blocks our view of him.
Information about him is scant, partly because he was by nature self-effacing.
His widow tells us the things we expect to hear; that he was good, kind, gentle.
Friends and relatives speak of him in glowing terms.
He was a loving husband and, briefly, an adoring father.
Did he have off-days?
Did he ever lose his temper, raise his voice?
Were his money worries the main source of his anxiety?
We know they were a contributory factor, but our curiosity is aroused by the hints of maladies of which we know virtually nothing.
Vincent once tried to persuade him to give up his safe career and join him as a fellow painter — like other famous brothers in art history.
Was he tempted?
If he had been, it would have meant the end of Vincent's support-system.
Are we to deduce from this that Vincent saw Theo as an artist-manqué, or was he simply trying, not too hard in this instance, to shift the guilt a child feels before a self-sacrificing parent?
These are speculative questions.
One thing is certain: the burden this younger brother assumed, of caring for Vincent like a parent — sometimes a mother, sometimes a father — extended him both financially and emotionally to a dangerous extent.
Vincent's demands mounted over the years until they seemed to flood in — as they often did — by every other post.
Theo's occasional complaints, hardly ever voiced directly, were usually muted and so we fail to take note of them.
His constitution was delicate, and the strain on his health would have been  considerable.
He suffered, like Vincent, from depressive attacks, of a kind now seen as indicating acute anxiety neurosis.
Otto Rank describes the neurotic as someone who, faced with the proposition ‘All or nothing’, chooses the nothing.
Rumour has it that he contracted a venereal disease at some point and sought medical treatment.
This only comes as a shock if we insist on seeing Theo in terms of sainthood.
He was, after all, living in Paris, which had dozens of brothels and hordes of prostitutes on the streets.
Access to whores.
was sanctioned by male tradition and by his class, if not by his upbringing.
He kept company with a crowd of painters and with businessmen.
As a man whose sensibilities would be troubled by these liaisons with ‘beastliness’, a basically tender-hearted man, it was perhaps in compensation for his acts of relief that he tried to befriend and help women in trouble, as we shall see.
For all his determination to break the mould, Vincent was in a sense always typically Dutch, and never more so than in his obstinacy.
Here was a trait that Theo could wholeheartedly approve and support.
And he did, up to the hilt, as soon as it was clear to him that Vincent had chosen his life's work and intended to concentrate on it enthusiastically, against all the odds.
Vincent made a start by setting himself exercises from a popular drawing manual, the Cours de Dessin Bargue , and by painstakingly copying prints.
Theo was soon keeping him well supplied with prints and etchings as well as art materials.
Vincent's aim, naive though it now seems, was to turn out drawings presentable enough to bring in a few francs.
His father cheered him by ordering copies of large maps of the Holy Land at ten guilders each.
He still drew from life, of men and women filing towards the mine shaft through the snow and of miners holding lamps, bent double under loaded sacks.
He drew stiffly, crudely, full of feeling but with faulty technique.
He had so much to learn.
He asked for and was sent Sketches of Anatomy for Artists' Use , and struggled to teach himself the complexities of bones and muscles by endless copying.
And what about animals?
Where was the nearest veterinary school?
If only he could make contact with a genuine practising artist he'd be able to discuss all these things and get proper advice.
A painter he especially admired, Jules Breton, lived thirty-five miles away at Courrières.
He went tramping off one day with  ten francs in his pocket, hoping to call on him.
He was on the road for a week, making sketches in villages along the way, intrigued particularly by the lives of weavers.
Miners he saw as men of the abyss, and the weaver as a different type of character altogether, dreamy, something of a somnambulist.
He made detours and slept in the open, ‘once in an abandoned wagon, which was white with frost the next morning.’
Then, as he got near to Courrières, a steady drizzle of rain descended.
When he located Breton's studio he was immediately put off by its exterior.
The new raw brick had a cold, Methodist-like aspect and that discouraged him, he said.
In fact he had lost his nerve and was too shy to go up and knock on the door.
Embarrassed by his lack of courage, he wandered forlornly about the town, finding in an old church a copy of Titian's ‘Burial of Christ’ that might have been done by Breton.
He went from there to a café called Café des Beaux Arts, decorated inside with rather dismal and bad frescoes.
He came out again.
He had to compensate for the waste of a visit with his encounters, and with the countryside around the town, the haystacks, the brown earth speckled with whitish spots where the mark showed, so unlike the black earth of Holland.
He was heartened too by the French sky, clean and limpid after the smoke and fog of the Borinage.
Leaving Courrières he saw a small colliery.
The day shift was coming up into the twilight, miners with tired and miserable faces trooping out, their clothes as tattered as those of the miners in the Borinage.
One man was wearing an old soldier's cape.
Now that he was working and studying with real purpose, he had a problem.
His cramped room in the Decrucq house, that he shared at night with two small children, was no good for his art work.
As well as the lack of space, it was ill-lit.
A larger room was taken up with the endless daily washing that miners' wives were obliged to do.
They might have swapped with him, but he couldn't ask it: their need was greater than his.
He kept drawing.
‘It is not surprising,’ writes A J Lubin, ‘that the pictures he drew in Holland (and in Belgium) had Dutch qualities, for he was thoroughly saturated in his youth with knowledge of Dutch artists of the past and the present….
Much of it resembled the old Dutch genre paintings that had ‘a touch of the curious and a moral to be learned’.’
Drawing was always to be a liberation for him.
He told Theo that the act of drawing enabled him to see things differently.
In everything he attempted, the religious ingredient, essential from the first, remained paramount.
His drawings and paintings were part of a gospel.
In time he would say, ‘I want to give the wretched a brotherly message.
When I sign myself ‘Vincent’ it is as one of them.’
Socialism is here coupled with a vision of the artist as a kind of Christ.
Unable to cope any longer with his conditions of work, he moved abruptly to Brussels and took a room in a cheap hotel at 72 Boulevard du Midi.
His unexpected changes of direction would take people by surprise.
He had moved out to escape distraction and improve on the bad lighting, but more than anything he wanted space, so that he could draw from a model occasionally.
In addition to this, he thought it might be possible to work with a sympathetic artist in a good studio, and perhaps take lessons at an academy.
The Brussels Academy, he reminded Theo in his next letter, had one great advantage over the academy in Amsterdam — it was free of charge.
M E Tralbaut recounts the story of Vincent's actual departure from Belgium's black country, as told to him by his old friend Louis Piérard, who knew the widow of the pastor of Warquignies well.
Vincent had called to say goodbye to them, Madame Bonte remembered.
He looked terribly pale, and said sadly, ‘Nobody has understood me.’
Then he walked away on bare feet, his bundle (or cross) on his shoulder.
His identification with Christ, whom he called ‘the greatest of all artists’, is here, in defeat, at its most sublime or its most ridiculous, according to one's point of view.
As he walked off, village brats ran after him, screaming, ‘He's mad, he's mad!’
The pastor stopped them.
Turning to his wife, he said, ‘Perhaps he's a saint?’
He stayed in Brussels for six months.
During that time he made important progress in a number of directions.
He did apply at the Academy for a place, but although his name is there in the archives for 1880, whether he actually attended is a matter for conjecture.
Living in a city again meant that he would have to stop looking like a derelict.
In a very Vincent-like move he wrote home to say that he had had to buy two secondhand pairs of trousers and two coats, as well as underwear and shoes.
He enclosed a sample of cloth with his letter to prove his words and demonstrate that he  wasn't being unduly extravagant.
Really he was inaugurating a procedure that would become permanent, providing itemised details of his budget, first of all to his parents and later only to his brother.
Once a week without fail a breakdown of his expenses would arrive.
We are intimately acquainted with the state of this painter's worn-out trousers, decaying coats, leaking boots, the money spent on his teeth, his food, his rooms, more so in fact than with any other artist.
Here he is, at the outset, reporting from Brussels: ‘You must not imagine that I live richly here, for my chief food is dry bread and some potatoes or chestnuts which people here sell on the street corner, but by having a somewhat better room and by occasionally taking a somewhat better meal in a restaurant whenever I can afford it, I shall get on very well….
The expenses here…’.
And so it goes.
Realising that his whole future depended on it, he perfected the art of talking ‘poor-mouth’.
At the same time, as with so many of his ploys, he was telling the absolute truth about his situation.
Art is a matter of timing, selection, emphasis.
Whether he attended the Academy or not, what is certain is that he wanted to live with a practising painter as a working apprentice.
Just to dream of their stimulating discussions was enough to make his head spin.
Theo, ever-helpful, arranged for him to meet a Dutch artist in Brussels, Anthon van Rappard, a young man in his early twenties.
After meeting him for the first time, Vincent thought that he must be wealthy.
The touch of luxury put him off, and so did his work, which he found charming enough but ‘a little more passion, please’.
All the same, in spite of these initial reservations the two got on well.
Van Rappard was willing to let his intense young friend share his studio for a while.
And now Vincent could realise another of his dreams, which was to draw from the nude in heated premises.
What a luxury — and what sensuality!
Back at his hotel room, he was bringing in an odd collection of characters, presumably off the street, to use as models: a porter, a snow shoveller, old women, a soldier, various working men.
Before long, objections were being made to these practices, and to his old habit of hammering up etchings and drawings on the wall.
He had also for some reason tried to mask part of his window.
Acting on his own initiative he found a mediocre painter whose technique was sound, and took some lessons in perspective from him.
His comments, taken out of context, read comically.
‘I should have written sooner, but was too busy with my skeleton.’
Working through the Bargues manual he laboured to produce a drawing of a large-sized skeleton on five sheets of Ingres paper.
All in all, he was a good deal happier now.
But how he missed the country!
And every so often, of course , things fell apart.
He couldn't draw properly, he lost confidence and floundered horribly.
One letter in January finds him apologising to Theo for composing his previous letter in ‘a moment of spleen’.
He should have waited for a better moment instead of acting impulsively.
Then he went back to the attack.
Exasperated by what he saw as Theo's heartless neglect of him, he unleashed a volley of angry questions to a brother he relegated to the third person: ‘Why doesn't he write?
If he is afraid of compromising himself in the eyes of Messrs Goupil and Co by keeping in touch with me, is his position with those gentlemen so shaky and unstable that he is obliged to be so careful?’
He followed this with the unkindest cut of all: ‘Or is it that he is afraid I will ask him for money?’
If so, Vincent rushed on, Theo might at least have waited until Vincent tried to squeeze him, ‘as the saying goes’.
By his next letter he had recovered his good humour and was asking to be forgiven.
He went on to say that he liked van Rappard in spite of his lifestyle, because he took things seriously , underlining the word.
This of course impressed him.
It always did.
His father came on a visit to see him, and inevitably he was left feeling homesick.
But he had discovered something surprising.
Theo had been sending him sums of money from time to time through their father, keeping his name out of the transaction.
He thanked Theo, and hoped he wouldn't live to regret the investment.
His plan, he explained, was to become a good enough draughtsman to earn a hundred francs a month and so support himself modestly without assistance.
It remained a dream.
Money and how to get hold of it were the perennial problems that refused to go away.
If he forgot it, some well-meaning or malicious busybody would be sure to remind him of it.
People would talk about ‘the strange and unaccountable fact’ that he was perpetually hard up, and yet belonged to a well-connected family.
These days  his reply, a lame one, was the same one repeated, only with variations.
It was temporary, things were about to change, his prospects were improving.
Tersteeg, his ex-employer and for long a friend of the family, wrote him a disapproving letter.
He had got wind of a rumour that Vincent planned to sponge off his rich relatives and he hoped it wasn't true.
This kind of gossip and these misunderstandings only served to bring home to him how grateful he should be to Theo, who was now a believer and supported him willingly.
Writing to his mother and father, he said he wanted to explain that it wasn't extravagance that had led him to buy not one coat but two, and two pairs of trousers.
No, he had a definite reason in mind.
He intended to build up a small collection of workmen's clothes, a Brabant smock, a fisherman's outfit of yellow oilskin and a sou'wester, a grey linen suit of the sort worn by miners, straw hat, wooden clogs, so that he could dress his models in them.
If this strikes us today as quaint, peculiar in its literalness, we have to remember that he was addressing, through his parents, a nation that prized practicality.
Dutch to the bone, his ambition was to paint the world realistically.
There were problems, however.
His realism was not the realism of his forebears.
It included the supernatural, and it contained the soul.
Nature was dead unless it had his soul in it.
The Dutch tradition of realism, together with his never-sleeping Protestant conscience, forced him to find an outlet for his visions and fantasies subversively, under cover of symbols, by depicting men at work, portraits of common people, street scenes and fields as everyday subjects in an ordinary light, and simultaneously as expressions of a state of mind.
Like his fellow countryman, Spinoza, he believed that God was nature and nature was God.
Hearing that his friend van Rappard was going back to Holland, he saw little point in prolonging his own stay in Brussels.
Anyway, living in a city was more expensive than a rural existence would be, he reasoned, thus rationalising his longing to return home.
Once his mind was made up he packed hurriedly and started out, in April, 1881.
He was looking forward to a reunion with Theo in Etten on Easter Sunday.
A year later, Tolstoy, another peasant-lover, would clear out of Moscow complaining of city life with its ‘stench, stones, luxury, poverty, debauchery,.
He  too was only able to relax in the heart of the country, seeking its isolation instinctively, just as Vincent did, and like him unable to breathe freely inside any mainstream.
‘THE FACTORY IS IN FULL SWING’
It was good to be home.
Nothing had really changed.
He was glad to be included in old routines and in a family which he always thought while he was away from it, he had outgrown.
Surprisingly, he had not.
His father was touching, grown older, less sure of himself.
His mother ran the household, and seemed as always the stronger of the two.
In fact she had been the powerful sustaining force for as long as he could remember.
Now he knew it consciously, took note of it.
His sisters were still at home, unwilling as ever to comprehend him, only making him feel oafish, prematurely old, unclean.
To them he was the same rough dog, running into the room with wet paws to be disparaged.
In short, ‘a foul beast’.
Nothing had changed.
The only surprising thing was that it was all less irksome than he had imagined.
His mother's dark nature and her rather cold surety still shut him out, but he expected it.
And there were compensations.
He liked to come in and find the family gathered under one roof.
He loved to wake and hear the large house stirring, with himself enfolded in it.
It was spring, the beginning of May.
His ink drawing of the parsonage (and the church with its tower across the road) and a photograph of it show a large, long, impressive building on two floors, the front door surrounded by thirteen windows.
He had plenty of space to work at his drawing and to study.
He doesn't seem to have expressed a wish for a studio — that  would have been to declare himself too soon, to stretch his confidence too far.
Most of his art activity went on out of doors.
If it rained, he continued with the exercises in the manual: he had reached the Holbeins.
He looked forward to the promised visit of young van Rappard.
When his friend did come, Vincent's parents approved of him, charmed by his personality.
He stayed for twelve days.
For Vincent this was a dream come true, working alongside a fellow artist in collaboration — two comrades, shoulder to shoulder.
The two men went off deep into the surrounding countryside on a series of expeditions, to the heath near Seppe, and to a big swamp, the so-called Passievaart.
They separated briefly, Rappard to paint a large study and then some sepias, and Vincent to another spot nearby where the water lilies grew.
Another day they went to Princenhage.
Vincent wanted to introduce Rappard to his uncle, but when they got there, the old man — never in good health — was ill in bed.
Left alone, Vincent did some drawings of his sister, Wil.
She was the one sister who was sympathetic to him; that is, when he was able to detach her from the others.
She posed well, sitting at a sewing machine.
He would have preferred a spinning wheel for her to sit at, but one had to move forward with the times.
Moving into summer, he took advantage of the dry weather and lived more outdoors than in, drawing the same subjects repeatedly if they appealed to him, toiling incessantly in an effort to improve himself.
His parents, perplexed by this endless repetition, thought it meant that he was unable to get anything right.
A stickler for realism, he was frustrated by an obstinacy in his models as strong as his own.
He wanted their gardener, Piet Kaufman, to pose holding a spade, and if possible in his own garden or in a field where he would feel more natural, but the fellow objected.
He insisted on wearing his Sunday best for such an important occasion, and as a mark of deference to the young master.
Have pity on these small miseries of the draughtsman's life, Vincent wrote humorously to Theo, adding proudly that ‘The factory is in full swing’.
He was now churning out drawings at a tremendous rate.
Like Hokasai, the old man mad about drawing, he drew everything in sight, insatiably.
‘And finally, he doesn't even notice that he's stopped talking and is only drawing.
And from then on, that's all he does…’.
Well, not quite: not yet.
Only too painfully aware of his inadequate technique, he went off one day to see his cousin-in-law, Anton Mauve, a successful painter of the Hague school — armed perhaps with a letter of recommendation from dear Uncle Cent.
Vincent, eager to consult Mauve, was hungry for any advice he could get, willing to kneel at the man's feet if necessary.
He took along a portfolio of his drawings, and received ‘many hints which I was glad to get,.
He reported back faithfully to Theo, who had provided his train fare.
Mauve expressed interest in his work, he said.
He had seemed puzzled but intrigued by the clogged, uncouth sketches of peasants.
He urged Vincent to clean them up, get them clear of the earth they stood on.
His stubborn cousin, who saw his models as a kind of earth, part of the body and blood of the soil they dug, one impregnating the other, failed to see how the interchange he saw stamped on the dazed faces of these men could be smoothed away without losing the secret of how they lived, rooted and dumb and rough-barked as live willow trees.
Something was being gained by the roughness of his work; what it was he couldn't explain.
He did say that by concentrating on types of labourers, and learning from the studies of life he admired so much in work by Gavarni, Daumier, Dore, De Groux, and Rops, he hoped one day to produce acceptable illustrations for the magazines and newspapers, and bring in a small income.
Mauve approved.
He showed Vincent a whole lot of his own studies, and told his eager listener that he ought to start painting soon.
Vincent didn't act on this heady, alarming advice for some time to come.
‘Painting is drawing at the same time,’ Mauve had told him.
Exactly how he saw it.
Hence his reluctance to start painting before he had mastered the incredibly difficult art of drawing — and drawing the figure especially.
If you mastered the figure, that was bound to influence the drawing of landscape, he believed.
The muscularity of his fields and trees — even the skies knotted with clouds — would soon bear this out.
There was also the totally unexplored domain of colour, rearing in his mind as a great seduction, a temptation to be fought off until he could enter it willingly, and then occupy it, live in it, like a paradise regained.
This could only happen when the time was ripe, which would be when he was worthy.
On this same trip he also called in on Tersteeg — who sowerscomplimented him on his progress — and on another painter, de Bock.
He took in several exhibitions, seeing a large figure drawing of a girl and two children by Neuhys which he thought splendid, and the paintings of an artist new to him, Clara Montalba.
Her talent was a peculiar one, he commented ambiguously.
And he saw the work of an old favourite of his from the London days, J Maris, who had some beautiful things on show.
Home again, he shot off an urgent request to Theo for some Ingres paper that was not blindingly white — the whiteness hampered him — and stout enough to withstand his attacks on it with a reed pen.
Could Theo lay his hands on some that was the colour of unbleached muslin or linen?
Otherwise he was forced to waste time giving the whole paper a wash of flat tone each time.
People would say — usually his father — that if he was determined to be an artist, well and good, but why did he spend so much time with books, and silly French novels at that?
Where was the connection?
He replied politely that just as he studied the whereabouts of bones and tendons and muscles so as to know more about the figures he tried to draw, in the same way — if he was attempting a portrait — it helped to know something about the working of people's minds and how their characters had been formed.
He would draw the same figure over and over again, trying to get what he wanted.
All his subjects were workers of one kind or another: ‘a man with a spade, a sower (twice), a girl with a broom twice.
Then a woman in a white cap peeling potatoes; a shepherd leaning on his staff…an old sick farmer sitting on a chair near the hearth, his head on his hands and his elbows on his knees.’
‘Diggers,, ploughers, male and female, they are what I must draw continually.
I have to observe and draw everything that belongs to the country life…
I no longer stand helpless before nature, as I used to.’
He began as he continued.
The nameless, the humble, the ignorant and the overlooked were his chosen material, to be recorded and given their true place, and if possible to be transformed by love.
Why, then, were these early drawings such examples of ugliness?
No one can pretend that his stooping, kneeling, and digging figures are beautiful, either by contemporary standards or our own.
Ugly and irregular in their bodies as  in their features, delineated in harsh thick outlines, these creatures are either static, frozenly waiting — as if for blows — or blackly and stiffly at work, or walking down roads with the clumsy, painful gait of arthritis sufferers.
His first drawings mount, whether unconsciously or by design, a direct assault on our concept of beauty, obliging us to reexamine it.
Concentrate on the truth, advised Eric Gill, and let beauty look after itself.
In Vincent's case there were precedents to be found among his Dutch artistic forebears.
The searching self-portraits of Rembrandt in approaching old age, as he became uglier and poorer and more grimy, were acclaimed as masterpieces in preference to the earlier elegant portraiture of his society period.
Frans Hals had painted portraits of girls who could only be described as plain, but something lively and piquant redeemed them.
Vincent had come to regard himself as unredeemably ugly and unkempt.
One suspects him of seeking equivalents in others and in nature.
It was one way of justifying his own self-image as an ‘unfortunate’ and at the same time masochistically drawing attention to it.
Certainly the paradoxical view of ugliness as a special kind of beauty appealed to him from the start.
‘I do not want the beauty to come from the material but from within myself,’ he wrote later, taking direct responsibility for this process of redemption.
Suffering, commonly seen as ugly and distorting, stirred emotions in him that brought the word beauty to his lips.
Some of his preferences were so extreme as to appear perverse.
He found beauty, or so he claimed, in a broken old woman bearing the marks of poverty rather than in a beautiful young woman who was the essence of grace.
On rainy days he devoured books, recommending Shirley and Jane Eyre by an author known to him as Currer Bell.
Theo should try Balzac again, he thought —Père Goriot , for instance.
And whatever he did he shouldn't neglect Victor Hugo.
Later he would see Hugo's Quasimodo as having a direct bearing on his as yet unformed philosophy of ugliness, and he remembered a saying: ‘In my soul I am beautiful.’
Another time, noticing the pain of a cow in labour and a small girl who shed compassionate tears as she watched, he thought the scene ‘pure, wonderful, beautiful’.
Beauty to him came from the soul, as we say, and he saw it as his task to exteriorise it in some  way that harmonized with the subject matter.
But how?
He spoke once of ‘a rough man who bears blossom like a flowering plant’ as being beautiful.
Soon he was seeking analogies in nature for the human beauty he wanted to unearth.
Gnarled old trees were drawn and modelled later on as if they were figures.
Of the host of trees he painted, how many should we see as self-portraits?
Dozens of his drawings from Etten and elsewhere are concerned with diggers.
It is such a prominent theme that we are compelled to ask why.
On the face of it, of course, nothing could have been more natural.
Diggers were everywhere around him, the most commonly seen labourers, cutting the peat and reclaiming the land of this ‘sinking boat’ called Holland.
In Vincent's case, however, there seemed something obsessive going on.
The endless repetition strikes one as inexorable, like a recurring dream.
Vincent made several copies of an influential painting by Millet,The Diggers .
As well as its obvious appeal as a peasant painting, Lubin suggests another reason for his fascination with this one.
In the picture are two men, almost interchangeable, working side by side as they dig a ditch.
To see this double image as joined to a symbol of the grave ‘that linked one Vincent to the other’ is not as far-fetched as it appears when one sees the multiplicity of twinned and fused pairs appearing later: pairs of cottages, trees, and chairs, as well as of people on roads or seated at tables, overlapping or merged or shadowed.
What are we to make of these coded messages that go on bombarding us in their attempt to break through?
Vincent, steeped in the realism of his culture, could never have settled for external appearance only.
He had to drag out of nature whatever lay hidden and ‘inferior’— to use Jung's word — and exhibit it on the opened-out surface of a work of art.
Grappling with nature's secret meant being prepared to wrestle with ‘her’.
This involved constant vigilance and  stubbornness .
To illustrate the problem, and explain why he saw the whole business in gladiatorial terms as a contest resulting in victory over a subdued female Nature, one that became the opposite of what it seemed, docile and yielding instead of cold and repelling, he invoked the example of Shakespeare.
‘The struggle with nature sometimes reminds one of what Shakespeare calls ‘the taming of the shrew’— that means conquering the opposition by perseverance.’
Perseverance in the face of bitter discouragement, such as feminine  resistance to his approaches, were factors he was now trying to incorporate in work habits that would be essentially him, original to him.
Opposing forces were in precarious balance, and resolving their tug-of-war was his prime concern.
Good work could only arise out of peace of mind.
Victor and vanquished, he was beginning to think, came together in art and were one and the same.
The busy ‘factory’ went on producing, running on nothing but aspiration, perseverance, and the passion for art.
One day, a woman turned up who must have seemed the very embodiment of that nature he was tussling with daily.
Presumably his parents had told Vincent that they had invited her.
It was a Christian act.
Kee, the daughter of his mother's eldest sister, was recently widowed.
This was the young woman Vincent had called on at her home in Amsterdam when he was studying there.
He had met her husband, Vos, a young clergyman, and seen their baby son.
The family scene had enchanted him.
Now Vos was dead.
Here was the grieving widow, his cousin.
She had come with her little boy of four to stay for a fortnight because the van Goghs felt so sorry for her.
They felt a change might do her good.
It was full summer.
Kee was dark, striking rather than pretty, with wavy hair.
But what was beauty?
Her sorrow and evident loneliness struck him as beautiful.
Her chin was distinctly pointed, her mouth clenched as if withholding a cry, Vincent saw the pallor of her face, its sad lines, her eyes inward-looking, and felt that his soul was in correspondence with her.
At once he wanted to heal and restore her.
First, though, she had to be saved from her sad trance.
The immediate effect she had on him was to make him strong, sure, steadied on himself as never before.
He knew all about unhappiness: she had come to the right place.
Bereavement was something he understood.
Hadn't the losing of Eugenia been like one?
Since then he had survived a whole series of setbacks.
He had learned to live in himself and be self-sufficient, Instead of feeling Kee's presence as an intrusion, upsetting his concentration at a critical stage, he was inspired by her.
Instead of fearing her as a sensual temptation, a bringer of chaos into the monastic order and productivity of his life, he was able to work harder and better.
His one-man factory became a powerhouse.
Drawings flooded  from him — not as the result of battling, but from the rare relaxing of his will.
He stopped fretting about his life and about the future, about what was good or bad in it.
He had faith, he believed.
We hardly need to ask where this faith and belief came from, pouring in from a source previously untapped.
He was in love as never before.
He poured this love back into his work, happy to keep the source of it secret.
He was twenty-eight.
She was a few years older, mature, a mother.
Everything he desired in a woman was in her.
The pattern is ominously familiar.
Like Eugenia, she was someone who had committed her love to another.
Like her, she had a clergyman father.
Like Vincent's mother, she had married a clergyman, and like his mother she had known bereavement.
Blissfully, quietly happy, he went through the village with Kee and the little boy, taking them on walks.
He led the way through the fields along paths only he used, pointing everything out to them.
He loved the child, and was endlessly kind and thoughtful towards it, as fond of it as if it were his own.
His tender consideration touched her.
She said how grateful she was.
Her words ran into him as love, like a shy declaration.
When his heart brimmed and overflowed, he told her he was in love with her.
She replied with three deadly words: ‘No, never never.’
The past and the future were one, she explained hastily, and that was how it had to be.
The next day she left for Amsterdam, earlier than expected, after asking him not to try to get in touch with her there.
Distraught, he went to his parents, thinking they might be able to intercede in some way.
Then he set to work laying siege to her with letters.
According to Tralbaut, his letters went unread.
Like a drowning man he snatched at anything, just as he had done in London.
Kee wanted to love him but her guilt prevented her.
Also her parents objected, he imagined.
To them, an approach to their daughter when she was still in mourning was ‘indelicate’, a word he now heard from his mother.
It made no difference what anyone said.
In Kee's fine dark eyes he had read a call for help.
She was a sleeping beauty: he would wake her.
He had strength enough for them both.
The old ones, fearful and suspicious, jealous even, were attempting to stifle young love.
Somehow they must find the courage to accept the challenge.
A new world was calling them.
How happy they had been together, he and she and the little lad in the drowsy heat of the meadows.
How gorgeous it was to be alive!
Once safely through the fire of this opposition they would move into a future that was free of the dead past, lovely as cowslips and silent like a miracle.
A love such as his could never be ‘untimely’ and ‘indelicate’.
He comforted himself with the saying of Uncle Jan —‘the devil is never so black as he is painted’— and dreamed of what he might accomplish in the company of such a woman, in collaboration with her soft femaleness.
It was destined that it should be ‘she and no other’.
He talked of her as a goddess beyond reproach who was being restrained against her will.
More realistically, she was an iceberg that he would thaw with the fire of his blood, the warmth of his heart.
If he went on courting her in absentia it was because he had no choice.
His parents and hers were afraid of change, as the old always are.
The only thing that would change them, he commented savagely, was when he became someone who earned a thousand guilder a year.
Only Uncle Cent acted unexpectedly.
He admired Vincent's refusal to take Kee's ‘no, never never’ at its face value.
Vincent, baffled and angered by his parents' pessimism, lost his temper when they told him not to write to his uncle and aunt in Amsterdam.
He refused to promise anything, just as he turned a deaf ear to their prayers for his ‘resignation’.
Surprisingly, he told Theo nothing of this drama until the late autumn, when he wrote that ‘perhaps you know about it already and it is no news to you’.
Theo must have known in any case: he was always his parents' confidant and advisor, as well as his brother's.
Out it all rushed in a torrent, the whole story so far.
In the midst of this pain and uncertainty, the wonder is that he could still produce work.
There was no creative stasis.
Tralhaut comments that he seemed to be almost glorying in his failure to break down the barriers and ‘storm the fortress’ of his love's frozen heart.
More probably he had tapped a fresh source of energy in himself — call it the power of love — which made him feel invincible.
Any obstacle could be overcome.
‘For love is something so positive, so strong, so real,’ he wrote exultantly to Theo, ‘that it is as impossible for one who loves to take back that feeling as it is to take his own life.’
Everything was now irradiated by this feeling, which was bound to affect his work for the good.
‘Did  you receive my drawings?
Yesterday I made another, of a peasant boy lighting a fire early in the morning on the hearth over which a kettle is hanging; and another, of an old man putting kindling wood on the hearth.
I am sorry to say there is still something harsh and severe in my drawings, and I think that she , her influence, must come to soften this.’
In his joy at being in love, all he saw was now sparkling like the illuminations in a missal.
He was full of an incandescence that ‘no pails of cold water’ could put out.
He felt prodigal.
Love was the new axis of his world.
For all his fortitude, and his determination to throw off what he called the ‘yoke of despair’, screams of pain would be suddenly torn from him.
‘Do you think Kee knows how terribly she unintentionally thwarts me?’
Even with his new source of strength there seemed little he could do.
At times he was irrationally optimistic.
‘Well, she will have to make up for it afterwards!
That means I count on her joining in many artistic campaigns, you see.’
He reread Michelet's L'amour et la femme , hoping for guidance, desperate to solve the burning problem that forever eluded him, the reality of being a woman.
If only he knew what he was up against.
Michelet was now reinstated, and indeed elevated during this crisis to ‘Father Michelet’, faced as he was with a father painfully unwilling to advise him.
‘I told Pa frankly that under the circumstances I attached more value to Michelet's advice than to his own….
But then they bring up the story of a great uncle who was infected with French ideas and took to drink, and so they insinuate I shall do the same.’
As usual, a French book meant only ‘thieves and murderers and immorality’ to his father.
He went on to quote Michelet: ‘A woman must breathe on you for you to be a man.
She has breathed on me, old fellow!
On the other hand, must a man breathe on a woman for her to be a woman?
I most certainly think so.’
He must have asked himself, perplexed as to how to act, whether he would ever again get near enough to ‘breathe’ on Kee with his ardent breath, so as to melt their horrid separateness into one glorious entity.
‘But she has loved someone else and her thoughts are always in the past; and her consciousness seems to bother her even at the thought of a possible new love.’
He warned Theo not to be confused, to get his priorities right at all costs, and to take care not to bow down before the ‘money  devil’.
Keep reading the Bible, but even better, read Michelet.
The Bible was true, eternal, and everlasting, but for clear advice, directly applicable to the hurry and fever of modern life, he was indebted to Michelet, who said aloud what the Gospel only whispered.
Moreover, if Theo wanted to love — and he knew he was as desolate and starved of love as he, Vincent, had once been — then a belief in God was an absolute necessity.
Not that he should listen, he hastened to add, to all the sermons of clergymen or the arguments of ‘bigoted, genteel prudes’.
He should just remember that there was a God, and feel that there was, ‘not dead and stifled but alive’, urging us towards more love, more life.
In other words: Good News, God is Love.
Resolute again, as though energised by his own words and thoughts, he told Theo to stand firm and take the broad view.
They were moderns, they must keep faith with their generation and not look back towards the old one.
That was fatal.
If they were misunderstood, so be it.
In the future it would be seen that they were right.
Let the old things die.
Be soldierly,
Inside, his heart would be strong one day, and quivering like a hurt bird on the ground the next.
Heartbreak, then hope, then heartbreak again.
He rose and fell on the sickening see-saw of his terror and delight.
How long could such anguish last?
How much punishment could the heart take before shattering into fragments?
He repeated once more, for Theo's benefit, his fateful words on that summer day: ‘Kee, I love you as myself…’ and her reply, ‘No, never never’, which fell on him like a death sentence, ‘and for the moment it absolutely crushed me to the ground’.
Only he had the inside story.
What did they, on the outside, know?
He and them, inside and outside: only in art was this dichotomy ever really clarified and brought to rest.
Now the focus for his interminable dilemma was Kee, held away from his sight in a kind of darkness.
He struggled on alone, as against a blank wall of darkness and silence that blocked his light, stifled his breath, and threatened to make him mad.
Why were they being held apart?
It was terrible, wonderful, the ‘peculiar discovery of love’: it was like ‘the discovery of a new hemisphere.’
He wanted to shout with glee and with despair, both together, locked in the birth-pain of this love.
He kept summoning up  more strength to attack the ‘fatal evil of burying herself in the past.’
It was like a disease she suffered from.
One thrust of the surgeon's knife — that was all it would take.
In spite of this agony, there was one sure reward.
Fall in love; he said to Theo, and you'll discover another force, stronger than any other, ‘and that is the heart.’
Sometimes the pain of unreturned, unacknowledged love turned to frenzy in him, exalting him to worship.
Sometimes he felt he had been made whole, delivered, in a kind of fantasy, by his very longing.
‘There is a feeling of deliverance within me and it is as if she and I had stopped being two, and were united for ever and ever.’
At other times his need to go to her was awful, He wanted them to complete each other, to be made fully whole and created by her, instead of enduring the throes of his uncreated self.
He preached to Theo like a priest of marriage, outdoing his father in unshakeable belief.
‘A man and wife can be one, that is to say, one whole and not two halves.’
His father could only say falteringly that ‘My conscience has never allowed me to influence two people to marry.’
Vincent's conscience was telling him precisely the opposite, and at the top of its voice.
When he came to move among artists he would sing the praises of marriage, he vowed.
An artist would be more productive with a wife, he went on to declare, theorising wildly, than if he stayed unmarried and took a mistress.
Then he uttered the simple statement of his faith, one which read more tragically, in retrospect, than any other single thing he wrote: ‘In order to work and to become an artist, one needs love .’
Meanwhile, his father and mother drove him frantic with their endless harping on irrelevancies, such as the ‘means of subsistence’ and his inability to provide it.
as if it were a question of an immediate marriage!
Couldn't they see that he was simply dying for want of a word from Kee, that not seeing her or being able to write or talk to her was killing him, and that nothing else mattered?
They could only see an obdurate, ungrateful son, old enough to know better, selfishly concerned with his own desires and no one else's.
And of course the dreadful thought gnawing at him like a rat, that he refused to allow into his conscious mind, was the fear that she might already be complete in herself, and because of her love for her dead husband have no time for his helpless need, just as his mother had once  been complete, in her sorrowful love for the stillborn Vincent who had preceded him.
In Arles, Vincent painted a picture based on memory of the parsonage garden at Etten.
Two women, Vincent's mother and a younger woman, walk together in a garden, so close as to be almost overlapping.
The younger figure is taller, but the mother is in the foreground and dominates.
Although the younger woman has been taken to be a likeness of his sister Wil by many biographers, misled by an ambiguous comment of Vincent's, Tralbaut sees in it a close resemblance to Kee.
This leads A J Lubin to speculate on the ‘close psychological kinship’ between the two women in Vincent's mind.
There was still the countryside, and he would never relinquish that.
The black gloom of his anger was effaced when he stepped into the open air.
‘I began to draw a man busy digging potatoes in a field again.
And I put in a little more of the surroundings.
Some bushes in the foreground, and a streak of sky.
I cannot tell you, boy, how beautiful that field is!’
Apart from D H Lawrence, no one has written so fervently about modern marriage as Vincent in 1881.
‘I do love, and I am loved,’ wrote Lawrence in a letter.
‘I have given and I have taken — and that is eternal.
Oh, if only people could marry properly.
I believe in marriage.’
And there are other resemblances.
Aldous Huxley said that it was impossible to write about Lawrence except as an artist.
He could have been writing about van Gogh.
Both men were prolific letter-writers, both allowed their correspondents generous access to all their moods, and gave intimate details of their daily lives.
Both saw a beauty in vitality; both preached a gospel.
This list could be extended.
They believed that emotions should be let out and then mastered; there was their Protestantism, fighting the good fight, the insistence on going their own way,; their fear and dislike of cities; their psychological as well as actual isolation from the body of mankind; their awareness of the stigma of art; a distrust of the intellect when fed on abstractions; a desire to get ‘beyond’ art to a kind of heaven and a paradoxical belief in art activity as a means of shedding psychic sickness.
Both were intuitive first and rational second, men who lost their composure, were impetuous, and dreamed of peace as a great goal, a heaven  on earth.
Both were dogged by homesickness.
Most striking is the tenacity they had in common.
Frieda Lawrence said of her husband: ‘I must say he is like the English in the bulldog quality of hanging on.
They say the English never are really roused till they are beaten — I do love that — though I am never quite sure whether I love or hate it.’
They both hoped to found colonies, brotherhoods of kindred spirits in warm climates.
Vincent would have applauded the religious tenor of Lawrence's Foreword to Sons and Lovers , and especially this: ‘So there is the Father — which should be called the Mother…’
Vincent lived by gusts; he was always on the move inside himself.
His gusts were disrupting the drawing room.
It is easy to sympathise with his parents as these whirlpools of feeling kept arising out of nowhere.
Driven by the thought that he was nearly thirty, his impatience consuming him, he was the cause of almost daily tension and argument at the parsonage.
They were at a loss to know what to do with this sullen rebel who kept bursting out against them so unjustly.
Vincent wrote more impassioned letters to Uncle Stricker.
No reply.
In his correspondence with Theo he suddenly dropped his role of wise counsellor and turned into a beggar.
How could he make his drawings saleable, he asked angrily — and then came abruptly to the point.
If he could earn some money for a railway ticket he would go straight off to Amsterdam and ‘fathom’ the deafening silence which was tormenting him.
Swallowing his pride, he came out with a proposal.
The relevant passage, in his letter of 12 November 1881, makes heart-rending reading.
He had hit bottom.
He could take no more nail-biting suspense; he must act:
‘Theo, I want money for the trip to Amsterdam; if I have but just enough, I will go.
Father and Mother have promised not to oppose this if only I leave them out of the matter…
‘Brother, if you will send it to me I will make lots of drawings for you of the Heike, and whatever you want….
Could you help me with the money, boy?
If it is only 20 francs, Father will perhaps give me another 10…and then I'll rush off at tremendous speed.’
First though he had to make sure that the person he burned to confront was in fact there.
His sister Wil was going to Haarlem, and then to Amsterdam.
She would spy out the lie of the land and  write to him.
He sent off three drawings for Theo's delectation —‘Dinner Time’, ‘Lighting the Fire’, and ‘Almshouse Man’.
By 19 November he had the whole amount, 30 francs, from Theo, and was writing to say how kind and humane it was of him to let him have the ticket money.
His letters to his brother were now naked as never before.
It takes little effort of the imagination to put oneself in Theo's shoes, and feel the grey, correct, judicious side of his character flinching from the terrifying sincerity of Vincent's outpourings.
At home, his protests died down.
He relapsed into a dangerous silence when they accused him of ‘breaking family ties’ by his refusal to stop writing letters to the Strickers' home.
This retaliatory silence was apparently even harder to take than his outcries had been.
When they did get him to speak, after several days, he said, in effect: This is what it would be like if family ties were broken, and how does it feel?
His father shocked him.
He swore.
Then he ordered his son out of the room.
In his rage, the clergyman ‘who is used to having everyone give in to him when he's in a passion’ told Vincent to clear out of the house if he couldn't mend his ways.
He didn't mean it — it was said in passion, Vincent assured his brother, knowing how profoundly the news would disturb him.
But here, out in the open, was the first real break with his father.
It would widen over the years.
He had worshipped his father, identified with his work, his faith, his church.
All these things were bound up together and by defying his father he was in effect abandoning them.
Before long he would react even more extremely, exclaiming bitterly, ‘There really are no more unbelieving and hard-hearted people than clergymen, and’— taking a vicious sideswipe at his mother —‘especially clergyman's wives.’
At last he took the train to Amsterdam.
He went straight from the station to the Keizersgracht where his uncle and aunt lived.
He rang the bell, and was asked in by the maid — only to be told that the family were at dinner.
Entering the dining room shortly afterwards, he looked around in vain for Kee.
Her plate was missing, too.
Had they taken it away so as to fool him!
Asked where Kee was, they looked at each other and said she  was out.
His uncle hesitated a moment and then said she had left the house as soon as she realised Vincent had come.
Vincent didn't believe them.
She was in the house somewhere, kept from him, probably against her will.
The famous incident of the ordeal by fire then occurred.
He put his hand over the flame of the lamp and said to Stricker: ‘Let me see her for as long as I can keep my hand in the flame.’
The tone is biblical.
Horrified, his uncle blew out the lamp, said Vincent would never see her, and ordered him from the house.
Several months later he told Theo the full dramatic story, ending sadly: ‘Then, not at once, but very soon, I felt that love die within me.
A void, an infinite void, came in its stead.’
The protracted struggle Vincent waged against impossible odds raises a number of questions.
Did he surrender, walking in the summer with Kee and the child, to his craving for a wife and family, to such an extent that an invented relationship became true — only to collapse, tipping him into shock when she abandoned him with her ‘No, never never’?
Just as a distraught person will deny an unbearable piece of news and act as though the opposite were true, so he kept repeating in his letters, ‘she and no other’.
Or was he courting pain?
Converting a forbidden sensual yearning for a ‘pure widow and mother’ into the voluptuousness of half possession.
To possess someone in the mind is to be saved from a brutal repudiation in reality, and instead to love the ethereal, which can neither disappoint nor satisfy, but only act as a goad.
So we find him circling for months around the insoluble problem of Kee, exulting and then despairing, then exulting again.
He could not lose, but nor could he win.
He was twenty-eight, a young man strange and violent in his being, as well as in the eyes of others: sensual in spite of himself.
Sublimation was not working any more.
His alliance with his work, with nature, excited him with the nearness of a goal he had not yet reached.
And the same with books.
It all swung him towards the burning reality of Kee.
Her proximity had overbalanced him; physically and in the spirit it had to be ‘she and no other’.
Now it was finished.
It is reasonable to ask whether there had been an element of choice in it all.
Kee loved a dead husband who was now angelic, beyond criticism, perfect.
Had Vincent sought pain for himself, putting himself forward as the rival of a man who was bound to  triumph over him?
Did he will failure on himself for the sake of his solitude?
Did his spirit want one thing and his body another?
This time the defeat of his hopes didn't crush him for more than a few days.
On the contrary, it made him blaze up into action.
Harking back to ‘the first case — that of the man whose little boat capsized when he was twenty years old,’ he said that then he had been prepared to give but afraid to take.
He was ‘foolish, wrong, proud, rash’.
Since then he had gained insight into himself, and into a woman's heart.
It was different this time.
All the same, he hung about dismally in Amsterdam for three days, beginning to sink.
Something forced him to move, to act.
He went to Haarlem and spent time with his sister Wil, walking about with her but not confiding anything.
From there he went to The Hague.
At seven in the evening he was at his cousin Mauve's.
Before his last throw of the dice he had been hanging on at Etten in hopes of a visit from Mauve, who had half promised to come and initiate him into ‘the mysteries of the palette’.
Mauve was an artist who could be generous and expansive, but as a personality he was unpredictable, not to be depended on because he was so self-absorbed.
Vincent was frank with Mauve.
He would dearly like to spend a month taking lessons from him, starting now: would that be possible?
Mauve answered without hesitation: yes.
Vincent was never to forget the straightforwardness of this man and his direct, open way with him, though they soon quarrelled and parted company.
Both had irascible temperaments, but for the moment all was well.
Vincent found a room in an inn nearby, going to Mauve's studio mornings and evenings.
The artist looked over Vincent's recent work and his comments were honest and constructive, not in the least ‘Jesuitical’.
He had thought his young cousin's stuff dull when he had seen it previously.
Now he saw something else there, a rough groping for some unformed, folded life.
He muttered gruff compliments and showed his student how to prepare a palette.
Vincent, overcome with gratitude for this ready help, apologised several times over for his presumption in landing on Mauve's doorstep without warning.
But you see, he said, ‘the sword is in my loins’.
One impulsive act had paid off.
Now for another.
‘Why don't we live more?’ he had exhorted Theo.
Dissatisfied with work and  nothing else he went on the streets to experience life in the raw.
What had happened in Amsterdam at the Strickers' had stunned him — as if he had been standing too long ‘against a church wall’.
The antidote was at hand; it was any real, warm, live female.
If she was outcast as he was, so much the better.
Perhaps it was no more than frustration, a demand for physical relief.
In Vincent's day, prostitutes were — in liberal circles at least— a recommended healthy alternative to masturbation and its frightful supposed dangers — paralysis, blindness, insanity.
Brothel-going was thought preferable to the guilt and fear induced by self-abuse.
Suddenly, shockingly, the clergyman's son was a desperado.
He prowled the streets looking, hoping to be picked off.
He was no longer at odds with himself; he had declared war on all those who were out to suppress or castrate him, for whatever reason.
Let them try: he was his own man now at last, at twenty-eight.
Though he often knew fear, and rage, and self-disgust, he was not a vengeful man.
It wasn't to take revenge on Kee that he wanted a woman — a want he now confessed to Theo.
If it was contradictory to say that he was ready to go to another woman so soon after declaring Kee to be the one ‘and no other’, very well then, he contradicted himself.
He sounded a grandiloquent note: ‘Who is the master, the logic or I?’
Blame the church wall, the indifference, the freezing-out treatment he had received.
‘I need a woman,’ he wrote defiantly, shamelessly.
It is as though he is amazing himself with his own lust.
‘I am a man, and a man of passions; I must go to a woman, otherwise I shall freeze or turn to stone…’
So he set out to look for one.
‘And, dear me, I hadn't far to look.’
The woman he found, or who found him,— a nameless prostitute, was neither young nor beautiful.
He spares us the details, saying only that she was tall, well-built.
He take a rather gloating pleasure in setting her beside Kee, and one imagines his expression as he writes — the isolate, turning over his secrets to make capital of them.
The woman's hands, he says, are those of someone who works for a living — not those of a lady like Kee.
But she isn't coarse or common, he insists.
She is in fact perfectly ordinary, with nothing to distinguish her from a thousand others.
Wonderful.
At this point his desire to embroider intervenes, and he somewhat patronisingly brings art into it.
She reminds him of  something out of Chardin or Frère, or is it Jan Steen?
And he waxes portentously for a moment.
‘Every woman, at every age, if she loves and is a good woman, gives a man, not the infinity of a moment but a moment of infinity.’
Insufferably put, and probably not his own thought but something he has read, out of one of his damned French books that his father loathed seeing about the place — he had a phenomenal memory for things he had read.
But what is this about love?
What has happened to the stalwart Dutch realist?
We have to allow for some license: he is writing to his brother in Paris about this street pick-up and doing his best to make it palatable.
He drops another little bombshell.
It's not the first time this has happened: he's gone with prostitutes before.
And what the devil, Kee isn't without sexual experience after all: she has a past.
Then, being human, he indulges in a spurt of malice.
One warms to him because of it.
If Kee, who is far from ignorant in these matters, wanted to go on starving herself for the sake of an old love which is dead and rotting in the ground, well, so be it, that is her business.
Don't expect him to do the same.
He refused to freeze.
When he said he wanted the ‘spark of fire’ and intended to have it, it wasn't spiritual love he was talking about.
He sang in praise of prostitutes.
There was no reason to withhold any of this from his brother, he said wickedly, because surely Theo was no stranger to these experiences himself.
And ‘so much the better for him’.
More revelations followed.
He didn't spend very much on the woman, since they had no need to make themselves drunk in order to feel human.
What he had to spare he put in her pocket.
‘And I wish I could have spared more, for she was worth it.’
She had humanised him.
They talked freely together about everything, about her sad life, her worries, her bad health, about how foul the world was, and it was more illuminating than plenty of conversations he had had with educated folk.
‘Sin, bah!
Is it a sin to love, to need love, not to be able to live without love?
I think a life without love a sinful and immoral condition.’
As we take in the tale of this encounter, which clearly did him a power of good, we have to translate the euphemisms.
He had nowhere to go, so she took him to her room, such as it was.
His lyricism takes flight as he remembers waking in the morning to find ‘a fellow creature beside you; it makes the world look so much  more friendly.’
A friendly whore!
The scene, which should by now be exuding sentimentality like syrup, somehow does no such thing.
Everything pleased him; it was good, it was right.
More to him perhaps than the relief afforded by the crude sex was the fact that he woke up in the meagre home of a real working woman, warm like a picture by Chardin; ‘a wooden floor with a mat and a piece of old crimson carpet, an ordinary kitchen stove, a chest of drawers, a large simple bed.’
Note the one touch of extravagance, the tool of her trade — a large bed.
Though she was only a part-time whore who ‘had to stand at the washtub next day.’
A brutal life, which had not extinguished her humanity.
That was what he found memorable.
It was love he felt — and not only for her: for the pathetic room, the faded carpet, the floor boards, the stove, everything.
And what he felt was a fraternal love.
Living in The Hague was expensive.
He soon got through 90 guilders, which his father thought an excessive amount.
He hated having to account for every cent, he complained to Theo, not least because sooner or later everyone came to hear about it.
A room with breakfast at the inn cost 30 guilders, and for double that he could rent a decent-sized room for a year in Schevengin, a poor district behind the station.
Mauve had said, on seeing his studies, ‘You are sitting too close to your model.’
Passing this on, he was making a plea for more funds.
When his money had gone he went back home, in time for Christmas.
The humiliating financial dependence on his parents, a fact of life ever since he had been dismissed from Goupil's, was being gradually shifted on to Theo, who would soon find himself shouldering the whole burden.
Probably one immediate result of this change was Vincent's growing rebellion against the restrictions that went with the use of his home as a base.
In addition, the Kee affair had put him on a collision course with his parents.
On Christmas Day, he met the opposition head-on.
Vincent waded into his father with such anger that his expulsion from the house inevitably followed: such grossness was an offence to the fragile truce they were only just sustaining.
Was that what he intended?
If he hadn't provoked the argument then he had certainly seized on it with relish.
The apparent cause was his father's  attempt to force him to go to church.
He had been going regularly, but out of courtesy.
To stop going was, of course, a hostile act, as he well knew.
‘But in truth there was much more at the back of it all, including the whole story of what happened this summer between Kee and me.’
He worked himself up into the kind of rage that leads to  unforgivable things being said.
He told his mother and father that he found their whole system of religion abhorrent.
The violent scene ended with his father telling him to leave the house, ‘so decidedly that I actually left the same day.’
He packed there and then and returned to The Hague.
Presumably he gave Mauve an edited version of what had happened, said he couldn't stay any longer at Etten, and he would like to stay in The Hague.
Mauve, a man of few words, said, ‘Stay then.’
And that was that.
On hearing this dramatic piece of news, Theo wrote at once, promising as much support as he could afford until Vincent was in a position to earn his own money.
He then proceeded to read the riot act to his headstrong brother.
It is one of the few letters from Theo that we have, and a remarkably frank one.
Pulling no punches, he asked Vincent what on earth had possessed him to behave so grotesquely.
It was callous of him to embitter and spoil their parents' lives.
What was he doing, acting the liberal again, and in front of country people who couldn't be expected to comprehend modern attitudes?
‘I don't understand you.’
Vincent replied by return of post, writing his answer on the back of Theo's letter — but not, he hastened to add, ‘with the intention of insulting you.’
Why then?
He defended himself vigorously, and took Theo to task for  parroting their father's words.
Admitting the affront, he made capital out of certain phrases.
That expression ‘embitter and spoil’ was in reality ‘a Jesuitism of Pa's,’he pointed out, and so typical of their father, who said things like that when in fact he had no answer to the charge.
It was just rhetoric.
For example, he would be sitting there calmly, reading his paper and smoking his pipe, and say to Vincent, ‘You are murdering me.’
It was nonsense, it meant nothing.
‘Because Father is a tired old man I have spared him a hundred times, and tolerated things which are little short of intolerable.
This time, however, there was no question of fighting at all, but simply of saying ‘Enough!’’
Anyway, he has since wished his father a Happy New Year,
The van Goghs must have been relieved as well as saddened when their rumbling volcano of a son departed.
A semblance of peace descended on the parsonage once more.
The Reverend van Gogh's servant girl remembered later that Vincent, who had turned a ground floor room into a makeshift studio, would sometimes work all night.
His mother would find him still at it when she came down to breakfast in the morning.
Called for lunch, he kept answering, ‘Yes, I'm coming,’ and often didn't put in an appearance until an hour or more later.
He walked around with a portfolio under one arm and a folding campstool under the other, his head held to one side in a manner considered odd.
He passed people in the street without recognising them.
He once gave a beggar his nearly new velvet suit — doubtless glad of the chance to get rid of it.
Without doing anything that could be described as eccentric, he left an impression of strangeness.
He was intensely serious.
He made no jokes.
He visited the homes of the poor.
If one of his drawings went wrong, he tore it in half with an angry gesture.
He stared straight ahead.
He wasn't in the least bit proud.
Once he did a picture of an old farmer ploughing his field.
When it was done the old man remarked that his dog was missing from it.
Vincent obligingly added the dog.
The evidence of peculiarity accumulates.
After his death, country people acquainted with him around Etten were astonished that ‘that Vincent’ could have ever amounted to anything.
CONJUGAL/MATERNAL
He was in The Hague: he had done it.
Now it was sink or swim.
The rupture with his father would never be absolute, and even now, after a dreadful parting scene, the old man had apparently offered to lend his son money.
Perhaps Vincent's mother had put pressure on him, or perhaps he had his own reasons for softening the blow.
The gesture may have been made for the sake of appearances: after all, how could a minister be without Christian charity?
His actions from now on were to show an increasing ambivalence.
Even with his authority flouted, in spite of all manner of provocation, it is possible that he still loved his eldest son, at least when Vincent was absent.
Face to face, the son who had wanted to model himself on his father now outraged him, showing him little respect, openly arguing with him, Under Vincent's voice, in his fixed, obstinate stare, he detected a lurking mockery and contempt for everything he stood for.
Betrayed into fury, he accused his son of being the cause of his own hatred.
It seemed to him that Vincent came home spoiling for a fight.
The father felt murdered.
He hated the brutal-sounding clumsy speech his son used, the invincibility of his young purpose.
Vincent rented a studio —‘that is, a room and an alcove which can be arranged for the purpose, cheap enough’— on the outskirts of town, at Schenkweg 138, close to Ryn station.
He was so near, he could see the trains pulling in and out.
He was only a ten minute walk from Mauve, who had promised to help him settle in.
The rent was low, 7 guilders a month; the expense of buying furniture was the problem.
He only needed the rudiments, a  wooden table and a few chairs; he was prepared to lay a blanket on the floor and sleep on that.
Mauve said no, he should get a bed: he would lend him the money.
He also mentioned an old bugbear — he thought Vincent should dress better.
Vincent reported to Theo that though he had worries, he had a feeling of satisfaction at having accomplished the move.
Now the die was cast he felt a certain calm.
No use regarding recent events in terms of misfortune; one had to show courage for anything worthwhile to be attempted.
So he began, with his bits of furniture which were in the real ‘village-policeman’ style, whatever that was.
The light was good, the window twice as large as an ordinary window, though it faced south.
He could work from the model here, a great improvement on the parsonage.
He had overcome the main drawback of living in the country at Etten, since now he could associate with other artists, exchange views, be stimulated by the work and lives of others with whom he had something in common.
To do so meant of course to abandon the simplicities of pastoral living.
In time he would seek a solution to this problem by envisaging a brotherhood of painters living self-sufficiently, away from the worldliness of towns and thus uncontaminated by modern fevers and distractions.
Entertaining such a dream was naive; yet, compared to Cézanne, who shared the instinct to hide away from civilisation, he was paradoxically the epitome of subtle thought, as his letters increasingly testified.
Cézanne was phlegmatic, timid, at times virtually dumb.
But as well as the instinct to get right away, the two painters were alike in being unable to draw acceptably.
Critics have expressed doubts about the draughtsmanship of both artists.
Both seemed to lack the facility to make things look right.
In Cézanne's case this was because at first he struggled to compose in the Renaissance manner, and did it badly.
Vincent strained every nerve to turn himself into a draughtsman acceptable to the illustrated papers, and the strain showed.
The truth is that the liberties he wanted to take simply disrupted his attempts to produce marketable drawings for Theo, and for his connections in The Hague (such as his Uncle Cor).
His aim at first was to produce a body of work which would sell.
During his eighteen months at The Hague he collected about a thousand sheets of contemporary wood engravings and etchings — English, French, and American.
These of course were paid for by Theo, Vincent regularly bought copies of the Graphic and London News , tearing out sheets to add to his stock.
The English artists in particular attracted him, he said, ‘because of their Monday-morning-like sombreness and studied simplicity.’
He went on admiring them in the face of the snobbish dismissal of them by many artists of the Hague school, who sneered at woodcuts as ‘those things you find in the South Holland Café.’
In other words, they attached about as much value to them as to the drinks.
None of this hollow criticism deterred him.
Like Cézanne he was at war with the cliché, whether religious or artistic.
If only he could have preached conventionally he might have been accepted, and if he could have imitated the smoothness of those illustrators he admired, he could have made a living.
Each time a drawing came out that looked ‘all right’, he seethed with dissatisfaction, tore it up and started again.
And again.
It wasn't what he wanted.
Remember, the age of photography had dawned.
Illustrators were hard at work representing things with photographic accuracy as a way of ensuring that their scenes and figures were true to life.
They weren't to him.
His aim was for a deeper realism than that of the illustrators and photographers who called themselves Realists.
Why then did he admire them, and collect them so avidly?
Partly he was desperate to earn his own living and vindicate his decision to be an artist, and, in spite of everything, to place in front of his father and mother the hard-won gift of his success.
But what attracted him above all else to the magazine illustrators was their subject matter.
It had the kind of social content which stirred him.
It wasn't that he wanted to be more imaginative than them.
His future liberties with techniques were all to do with representation.
His urge was to deepen.
Representation could be more truthful, more profound than that, and ought to incorporate that feeling which had been naively symbolised by the halo in early primitive Christian painting.
Blake's ‘everything that lives is holy’ was now a gospel confined to churches in the care of men like his father.
In Vincent's era, as he knew in his nerves and on his skin as well as through his eyes, the new creators were the inventors of speed and progress.
Vincent's early history is the story of a great refuser.
He refused outright the advice of his ‘betters’, either by alienating them in a flash of rage or by stubbornly preferring not to go along with them; rather like Melville's eponymous character Bartleby.
But Bartleby by his refusal was preferring not to live.
Vincent wanted to cast his skin and emerge shining, like Christ after the crucifixion.
After refusing to be a Jesuit, he then refused to be an atheist.
He sought the means to do something quite different, creating it out of himself as he went along — but he hoped for everyone: a way of looking that was a kind of worship.
At first, as always, things went well.
Mauve put himself out in all sorts of ways — a highly irritable man who could be expansively generous.
Vincent went to him for drawing in the mornings, and in the evenings to try his hand at watercolours, as he had done before Christmas.
Mauve proposed his name for membership of the Pulchri Art Club, where Vincent could draw the models available without extra expense.
The more he was involved with Mauve, the more he saw how the man's work drained him.
They were too alike, they annoyed and inflamed each other now and then, which made for a tricky situation.
‘I think we are equally nervous.’
Watercolour was a revelation.
Vincent was soon absorbed in trying to master its alchemy, daubing and washing out again.
Something though was eluding him.
Either things came out too harshly, heavy, muddy and dull — Mauve called it his ‘yellow-soap style’— or else the tenderness wasn't tender enough.
He turned back in despair to drawing.
When he went out, he tried to infiltrate the soup kitchens, the third-class waiting room at the station, anywhere in fact where the poor gathered.
Working in the open was too bitterly cold at present.
He even ate at the soup kitchen to save money and time.
Drawing was now an abiding passion, and ‘it is a passion just like that of a sailor for the sea’.
He lost himself in its possibilities, its immensity, he went far out, and came back dazed, stunned by horizons, often with sketches he had done in a hurry and afterwards flew at with the axe of a black crayon, or a pen loaded with black ink, hacking at them fiercely, savagely, to kill off the sentimental and picturesque that was so much in vogue.
In his rage and despair he became a vivisector.
At the beginning of February he confessed to a whole list of ailments and obscure setbacks.
Some were psychological; or perhaps they all were.
He had headaches, toothache, his anxiety about the coming week and how he would cope with it had given  him a fever.
He was depressed, so severely that he took to his bed.
He got up, then went back to bed again.
Next came a litany of his material difficulties.
His clothes, some of them old things of Theo's which had been altered for him, were shabby, and were getting spattered with paint.
His boots were dilapidated.
His underwear was falling apart.
He gives as his reason for this sudden discouragement the feeling that his strength was failing him.
Also he was worried about a model he had arranged to hire through Mauve, and then doubted whether he could pay the price.
Mauve would think he lacked guts.
So was the whole epistle an elaborate begging letter, or was it voicing a loss of nerve, a fear of life, an attack of what we now call angst?
In his next letter, on his feet again, he thanks Theo for the enclosed 100 francs.
We shall become accustomed to these inexplicable relapses.
They punctuate the log of his days and weeks throughout his months at The Hague.
This time he seems to be picking up the signals of some approaching hostility towards him.
He was a man excessively sensitive to the opinions of others.
Disapproval would at first enrage and then devastate him, and these warning messages apparently arrived visually.
He observed people closely, as was only natural for a painter, and he was already watching Mauve, the friendly mentor who might at any moment turn into an enemy.
Feeling unloved, he half expected to be hated.
People at Etten had recently commented on his habit of walking along while staring straight ahead, and this was perhaps his protection against unfriendly glances.
His sister Elizabeth remembered that as a child he half closed his eyes at meal times as he sat with his family.
He was burdened too during this difficult winter with a sense of the loss of his youth.
Nearly thirty, at the mercy of involuntary depressions which seemed causeless, and which struck at him ‘just when one is feeling cheerful’, he analysed his feelings with considerable insight and honesty.
‘At such a moment one feels as if one were lying bound hand and foot at the bottom of a deep dark well, utterly helpless.’
He admitted that it saddened him to realise that ‘my youth is gone — not my love of life or my energy, but I mean the time when one feels so lighthearted and carefree.’
He offered Theo some startling advice.
‘And I tell you frankly that in my opinion one must not hesitate to go to a prostitute  occasionally if there is one you can trust and feel something for….
For one who has a strenuous life it is necessary, absolutely necessary in order to keep sane and well.
One must not exaggerate such things and fall into excesses, but nature has fixed laws which it is fatal to struggle against.’
Another desolate little thought followed swiftly on the heels of this one.
‘It would be well for you, it would be well for me, if we were married — but what can we do?’
What indeed.
Nothing prepares us for his next move.
He was about to experiment with a drastic remedy — not only taking his own advice but overriding that ‘occasionally’ by cohabiting with a prostitute as a common law wife.
This done, though not yet admitted to his brother or, presumably, to anyone else, he found all the justification he wanted in the words of ‘Father’ Millet — another of his father-replacements.
‘Art is a battle,’ Millet had said in his autobiography.
‘In art you have to risk your own skin.’
Biographers, notably A J Lubin, have suggested motives which may have prompted him to choose such a woman for a partner.
One immediate result, once the news leaked out — and he made no attempt to hide his new circumstances from Mauve and others in his immediate vicinity — was swift condemnation by all his middle-class associates.
This one act of his expelled him into the wilderness more forcibly than any other, just as it did the novelist George Gissing in England.
In Vincent's case, this may have been the very reaction he wanted.
The neglect of his appearance had already caused him to be shunned, in the Borinage and elsewhere.
Justifying this self-neglect to Theo in 1880, he also commended it as ‘a good way to assure the solitude necessary for concentrating on whatever study preoccupies one.’
Barriers and handicaps were always contributing to the alienation he bemoaned and yet instinctively courted.
When his teacher, Mauve, and then Tersteeg, the manager at Goupil's whom he had counted a friend, both turned against him, he was at first bitterly hurt.
Then he managed to stand their opposition on its head.
‘And though some people may damn me irrevocably and for ever, in the nature of things my profession and my work will open new relations to me, that much fresher for not having been frozen, hardened, and made sterile by old prejudices.’
In the light of these observations, the act of living with a prostitute takes on another meaning.
Relationships were perhaps being tested and found wanting.
Hopefully he would be led to others which were more fruitful in the long run.
By ensuring rejection in this way he was also ensuring that he would not be enslaved by anyone else's methods of work.
His attitude to others and towards mixing with them was rooted in an ambiguity that was fertile for his art but disastrous in his dealings with people.
He was hungry all his life for friends and friendly environments, vilifying and imploring as he shifted about restlessly and unpredictably like a Lawrence, never finding the right place, the right person.
Often he acted in ways that made him seem like a child demanding to be looked after.
Falling into depression, he appealed to Mauve to call and see him.
In spite of his bitter criticism of his father, he still asked for help from him.
Theo was soon changed into the loving father he believed was his due.
Later on he would utter cries for help and expect to be nursed back to health by sympathetic doctors, demanding attention as a substitute for love and taking masochistic pleasure in its denial.
When he declared, ‘I resign myself to everything and put up with everything’, he was rejoicing in his discovery that to behave like a child sometimes worked.
It also aligned him with the underdogs, helpless like children under the blows of fate.
He chose ‘the dog's path’, and chose it consciously, because it was the crooked rather than the straight, it created difficulties, and those difficulties fed his art.
By accepting the role of victim he glorified his own suffering and was brought close to Christ.
‘It is better,’ he concluded, ‘to be a sheep than a wolf, better to be ruined than to do the ruining.’
Failure was more honourable than success.
It became a matter of pride to be ‘chained to misfortune and failure’, like the picture ‘The Prisoner’ by Gérôme, showing a man lying fettered.
The hardships he accepted with a kind of satisfaction would benefit others and do their work a power of good, he said, and cited as an example a painter friend at The Hague, Theophile de Bock.
‘I should be sorry for him if he did not land more in the thorns than in the flowers — that's all.’
Vincent remarked several times that he had no fear of death.
On the contrary, he welcomed it, befriended it.
At the end, he  chose it.
He was afflicted by the modern malaise of instability and a fear of life.
To fear life is to fear the world.
A lifelong fear of the world means that one is afraid of the outside, of society, and erects what bulwarks one can against it.
Nothing, he found, was more effective — as he tried to devise an inner world that at the same time avoided the black hole of dejection — than work, solitary work, work in which one was gladly buried.
Dostoevsky had come to a very similar conclusion when he came to write about his four years of penal servitude in Siberia: ‘I felt that work might be the saving of me, might build my health, my body.’
His letters at this time were — like van Gogh's throughout his life — full of references to fainting fits, spasms, weakness, nervous attacks of various kinds.
Vincent said categorically: ‘Work is an absolute necessity for me.
I can't put it off, I don't care for anything but the work; that is to say, the pleasure in something else ceases at once , and I become melancholic when I can't go on with my work.’
On another occasion he reflected that only hard work saved him from ‘that melancholic staring into the abyss’.
His aim, in fact, as he freely admitted, was to forget himself in his work.
Forget his disappointments, forget that he was unmarried, childless, forget his hunger for a loving mother, forget that he was ugly, freezing cold, in disgrace.
As A J Lubin movingly observes, ‘His pictures became his companions, his mistresses, and his children.’
Now, however, he had a real-life mistress, a mother with a child of her own.
A van Gogh scholar, Jan Hulsker, has unearthed the following facts about her.
Her name was Clasina Maria Hoornik and she was born at The Hague in February, 1850.
This makes her three years older than Vincent, and roughly the same age as Kee.
Vincent called her Sien, the familiar version of her Christian name.
Her parents had eleven children legitimately and probably others besides.
Before their encounter Sien had two  illegitimate children, in 1874 and 1879.
These children were dead, Vincent knew nothing of them.
Sien had a five-year-old daughter, and she was pregnant.
The poor woman was a wreck, addicted to drink, ill and half starved.
She scrubbed out the houses of Dutch burghers when she had the strength, or she took in washing.
Too weak to do either, she had gone on the streets.
It was an old resource.
Her own mother had done the same.
Where did they meet?
Possibly in one of the cheap wine-shops he frequented at the back of Ryn station.
He may have taken pity on her and bought her a drink, at the same time buying a little companionship for himself, easing the ache of his loneliness.
It was winter, bitterly cold outside.
Wherever it was, she attracted his attention by her deplorable state.
He found himself confronted by a sorrier specimen than himself.
They met towards the end of January, and he kept the news from Theo until April.
When he did let it out, he did so in a rather peculiar fashion, linking it to a quarrel with Mauve and casting it in a dramatic mode, with himself in the first and then third person.
‘They suspect me of something — it is in the air — I am keeping something back.
Vincent is hiding something that cannot stand the light .’
This narrative flexibility indicates the extent to which he now saw himself as a character in his own drama.
To put it another way, he was aware of the idea of divided consciousness, much discussed in his day, and here and elsewhere he can be seen applying it to his own actions.
No doubt attempting to forestall criticism and evoke compassion, he began with the pregnancy, highlighting it twice.
‘Last winter I met a pregnant woman, deserted by the man whose child she carried.
A pregnant woman who had to walk the streets in winter, had to earn her bread, you understand how.’
Kenneth Wilkie, asked in the early 1970s to write a feature article on van Gogh for the Holland Herald , has done his best to show that Vincent was the father of Sien's unborn child.
One warms to Wilkie's enthusiasm for detection and admires his industry, but the evidence he puts forward is somewhat shaky.
Dr Jan Hulsker had told him that after Vincent's departure from The Hague, Sien had given custody of the baby Willem to her brother, Pieter Hoornik, before going back to a life of casual prostitution and drink.
She drowned herself in 1904.
The brother, Pieter, had a son of his own.
This boy became the Dutch poet, Ed Hoornik.
Wilkie, who describes himself modestly as a working journalist, then tracked down the poet's widow.
Mies Hoornik-Bouhuys, a writer and broadcaster, said that her late husband succeeded in tracing Willem, after being told by Jan Hulsker that the prostitute Vincent lived with was his aunt.
Then follows more hearsay evidence, and the trail peters out on a question mark.
For all the fascination of this quest, we have to ask whether its  outcome really matters.
It is not nearly so intriguing for this writer as is the closed book of Vincent's intimate life in this unlikely household, with a woman who allowed him to clean her up, who tended and fed her like a mother, rocked the cradle of her newborn baby, and shared his food and his room with her.
We do have a few glimpses, through the keyhole as it were.
It makes more sense to enquire into his attempts to reform this woman, and then to glorify her and her child in a whole series of marvellous drawings, than to establish a dubious fatherhood he in any case assumed at the outset, emotionally and spiritually and with the utmost delight.
The horrible emptiness of his heart, mocked in a cruel doubling by his empty room, was now filled with a domesticity he had thought would never be his.
Every extreme action produces its reaction.
From an idealised, spiritual love for Kee which always had something sickly and perverse about it, he plunged into the lightless sub-world of labour, submerging himself in its mean and desperate poverty, as if to kill off once and for all the romanticism which had brought him nothing but pain.
The joyless cynicism, vicious cruelty, and ugly surroundings of his new life were his punishment for living so long in foolish illusion.
Here there were no facades, no masks, no appearances to be kept up.
Faces were stripped of pretence by the pitiless bombardment of harsh reality.
A crust was a crust.
You snatched at it and gobbled it down, before someone else did.
Fine feelings were soon mauled and discarded.
It was the Borinage all over again, but with one essential difference.
He had no shreds of status clinging to him.
The Church was unaware of his existence.
An unsuccessful artist was no better than a lunatic in the eyes of these people.
Only one person really cared whether he sank or swam, and he was far off in Paris.
Cohabiting with Sien made him a denizen of the slum district she knew intimately.
He had moved in, not only with her, but with Jack London's ‘people of the abyss’.
He was in fact a man of two worlds, as he would always be.
Balancing between them took a great deal of agility.
There were risks, deformations, and there were compensations, artistic seams to be mined.
He set about exploiting this one with tremendous zeal.
Pleas for understanding began to pour from him in a stream.
‘Poverty has advantages and disadvantages.’
‘I am not living in a bed of roses but in reality.’
By living with ‘the woman’ he was undeniably saddling himself with more expense, but consider the gains, he implored.
He now had a permanent and very willing model, and not only one; he had several.
The mother was a good subject, and the little girl, and soon there would be a baby.
He spoke already in terms of collaboration —‘I sent you a few studies because you can see from them that she helps me a great deal by posing.
My drawings are done by ‘my model and me’.
The woman in the white bonnet is her mother.’
A row blew up between him and Mauve.
The truth was that Mauve only wanted to spend time on a large painting of sailing barges which he was getting ready for an exhibition.
Vincent's constant demands for attention were becoming a pest.
Mauve's critical comments, at first sympathetic, were now unpleasantly caustic, and, as far as Vincent was concerned, unjust.
What had he done wrong?
Why had the man turned against him?
As always, when he was criticised unkindly he smelled persecution.
Who had been whispering against him — was it Tersteeg?
As it happened, he was right about Tersteeg.
The man was a snake.
Beneath his refined manners and superficial elegance lay something treacherous.
God knows, there was little about Vincent to inspire jealousy, but jealous the fellow undoubtedly was.
His favourite line of attack was to start talking about finding useful employment for Vincent, and to issue veiled threats.
Vincent translated these to mean: Take my advice or I'll use my influence with Theo to cut off your subsistence allowance.
Then Vincent heard, in this nest of artistic vipers, that Tersteeg was laughing at Vincent's absurd ambition to be a painter.
He was going behind Vincent's back with his ‘hatred, grudges, chicanery, sarcasm’.
And now Mauve too was suspect.
Agitated, Vincent went running to a painter called Weissenbruch to see if he was another one who had been poisoned by the gossip circulating against him.
He was reassured by the man's friendship.
He liked Weissenbruch's gaiety, and the man had a reputation for telling the truth.
The painter said frankly that he had told Mauve: ‘I could work from his (Vincent's) studies myself.’
This was praise indeed.
Mollified, if not entirely convinced, Vincent went back to Mauve and tried hard to knuckle down.
Tersteeg had finally told  him venomously: ‘You failed before and you'll fail again — it'll be the same story all over again.’
His security undermined, he was now more vulnerable than ever to Mauve's voice and its cutting edge, to his cold eyes, the touch of condescension.
Things were disintegrating between them.
It was hideous, unfair.
He did what the established artist ordered, and felt the ignominy of it, of what his instruction had turned into — a succession of orders.
Finally his anger boiled over.
Mauve kept insisting that he should concentrate more on studies from plaster casts.
It was perhaps a strategy for dissuading him from coming round so often.
Vincent loathed the grey, dead plaster.
Mauve had given him a few casts of hands and feet to take home and study.
A day came when Mauve lectured at him, ‘as the worst teacher at the academy would not have spoken.’
He swallowed his pride and kept quiet, but was so furious when he got home that he hurled his hated casts into the coalbin.
They lay there, smashed and filthy.
He was done with them: from now on he would draw from living hands and feet, and no others.
At Mauve's studio the next time it came spilling out.
In a pitch of frenzy he stammered, ‘Man, don't mention plaster to me again, because I can't stand it.’
A curt note arrived shortly afterwards from Mauve, telling him to stay away for the next two months.
It was soon after this incident that Sien moved in with him.
Overjoyed to be of use to someone, and by his role of rescuer, he expressed his happiness to Theo obliquely, in a rushing torrent of plans.
He wanted to be out in the open street working, so as to catch things ‘in motion’.
Industrial subjects interested him.
He had just come in from sketching workmen out on the Geest, where they were laying water and gas pipes.
It was difficult to draw well in such conditions, among the noise and confusion, standing in mud in the squalls of rain, but worth it for all that.
They were the kind of difficulties he thrived on.
He made out a case for dressing down rather than up.
‘When I wear a fine coat, the working people that I want for models are afraid of me and distrust me, or they want more money from me.’
The real reason was that he felt at ease; he was no longer a figure of fun or an eyesore, he had a place — just as he did at first with Sien.
The metamorphosis he felt was an inner as well as an outer one.
‘I am a different person when I am at work on the Geest or on the heath or in the dunes.
Then my ugly face and  shabby coat harmonise perfectly with the surroundings and I am myself.’
Figures, the human body in motion or at rest, would be his prime material for the immediate future.
Landscapes were empty and without meaning unless they could be related to an inner view, to a feeling of emptiness or apprehension, a sadness, a surge of hope, an ecstasy.
When he turned to attack landscape he would either include a figure smudged on the periphery, dwindling in the distance, or portray anonymous couples or figures imprisoned by fences and obstructed by walls and trees.
Landscape only became meaningful when he found the confidence to treat it subjectively.
He equated a lone tree with a lonely person, and paired trees in the same way that he paired humans.
His work, nearly always typographically accurate, had himself projected into it.
The earth he painted was impregnated earth.
His skies boiled and burned, or they reflected the eternal in the eyes of a baby.
His perspectives led the eye obsessively to some place out of reach, that he could long for but not have.
Sien had made him strong and potent again.
It was not the sex.
Without knowing it, she bestowed value and purpose on him.
He could help her regain her health, even give her a sense of her own worth if he persevered.
He saw her as a person injured by life, as he was injured.
He encouraged her to take public baths, he saw that she ate properly — though indifferent to food himself — and behaved with her like a caring mother, the kind of affectionate mother who had always inspired him.
The mother-daughter relationship he had witnessed in London had moved him so profoundly that he had fallen in love with them both.
Sien's own mother was inadequate, often drunk.
He would stand in for her.
His description of Sien bears a remarkable resemblance to the image he had now formed of himself, She inspired disgust in other people.
She threw angry tantrums.
Her health, like his, had been impaired by malnutrition, and ‘her mind and nervous system were also upset and unbalanced.’
In moments of extreme stress Vincent could barely speak, and when he did his words would sometimes be mangled.
Sien's speech was ugly.
‘Nobody cared for her or wanted her, she was alone and forsaken like a worthless rag.’
Seeing her as innately beautiful, especially after she gave birth to the child she was bearing, was to applaud her regeneration and  at the same time redeem his own unattractiveness.
Out of sorrow and ugliness emerged freshness and grace.
Depravity and a wasted body and spirit could give birth to health.
In taking refuge with a submerged class, which by its toil serviced the spotlessly clean houses of Dutch society, he was laying down a challenge to his privileged friends and relatives.
It was this implied indictment that was soon to bring so much wrath down on his head.
Yet he was no revolutionary.
He had a hatred of cant, but his eyes were wide open.
After his liaison ended and he was alone again, he wrote simply and forlornly, ‘I hated being alone so much that I preferred being with a bad whore to being alone.’
For all his apparent certainty, the decision to throw in his lot with her must have weighed heavily.
He held back at first, but only until she was confined in the hospital at Leyden.
Sien as a nursing mother was irresistible.
What he found in her was what he wanted to find: a sickly, faded woman as beautiful in his eyes as a Madonna.
He made a simple crib for the baby, and heaped praise on Sien whenever she acted maternally.
The inferior and degraded had become the norm.
A later friend, the painter Emile Bernard, remarked that ‘Vincent showed extreme humanity for prostitutes’, and said he was a witness to ‘sublime scenes of devotion on his part.’
By subjugating himself, Vincent replaced their bad image with a good one, and not only theirs but his own.
He wrote enigmatically to Theo, urging him to come and meet Sien.
He thought he would be reminded, as Vincent was, of their childhood nurse at Zundert, Leen Veerman.
Sien, he stressed, was that kind of person: in other words she was a substitute for something else — as prostitutes are — and from an inferior class.
He went on to say that meeting her would be like meeting an apparition from their past…‘you will rediscover yourself in her’.
And he went on more explicitly to speak of that period ‘some ten or even twenty years ago.’
It was all a roundabout way of saying that Sien was synonymous with sorrow, and perhaps as well he was referring to the sorrowing mother of their childhood.
Sien had ‘that Dolorosa expression’ which had affected him so deeply when he had seen it depicted in the picture Woman in Mourning .
Somehow this sad and pitiful woman, ‘already  pock-marked, already withered and prematurely old,’ has been fused with Michelet's ‘woman in black’in his imagination.
Women cast down, on whom life had left its mark, were to him sisters under the skin regardless of station.
In the hard light of day, of course, he had no illusions about her.
Nevertheless, he thought Theo unduly alarmist in warning him that women like her were out to fleece him.
Before he had become involved with Sien he had used her for some time as a model.
One incident in particular had convinced him of her genuineness.
They had been working together, and she had asked about the following day.
No, he couldn't afford her.
The next morning she came knocking on his door.
He opened it shaking his head.
‘I just came to see if you had something for dinner,’ she said.
She gave him what she had brought, a dish of beans and potatoes.
At about the same time, something extraordinary happened.
Crowing over it to Theo he made it sound like a breakthrough.
‘It is almost miraculous!’
His uncle Cornelius, head of the van Gogh art business in Amsterdam, had commissioned him to make twelve small pen drawings of The Hague.
If he liked them he would take another twelve, at a better price.
This was Vincent's first sale.
The day before he had just bumped into Mauve, ‘happily delivered of his large picture,’ who had promised to call in.
Another miracle.
So his fears about his cousin's strange hostility were, it seems, unfounded.
Alas, his elation was short-lived.
When Vincent wrote impulsively to congratulate Mauve on completing the big work he had laboured at for so long, he got no reply.
Fretting, he thought of hurrying round to have it out with him, whatever it was.
He was never able to bear uncertainty.
He lost sleep, his mind churning, piling up imaginary complaints and magnifying them.
He wrote again, a careful, stilted letter, expressing gratitude for the help he had received and suggesting they shook hands and called it a day.
His reserve broke before he had got far and he revealed his own grievance.
If it was hard for Mauve to guide him, it was equally hard for him to be guided ‘strictly’.
The stumbling block was the obedience he demanded.
‘I cannot give that.
So that's the end of the guiding and being guided.’
He had acted hotly, but with his usual honesty.
It was a manly, proud note.
He had no reply to this letter either.
One day the two men met by chance out on the dunes.
It was clear from Mauve's manner that they were finished.
Vincent asked his cousin to call and see his latest work, and Mauve shook his head, his face bitter.
He turned away, muttering something about Vincent's vicious character.
Deeply hurt, Vincent jumped to the conclusion that news of his friendship with Sien had reached him and upset the man.
He was in a small world, incestuous, spiteful, and more disliked for his unorthodoxy and his apparent arrogance that he realised.
He gave up trying to understand it and vowed to harden himself more.
He worked harder still.
He still resisted colour.
He had heard enough stories of artists who had started painting too soon, and failed, floundering in a morass without sound drawing and perspective techniques.
In a book by Dürer he read a description of a perspective device and made one for himself.
Drawing refreshed him as a long walk refreshed him, and it was part of the art of forgetting slights, frustrations, old wounds, so necessary if he was to survive and stay serene.
Nature too was a great balm.
He was always grateful for ‘the healthy and restorative force that I see in the country.’
Yet the Expressionist in him kept seeing psychological equivalents everywhere.
Trees, corn, grass, cabbages would all be anthropomorphised, so that‘for instance in trees I see expression and soul, so to speak.
A row of pollard willows sometimes resembles a procession of almshouse men.
Young corn has something inexpressively pure and tender about it, which awakens the same emotion as the expression of a sleeping baby.
The trodden grass at the roadside looks tired and dusty like the people of the slums.
A few days ago, when it had been snowing, I saw a group of Savoy cabbages standing frozen and benumbed, and it reminded me of a group of women in their thin petticoats and old shawls which I had seen standing in a little hot-water-and-coal shop early in the morning.’
Whatever he drew exhibited the old traits and gestures for which he had been criticised and condemned, but preferred not to correct: their so-called clumsiness, for instance.
John Berger has noticed that his drawings — and later his paintings — contain in their ink, their crayon, their pigment, what he calls ‘the labour of being’ of what they depict.
If he drew a chair or a pair of boots he managed to convey the effort of production that went into them, as if he had shaped them and fitted them together himself.
The spectator is made to feel that without this element their reality would be incomplete.
His pictures were stubbornly not nice : he called for carpenters' pencils of rough graphite rather than the refined Fabers, crayons of a denser black, and later squeezed his colour messily and thickly from the tube direct when he was in the mood.
It was as if neatness and cleanliness were linked in his mind with the hypocritical.
At The Hague, still aiming at the illustrated magazine market, he concentrated on figures in action, and in the process would be distracted by other subjects: by shabby house fronts, factories, drying sheds, parks, churches, refuse dumps, freight yards.
And somehow they all came out as expressive of human beings.
The bricks and iron and peeling paint were somehow analogous to the people he saw passing in and out of them, with their dirty faces, stooping postures, and threadbare clothes.
He walked out as far as Scheveningen to draw the fisherwomen there.
He drew peasants digging and sowing, and labourers of all kinds, timber men, blacksmiths, hauliers, as well as the sick and the old, the maimed and the deformed.
Wanting to capture figures engaged in activities he made quick sketches of people reading, writing, cooking, drying themselves, or huddling close to fires.
Women burdened with loads attracted him, as they had done in the Borinage, pushing wheelbarrows, sweeping, and fetching coal.
Once, out at Scheveningen, he was excited by the wind lashing the sea into a fine rage.
The trouble was, in all the fury and exuberance the view was half obliterated: masses of water raised fountains of spray and wrapped the fore-shore in a sort of mist.
The most impressive thing about the storm was its eerie quiet.
The sea was the colour of dirty washing water.
Another time he was out with his watercolour box and a horse suddenly bolted, dragging a coal cart from the entrance to Ryn station at a mad gallop.
In his haste to leap out of the way Vincent dropped and broke his paintbox.
He reported the event to Theo laconically as ‘another expense’.
If it rained or snowed and he was trapped indoors, he composed beautiful word pictures in ever-lengthening letters to his brother, and for good measure added lightning sketches from memory.
He complained now and then of feeling curiously weak and faint.
This feeling of exhaustion would pass, he said, if he kept busy.
Ryn station was one of his favourite haunts, or rather its approaches, ‘the cinder path with the poplars…then the ditch full of duckweed, then the brown-grey soil of spaded potato fields, or plots planted with greenish purple-red cabbage…behind this stretch of ground the red-rusted or black rails in yellow sand; here and there stacks of old timber — heaps of coal — discarded railway carriages.’
His colour sense was demanding to be heard and utilised.
He used correspondence as a safety valve, and for imaginary company.
But it was on days like these that one longed for a friend, hoped for a caller.
It was on days like these that the emptiness came back and one grew desperate.
How essential it was to be able to work, and to be blessed with the will to work.
One solution, of course, providing he was in funds, was to employ a model.
Then he had both the work and the company.
He described one, a boy who was glad to come in and sit for him, and bring his spade.
He was a hod-carrier.
The lad intrigued him, with his curiously flattened nose, like a cat's, and his extremely coarse straight hair.
For all his simplicity and rough appearance he had a certain grace of figure.
Of course, Vincent explained to Theo, he could avoid the expense of models and use his imagination.
His tongue was firmly in his cheek.
Wrestling with nature — and human nature — was the prime thing.
It mattered.
The body's terrible corruption, like the earth's, somehow had to be grappled with and known at close quarters, like a mistress.
Then all the rest would follow: salvation, resurrection, heaven.
Vincent had grasped early on that his deep-seated, recurring fearfulness in the face of life was a condition he shared with many nineteenth-century artists.
His were not merely personal problems.
He rejected outright the idea that he was a special case.
The loss he felt at times with such anguish, personified by Eugenia, by his mother, by Kee, were the knife-thrusts of a severance from the world itself, from nature.
The Renaissance certainty had been exploded by Copernicus, Kant, the French Revolution.
How could a man join himself to God's creation again?
How did you get back?
It was a cruel madness, being so blindingly aware of  his plight and yet mired in it, chained down on a rock, powerless to live fully, in the full glory of the senses.
The painters and writers with whom he felt an affinity akin to brotherhood were all suffering, in their different ways, as he was.
He was convinced of it.
He read the signs everywhere, in their books and pictures, their sundered lives.
Something had broken down in them.
They had got lost in themselves.
Their modern subjectivity tormented them with a consciousness of what they had lost.
He saw the age into which he had been born as a civilisation in decline, and said so.
One did one's best in the face of it.
Why, then, does a contemplation of his life and work leave us feeling zestful rather than discouraged, as if we have been brushed by someone with an incorrigible belief in happiness?
The great Italian poet Leopardi had this to say: ‘Works of genius have this intrinsic property that even when they give a perfect likeness of the nullity of things, even when they clearly demonstrate and make us feel the inevitable unhappiness of life, even when they express the most terrible despair, nevertheless…they always serve as a consolation, rekindling enthusiasm, and though speaking of and portraying nothing but death, restore to it, at least for a while, the life that it had lost.’
But one kind of suffering seemed about to end for him.
He was no longer hopeless and defeated: he had a goal.
If he could find someone who had been through the mill as he had and then collaborate with them, great things were possible.
He had not yet abandoned the idea of finding a woman who would commit herself totally to him as a life partner.
The dream was still alive, and more desirable than ever.
He dreamed of a total sharing, body and soul.
To combine forces made supreme sense to him, and the more absurd the reality seemed, the more deeply he desired it.
A woman was a world apart, infinitely baffling and mysterious, even when degraded, even screeching in a foul rage.
Even falling apart she was amazingly all of a piece.
Fluctuating wildly, yet paradoxically consistent and real, as a man never was.
Attaching himself to Sien was like fastening himself to something that was eternal, that never changed, for all its mad fits and perversity.
He clung to her, at first out of pity, then self-pity, and finally from need.
As the voices of respectability rose in unison against him, he clung even tighter.
He set out his position with great deliberation and tenacity.
‘I know full well that, frankly speaking, prostitutes are bad, but I feel something human in them which prevents me from feeling the slightest scruple about associating with them….
If our society were pure and well regulated, yes, they would be seducers; but now, in my opinion, one may often consider them sisters of charity.’
He drove this argument home with a bitter flourish.
Wasn't it Jesus who said to the respectable citizens of His time, ‘The harlots go into the Kingdom of Heaven before you?’
Oh, he knew perfectly well that women like her could be bad news.
They didn't give a damn for what we call reason, they were liable to act wickedly at a moment's notice.
He knew all that.
In his eyes their saving grace was something he could only define as ‘that truly human feeling’.
Whatever that was, it made up for everything else.
He was brought in touch with reality, he was thawed out.
Vain they might be at times, dangerous, vicious even, when the devil was in them.
But for all that they had a certain passion.
There were peaceable, calm times.
The woman's debility softened her.
Sien responded like a weak child to Vincent's ministrations.
Sitting quietly with her in a kind of wordless communion, he felt blessed, fortunate to be in her company.
She made no objection to his strange ways, his obsessive working habits were his own business, and she found nothing repugnant in his looks, his soiled clothes.
What were they to her?
Nor was she at all put off or frightened by his intensity, when he flew into a temper if a drawing went badly.
He soon calmed down, then went across and fussed over her to make up for the rumpus, though it hadn't bothered her in the slightest.
She was only half alive, poor woman.
She sat in a chair with a shawl over her shoulders to keep off the draughts.
He taught her how to sit, arranged her arms.
When he asked anxiously if she minded, she said it was a fair exchange for all his kindness to her.
He was in a quiet heaven of his own making.
However, since he had an imagination, he had to use it.
Detaching himself from this passionate domesticity, he composed in his mind the kind of picture Rembrandt would have made of it.
Only recently he had seen a photograph of a Rembrandt, one he didn't know.
It was the head of a harlot.
The light fell on the woman's breast, neck, chin, and the tip of her nose, creating that gravity unique to him, which Vincent adored.
Rembrandt was for him ‘the magician of magicians’.
Sitting at peace with his ailing woman, tenderly responsive, he imagined his mouth curved in a mysterious smile ‘like that of Rembrandt himself in his self-portrait in which Saskia is sitting on his knee and he has a glass of wine in his hand.’
He also had a mind.
While Sien sat to him, a pathetic drooping invalid who wanted to please him, who actually asked him to tell her what would please him, he probed her, observed her, dissected her painlessly, as the masters of literature had done with women, subtly and beautifully revealing their characters.
He thought of a Zola, Daudet, de Goncourt, Balzac.
He had felt the truth of their analyses in the very marrow of his bones, yet he remained outside, forever outside.
It was during this interval that he drew several versions of a famous picture of the Hague period, entitled Sorrow .
It was a seminal work.
He worked at it obsessively, did versions in pencil and ink, had lithographs made of it, and sat the figure both indoors and out.
Each one is labelled clearly with the title in large letters in the bottom right-hand corner.
On one he inscribed Michelet's words: ‘How can it be that there is in the world one woman alone — deserted?’
He combined in it his two great themes of death and rebirth.
The figure is Sien, painfully stripped naked, her bony shanks drawn up as she squats on a sawn-off dead tree stump.
Her head is sunk on her arms, one wrinkled hand is visible, her black hair straggles down her knobbly back.
The swollen belly tells of her condition.
Her breasts hang like empty dugs, the opposite of fruitful.
In a letter, Vincent only said that he wanted to express ‘the struggle of life in that pale, slender woman's figure.’
She was drained of strength and ‘would die if she had to walk the streets again.’
The words are gentle, the lines of the drawing cruelly incisive.
When he drew he put aside all other considerations and reached for the truth.
The outdoor version shows the woman in the midst of spurting spring growth.
Behind her a young sapling is about to bloom.
Flowering plants grow near her feet.
She sees none of it.
The stump she sits on is as dead as she is blind.
Her spirit, wasted, lapses towards death.
Yet her belly, in spite of her defeat, goes on filling with new life.
Another picture, a pen and pencil drawing, is a more devastating exposure still.
Like the other, it is of Sien, this time sitting  in bed with arms folded, propping up her naked breasts.
It is of a remarkable ugliness.
One flinches, physically hurt by it.
The mouth is drawn down in bitter disgust, the eyes nearly closed, unseeing.
The scraggy neck and brutally squared and misshapen breasts put one in mind of an old woman, worked over by a lifetime of misfortune.
Again, like the other, it is inscribed with a title, the savagely ironic The Great Lady .
Is this facetiousness?
The woman is on show, held up to be coldly viewed.
She is accustomed to being despised.
She despises back.
Any moment now and she will spit on us, on life.
A J Lubin's belief that Vincent was out to mock or deride his mother (why not Kee?) by taking up with Sien, and by thus labelling his drawing, is of course pure supposition.
He did tell Theo that the sketch was suggested to him by a poem of Thomas Hood's relating the story of a conscience-stricken rich lady who has been to buy a dress and sees an emaciated, consumptive seamstress in a back room of the shop.
The great lady sits up in bed stark naked, with Sien's face and torso, and we have no way of knowing why.
The Roots , a drawing done at about the same time as Sorrow , was conceived quite deliberately as a companion piece, He paired them because he was trying to say the same thing in both.
‘I tried to put the same sentiment into that landscape as I put into the figure: the convulsive, passionate clinging to the earth, and yet being half torn up by the storm.’
The ‘black, gnarled, and knotty roots’ were in harmony with the woman's limbs.
The Hague school of artists was rife with theories about ‘pure’ art.
Vincent's work was found wanting — when it was noticed at all— by a sniffing, word-of-mouth criticism that condemned him as too literary.
He was a van Gogh, and his cousin an established painter, otherwise he would no doubt have been ignored altogether.
Vincent was irritated but not dismayed.
These were cant phrases so far as he was concerned and they missed the point.
He was not in the business of inventing metaphors or illustrating stories with moral cameos.
The parallels he noticed occurred naturally, like Henry Moore's found objects.
The roots torn up and bleeding on the ground and the woman smashed by life's storms were to him interchangeable images.
The same black thread ran through them both.
He picked up the thread and  followed it.
Sometimes the thread was misery, sometimes the black joy of an earth, blasted and left for dead, that went on labouring in darkness to renew itself.
Walking down a road outside The Hague his attention was caught by a dead willow trunk, ‘alone and melancholic’.
He went back home and returned later to make a watercolour of it.
Another time he passed a copse of exposed trees that had been battered by the prevailing wind for so long that the trees were permanently bent over.
‘Those trees were superb; there was drama in each figure I was going to say, but I mean in each tree….
Yes, for me, the drama of storm in nature, the drama of storm in life, is indeed the best.’
By its tests and challenges, a storm called up hidden powers of recuperation.
Soon the drawings of people with hunched shoulders, their heads bowed, would be filled with this drama.
He had his eye on a bigger apartment next door.
Though he didn't say so, he was looking for something more satisfactory for himself and Sien, and perhaps for an extended family if her mother and brother joined them later.
The place next door had a large attic that could be divided into two or three rooms — he knew where he could get the partitions for next to nothing.
His present place was shaky — a violent gale had just blown in the window panes and the frame was flapping loose.
His easel collapsed, his drawings were ripped from the wall.
Over the eight square feet of hole he had nailed a blanket.
He was denied proper light.
The landlord couldn't afford repairs.
‘He gave the glass, I paid for the labour.’
Again and again he was at pains to demonstrate to Theo that he didn't live idly on his brother's money.
He detailed his expenses, listed work accomplished and projects lined up.
Then suddenly Theo was assailed by a series of shocks, without warning and in swift succession.
Vincent had up to then only given vague hints about his relationship with Sien.
Now he confessed that he had in fact installed her.
Immediately after this he announced that he intended to marry her.
With this body-blow came a plea for understanding.
Nevertheless, he rushed on, if his plans caused Theo to withdraw his support, God forbid, would he please tell Vincent at once.
He begged for a letter by return.
Meanwhile, he gave Sien a reference so glowing that she sounded positively  angelic.
It would be wicked, mean of him to turn such a woman out.
The only way he could really help her, that is if he was genuine about it, was by doing it seriously.
Carried away by his own eloquence, he said blithely that his father would surely prefer him to be married.
A son who accepted his responsibilities and was only concerned to do good was an honourable son.
If he really thought this would be his father's reaction, he was cruelly deluding himself.
When his father did hear, he found his son's actions totally incomprehensible.
He would disgrace the family name and be destroyed into the bargain.
Theo the go-between was soon urgently warning Vincent that his parents believed he should have treatment and were in touch with the lunatic asylum at Geel near Antwerp.
Clearly Vincent was out of his mind, There had been plenty of signs: eccentric dress, abnormal behaviour, violent outbursts, irrational hostility.
Horrified by his latest intentions, they were perhaps genuinely considering a last-ditch attempt to save him from himself.
Or it may have been no more than a ruse to exert pressure and force him to reconsider.
Nothing further was heard of this move.
Vincent stood firm.
If they moved against him as if he were a common criminal, he would retaliate by standing up in court and defending himself.
He was a grown man, in full possession of his civil rights.
His attitude to Theo hardening daily, he said he knew very well that ‘whether Father and Mother take it quietly or not will three-fourths depend on what you tell them.’
Theo wavered, his loyalties hopelessly divided.
Vincent turned the screw, painting a heart-rending word-picture of himself and Sien as persecuted victims.
‘I ask nothing, not even an old cup and saucer.
I ask but one single thing: to let me love and care for my poor, weak, ill-used wife as poverty permits, without their trying to separate, worry, or hurt us.’
This emotional blackmail worked.
He even felt strong enough to issue a threat.
‘If you oppose me, then the trouble starts.’
In the face of such resolve the opposition finally collapsed, at any rate for the time being.
But Vincent never forgave his father, holding him personally responsible for this betrayal.
He could exhibit a saint-like submissiveness, become a mere servant of art, willing to learn from anyone; he would sit patiently  at the bedsides of the sick and dying, painting unhappy men and women and feeling awe before peasant earth-mothers, but he could never be coerced into doing anything against his will.
He was now more estranged from his family than ever.
Theo, too, was under suspicion.
In a mounting attack he castigated his conventional father as a Pharisee, one of the most ungodly men he had known, Let him come and visit them, he exhorted, and see for himself what the reality was.
‘She and I are two unhappy people who keep together and carry our burdens together; in this way unhappiness is changed to joy, and the unbearable becomes bearable.’
Scornful now of church sermons, he thought of them as black in comparison with the light emitted by pictures, and evoked the name of his preferred ‘father’, Millet.
‘Millet has a gospel, and I ask you, isn't there a difference between a drawing of his and a nice sermon?’
His transfer from religion to art was now complete.
Drawings and paintings took the place of his father's church.
Christ, however, remained exempt.
As the greatest of all artists, one who worked ‘in living flesh’, he still reigned supreme.
Niceness had become the number one enemy.
In a fury of revaluation he turned Sien into a ‘pure’ person.
‘It is wonderful how pure she is, notwithstanding her depravity.’
Something had been reclaimed, saved, changed from bad to good.
He no longer saw her as she was but as a Mary Magdalene, fit to mix with his sisters, with his mother, even, dare he say it, with Kee.
Whether or not she was saved, it was a fact that she had saved him from a bleak scepticism.
‘I think I shall become a better artist with her,’ he rationalised, ‘than if I had married Kee.’
Sorrowing women in Vincent's past were put into the category of mater dolorosas .
Eugenia had a dead father, Kee a dead husband, his mother a dead son to grieve over.
Eros and death, mingled romantically in his imagination, aided and abetted by Michelet, made these women potent without being overtly sexual.
But they had all, in his view, spurned him.
Sien enabled him to combine sorrow with sex and yet stay true to the ‘eternal poetry’ of Christ's story.
She was a fallen Magdalene and a lamenting dolorosa rolled into one.
Above all, she had been mistreated, a sad mother who opened her arms to him.
Another shocking piece of news greeted Theo in June, 1882.
A  letter came from Vincent bearing the address of the City Hospital (Ward 6, Number 9).
He had been admitted with a fever which had lasted for three weeks.
He was passing water painfully and he couldn't sleep.
Examined, he was told he had a ‘mild dose’ of clap, hardly surprising in the circumstances.
Theo was asked not to worry, and not to tell anyone unless forced.
The treatment so far had been innocuous: quinine pills and injections of alum water.
The fact was that he was enjoying the experience.
Being cared for in a hospital was like being a child again.
The nurses were paid substitutes, like Sien, for the provision of care that a mother was supposed to give naturally.
The sensible diet and strict routine also did him good, but the surrogate maternal love was best of all.
He was able to lie quietly and calmly without feeling guilt-ridden about his idleness.
Nor did he have to present himself as piteous in order to feed his everlasting hunger for sympathy.
Here, as an ill person, a patient, he had status.
Sien came in to see him on visiting days, and she was keeping an eye on the studio.
He hoped he would be able to reap the benefit of this enforced rest later, and see his drawings more freshly.
To help combat the boredom he had brought his books on perspective with him, and a novel, Dickens' Edwin Drood .
‘Good God, what an artist!
There's no one like him.’
Already his fingers were itching for a pencil, though he wasn't allowed to draw yet, and in any case he wasn't well enough.
As he was not destitute he was charged 10.50 guilders a fortnight, all in.
Food and treatment were the same for paying and free patients.
He found the ward as full of interesting types as in the third class waiting room at the station.
Weak and feeble though he was, he didn't omit a lucid description of the view from the window of the ward.
It was splendid.
He could see part of the canal, part of a garden, barges loaded with potatoes, a rear view of houses being pulled down by workmen, and in the distance rows of trees and street lamps, a complicated little almshouse with its gardens, and finally a grand expanse of roofs.
In the evening and at dawn the whole bird's eye view was bathed in a mysterious light, ‘like a Ruysdael or Van der Meer.’
Although he was forbidden to get out of bed he sneaked over every evening and peeped out, unable to resist looking.
Still receiving treatment, he heard that Sien had gone into the  hospital for poor patients at Leyden to have her baby.
Overcome with pity for her, he exclaimed, ‘What are the sufferings of us men compared to that terrible pain which women have to bear during childbirth?’
It is startling to read that his father paid him a visit in hospital, though presumably without knowing his son was being treated for  gonorrhoea .
Longing to see something green and to inhale fresh air, Vincent asked the doctor how much longer he would have to wait to be discharged.
A prolonged stay of several weeks was advised.
The news depressed him.
The whole business of lying there inactive was, like his father's visit, now as unreal as a dream.
The doctor, however, acted in ways he found wholly admirable, and he thought that when he did get out he would apply his methods of handling patients — getting hold of them firmly and putting them into the right positions — to the positioning of his models.
And what patience the man had, massaging his patients himself and rubbing them with liniment.
He admired him as he admired all carers.
He had a head ‘like some heads by Rembrandt, a splendid forehead and a very sympathetic expression.’
When it came to his own treatment by this doctor, he was surprised to find him more abrupt than gentle.
He often inserted the catheter into his bladder with force, causing pain.
The details he gives of contemporary medical practice are explicit.
Bougies were inserted into the urethra, and these got bigger and bigger, inflicting great pain and considerable nausea.
Yet his comments were curiously approving.
Either he wanted to suffer, or he liked the idea of being treated less fussily than in the more expensive wards.
On July 1st he was writing to say that he was back at the studio, and how delightful it was to be free of catheters, bougies, and syringes.
On the way from the hospital, everything he saw in the streets was inexpressively beautiful, the light clearer than he remembered, ‘the spaces more infinite’.
He was describing the kind of everyday ecstasy with which his paintings would one day be imbued.
What he had gone through couldn't be compared, he repeated, with Sien's ‘grande misère’.
He mentions his father's visit again, when they were to some extent reconciled, with Sien sitting  unrevealed in the waiting room.
She saw Vincent's father as he went upstairs to confront his son.
Sien was admitted for her confinement while he was still in hospital himself.
Her general condition was so weak that he had arranged for the doctors to take special care of her, financially assisted as usual by Theo.
Still not completely recovered, he got busy preparing for her return, The apartment next door was still being renovated.
When Sien came home they would take it.
A large upper floor in their poor district only cost three guilders a week.
Sien's baby was safely delivered with forceps.
Sien was in an exhausted doze when he went in with her small daughter and her mother.
His description overflows with quiet joy.
‘Theo, I was so happy when I saw her again.
She was lying near a window overlooking a garden full of sunshine and green.
Oh boy, she looked up and was so happy to see us.
And she brightened up so much, and in a moment was wide awake, and asked about everything.’
A few days after the birth she fell into a post-natal depression.
He was bewildered by a miserable, incoherent note from her, questioning everything.
He no longer cared about her, and would soon replace her with someone else, that is if he hadn't done so already.
The poor woman had given way to a black mood and been swamped by her ugly past, he explained.
When they were reunited, he and she and the baby, he would cherish her as never before.
Home again, and alone, he rhapsodised over the scene he had witnessed.
Just to look at the cradle he had ready and waiting with its green cover there in the living room transported him, ‘though it was only a hospital where she was lying and where I sat near her.’
In his imagination, though, it was a stable.
Sien, the hard-bitten prostitute with the foul mouth, had become his star in the dark night, like the Virgin Mary with her newborn child.
He tried to convey the power of the emotion which gripped a man at such a moment.
Over the crib, in readiness for her homecoming, he had tacked up his most treasured prints.
In pride of place was one of Rembrandt's great representations of the Holy Family, the two women by the cradle, one of whom reads a Holy book by the frail light of a candle.
He moved in to the new, roomier accommodation.
Sien's  mother had helped him sweep up the plaster littering the place.
He scrubbed the floor, put white muslin curtains at the windows.
Everything was spotless.
He touched lovingly on all the details, the white deal working table, studies on the wall, in one corner a closet with their bottles and pots, and his books.
Then there was the partitioned living area with a few kitchen chairs, an oilstove, a larger wicker easy chair for ‘the woman’ in the corner, near the window that overlooked the wharf and the meadows.
He urged Theo to come and look for himself.
The tone could not be more seductive; he could coo like a dove if it helped to get what he wanted.
Right now, if he had his brother standing beside him, his happiness would be complete.
As it was, he had been lifted out of the void in which he had barely existed, on to a plane that was real — he underlined it triumphantly.
He had a new studio, a real home was about to swing into life, and, most wonderful of all, he had a studio with a cradle and a baby's pot in it.
He reiterated, with immense care and deliberation, why it was that Sien had come to mean so much to him.
It was of paramount importance for Theo to understand that the feeling between Sien and him was real : ‘it is no dream, it is reality.’
True, what he had felt for Kee was at the time a stronger passion, and so far as charm went they couldn't be compared.
That didn't make his love for Sien any less true.
Still the reality he so urgently wanted to communicate seemed to escape him, as if he was distracted by a voice whispering in his ear of what might have been, if only Kee had said yes.
His efforts to get it right, to tell the truth, are both painful and deeply moving.
He was grappling to define love itself, in so far as he had experienced it and now understood it.
The romantic agony that had bewitched him was a million miles from the conjugal love he was now determined to celebrate.
What he had felt for Kee had left ‘a large deep wound which is healed but is still sensitive.’
Meeting Sien for the first time and getting to know her was like knowing ‘a fellow creature as lonesome and unhappy as myself’, no more and no less.
By helping her he was able to help himself.
So how had this mutual aid, if that was all it was, slowly changed, so that their lives became interdependent, until one day it was love?
All he could say was that it had to be called a great  and profound change, and that it had happened, ‘I have a feeling of being at home when I am with her, as though she gives me my own hearth, a feeling that our lives are interwoven.’
It was heartfelt and deep, but Theo should not run off with the idea that it was all laughter and light and the cooing of turtle doves.
A shadow fell on them from time to time, from his own past as well as from hers, and it seemed then that they were threatened by some evil which could blot out their joy at a moment's notice.
In short, life could never be rosy for them.
Her health was still uncertain.
She experienced a lot of pain and perhaps always would; her privations may have damaged her health permanently.
Her youth was over, and God knows it had been bitter and barren enough.
Again one has the feeling that he speaks of himself when he speaks of her.
The biggest threat, he predicted, was the presence of that ‘gloomy shadow master: master Albrecht Dürer knew it well enough when he placed Death behind the young couple in that beautiful etching.’
But enough of that: what he felt now was calm and brightness and an inexpressible gratitude.
Up in the large attic was a large bed for them, with the bedding neatly arranged.
The little girl would have his old one.
If he happened to be out when Sien came home, the flowers in front of the window by the wicker chair would let her know he had thought of her.
To save money he had stuffed the mattresses himself; bought straw, seaweed, bed-ticking.
The love nest he had conjured out of so little would make up for all her pain.
He thought back to how it had been for him last winter.
What was the reality then?
‘Two great voids stared at me night and day.
There was no wife, there was no child.’
He put a direct question to Theo: did he ever experience moments when a groan or a sigh would be forced from him?
Was living alone worth while?
Wasn't it damaging for men like them, who ‘often find it painful and difficult to mingle with people, to speak with them?’
It was marvellous how well Sien coped with his peculiarities of temper, as he called them.
She had the knack of handling him if he got worked up about the posing, she knew how to quieten him down, and this ability to put up with his disagreeable side could only mean one thing, he reasoned.
She understood him better than anyone else.
VINCENT AGED THIRTEEN.
ANNA CORNELIA van GOGH (VINCENT'S MOTHER).
THEODOROUS van GOGH (VINCENT'S FATHER).
VINCENT AGED ABOUT EIGHTEEN.
THEO van GOGH.
KEE VOS-STRICKER.
PORTRAIT OF van GOGH BY JOHN P. RUSSELL.
JO van GOGH-BONGER WITH THE BABY VINCENT.
And he returned again to the article which symbolised so much, on which he had begun to pin all his hopes.
‘Do you think Father would remain indifferent and make objections — near a cradle?
You see, a cradle is not like anything else — there is no fooling with it…’.
In the hospital, sitting up for the first time in several days, he had watched the doctor anointing an old man who would have made a superb St Jerome: ‘a thin, long, sinewy brown wrinkled body with such very distinct and expressive joints that it makes one melancholy not to be able to have him for a model.’
He thought of the old man, and he thought of Sien.
His clean new home was about him like a blessing.
The weakness still lived in his body but his urge to draw was reviving, he could feel it.
Sien would come, the infant quivering in her arms.
He would draw them both.
Already he was inspired by the thought of their fusion.
A profane woman, on whom he had committed profane acts; yet he could not help but see her with the child at her breast as holy.
What was profane and what was sacred?
Yes, that was how he would draw them: soldered together by a mother's love.
This he would find touching beyond anything: Sien brought to rest, at peace in a thrilling silence.
How could anyone repudiate her?
When he received the despairing note from Sien he hurried in to see her.
The change in her was shocking.
She looked as if she had withered from within, and she was obviously disturbed.
The baby, born with jaundice, had an eye infection.
It was like a blind kitten.
He decided to try to shake Sien out of her black mood by acting angrily, responding abnormally to what he saw as abnormality.
She responded, he claimed afterwards, by emerging from her depression like a sleepwalker.
He went again a week later to take her home, and sat in the hospital waiting room for her, full of trepidation.
She came down with the baby in her arms, took one look at Vincent, and burst into tears.
The crisis was over.
He gazed again at the madonna he had sat beside when her child was just born.
The baby looked at him brightly out of clear, wide-open eyes, as healthy as a young rabbit.
The family spent their first night in the large attic, in the bedroom that was completely timbered, reminding him of the  hold of a ship.
It wasn't strange, but perfectly natural to be in Sien's company, her and the children.
She was still mortally weak, so he did everything, made the beds and cooked and cleaned.
He had done the same for old and sick people when he lived in the Borinage, so it was nothing new.
All in all, he was in his element.
He had to watch her carefully, he said, and if she felt like pottering around, that was good medicine, Anything was that encouraged her to be cheerful.
His protective instincts thoroughly aroused, he changed roles.
Almost as good as being cared for, naturally and freely, was to care for someone else and imagine yourself the recipient.
The baby was now his delight.
He soon set to work making drawings of the tiny fellow, and of the cradle.
Albert Lubin remarks perceptively that the presence of babies ‘relieved his sadness, and numerous drawings and paintings of babies attest to his fascination with recreating them.’
He depicted them with their mothers or alone, being held or rocked, or lying in cradles.
He even painted their absences, painting empty cradles, or the mother attached to an unseen cradle by a cord which she is pulling, as he did when he painted Madame Roulin's portrait at Arles.
Drawings done while at The Hague show infancy and old age in close proximity, sometimes hand in hand — the simplest, most natural representation of his death-and-rebirth theme.
Old Man with a Child has a little girl facing a seated old man who holds her hands, and in Old Man Holding an Infant the tiny baby is being cradled by a bald old man with bushy white side-whiskers.
Life is about to wriggle out of the arms of death itself.
The presence of a baby calmed his nerves and soothed his spirit, like drawing and painting.
He thought one of the best places for meditation was ‘by a rustic hearth and an old cradle with a baby in it, by a window overlooking a delicate green cornfield and the waving of alder bushes.’
Later he would say that fields of young wheat and orchards in bloom were delicate as babies.
Young wheat especially, so pure and tender, woke in him the same emotion that he had when observing the face of a sleeping baby.
If a gloomy mood descended on him, he could shake it off by taking a long walk in the direction of the most barren stretch of beach, out over the dunes.
Looking at the greyish-green sea streaked with white waves was a good antidote, as indeed the grand and infinite was always.
But there was no need now to go  further than the baby in its cradle.
‘I think I see something deeper, more infinite, more eternal than the ocean in the expression in the eyes of a little baby when it wakes in the morning, and coos and laughs because it sees the sun shining in its cradle.’
The child, registered Willem, was already a miracle of vitality.
The little girl too was much improved, no longer neglected, looking very pretty in the new shoes he had bought for her.
Patiently occupied with his household tasks and with his sketching of Willem, it amused him to notice that ‘already he seems to oppose himself to all social institutions and conventions.’
That must be healthy.
The infant spat out its porridge, and even without teeth enjoyed chewing on a piece of bread.
The noises he came out with were amazing, laughing and cooing and gurgling, but he shut his mouth ‘absolutely’ against porridge.
Vincent liked to have him sitting drowsily on the floor of his studio on a few sacks while he worked.
He crowed suddenly up at the drawings tacked on the wall, then at other times was perfectly quiet and lovely, just looking at things, motes of light, bits of fluff, a pencil.
He smiled broadly, clapped his tiny hands.
‘Oh, he is such a sociable little fellow!’
An unexpected caller from the world outside rudely overturned this domestic contentment.
It was Mr Tersteeg, never more detestable than in Vincent's account of the visit to Theo.
Supercilious and bullying, he ignored Sien completely and told Vincent what an idiot he was making of himself.
He would take steps to put a stop to it: write to his father, to Uncle Cent at Princenhage.
Vincent barely managed to keep his temper in check in the blast of this ‘raw north wind’ that had come howling in through the front door.
Afterwards, he was badly upset.
He was most hurt and angered by Tersteeg's policeman-like dismissal of Sien as ‘that woman and child,’ and he worried that the scene might have affected her milk.
He was strong enough now to attribute the man's parting shot about his drawings to sheer malice.
Then he came to some characteristic conclusions.
If he was a nonentity, one of the lowest of the low, then he wanted his work to reveal what it was like to be such an unfortunate.
That was his ambition.
There was a calm harmony and a music inside him, underneath the misery.
He intended to demonstrate that the two could coexist, and that from their coexistence could flow something unique and beautiful.
‘I see drawings and  pictures in the poorest huts, in the darkest comer.
And my mind is drawn to these things by an irresistible force.’
It was a clear statement of his credo.
When was Theo coming to stay with them?
He longed to see him again, to talk about a thousand things.
It was no use expecting Sien to be able to understand books or art, but then their attachment was based on something else, on reality, of which books and art were only a part.
If she had happened to be a woman out of touch with real life, that would have bored him.
He looked for art in reality, and that was how he came to be with her.
Did Theo remember that mill on the road out of The Hague where they had once sat and pledged eternal friendship so passionately, over their glasses of milk?
He had passed by the very spot only the other day, and it had brought tears to his eyes.
Then one day in August he made his momentous announcement: ‘I have launched my boat .’
He loved these allusions to river craft and the water, once describing himself approvingly as looking like a rough bargeman.
He thought of his studio as a barge interior.
He means the boat of his creativity.
He had launched himself into painting at last, into colour, and more specifically into painting with oils.
Now he was a real painter with a real painter's studio.
He thought oils would suit him.
The medium had a robust quality.
With it he could express the body, the mass and density of things.
Rehabilitated by the partnership with Sien, refreshed by the gleams of baby life, confirmed by Theo's continuing supply of materials and basic finance, and by his unflagging moral support, he was ready to move in closer, as if to feel on his skin the buried heat of creation and experience its terrific energies.
He was aware of dangers, but compelled by the promise of unimaginable rewards.
His approach can be compared to that of a saint who risks everything when he bares his breast to the unknown.
Though he began each day as before, in fear and trembling, he had found the courage to follow his own path.
Casting around for precedents for the next move forward, he seized on Michelet's improvisatory style, which he said put him in mind of the rough sketches of a painter.
‘Michelet has strong emotions, and he smears what he feels on to paper without caring in the least how he does it, and without giving the slightest thought to technique or conventional forms — just shaping it into  any form that can be understood by those who want to understand it.’
There was the rub.
Who did want to understand it?
But examples of this kind were pointing him in the direction he wanted to go.
As was so often the case, he sucked up nourishment from books he happened to be reading, finding parallels in the lives of characters to his own dilemmas and solutions.
Pascal Rougon, in the series of novels by Zola, he thought a noble figure.
‘In his profession he found a force stronger than the temperament he had inherited from his family; instead of surrendering to his natural instincts he followed a clear, straight path, and did not slide into the wretched muddle in which all the other Rougons perished.’
Zola's Le Ventre de Paris was one source of inspiration, and the theme of the fallen woman, which he kept coming across everywhere, another.
Sien was causing him a great deal of worry as the year wore on.
She had begun to show signs of regression.
He blamed her family, her appalling early life, anything but her.
One of the finest drawings of this period shows only too clearly what he was up against.
Sien with a Cigar, sitting on the Ground by the Stove , executed in mixed media, was as close to a painting as he could come without the use of colour: pencil, black chalk, pen, and brush with sepia and white applied over a wash.
The hunched figure is such a picture of hopelessness that the heart sinks.
One of the cheap cigars to which she was addicted burns ignored between her fingers, the skin of her face dragging down with indifference.
Her big beaky nose gives her a masculine look.
The picture was done before the birth of Willem.
Now she was sunk back in the same state, or perilously near to it.
She smoked and drank, neglected the children, left the clothes unmended.
Always seeking excuses for her, refusing to see her as bad —.
‘she has never seen what is good, how can she be good?’— Vincent quoted from Zola's L'Assommoir to back up his contention; or perhaps he had read it there in the first place and appropriated it.
Zola had written: ‘Yet these women are not bad, their errors and their disgrace are caused by the impossibility of living a straight life in the midst of the gossip and calumny of the Faubourgs.’
He knew all about gossip and calumny, having tried for months  to cope with the shifty Hoornik family.
Behind his back they were doing their utmost, he suspected, to turn Sien against him.
As well as the nastiness being endlessly stirred up by her mother, who whispered lies about him, saying he only wanted Sien for the posing and would drop her back in the gutter when he was done, there was Sien's wretched pimp of a brother to contend with.
He had put his wife on the streets, then divorced her.
The scheme the mother and this brother were plotting entailed Sien somehow, and though he couldn't make head nor tail of it he feared the worst.
If Sien went back with them, she would be driven back to her old life in no time.
Why couldn't she see that?
There were moments of anguish, which tore him apart and made him sob along with her.
He could scarcely bear it when she cried out, ‘I don't know what's wrong with me!’ like someone utterly lost.
She was not alone, not lost, she had him, he told her, and implored her to persevere.
He even castigated himself for not being a better example, more patient, gentler.
Her slovenliness was a state of mind, the exteriorisation of her despair, and he saw all her faults as having the same root: bad company, bad education, bad conditions.
He was also learning the hard way what it was like to live with the ‘changeability of women’.
‘They vary, Theo, they vary like the weather.’
There was no point in trying to understand the weather: one had to submit to it.
After all, there was something to be admired, something good and beautiful in every kind of weather.
Thus he persuaded himself when writing to Theo, but not when he was face to face with a spitting hell-cat who abused him vilely, telling him to stop messing about with his stupid painting, scraping and altering it until her nerves were in shreds.
He should get out and earn some decent money.
Her mother was right, he was just using her, and one day he would be off.
He was like all men, a liar and a cheat.
An hour later she would ask to be forgiven.
Her changes of mood were so bewildering that he had no idea what she was, angel or devil.
Unnerved and saddened by her bouts of instability, he tried to keep going, spending as much time as possible out of doors and away from her.
In the winter he was driven back in again.
What had gone wrong?
How different things had been last spring, for all their difficulties.
She had clung to him then, inordinately grateful for his food and shelter, and for the shelter of his body, which was stronger, more resolute than hers.
They had been on the right road, he was certain of it.
Now, having regained a little strength of her own, she seemed cruelly intent on conquering him.
A woman wants a man to be strong, and then some perversity in her enjoys seeing him brought to his knees — was that it?
Certainly she seemed inclined to despise him for giving way to her.
All the scenes she made out of nothing were part of another, more insidious pleasure she was experiencing: she wanted to see how much punishment he would take, how long he would go on bowing his head.
But how could he help himself, when self-abasement was his deepest instinct at such moments?
‘Don't you also think that if one meets someone in such a way — I mean, so weak and defenceless — something makes one surrender completely, so that one cannot imagine ever being able to desert such a person?’
That was how he was.
Something at the core of him gave in to her.
The situation was Dostoevskian.
Nerves were shrieking.
He had taken up a woman's role, and in the most feminine way taken up the nursing of Sien when his own mental and physical health were at a low ebb.
This forgiveness of her and of everyone had called up its opposite.
His total surrender had only earned her derision.
His pity, to him the most selfless kind of love, had produced hatred.
There is a type of woman who can forgive the man who hurts her, but not the sacrifices he makes for her.
Vincent, the Eternal Husband, dreaming his wife.
He wondered, in his confusion, whether an encounter such as theirs was really some sort of apparition, not real at all.
She was a phantom, a shadow of what he had longed for.
He hung on to his memories, walking alone on the Geest, past the streets and houses and dark alleys where he had walked with her that winter.
When he came in he said to Sien, ‘It is still the same as last year.’
We don't hear the response.
The best of her was preserved in his memory, ‘the sea remains the sea’, but that was no help to him now.
She had joined forces with her shiftless family: they were ranged against him, and there was nothing he could do.
What was so horrible was the feeling of enmity, both inside and out.
He could accept rejection, but to be actively disliked was to him a kind of living death.
‘One is afraid of making friends, one is afraid of moving; like the old lepers, one would like to call  from afar to the people: ‘Don't come too near me, for intercourse with me brings you sorrow and loss.’’
His work faltered.
Ugly tricks were played on him, set in motion by the mother.
Sien confided in him for once, and the scheme to start another quarrel backfired.
He took heart again, but not for long.
Disgusted with everything, he tramped out beyond the town, near to where the public ash dump was situated, and soon found a scene accurately reflecting his inner state.
‘I stood there a long time, looking at a row of the most twisted, gnarled, sorry-looking pollard willows I have ever seen.
They bordered a path of vegetable garden — freshly dug up —.
and they were mirrored in a dirty little ditch — very dirty — but in which some blades of spring grass were already sparkling.’
The signs of rebirth, small enough to be overlooked, sprang up in the dirt for those who had eyes to see.
His hope was hardly sparkling, but neither was it extinguished.
Theo came on a visit, alarmed by the growing despondence of his brother's letters.
Cautious and practical, he took one look at the situation and advised Vincent to get out at once, while he still had a shirt on his back.
Vincent agreed, too low-spirited to put up any resistance.
He had had enough; the cause was a lost one.
Time to move on.
Though he was not yet prepared to admit it, he had tried and failed to enter the realm of marriage.
Theo distracted him from this gloomy conclusion by springing a surprise on him.
He too had met a woman, in trouble as Sien had been, but educated, fine.
She was ready to kill herself.
She needed an operation on her foot, and he was taking care of that.
And he had found her somewhere to live.
No, he wasn't proposing to live with her.
He called her his patient.
Completely forgetting his own mess, Vincent congratulated his brother.
Well done!
Wonderful!
Theo answered dryly to the effect that it was not so wonderful for his finances.
But Vincent was more touched by the news than he could say.
Had he been an influence?
Was he to blame?
Didn't this bring them closer together, two brothers who were rescuers?
We were together as two fools were together, Theo told him bluntly: a couple of foolish idealists.
Vincent couldn't agree.
No, such actions were wholly good, he maintained, whatever the consequences.
It brought one in touch with the infinite.
After Theo had gone, Vincent waited for the right moment to break his own news to Sien.
He would have to move out.
The country was beckoning again, and his friend van Rappard had been telling him about Drenthe, a remote moorland region in the north of Holland which was starting to attract artists.
For instance, it was rumoured that the German painter Liebermann had gone there to paint.
The possibility that a colony of artists might form there revived his old dream of a brotherhood of kindred spirits.
None of this meant a thing to Sien.
He showed her a map he had bought.
He tried, perhaps not too hard, to persuade her to come with him.
The last thing she wanted, she said, was to live with him in some godforsaken bog, cut off from relatives and shops.
He pressed her to agree that it was finished between them, but she merely shrugged.
It drove him mad when she turned herself into a sphinx as a ruse to avoid facing the truth.
But at least she made no objection.
He felt that he had to move, before the stagnation killed him.
He would have applauded the wisdom of Jung's ‘Let things happen.’
Still reluctant to abandon her, he placed advertisements in the local paper in an effort to find her a job.
It came to nothing.
She pretended to keep appointments and went to the wine shop instead.
Another trick of the mother's, now he was about to leave, was to delay his departure by various requests.
Their source of money was about to disappear over the horizon.
He promised to keep in touch, to send monthly payments if he possibly could.
Even this failed to penetrate Sien's listlessness.
He feared for her, for ‘my little boy’, and for the girl too.
Sien had taken to staring into the abyss with the kind of inherent fatality he dreaded in himself.
They came to the station to see him off.
The little girl sat on his lap a moment, till the whistle blew.
A few days later, from the bleak room of a grimy hotel, the rain pouring down outside the window, he surveyed his surroundings and wrote forlornly: ‘Theo, I never suspected her, nor do I now, nor shall I ever suspect her of having had financial motives, more than is honest and just.
People exaggerated….
Oh, when she came with the baby and the young girl to see me off at the station, I was unable to speak.
The train came in and I got on.
She stood there with  the baby at her breast, holding the girl by the hand.
For all that has happened, I couldn't stop watching for her figure as my train pulled out into the bright sunlight and the rails took me…’.
‘And Theo,’ he confided, ‘when I pass on the heath here such a woman with a child on her arm, it pierces me right through, the melancholy, and my eyes get moist.’
But it was over.
He had known the reality of a home of sorts, with a cradle and a baby in it.
From now on he would be on the outside of such domesticity, looking in.
He was a man of thirty.
Staring into the mirror he saw a man gazing back at him ‘with wrinkles on my forehead and lines on my face as if I were forty.’
He repeatedly complained of being old beyond his years, and yet behind his words one senses at times an element of satisfaction.
His youth had been a misery to him.
And old people, like gnarled old trees, attracted him.
The nearness of death always did.
ART OF DARKNESS
He took the train to Hoogeveen on Tuesday, 11 September, 1883.
Probably he was already dressed for the part in a brown peat-carrier's suit: he had been anticipating the trip for at least a month.
On the train he studied a map of Drenthe — not that there was much to see.
He was heading for a desolate inland area in the north-east, a region without large cities and with few towns, a flat endless landscape of black earth, dotted with primitive cottages made of sods of turf and sticks.
Inside, these dwellings were dark like caves.
In the centre of his map was a large area, crossed by the Hoogeveen canal and empty of villages, labelled with the words ‘Peat fields’.
The canal petered out in the middle of it.
Only painters would find this featureless landscape interesting, but if Max Liebermann and Mauve — to name only two — had found it worthwhile, then he wanted to see it.
He had stumbled on a reference to it in an English journal — a painter had once disappeared into the peat fields to escape civilisation.
Tales like this inspired him to go and explore for himself; and apart from them he had another reason.
Peasants, and only peasants, lived in Drenthe.
He wanted to make a record of their hard life.
He believed that reality was best approached through work or its cessation, whether in the shape of miners in the Borinage, labourers digging streets in The Hague, the poor waiting submissively in long lines in soup kitchens, or old men in broken top hats walking through the gates of almshouses.
Here it would be the peasants.
It was here that he first conceived  the idea of being a peasant painter.
Only the country, he believed, could solve his problems.
Here he would be forced to work as hard as the people among whom he lived.
Their example would shame him.
Best of all, his work would take on a new virility once he rooted himself in the earth and responded to what he called its ‘music’, experiencing its moods as ‘symphonic, dramatic’.
A countryman by upbringing, he was always deeply uneasy in towns and cities.
His simple habits were questioned, his clothes out of place.
While in The Hague and anticipating Theo's visit, he had written humourously that he would have to change his Robinson Crusoe-like outfit when his brother arrived from Paris and they walked out together.
As soon as he reached Hoogeveen the weather deteriorated, and so did his spirits.
He wandered around in a state of utter dejection, belonging nowhere.
What did this place with its low houses and deserted air have to do with him?
It was like being at the edge of the world.
The vast heath stretched away like a sea, beyond this one wide street.
It was unbearably lonely.
Now he had no one to go to with his artistic problems, no hearth to sit at.
Canals were everywhere, criss-crossing each other, more than he had ever seen.
He would be out tramping aimlessly and come upon peat barges drawn by men, women, and children, and sometimes black and white horses.
He was reminded of the Brabant, only this was wilder: it was immense.
The heath shrank figures to mere dots.
Sheepfolds were curious triangular structures, the shepherds impressive.
Desolation could have its own beauty.
The sun broke through, it stopped raining at last.
Then the heath became menacing, like a hostile desert.
‘Painting in that blazing light and rendering the planes vanishing into infinity makes one dizzy.’
One day he wandered into a cemetery, no more than a patch of heath bounded by a hedge of conifers.
The turpentine smell had ‘something mystical about it’.
It was one of the weirdest graveyards he had seen — and he was something of a connoisseur.
The graves had to be searched for in what looked like a clearing in a pine wood, they were so thickly overgrown with grass and heather.
Then he found the white posts marking each one, and could read some of the names.
A few months later he would discover an abandoned graveyard in Nuenen, where his father now had a living, and paint a picture called Peasant Cemetery .
In  Drenthe, feeling more than ever the despised outcast, he found consolation in a human resting place.
At least everyone was equal in a cemetery.
After painting the peculiar burial place in Nuenen, he felt so moved that he had to express his intentions in words.
‘I wanted to express what a simple thing death and burial is, just as simple as the falling of a leaf -just a bit of earth dug up — a wooden cross….
And now those ruins tell me…how the life and the death of the peasants also remain forever the same, budding and withering regularly, like the grass and the flowers growing there in the graveyard.’
Hoogeveen was a nondescript, cheerless place, and so was his room, with only a dirty skylight over his head for a window.
He felt wretched, in fact at times so miserable that he wanted to laugh out loud.
It was depressing to think of Sien and the children he had left to fend for themselves, depressing too to remember that Theo was having to bear the brunt of his trouble as always.
‘Through one single glass pane the light falls on an empty colour box, and on a bundle of worn-out brushes…’
In short, he was on the point of hysteria, not knowing whether to laugh or cry,
He turned in sheer desperation to his parents and wrote them a letter, prompted by the news of the death of a cousin.
Disguising his real feelings he wrote cheerfully, telling them that it was better here than The Hague, as if to say that nothing could be worse than the hell of being unloved.
That kind of emptiness he associated with cities.
City life was only too often a degradation, he thought.
A simple farmer who worked intelligently was the truly civilised man, not the city dweller.
‘Though they may cheat each other, it is not so bad as in the city.’
He told them not to concern themselves about him; his overcoat was all right, and the woollen undervest they had sent was comfortable, thank you.
They were no doubt relieved, as Theo definitely was, that he had escaped from the clutches of ‘that woman’.
And there was nothing in his present circumstances likely to ensnare him in sensuality.
On the contrary, the women were beasts of burdens, strikingly sombre.
‘A woman's breast, for instance, has that heaving movement which is quite the opposite of voluptuous.’
The men wore leggings which revealed the shape of the calf and made their movements expressive — a distinct gain for an artist out to capture action.
Feeling himself very much at a crossroads, he delivered himself of some reflections on the modern times they  were living through.
Society was increasingly corrupt, he declared, and values had been turned upside down.
One had to return to grass roots.
He had certainly done that.
While he was out painting a cottage, two sheep and a goat ambled up over the roof and grazed on its turf.
The goat went on climbing and nibbling, until it was peering down the chimney.
When he came to employ the locals as models he hit bad luck.
They just laughed at him.
If they did consent, and accepted the money — it was good pay for this area — they wandered off before he had half finished, not wanting to be classed as figures of fun like him.
He was driven to drawing them inside barns, where the light was too poor for painting.
Unable to stop worrying about the fate of his dependents in The Hague, he decided to go on a trip down the canal on a peat barge; anything to distract himself.
He left just after noon and reached New Amsterdam at six.
The snail's pace of the boat made it seem like an endless expedition into the interior.
They passed other barges carrying heaps of peat, or bullrushes from the marshes.
He was occupied with sketching whatever came into view; a mother with a baby that was draped in a purple shawl, lean cows of a delicate brown, meagre birches, scourged oaks, poplars.
The barge tied up at a quay.
Overlooking the quay was a small hotel, the Scholte.
Vincent went to enquire about a room.
Hendrik Scholte eyed the stranger suspiciously — hotel-keepers invariably did — and was on the point of showing Vincent the door when his wife intervened.
Scholte changed his tune when he heard that his customer was the son of a clergyman in Nuenen.
The room was a big improvement on the rat-hole he had crawled into at Hoogeveen.
It was fairly large, with a stove — even a small balcony, from which he could see the heath, huts, and in the distance one of the lifting bridges typical of the region.
The Scholtes had three small daughters.
One of them, Zowina, later remembered her fright when she encountered the strange red-haired man with the square forehead prowling along a dark passage at night.
They liked him well enough, however, when they knew him better.
He was quite harmless, and he had time for them.
The youngest girl, only two, had her portrait painted by him.
Better than that was riding on his back while he went down on hands and knees and neighed like a horse.
The mother  had to hold the child steady.
He played trains with the older ones, sitting them inside upturned chairs and positioning himself in front, using a broom handle for the wheels' connecting rod.
The child passengers gripped the broom while their arms pumped round in a rhythm, as their imaginary train gathered speed and went racing over the land.
As he walked further into the heart of the country, disappointed to find no painters with whom he could converse, he was struck by a desolation that matched his own worst moods.
It was as poor here as anything he had experienced in the Borinage.
Time had passed by this isolated district, with its peat bogs, and rain, its crudely thatched huts, the roofs nearly touching the ground, as dismal inside as stables — though sometimes the gloom would seem almost beautiful — and shared by people and beasts alike.
It was dreary beyond belief, and at first it had the effect of offsetting his own emotional night.
Black-and-white art was still essential to him, as his inner war went on being fought, when it came to dramatising the reclamation of light from darkness.
Diggers helped, so did graveyards with flowers, and a dark picture from Drenthe,Landscape with Bog Trunks , was another instalment in the story of his desired rebirth.
He had discovered some decayed oak roots, locally called bog trunks, lying in a pool of black mud.
They had been buried in the bog for perhaps a century, until unearthed by the peat diggers.
Here was another burial ground, laid open under the light for resurrection.
To signal the victory ‘a little white path ran past it all’.
The rainy weather came back.
His temporarily revived spirits darkened again with the days.
Autumn in Drenthe was often wet.
When it poured down incessantly he saw only too clearly how he had got stuck, was at an impasse, handicapped as he was in so many respects.
He was badly hampered and discouraged by the lack of a studio.
Without one, how could he bring in models? 1 hey objected to posing for him out of doors.
He thought wistfully of the studio he had created for himself so laboriously in The Hague, only to abandon it.
Now he wished he had waited a year and a half and done the same thing here.
He would have fitted up this room, only he couldn't afford it.
He had left some of his belongings behind, which would mean a return journey to  go and collect them.
To tell the truth, he was too low for that.
He lacked the will.
Going back there would be walking straight into a trap.
Irresolution made him turn and turn, like a beast sunk in a bog.
The atmosphere of this immensely still, stranded landscape, empty and waiting like an Eden, was beginning to affect him, in spite of all his doubts.
Its dreariness was illusory.
One was overwhelmed by its huge peace, opening to him little by little like the rose of peace in his own breast.
He had found his kingdom, and though it filled him with Adamistic yearning, he was somehow powerless to enter and possess it, Why was this?
Simply, it was because, no matter how hard or how often he tried, he failed to get on too well with people.
‘I take it so much to heart,’ he mourned, ‘that I do not get on better.’
This was terrible, because the success or failure of his work depended on his coming to terms with his fellows.
They were at the core of it, the focus of all his striving, the clue to everything.
He had acted rashly in coming here, but now he was here he must forget himself in his work.
He feared for his sanity otherwise.
He would have a sensation of something malignant about to crush him.
He was exaggerating, of course.
Baby cries appealing for comfort issued from him in letter after letter.
He confessed frankly that he was ‘overcome by a je ne sais quoi of discouragement and despair more than I can tell.’
It was true that there were sights here not to be missed.
For instance, yesterday he saw a funeral in a barge, fascinating — six women wrapped in coats in the boat, which the men were dragging along the canal through the heath, and the clergyman in his three-cornered hat and his breeches trailing them on the other side.
There was poetry here, and he was bogged down in prose.
If only he had some security, if only his art supplies were replenished.
Why did his letters meet with an inexplicable silence?
Shortly after these outcries, he pulled out all the stops in an attempt to persuade Theo — who was embroiled in crises of his own and talking of emigrating to America — to join him and become an artist.
One motive, of course, was his desperate need for some congenial company.
As well as this, Vincent may have been influenced by Zola's theory that one could make oneself an artist by an act of will, providing one had the temperament —‘Art is nature seen through a temperament’— and although natural  talent was helpful, it was by no means essential.
To think so was to be conned by the art dealers.
Theo had been confiding his disappointment with the way his life was turning out, and Vincent quickly swept in with an indictment: ‘It seems to me that the whole art business is rotten.’
His bid for Theo's conversion rose to a pitch of lyricism.
Don't wither on the sterile sidewalks of Paris, he exhorted, ‘come and paint with me on the heath, in the potato field, come and walk with me behind the plough and the shepherd, come and sit with me, looking into the fire — let the storm that blows across the heath blow through you.’
Theo knew his impulsive brother only too well.
Disillusioned at times he might be, but art dealing was what he was good at.
He couldn't have failed to note Vincent's other, contradictory moods and feelings, such as, ‘It doesn't matter in the least where I am.’
Throwing up his career like a Gauguin and turning his back on civilisation would have meant the end of financial support for both of them.
And not only them.
He was not only helping Vincent but also his father and mother, his sisters, and the mystery woman whose hospital expenses he had just settled.
Worried that his brother might be close to a nervous collapse, he refrained from spelling it out bluntly, but what it amounted to was this: Don't kick the bourgeois while they are still feeding you.
Vincent saw it differently — as a simple matter of courage.
It was a question of wanting an entirely new thing, of undertaking a thoroughgoing renovation of yourself, ‘in all simplicity, with the fixed idea:ça ira .’
He should just say straight out: ‘I don't want the city any longer, I want the country.
I don't want an office, I want to paint.’
He had been reading some fine sentiments in a little book of Carlyle's, his Heroes and Hero-Worship .
It said there what he had long believed, that one had a duty to be brave, a duty to one's soul.
It was possible, he warned Theo, to go against one's own character.
Self-knowledge was the thing.
He tried one more time.
‘Throughout the history of art one repeatedly finds the phenomenon of two brothers being painters.’
His judgements take on the ex-cathedra ring of a Lawrence: ‘I believe in you as a painter.’
‘Your soul is sick.’
‘Don't go to America.’
‘Get back to nature.’
‘Give yourself up to the fixed idea: to become a painter.’
Behind  them lay the poignantly admitted longing for him to be there, so that he could ‘have a comrade’.
Gradually his rhapsodies left off.
In a sense he was singing siren songs to that part of himself which had got stuck in the old, dead forms, where the artist mattered more than the content.
He would soon argue for a Whitmanesque, democratic art, drawn from the people and distributed to them in popular editions, accessible to all and finding its way into ‘workmen's houses and farms’.
Before that could happen the sick spirit had to get well, in a time that — he was convinced — was poisoned at the root, shaky and tottering.
‘One is ill because one doesn't live properly — can't’, says Birkin in Women in Love .
‘It's the failure to love that makes one ill, and humiliates one.’
Vincent would have agreed absolutely.
In Drenthe, with his unerring instinct for bringing old and new together, he took note of a gnarled old apple tree, how ‘at certain moments (it) bears blossoms that are among the most delicate and virginal things under the sun.’
How did he, a rough-barked man, break into flower?
Before the pangs of birth there had to come death throes, infinitely more painful, and whatever still chained him to deadness and the abyss had to perish.
Perhaps the decaying, deathly process would be hastened here, in this black mud, on this brackish marsh land, where life and decay were somehow united.
He kept faltering badly, despite some initial optimism, and was soon more urgently dependent on Theo's letters than ever.
If one failed to arrive in response to his appeals he felt ‘bitterly, bitterly sad’, alone like someone shipwrecked, ‘absolutely cut off from the outer world’.
In a philosophical mood he would describe his loneliness as an occupational hazard.
Painters had to accept that they were likely to be ignored, shunned, set on by dogs like tramps, under suspicion like wandering lunatics and criminals.
He was saved from sinking even lower by the balm of a journey he made in an open cart to Zweeloo with his landlord, who had to go to the market in Assen.
Liebermann, so Vincent had heard, had once established his base there for quite a while.
He was curious to see the village.
It was a momentous trip.
He set off while it was still night, at three in the morning.
Bearing in mind his liking for nocturnal  walks, one can imagine his excitement.
They travelled along a road banked up with mud, called a ‘diek’ in these parts.
It was even better than going by barge.
As the dawn slowly broke and the cocks began to crow in unison outside the cottages scattered over the heath, a sensation of rapt stillness cast its spell on him.
How silent it was when the cocks had stopped!
They were passing thin poplars in a quiet so intense that you could hear the yellow poplar leaves dropping to the ground, on past an old stumpy church and a graveyard, with earthen walls and a beech hedge around it.
‘It all, all, all became exactly like the most beautiful Corots.
A quietness, a mystery, a peace, as only he has painted it.’
They reached Zweeloo at six in the morning, and still it was not properly light.
Entering the village was like passing under an invisible triumphal arch, quite splendid.
Enormous mossy roofs of houses awaited them, and stables, sheepfolds, barns.
The broad-fronted houses stood between oak trees that were dressed in all the splendour of autumn bronze.
He was stunned by the absolute purity on all sides, on the wet trunks, tones of black contrasting dramatically with the showers of leaves, hung in suspension like clouds of golden rain, in loose tufts as if blown there by a wind.
The sky glimmered through them, and through the poplars, birches, the limes, and apple trees.
He was at a loss to describe the sky, its lilac whiteness, so ineffable above him that it was like a secret waiting to be deciphered, reflecting everything and seeping into the thin mist on the ground.
All was soft, wet, newly born.
One went on tiptoe so as not to disturb the hush.
There were no painters around.
Villagers said that none ever came at this time of year.
Vincent decided not to hang about for the landlord, but head back on foot the way they had come.
He did locate the apple orchard from which Liebermann had composed a large picture, and he made a sketch of it.
He began to retrace his tracks, drawing as he went, back over that country around Zweeloo that was entirely covered, as far as the eye could see, ‘with young corn, the very, very tenderest green I know.’
Imagine, he urged Theo, a vast expanse of black earth, planted with corn and now sprouting, so that the ground looked almost mouldy with fresh life.
The haze in which all this fertility was  bathed reminded him of Brion's The Last Day of Creation .
Now the meaning of that picture was being revealed to him.
He left the fertile area behind and was soon lost in the midst of enormous tracts of poor soil, black as soot.
He missed the lilac-black of the furrows, then grew accustomed to the ever-rotting heather and peat.
He had left behind as well the massive structures of farms and sheepfolds, with their strange irregular shapes, their gigantic mossy roofs, and little low walls.
Walking and walking until he lost track of time, he felt that this was the entire world, it was comprised of nothing else, just the infinite earth and infinite sky.
‘Horses and men seem no larger than fleas.’
As the specks came nearer and enlarged, one saw in each one the germ of a Millet.
He re-entered the domain of ploughed land, far off and spreading endlessly like a sea, with furrows instead of waves.
He encountered people who were all busy — ploughmen, a shepherd, roadmenders, drivers with dung carts.
He stopped at a little roadside inn and found inside an old woman at work with a spinning wheel, like ‘a dark silhouette out of a fairy tale’, and beyond her, through the window, the clear sky and a path through the delicate green, and geese pecking in the grass.
He sketched the woman at her wheel.
He ate a piece of brown bread and drank a cup of coffee, the only food he consumed all day.
Twilight descended, his favourite of all times.
He was engulfed once more in an indescribable peace, and knew again, as he had known at dawn on the outskirts of Zweeloo, that he belonged to life, that the primal desire of man is to come into being, to achieve this peace.
He trudged on down a wide muddy road, past the weird triangular shapes of sod-built huts, glimpsing through the smoky windows the red light of a fire, and outside the pools of yellowish water with the bits of sky that had fallen into them, and bog trunks lying half rotten.
Everywhere the drama of black and white.
He was on a road that led through a swamp, and then coming towards him was the rough figure of a shepherd, the jostling oval shapes of the animals.
The flock divided around him, in the hoary biblical silence.
He was confronted by one rearing sheepfold that loomed in silhouette, a black triangle.
The door was flung wide, and inside lay a dark cave.
Boards let in chinks of dying light from the sky's embers.
He stood humbled, with his heart, that had been so  tortured, at peace.
On his head the twilight rained down like something palpable, as the ancient biblical ritual took place before him.
‘The whole caravan of masses of wool and mud disappear into that cave — the shepherd and a woman with a lantern shut the doors behind them.’
He went on down the road.
‘The day was over, and from dawn to twilight, or rather from one night to another, I had lost myself in that symphony.’
If certain aspects of Vincent's personality repel us, it is perhaps because he is never full face.
He is always half turned to darkness and death, a part of him inarticulate, caught up in gloomy, speechless passion.
He draws and paints from his flayed nerves as much as from his baulked emotions.
His plight affects us like the unwilling martyrdom of a saint who wants to be like other men.
He is on the road to a conversion he would rather not have.
His flesh is the modern flesh of the world-weary modern, the benumbed, faithless man who comprehends what he has lost, and prefers the sensations of torture to no sensation at all.
Destructiveness and self-doubt are preferable to the enfeebled body politic and the parasitic Church.
The natural world mocks him; it is quick, it encompasses death and blossoms forth in abundance.
The secret of its flowering, he thinks, is not the light and warmth of the sun but the rotting flood of corruption underneath, on which it feeds.
His instinct is to nourish the corruption where it lives in the dark places of himself.
He crawls, in a shame of abasement, when he longs to leap like a flung wave, like a cloud of starlings.
He finds the surge of earth more beautiful than the sea because it waits for man to inhabit it, when man comes into his own and finds his true home.
The laughable forerunner, he hangs his head and averts his face, while over his head runs the sky like a great river of peace.
What then must he do?
His passage through darkness, marked by the ‘woman in black’, burdened women, the bent heads of sorrowing men, convulsed roots and empty chairs, leads from death to the growth that one frosty crisis after another nips in the bud — in fact to the Baby in Cradle he had pictured while in The Hague and been unable to keep faith with.
Dutch chiaroscuro, dark and sombre, would hold him for a while yet, until he freed himself from Rembrandt, Millet, and Israëls and turned to Delacroix's symphonies of colour.
Psychologically, the darkness had not done with him.
Brightness tempted him, and yet many bright pictures he saw were insipid, cold lies that left him unsatisfied.
‘I hate more and more those pictures which are light all over,’ he wrote.
One senses his repugnance.
In The Hague with Sien he had given himself over to light, like a Myshkin who was all love, meek as a lamb, becoming the woman's servant and in this roundabout fashion returning himself to infancy.
It solved, or seemed to, the ghastly problems of adulthood.
The baby in its cradle confirmed him in his desire for infantile carefree experiences.
Gratification opened to him like a regained paradise.
The joys denied him as a man he would forgo for those of a child-man.
But there was still a murderous and suicidal Rogozhin inside him to appease, presiding over his disintegration.
Reduced by that process he fell back into the void, the shrieking loneliness of the proud ego.
He had gone to the limit as a babbling idiot, wringing his hands and begging for reasonableness from a woman who loathed his mother-worshipping love.
Running out, he was back in a dark antagonistic Holland with a saviour he had forgotten, who said, ‘I am the Light.’
Somehow the wave of darkness and the wave of light were personified in his parents.
He wanted the refuge of his home again.
Suddenly his will to endure alone collapsed.
Living utterly without family ties on the moors of Drenthe was insupportable.
Abandoning the isolation he had sought so avidly in September, he went back so as to be at home for Christmas, always a precarious time for him.
His journey began with a six-hour walk in the rain and snow across the heath to Hoovegeen.
Stormy conditions against which he had to battle seemed to put new heart into him.
Though loath to admit it, he was relieved at first to be back, among the familiar sights and sounds.
He justified the return to Theo on economic grounds, while stifling a feeling of failure that was liable to erupt in displays of growling boorishness.
His parents welcomed him, assuming he was back for an indefinite stay and perhaps interpreting this as a change of heart.
This was even harder to bear than his own self-criticism.
And to treat him like the prodigal son was stupid.
Morose and angry, he now saw his parents as unhappy, telling his brother that ‘the light within them is black and spreads obscurity around them.’
Within a fortnight he was back in open conflict with his father.
It was hardly an equal contest.
His father was ageing, unsure, falling back on old prejudices to defend his position.
It must have seemed to him that Vincent had gained immeasurably in strength and confidence since their last confrontation.
Reading between the lines, one sees the father quailing before the rude questions of his son, with his big, overwhelming needs.
His very stance could be intimidating, standing with his head lowered, bull-like.
One marvels at the weird contrast between the chastened, helpless child he had become with Sien and this rebel, flushed and combative, thirsting for battle, only disappointed because the fight could not be more prolonged and violent.
Struggle, opposition aroused his animal vitality.
He protested to Theo at one point that he was trying hard to keep the peace — but how hard?
He seemed more concerned to break than maintain the shaky truce existing between him and his father.
How much of this savage attack was for Theo's ears only and how much of it was actually voiced is not clear.
The Reverend Theodorus, anxious about the spell this demon artist might be casting on his younger son, wrote mildly to Theo advising him ‘not to let yourself be influenced into doing things which are not practical, for alas, that certainly is his foible.’
‘The line between God the Father, and Father the God, blurred to begin with, and increasingly fuzzy with time, produced a split image of troubling contradictions,’ writes Ernst Pawels in his life of Kafka.
The parallel is striking.
Vincent was fired as never before by the poetry of Christ's poverty.
As he darkened his palette in Drenthe, this had been the thrust of his art of darkness.
What had Christ's gospel of renunciation to do with his parents' comfortable parsonage?
The fact that he was now sheltering within it does not seem to have occurred to him.
In any case the struggle in his mind was an ideological one.
He had not yet abandoned Christianity, and he would never abandon Christ, but the dogmas preached by his father were to him false.
Through his painting he would reach the kernel of moral truth ‘they’ had mislaid, and make it new.
He had come home, it was beginning to seem, in order to finally wrench himself away from all his father represented, and not only him but the even more hateful world of the van Goghs; the art dealers, the bourgeoisie, polite society, ‘them’.
From this point on he would aim his life in a new direction.
Possibly too he aspired to this final showdown with his father in order to needle Theo, penetrate his tidy exterior and force him into the open.
as if looking for a quarrel he went on to exaggerate the uncompromising nature of his position.
He aligned himself with the workers, the rebels at the barricades, with Zola and Michelet and the students of 1848.
And what he demanded to know was: where did Theo stand?
He knew of course that Theo would equivocate.
Vincent's utterances were now briefly, startlingly, those of a political animal.
‘My sneers are bullets, not aimed at you who are my brother, but in general at the party to which you belong once and for all.
Nor do I consider your sneers (a reference to Theo's occasional sarcasm) aimed expressly at me….
You fire at the barricade and think to gain merit by it….
Neither you nor I meddle in politics, but we live in the world, in society, and involuntarily ranks of people group themselves,
Out to provoke Theo into a declaration of loyalty, and at the same time sting him for continuing to belong to a hated class, he charged him with hypocrisy and self-righteousness in refusing to belong to either side.
That was ‘a dear little van Goghish trick.’
He spat out more venom at his father (to Theo), calling him narrow-minded, emitting rays of darkness from his breast — against him, the angel of fiery light — and by his clergyman's vanity creating error and confusion in the house.
Then he laid down his challenge: essentially, he announced, ‘I am not a van Gogh.’
What about Theo, what was he?
‘I have always looked upon you as ‘Theo’.’
It was to cut his ties that he had begun, from the earliest days, to sign his work ‘Vincent’, following the practice of his adored Rembrandt, and making the excuse then that foreigners would have difficulty pronouncing his surname.
Here was his real reason.
Even stronger than the need to disentangle himself from his father was his desire to break free from any association with those money-grubbing relatives of his, ‘Messrs Van Gogh and Co,.
The real life Theodorus, whatever his limitations as a parent, was no monster.
Theo was swift to point this out, at the same time rebuking Vincent for his bullying and insensitivity, hurting an old man who was in no condition to hit back.
Vincent took this in his masochistic stride.
To be branded an unfeeling brute reinforced the image he had made for himself of a man who was  dog-rough, ‘a foul beast’, unfit for human company, not to be tolerated in civilised drawing rooms.
Resorting to a dog-like whine, he complained to Theo: ‘The dog feels that if they keep him, it will only mean putting up with him and tolerating him in the house, so he will try and find another kennel.’
his old age, was no longer a match for Vincent's increasingly vociferous rebellion.
Why, we might ask, all the shot and shell?
Partly it was fire directed at the father he carried in his heart, whom he still loved and admired despite everything, and who, after all, had been his benefactor and model for so long.
‘Did I ever tell you,’ wrote Kafka to Felice, ‘that I admire my father?
You know he is my enemy, just as I am his enemy, an enmity determined by our respective natures.
Yet aside from that, my admiration for him as a person is perhaps as great as my fear of him.
I can get around him at a pinch, but roll over him, never.’
It was after Vincent went back to The Hague to collect some belongings that his correspondence with his brother became really acrimonious.
For a time it was almost open warfare between them.
Theo did not provoke easily, but he could defend himself.
Vincent accused his brother of caring more about his career (a constant source of jealousy) than for him, and doing next to nothing to promote his work.
So far he hadn't sold a single thing.
Was that because Theo didn't want to risk his precious name in the Paris art world?
But the hostility had another root.
Vincent had looked up Sien and been dismayed to find her and the children in poor health and deplorable conditions.
She had not gone back to whoring, but eked out a miserable living as a washerwoman, for which she lacked the stamina.
It was Theo and their father in unholy alliance who had talked him into abandoning Sien when she was on the mend, he now alleged.
They were both cruel and worldly.
Upset by what he had seen and casting around for someone to blame, he translated his guilt into aggression and resurrected the threat of marriage to Sien as a supposed solution.
It would save her, and be doing the honourable, Christian thing.
He was having a last vicious swipe at his father and his father's religion.
A wild urge to uproot himself, coupled with unhappy years of accumulated bitterness, threw him into one assault after another.
In love with Kee, he had taunted Theo with being no more than a ‘Man  of business’.
Years before, he had suddenly exclaimed with bitter irony, ‘You are quite the plush gentleman and I am the black sheep.’
He did simmer down at times, enough to recognise his tendency to pour oil on the fire, and catch glimpses of himself as a ‘half-strange, half-tiresome person.’
Should he go or stay?
The atmosphere remained fraught, and though he may have secretly relished the animation it gave to things, he needed to settle into a quiet routine if he was going to produce good work.
The unconscious blackmail threat levelled at his parents — he would marry Sien unless they accepted him as he was — hadn't resulted in his expulsion, but nor had it improved matters.
He thought more than once of Antwerp as a possible bolt-hole.
At least there he would find painters, and perhaps a market for his paintings.
His friend van Rappard joined the fray, urging him to stay put, as he was doing.
However,his family was extremely tolerant, unlike Vincent's — even though Rappard hadn't yet earned a cent from his art.