

Cracking the wrong nut
Companies that take significant sums of money from members of the public in advance of providing goods or services are in a special position of trust.
They are, temporarily and on a smaller scale, in the same position as banks or building societies or insurance companies, all of which are subject to special regulatory regimes to ensure that depositors and policyholders are adequately protected.
The question therefore arises: should we also regulate companies that take the public's money as prepayments?
The regulation need not be as thorough as the bank or building society variety.
It could simply be a requirement for a bond or an insurance policy that would ensure repayment for depositors in the event of a collapse.
A regulatory regime to enforce such a straightforward rule should be cheap and uncomplicated, and should avoid burdening the regulated businesses with a host of new rules.
Had such a regime already existed, the creditors of the recently collapsed Land Travel would not have lost the money — about £6.6m — that they had paid in advance for their holidays.
And, although this is probably hoping for too much, the by now traditional attempt to pin the blame on the auditors might have been avoided.
On this occasion, devising a pretext for attacking the auditors has called for some ingenuity.
Usually, if a company collapses after receiving a clean audit report, one simply leaps to the assumption that the auditors got it wrong.
This time, the audit report was heavily qualified, or rather, to be precise, the auditors were unable to express an opinion.
It was perfectly obvious from the accounts that the company was in deep trouble.
A Labour Party spokesman, however, has got round this little difficulty by asking the company's current auditors and their predecessors what they did to draw the public's attention to the problem.
If either of them did nothing (and they were under no obligation to do anything), then they will no doubt be accused of failing in their duty.
More positively, the Labour Party's spokesman has suggested, among other things, that auditors should inform the Department of Trade and Industry whenever they qualify a set of accounts.
At first, this suggestion seemed to apply to all accounts — which certainly would have been taking a sledgehammer to crack a nut — but it has now been narrowed down to those of ‘public interest’ companies, with a fairly generous definition of which companies are of public interest.
This idea is worth looking at, but it is not clear what the DTI would do with the information.
Should it launch an investigation into every going concern qualification?
Should companies with a going concern qualification be required to display the fact prominently on their premises and letter headings?
Should they simply be closed down forthwith, for the supposed protection of the public?
A simpler solution would be to ensure, as we have suggested, that pre-payments by the public are adequately protected.
A new regulatory system to react to qualified audit reports would be both an excessive and a less effective response.
technical summary
Solicitors' accounts rules
A new edition of the Law Society's Accounts Manual has been published.
It incorporates the latest Solicitors' Accounts and Accountants' Report rules (p 97).
Banks' interim profits
From 1 January 1993 UK banks will only be able to include their interim profits in tier 1 capital if their external auditor has verified them (p 97).
Late filing of accounts — dates clarified
Companies House has confirmed that a private company with an accounting reference date of 30 September (for example) must file its accounts by 30 July, not 31 July (p 98; see also p 7).
Pensions for migrant workers
The Department of Social Security has published a consultation paper on occupational pensions for migrant workers in the EC (p 99).
Greater timeshare protection
The Timeshare Act, which provides buyers with a 14-day cooling off period during which they may withdraw from a timeshare agreement, comes into effect on 12 October (p 99).
Injunction granted against receivers
A company gained an injunction to prevent its receivers disposing of assets to pay their own fees, which were in dispute.
The receivers had already paid off the debt to the bank which gave rise to their appointment, but had not paid themselves first, as they were entitled to do under the terms of their appointment (p 99).
Sale of mortgaged property
It has been held that the court is able to order a sale of mortgaged property against the lender's wishes even though the mortgage will not be redeemed by the proceeds, if it would be unfair to the borrowers to postpone a sale (p 100).
Clerical error in a will
It has been held that if a solicitor preparing a will omits a provision the testator intended, it counts as a ‘clerical error’, and that the will can therefore be rectified by the court under the Administration of Justice Act 1982 (p 100).
Director disqualified for safety offence
A director found guilty of an indictable offence under the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974 has been disqualified from being a company director for two years (p 102).
Disabled persons
75% of employers are failing to meet the requirement that 3% of their staff should be registered disabled (p 102).
Employee benefits
The question of whether the cash equivalent of a benefit to an employee should be calculated as the marginal cost or average cost of providing the benefit is currently under consideration by the House of Lords, in the case of Pepper v Hart .
Cases that depend on the result of this one will be left open, and methods of valuing benefits previously agreed or accepted in practice will not be disturbed for 1991/92 or earlier years (p 103).
Interest without deduction of income tax
Checks carried out by the Inland Revenue on a sample of bank and building society accounts have revealed that some people have incorrectly registered to receive interest payments without deduction of income tax.
The Revenue will not, however, impose interest or penalties on anyone who has simply misunderstood the position (p 103).
Employers' payslip booklets
The Inland Revenue has reviewed the arrangements under which it issues booklets of payslips spanning two deduction years to employers and has decided to revert to supplying employers with booklets containing payslips which relate to one deduction year (p 103).
Stricter PRP rules
The Inland Revenue is now applying stricter rules in considering applications for Profit Related Pay scheme registration.
Schemes will no longer be considered for registration where the fixed percentage of profit or the specified amount of the notional pool to be distributed as PRP depend on a formula that cannot be determined at the time of writing the scheme (p 103).
Release of close company loans
It has been held that loans from a close company to participators in that company were ‘released’ within the meaning of s 287(1), TA 1970 where, under an agreement between the company, the participators and a third party, the third party assumed and then settled the debt (p 104).
Charitable gift taxable
It has been held that a gift to a charity of shares in a close company gave rise to a charge to capital transfer tax where the company had an interest in possession in a trust (p 106).
Where profits arise
The Privy Council has held that the profits of a Hong Kong company that granted fixed fee sub-licences of video films to overseas customers ‘arose in’ and ‘derived from’Hong Kong (p 106).
Valuation of shares
It has been held that transactions in shares, not necessarily at arm's length or for cash, and previous agreements with the Inland Revenue with regard to their valuation, were admissible evidence in relation to the valuation of the shares (p 108).
Alternative assessments
It has been held that where more than one assessment was raised under different statutory provisions in respect of the same amount then, provided these were clearly alternative assessments, they were not void.
However, the Inland Revenue could seek to recover the tax due by summary judgment under only one of the alternative assessments (p 108).
Import of palettes, containers etc
Customs have announced that, with immediate effect, certain types of palettes, containers and packings despatched from other EC member states and temporarily imported into the UK may be admitted without any formalities (p 109).
letters
Open borders?
Sir,— I write to you in my capacity as president of the Institut des Reviseurs d'Entreprises (Institute of Auditors) of Luxembourg in order to comment on the article Ramrath opens borders to accountants (ACCOUNTANCY , July 1992, p 27).
I consider that, in order to understand the meaning of the court's decision, it is necessary to be aware of a number of facts which are not mentioned in your article:
1.
Luxembourg law requires all reviseurs d'entreprises to have a professional establishment in Luxembourg.
The concept of a professional establishment is defined clearly in the profession's rules, and cannot be satisfied merely by a business address.
Also, the law requires that a reviseur d'entreprises must be either self-employed or employed by a reviseur d'entreprises (which includes auditing firms) authorised to practise in Luxembourg.
2.
During a transitional period, which ended in 1987, accountants holding recognised auditing qualifications from any EC country could apply to become qualified auditors (reviseurs d'entreprises ) in Luxembourg without being required to pass any supplementary examinations in Luxembourg.
Mr Ramrath holds a German qualification as auditor (Wirtschaftsprufer ), and was employed by an audit firm in Luxembourg.
Like many other non-Luxembourg accountants, he applied to take advantage of the transitional regulations.
The status of reviseur d'entreprises was duly granted to Mr Ramrath.
However, when subsequently he became employed solely by an audit firm established in Germany, and thus ceased to fulfil the conditions described above, his authorisation to practise in Luxembourg was cancelled.
3.
Mr Ramrath considered that these conditions were not in accordance with European legislation, and applied to the Luxembourg courts for reinstatement.
The Luxembourg court requested the opinion of the European Court of Justice.
The European Court confirmed that the dispositions of the EC treaty relating to the rights of establishment forbid member states to prevent a person from establishing himself in a state and carrying on the profession of auditor on the grounds that that person is already established and recognised as an auditor in another member state.
(This ruling is of course not surprising, being a confirmation of the well-known Klopp decision.)
However, when practising in another country, an auditor must observe the specific rules of that country which govern the profession.
The European Court further ruled in this case that Arts 48 and 59 of the EC Treaty do not prevent a member state from requiring that the exercise of the profession of auditor in that state by a person qualified to carry on that profession in another member state be subject to conditions which are objectively necessary to guarantee observation of professional rules concerning the permanence of the infrastructure in place for the completion of the work, the effective presence in the member state and assurance of the observation of professional ethics, unless respect for such rules and conditions is already guaranteed by a reviseur d'entreprises , whether a natural person or a firm, established and recognised in the state, and in whose service is placed, for the duration of the work, the person who intends to exercise the profession of auditor.
4.
In conclusion, one has to wonder whether the borders are in fact open.
The Luxembourg Institute intends to verify closely whether the auditors who have their ‘second offices’ in Luxembourg fulfil the condition of having an effective establishment in the sense of the professional rules.
John Williams, the Institute's director of international affairs, comments: I agree with Mr Schmit's letter.
Some of the European Court of Justice's opinions can be quite ‘woolly’ and do leave themselves open to a wider interpretation, but I do not believe that the opinion was meant to be interpreted so widely as to provide for an auditor recognised in one member state to practise in a second member state without any requirement to obtain local authorisation.
The delight at the judgment which was ascribed to John Hegarty in the July issue of ACCOUNTANCY perhaps goes too far in suggesting that there is now mutual recognition of firms within the EC.
I think that it is important not to lose sight of the fact that the judgment relates specifically to Claus Ramrath's circumstances and, in particular, the fact that Mr Ramrath had already obtained authorisation locally as a reviseur d'entreprises .
The dispute which led the Conseil d'Etat Luxembourgeois to seek a legal opinion from the ECJ arose quite simply from the withdrawal of Mr Ramrath's authorisation on the grounds that he no longer satisfied Luxembourg law (ie the requirement that he have a professional establishment in Luxembourg and that he fulfil conditions of professional independence).
Now that the ECJ has issued its opinion, it is up to the Conseil d'Etat to make a final ruling regarding Mr Ramrath.
In the meantime, I believe that it would be rash to read too much into the opinion by taking it out of its narrow context.
District society debate
Sir,— At the risk of prolonging correspondence, may I be permitted to join the debate started by my old friend Stella Fearnley (see ACCOUNTANCY , August, p 66) and continued in the September issue (p 6) by Richard Harwood?
As president of the Southern Society in 1984/85, it was brought home to me very strongly that the district society network has a vital role to play in communications between Moorgate Place and the membership.
Without entering into discussion as to any other failings the Institute may have, communications is certainly still one of them, and any weakening of the district society network will make this problem far worse.
The national president who served during my year, Alan Hardcastle, made a point of having three or four formal meetings of district society presidents during the dinner circuit.
At these, information was communicated, sometimes on a confidential basis, which enabled all of us to brief our committees, our local groups, and through these areas our membership, far better on Institute policy and matters.
It would not have warranted summoning all district society presidents to London for a brief meeting, but the value gained from these was particularly significant.
I entirely agree with Richard Harwood that those district societies that put the effort into breaking their society down into local groups, small practitioner groups, commercial membership groups and, for that matter, any other group that seems appropriate, have seen the real benefits from this assistance in the vital area of communication and, perhaps an unseen fact, value for money for the subscription as seen through the eyes of the Institute's membership.
On the question of the dinner circuit, in addition to the point mentioned above, I was very fortunate in that my firm at the time gave me financial support for travelling to a number of dinners.
I also took the opportunity to visit the regional offices of my firm in those towns where dinners were held, and this was very much appreciated by the people concerned.
The opportunity to discuss problems with members of other district societies was a great assistance to me in leading the various debates of the Southern Society during my presidential year and would certainly not have arisen without the opportunity to travel.
The presidential year does cost the individual money; if it is decided that one's partner goes to dinners then this comes out of the individual's pocket and is not subsidised, at least in my case, by anyone else, and it is entirely a matter of personal choice as to how this part of the arrangements is made.
I made during my year a number of lasting friendships, some of which have actually turned into professional assistance in different parts of the country, and the fact that people genuinely enjoy meeting each other is shown by the annual reunions which take place, entirely at the personal expense of the individuals, which demonstrate the bond of friendship which our Institute can bring about.
Perhaps there are more advantages to membership than people imagine!
30 days hath September…
Sir,— My firm were appointed auditors of a private company in May 1992, and, due to the previous auditor being unable to act, carried out the audit of the financial statements for the year ended 30 September 1991.
Bearing in mind the threatened penalties to be imposed by the Registrar of Companies for late filing of accounts, meetings were arranged for formal approval of the financial statements by both the directors and members on 28 July 1992, and I emphasised to my client the need to lodge a copy of the accounts with the Registrar by the end of July.
The Registrar has acknowledged receipt of the accounts on 31 July 1992, but maintains that the due date for filing was 30 July 1992, which he regards as 10 months from the accounting reference date.
A penalty of £100 has been imposed.
The problem appears to be the interpretation of the word ‘month’.
I cannot find a definition within the Companies Act 1985, but in s 224(3), relating to automatic fixing of accounting reference date for a company incorporated after 1 April 1990, there is a reference to ‘the last day of a month’.
I must admit that I have always assumed that ‘last day’ of one month compared with ‘last day’of any other month, irrespective of actual date.
The interpretation by the Registrar would appear to create some interesting situations with new companies.
For example, a company registered on 29 August 1992 fixes its accounting reference date at 28 February.
Would financial statements made up to 28 February 1993 satisfy the six months rule?
Would first statements made up to 28 February 1994 be deemed to exceed 18 months?
Similar situations can be contrived with other months of fewer than 31 days.
Possibly the solution is to fix accounting reference dates for those companies choosing to make up their accounts to the end of the month with fewer than 31 days to, say, the third day of the following month and take regular advantage of seven day variation of actual accounting date from accounting reference date allowed by s 223.
The editor writes: The Registrar's position on this question is stated at p 98 of this issue.
Independent taxation: round in circles
Sir,— I wonder if I might use your publication to enquire of the members in practice as to their success or otherwise in dealing with the Inland Revenue on the matter of dividends paid to directors' wives where shares have been transferred to the wives following independent taxation.
We have been arguing the point with the inspector at claims branch for many many months and we just seem to go round in circles.
We do not wish to be the first case of this kind to go before the Special Commissioners.
The inspector argues that because the directors (the husbands) have the right to veto a transfer of shares, this constitutes a condition under s 685(4B) ICTA 1988, thus taking the gift outside the provisions of independent taxation and rendering the dividends taxable on the husbands.
This is despite the fact that the veto clause is standard in private companies and had existed within the client company Articles of Association since the incorporation in 1979.
The Revenue is centralising its cases on this point at claims branch and of course the value to the Revenue of fighting these cases is far greater than the value to individual taxpayers; on the other hand, the financial risk for the individual taxpayer of being the first to take such a case before the Special Commissioners or higher, would be extremely high.
I have put it to the inspector at the claims branch that there must be many cases of this kind which have been settled by local inspectors without so much correspondence; his reply is that local inspectors are under instruction to pass the cases to claims branch.
I would certainly be very interested to hear from readers who have obtained agreement from local inspectors on similar cases.
If anyone is currently fighting a case such as this, I would also be pleased to hear from them as it does seem to me that the Revenue is using its muscle to try to remove one of the benefits of independent taxation.
Remote control audit
Sir,— It has been of great interest for me to read of small company audits in recent issues, and especially the approaches of other members.
The surprising point that has occurred with regard to my own business is that other supposed chartered accountants have been preparing fully audited accounts without ever setting foot in the premises that they are conducting the audit for.
This situation has been exemplified on at least three occasions and I wonder what my fellow members think, especially when the companies are paying high fees and not receiving a proper audit.
president's page
Tax lobbying: our quiet diplomacy
The outstanding success of the Tax Faculty illustrates the extent of our members' involvement in taxation work.
Formed only 18 months ago, the Faculty has already attracted a membership approaching 7,000 — and rising.
Seemingly almost every month a new product or service is launched to meet yet another of its members' needs.
However, I want to concentrate here on the technical work that the Faculty does on behalf, not only of its members, but of the Institute membership as a whole.
No-one with even a passing knowledge of tax would doubt that it is now one of the most complex areas of an accountant's work.
Ever since 1965, when the incoming Labour government transformed direct taxation in a single budget, the pace of change has quickened and the complexity deepens as each year goes by.
Every year another Finance Act adds to the volume of legislation — and it is inevitably accompanied by more case law, statements of practice, published concessions and other, more subtle, unpublished changes in view or practice.
And not content with an immensely complicated system of direct taxation, the Conservative government that came to power in 1970 gave us value added tax — heralded at the time as ‘a simple tax’.
Most recently national insurance, long regarded as ‘a forgotten tax’, has become of increasing importance to taxpayers, and thus to their advisers.
It can be seen straight away that the Faculty has an enormous task merely trying to help members keep up-to-date with all these changes, to help them interpret some of the more obscure elements and, wherever possible, to pool their combined knowledge to match the tax authorities' ability to pool their knowledge of the activities of taxpayers and their advisers.
However, the work of the Institute, through the Faculty, does not stop at just interpreting tax law and disseminating information.
It tries to influence new legislation and, where problems are arising, to modify Revenue practice.
It does this by making formal representations to government, sometimes at ministerial level, but usually to the Inland Revenue, Customs and Excise and the Department of Social Security.
Representations fall broadly under two headings: first, in response to invitations to comment, and second, representations originated by the Faculty.
The first category includes consultative documents which are publicly available and, more numerous, invitations to comment made only to interested parties.
The second covers a miscellany of submissions, some on a yearly or other periodic basis, others made only when the need arises.
The former includes submissions on Finance Bills, the annual ‘anomalies’ paper and notes of meetings with the Inland Revenue on procedural matters.
Often these representations are made by the Faculty of the Institute alone, but wherever it is considered beneficial, submissions are made in conjunction with other professional bodies and, indeed, the Tax Faculty is represented on a number of joint bodies set up for this purpose.
Every year on average the Faculty, on behalf of the whole membership, issues some two dozen technical releases, makes around 70 submissions to Government departments (most of which are not published), and attends about 24 meetings with these departments.
So what does all this work achieve?
Looking at the state of tax law in the UK, one might be forgiven for concluding that the effect is extremely limited.
The reality, however, is that the Institute has had considerable influence in knocking the rough edges off legislation and practice.
That it has achieved so much is largely due to the high regard in which Philip Hardman, chairman of the Faculty's technical committee, Edwin Vidler, its secretary, and other members of the committee and its subcommittees are held by the Revenue departments.
They get little or no publicity for their efforts in this area — quite deliberately.
They believe they would not have achieved so much had they tried to score points by claiming victory every time an amendment was made or a change was accepted.
Still, they will be on the lookout for opportunities to let members know about their achievements whenever appropriate.
Every now and again the Institute's contribution is publicly recognised.
For example, John Maples, the then Economic Secretary to the Treasury, accepted an invitation to launch the Faculty at a luncheon at Chartered Accountants' Hall in May of last year.
In his speech he went out of his way to welcome the establishment of the Faculty, and the part it would play in encouraging and enhancing proficiency and knowledge of tax not only within the profession, but in business, industry and commerce, and among the general public the profession serves.
He thanked the Institute and the Tax Committee — now the Faculty's technical committee — for their positive and constructive role in the development of the tax system over the years and for the thought and effort put into representations.
Thanks to years of quiet and patient work by our team, the relationship with the tax authorities is strong, effective and to our mutual benefit.
We plan to keep it that way.
news
US LITIGATION CRISIS
Big Six join forces to fight ‘epidemic’
In a show of unity rarer than a dodo sighting, the US Big Six have issued a joint statement of position in an attempt to focus attention on the ‘epidemic of litigation’ that is beginning to threaten the very existence of many American firms.
The statement suggests a number of reforms to US tort law, several of which were first put forward by Arthur Andersen managing partner Lawrence Weinbach in a heartfelt speech to the New York Financial Writers Association in May (see ACCOUNTANCY , June, p 12).
The US tort liability system, the firms say in their statement, is out of control.
Flaws in the system are taking a ‘severe toll’, and if they are not corrected, ‘the consequences could prove fatal to firms of all sizes’.
The forcefully-worded statement is the strongest indication yet of the US profession's concern over liability exposure.
The problem has been augmented over the past two years by the US recession, which brought about more company failures, and the savings and loan debacle.
Both have seen auditors, irrespective of their innocence or guilt, placed firmly in the firing line for investors hoping to recoup some of their losses.
The US government, in the form of the thrift-liquidating Resolution Trust Corporation, has been one of the worst offenders.
The RTC has tenaciously pursued the auditors of practically every failed thrift, and has won some spectacular rulings.
Its outstanding claims involving accountancy firms currently stand at $3bn, and under joint and several liability, the auditors could be found liable for the entire amount sought from all defendants, regardless of the degree of blame.
The amounts involved are often huge, well above any amount that would be covered by professional indemnity insurance.
In August, for instance, the RTC filed a $400m claim against Arthur Andersen over the Benjamin Franklin Savings Association (see ACCOUNTANCY , September, p 16).
The size of the claims, and the fact that the defendants cannot recover their costs if they are found innocent, persuade many firms to settle out of court.
A survey conducted at the beginning of this year suggested that 96% of securities fraud cases are settled before coming to trial.
Instances of firms fighting all the way to the courtroom — and on to appeal if necessary — are few and far between.
The Big Six, in their statement, say that in 1991 they spent 9% of auditing and accounting revenues — $477m — on settling and defending lawsuits, and repeat an estimate that the profession as a whole is currently facing $30bn in damages claims.
The threat, they say, affects business and the US economy as a whole in two major ways: ‘through the actual and threatened failure of accounting firms, and through the survival tactics the firms are forced to employ’.
The larger firms, they say, are practising risk reduction — avoiding high risk clients such as financial institutions, real estate investment firms and high technology companies.
Smaller firms are avoiding auditing altogether and 40% are operating without insurance cover.
The firms offer a number of suggested reforms of both federal and state liability laws.
‘The principle cause of unwarranted litigation against the profession is joint and several liability,’ they begin.
‘Proportionate liability will help restore balance and equity to the system.’
They also call for ‘reasonable limitations’ on punitive damages, dis-incentives to filing meritless claims, and fewer restrictions on the forms of organisations accountants may operate under.
The best the firms can hope for from the statement is a raised awareness of the problems they face.
‘It's not the kind of document you are going to get a dramatic reaction to; you might say it's more of a White Paper,’ Ernst & Young's Mort Meyerson told ACCOUNTANCY .
‘But a lot of US businesses are supporting the effort.’
The US Congress is considering legislation for limited tort reform, he added, but that is not expected to progress before the end of the year.
The accountants' cause received a small but unexpected boost last month when the California Supreme Court ruled that only clients could sue accounting firms for alleged professional negligence in the course of an audit.
Any other parties must be able to allege fraud or deceit.
It was the first time the state's highest court had debated the point and was widely welcomed by accountants.
The RTC, on the other hand, said in court papers that such a decision could affect its ability to recover money on behalf of failed thrifts.
Shortly before the joint statement was issued, Coopers & Lybrand became what is thought to be only the second US firm to file a countersuit against a former client.
The firm is involved in a bitter dispute with Phar-Mor, a discount drugstore chain which filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in August.
At the beginning of that month, Phar-Mor's founder and chairman, David Shapira, announced that he had discovered a massive fraud in his company.
The company's president and chief financial officer were fired, the FBI began an investigation and Phar-Mor announced a $350m write-off over the affair.
Two weeks after the first announcement, Phar-Mor filed a damages claim against its auditors, Coopers, alleging ‘grossly negligent, intentional or reckless failure to uncover massive fraud’.
Coopers then issued a statement saying that ‘any injury to Phar-Mor was caused by its president and his fellow conspirators.
Coopers deplores what has occurred and was as much the victim as everyone else’.
That statement was swiftly followed by a countersuit against Phar-Mor's management, claiming unspecified damages and maintaining that it was unable to audit the company accurately because its financial statements were altered.
‘Phar-Mor has taken the illogical and outrageous action of suing Coopers in a blatant attempt to twist the truth, avoid responsibilities for their own actions and shift the blame from themselves,’ said the firm.
‘We are confident we have done nothing wrong, but need to protect ourselves from the arbitrary and capricious actions of our adversaries.’
Lawrence Weinbach: First put reforms forward
AUDITING
MP calls for action on reporting requirements
Auditors of companies in financial difficulties, and whose accounts are qualified and filed late, should be required to bring the fact to the attention of the Registrar of Companies and the DTI.
And the DTI should be required to send in inspectors who would, if necessary, stop the company trading.
The call comes from shadow Consumer Affairs Minister Nigel Griffiths in the aftermath of the Land Travel collapse, which left more than 2,000 holidaymakers stranded abroad and 40,000 more without their prepaid holidays.
‘I am appalled,’ he told ACCOUNTANCY , ‘that when a company is trading £0.5m in the red, when it has failed to file its accounts, and when it has been reported to a DTI Minister, there is still no failsafe mechanism to pick the matter up.’
In Land Travel's case, the company's accounts for 1990, which were heavily qualified by auditors Price Waterhouse, were filed in July 1991, more than a year late.
At the time, PW made it very clear to the Registrar that the company was £2.1m in debt, that £1.6m was irrecoverable and that the company was not viable.
The firm resigned as auditors.
In August 1991, the then Consumer Affairs Minister Edward Leigh also received a letter about Land Travel's precarious financial position from the secretary of the Boston Conservative Club.
Yet no action was taken.
Mr Griffiths has written to Michael Heseltine, president of the Board of Trade, demanding an independent inquiry into the DTI's handling of the case.
He also wants recommendations on what action should be taken in future to investigate serious complaints properly; whether auditors should have a duty placed on them to report to the DTI separately where a company has critical financial problems; and whether compensation should be paid to Land Travel's victims.
He has yet to receive a reply.
The issues, he says, also have implications for the accountancy profession.
‘It calls into doubt the effectiveness of accountants.
There is no question here that PW acted completely above board, but it strikes me that the time has come to consider whether the profession's rules and regulations on reporting to external authorities are not too restrictive.
‘If I were the accountants’ professional body, I would be seriously worried, because further cases like this one will severely damage the reputation of accountants, whether or not they are doing what they should.’
APB faces going concern rethink
Major audit firms have expressed serious reservations about the Auditing Practices Board's proposals on going concern.
They are also unhappy with the APB's ideas for an extended audit report.
The APB issued the exposure drafts Going Concern and Auditors' Reports in Financial Statements in May (see ACCOUNTANCY , June, p 9), with a request for comments by 31 August.
About 60 responses have been received on each of the documents.
The going concern ED proposed that auditors should obtain a statement from the directors confirming their considered view that the company is a going concern; that, in forming an opinion on whether the company is a going concern, the auditors should look ahead one year from the date of the directors' approval of the accounts; and that, even if disclosures in the accounts of any matters giving rise to an uncertainty that could affect the company's ability to continue as a going concern are adequate, the auditors should draw attention to the matters in their report.
While comments (see also p 25) from the Big Six vary on details, most of them express fundamental doubts about either the ED as a whole or important points in it.
Ernst & Young says that ‘we do not believe the Exposure Draft should be converted into a SAS (Statement of Auditing Standards) without fundamental reconsideration’.
Arthur Andersen argues that ‘some major points of principle in the ED should be reconsidered’.
Touche Ross suggests that ‘to develop a SAS on going concern without first resolving the financial reporting issues would be premature…when these issues have been properly considered, a new ED should be issued’.
Coopers & Lybrand does not believe that the ED's proposals ‘should be issued either in the short term or in their present form’.
Criticism of the audit report proposals is less severe, but still material.
The ED proposed that auditors' reports should contain brief descriptions of the responsibilities of directors and auditors; include a description of the key features of the audit process; abandon the system of reporting only by exception on such matters as proper accounting records; and draw attention to a range of inherent uncertainties, including those affecting the validity of the going concern assumption.
A number of the firms express concern at the length of the proposed report.
Ernst & Young says that it is ‘too detailed and too ‘boiler-plate’.
In our view it will lead, in a relatively short time, to fewer people reading auditors' reports'.
Several share KPMG's view that ‘the responsibility paragraphs more logically belong outside the report’ and that ‘if an uncertainty is properly disclosed in the accounts, such accounts can present a true and fair view without the auditors having to refer to it…a set of accounts should be complete in itself, without having to read the audit opinion’.
There is also support for the retention of reporting by exception.
Morrison: Faces rethink
MIDDLE TIER MERGERS
PKF snaps up Hays Allen office
Hays Allen Exeter, an associated firm of the 30th ranked Hays Allen, joined Pannell Kerr Forster on 1 September.
The office, which has an annual fee income of around £750,000 and 25 professional staff, will take the PKF name.
Two of the office's three partners are joining the PKF partnership.
A PKF spokesman said that the partners had decided to merge because ‘they did not feel they would have the opportunity to grow much more unless they joined a bigger firm’.
Hays Allen Exeter demerged from the rest of the firm in April 1991.
Hays Allen itself registered a 2.7% drop in fee income to £6.8m for the year to 30 April.
The move has done little to dampen speculation that the middle tier will see more mergers in the immediate future.
A survey of more than 50 finance directors across the country, carried out by marketing consultants the Glanville Partnership and sold to accounting firms, reveals that many directors see the middle tier as being under great pressure.
‘The view is that the middle tier will have to merge, and we are only just seeing the beginning of this,’ Michael Jenkin, Glanville's managing director, told ACCOUNTANCY .
‘It is thought very unlikely that they will merge with each other, as they have similar problems.
So, many will start mopping up smaller firms so they can show reasonable growth.’
Ironically, Mr Jenkin added, more companies are becoming disillusioned with the Big Six (although one, Arthur Andersen, comes out of the survey well), and would be willing to move to a middle tier firm.
‘If the middle tier marketed themselves better, they could pick up a lot of business.’
Nottingham and Derby-based Cooper-Parry Watson & Sowter and Prior & Palmer have merged to form one of the largest practices in the Midlands.
Cooper-Parry Prior & Palmer has 16 partners, 200 staff and a fee income of £6m.
The newly appointed managing partner, Alan Woods, told ACCOUNTANCY that the firm intended to promote itself as ‘the largest independent and credible alternative to the Big Six’.
INTERNATIONAL AUDITING PRACTICES COMMITTEE
IOSCO to endorse auditing standards
The International Organisation of Securities Commissions is to give its seal of approval to international standards on auditing (ISAs) at a conference to be hosted by the Securities and Investments Board in London later this month.
This means that multinational accounts which are audited in compliance with the standards will be acceptable to securities regulatory authorities around the world.
It will also make transactions, such as cross border offerings, a great deal easier and less costly than before.
The move brings to completion one of three major projects being run in parallel by IOSCO and international accountancy bodies.
These include work with the IASC on reducing flexibility in international accounting standards, a project with the International Federation of Accountants' Ethics Committee on international ethics rules, as well as the work done on ISAs jointly with the International Auditing Practices Committee.
‘IOSCO wants to reach the point where there is one set of accounting standards and one set of auditing standards, so that companies which file their accounts in more than one jurisdiction only have to prepare one set of accounts and have them audited once,’ said Auditing Practices Board secretary Robert Charlesworth.
‘This avoids the need for reconciliations and auditors’ doing additional work.’
The ISA project took five years to complete and involved examining basic auditing principles and essential procedures to ensure that ISAs adequately addressed IOSCO members' concerns.
A joint task force identified a number of areas in which changes were needed — for example, requiring the auditor to attend stock-taking, direct confirmation of debtors and guidance on illegal acts — most of which have now been incorporated in the ISAs.
The international profession has welcomed the move.
Tony Dalessio of IFAC said that both IFAC and IAPC were ‘very pleased and enthused’.
Mr Charlesworth said it was important because it would provide an incentive for countries to bring their standards into line with international ones.
‘If they want to be players on the international scene, their standards will have to match up.
That will be of real practical benefit to professions worldwide.’
He added that the APB would be paying ‘great attention’ to ISAs in its review of existing UK auditing pronouncements, to ensure that these reflected all the basic precepts of the international standards.
AUDIT CONCENTRATION
Large firms dominate market
The past four years have seen the largest accountancy firms dominate the auditing market, according to a new study.
A Research Board-sponsored paper,The Changing Structure of the Audit Market in the UK , by Vivien Beattie and Stella Fearnley of Southampton University, shows that while the top four firms audited 43% of all listed companies in 1987, they audited 59% of the companies in 1991.
The top eight audited 64% in 1987 and 79% in 1991.
Over 100 firms had only one listed client.
The number of listed companies rose by 428 during the four years, but the number of firms auditing them fell by 39.
The authors put the reasons for the concentration mainly down to mergers between accounting firms, and voluntary auditor changes.
341 companies changed their auditor during the four years the study covers; 60% of these involved a change of tier.
Of those, 71% moved to a top tier auditor while only 8% moved away from the largest firms.
The rate of auditor changes slowed dramatically during 1991, note the authors, but there was not enough information to determine whether this was a fluke or a growing trend.
According to Ms Fearnley, the concentration of listed audit clients among a few firms could present difficulties.
‘There could be a problem with conflicts of interest at the top,’ she says, ‘while at the bottom end of the scale there is a question about experience and back up.’
AUDIT FEES
Bargains for the big companies
A surprisingly large number of private limited companies pay nominal audit fees, even when their turnover runs into millions and they are audited by one of the top 12 firms.
A survey of 4,020 such companies by Glasgow-based JDH Consultants shows that several hundred, whose sales range from £10,000 to well over £1m, are paying fees of £1,000 or £2,000.
Seven companies involved in timber and wooden furniture manufacturing, for example, pay just £1,000 although their turnovers vary from £22,000 to £1m.
In the most extreme case, a company in the wholesale distribution: fuels, ores, metals and industrial materials sector, with a turnover of £10.1m, pays a fee of £1,000.
The survey says that there appears to be no one explanation why the fees should be so low, particularly as other companies' fees do relate to their size.
There was also a wide variation in the fees paid in different industrial sectors.
Overall, private limited companies' audit fees are much lower than those of plcs.
Smaller companies with turnovers of up to £1m tend to pay half the amount similar sized plcs do.
The larger they become, the more the gap narrows until the £1bn mark is reached: at this point private companies pay the same level of fees as their counterpart plcs.
The survey also shows that the audit market is dominated by the top 12 firms.
Although the companies surveyed paid out a total of £64.021m in audit fees to 1,674 different auditing firms, £36.893m of it (57.63%) went to the top 12, which audit 28.66% of them.
The lion's share (£27.9m), not surprisingly, went to the Big Six.
KPMG Peat Marwick audited the largest number of private limited companies (213), followed by Coopers & Lybrand (164), Touche Ross (141) and Ernst & Young (140).
Arthur Andersen only audited 31 companies and earned less fee income than firms like Stoy Hayward, Kidsons Impey and Pannell Kerr Forster.
Moores Rowland, which audited 28 companies, was the best buy.
Copies of Report of Audit Fees of UK Private Limited Companies are available, price £75, from .
Hall of fame.
David Solomons FCA, professor emeritus of the Wharton School of Accounting at the University of Philadelphia, has just been awarded the US's top accounting honour.
He has been inducted in the Accounting Hall of Fame at Ohio State University.
The award, which is an international one, is given once a year at the national convention of the American Accounting Association, of which Professor Solomons is a past president.
The winner is nominated by a board of leading accountants throughout the world — including David Tweedie and Sir Bryan Carsberg.
A bronze plaque, featuring Professor Solomons, will hang in the corridors of the university alongside the other 51 inductees — including two other British chartered accountants who also made the grade, Arthur Dicksee and Lord Benson.
The Hall of Fame is not the first international honour awarded to Professor Solomons.
In 1989 he was presented with the Institute's own International Award for his contribution to the international development of accountancy.
THE AUDITING PROFESSION
Robson Rhodes laments lack of leadership
Robson Rhodes has unleashed a scathing attack on the profession's leaders, and in particular on the Big Six, for their concentration on commercial self-promotion at the expense of the auditing profession's reputation.
In the firm's review for 1992, managing partner Hugh Aldous writes that the current crisis in the profession has probably occurred because the leaders have lost their way and muddled their priorities.
‘Greed and the marketplace may well be at the root of many of our economies.
But in a profession, once you put money first, your firm second and your profession a very poor third, the stresses become immense.
Fees become more important than public duty or public contribution.
Power within a practice becomes more important than developing the people in it.
The presence of your firm has to be pushed against the competition — and eventually your firm has to be advanced at the expense of others.
The process of driving for wealth through the construction of hierarchies of growth in a relatively stagnant economy is inherently destructive.’
The crisis, he adds, is one of inactivity and complacency, which cannot be solved by the profession's leaders saying ‘Crisis, what crisis?’.
They have become out of touch.
‘They are running big businesses and worrying about the output of big press offices, suspended within a fragile web of willing belief.’
Other critics are more damning.
Barry Riley of the Financial Times writes that ‘in the process of achieving great commercial success, accountants have come close to deprofessionalising themselves’.
Robson Rhodes' national head of audit, Bill Smith, believes that the fault lies with the professional bodies, as much as with the larger firms.
While the large firms were busy in the 1980s compromising the quality of audit in the search for fatter fees from more lucrative work, ‘the professional bodies to which these accountants belong — possibly under a certain amount of external pressure — produced accounting ‘standards’ which allowed the management of businesses to portray results which were remote from the truth'.
‘The folly of this unfortunate combination of circumstances is well publicised and damaging to the profession.’
So what is the solution?
Mr Smith believes it lies in treating the educated public as reasonable people and facing up to the fact that their expectations do need satisfying.
Mr Riley says that auditors may have to be ring-fenced to ensure their independence.
Mr Aldous believes that the profession should set out clearly what it is about and re-establish the Institute's lead in auditing and accounting matters: ‘How about a legislative Council of highly paid members, all of whom were obliged to resign from all other paid posts?’
ICAS CONFERENCE
High standards are the norm for Scottish CAs
There is a need to restore balance to the debate over professional standards and the quality of the service which the profession provides to the public, according to Scottish Institute president Allan Denholm.
The profession should stop being so defensive, he told participants at the Scottish Institute's annual conference in St Andrews last month.
The vast majority of chartered accountants do provide a very high standard of service: as a result, public expectation is high which is why when the relatively few failures do occur, they lead to so much concentrated and adverse publicity.
‘While it is understandable that the media will home in on failures, it is important that the public should be reassured that such cases are very much the exception, rather than the rule, and that their continuing confidence in the profession is justified.’
He said that ICAS members were in a special and privileged position as a result of the Institute's size, and its education and training system.
‘In our relatively small classes, lifetime bonds of friendship and mutual trust are formed, and these contribute to the loyalty of our members to their Institute and the profession.
In simple language, it is much harder for our members, coming from a close-knit professional community, to step out of line.’
Since the profession's livelihood depended on the public having confidence in its members' integrity and professional ability, he warned, those who did break the rules would be dealt with swiftly, effectively and fairly.
‘Scottish chartered accountants have no time for rotten apples in their professional barrel.’
Piping his own tune.
When the Scottish Institute employed Charlie Clark as its property manager eight years ago, after he left the army, it had no idea what a talent it had acquired.
But when he was invited to play a piece of music he had composed for the Princess Royal to her when she visited Edinburgh, they rapidly found out.
For Charlie is one of Scotland's best known pipers and has travelled all over the world with the Black Watch to play at social and diplomatic functions.
He played the bagpipes at John Kennedy's funeral, performed in front of the Queen at Balmoral and spent time in America with Glen Campbell, performing at the Las Vegas Hilton.
He started to learn the bagpipes at the age of nine and won several junior prizes.
Joining the army gave him the opportunity to play full time: ‘I practised mostly all day, and in the evenings.
It was an addiction,’ he laughs.
Nowadays, he says, he just plays for fun.
But there's one yearly booking he'll not be allowed to get out of— piping the high table into dinner at the Scottish Institute's annual conference.
‘He's become a tradition,’ said an ICAS spokesman.
‘It wouldn't be the same without him.’
RECESSION
Small firms look to managers
Small and medium-sized accountancy firms, squeezed by the recession, are considering employing full or part-time business managers, according to a recent survey.
The survey, of 587 accountancy firms ranging in size from sole practitioners to 20-partner firms, shows that many are taking positive steps to fight back against the recession.
Of those questioned, 45% thought that experienced business managers could help them with future strategic decisions.
Half of these preferred a non-executive style appointment at partnership level, 35% mentioned outside management consultants and 31% said they would consider employing a manager full time.
A total of 62% of firms said they expected to lose clients through business failures over the next 12 months, the largest area of concern; 54% named cash flow as an area of concern, while 47% named staff overheads and 38% property overheads.
52% said they were expecting partner remuneration to fall in absolute terms over the next year.
When asked about audit regulation and reporting requirements, 478 firms (81%) said there should be less control on work done for small companies, while 396 firms (67%) wanted more regulation controlling the work done for large companies.
The full results of the survey, which was carried out by Inform Corporation, are only being made available to the 587 firms which took part.
CANADA
PW forced to return fees
Price Waterhouse's Toronto office has been forced to repay fees of Canadian $680,000 to a client, after a court found that the firm, in accepting the appointment, had ignored a conflict of interest.
PW also had to hand back $500,000 of the client's money, which it was holding as a contingency against liability.
The firm had agreed to act as a supervisor under the Companies Creditors Arrangement Act for the United Maritime Fishermen Cooperative in December 1987.
The Cooperative had been in severe financial difficulties for several years and in 1981, after its own bank had withdrawn its support, it turned for help to the Canadian Cooperative Credit Society.
In 1986, the Society employed Price Waterhouse to undertake a review of its lending policies.
The advice it received from the firm was to bring its loans up to date, in particular the $18m credit line it had given to UMF which, PW noted, had consistently been trading at a loss.
PW suggested that the Society should set up a team to sort its lending business out.
The firm was not taken on to implement the proposals.
Six months later, however, the Society, with UMF's agreement, hired Touche Ross to look at UMF's business and come up with a plan of action.
But it continued to trade at a loss and in November 1987 the Society implemented one of PW's original recommendations by calling in its loan.
Touche Ross was appointed receiver.
In 1988 UMF won a court order to stay the receivership and asked PW to act as monitor.
PW agreed but did not inform the court of its previous connections with the case.
The Society challenged the order and after UMF became bankrupt in March 1988, it issued a writ against the firm alleging breach of fiduciary duty.
The New Brunswick High Court judge agreed.
Had the court been provided with the information that was necessary, he said, PW would not have been appointed receiver-manager because of‘the untenable conflict position’ in which it had placed itself.
He also criticised the firm for failing ‘to devote reasonable time to the court appointment’.
As a result, PW had ‘thereby disentitled itself to the fees it has been paid’.
After the judgment, Price Waterhouse issued a statement saying that it had acted in good faith according to its understanding of the conflict of interest rules at the time.
‘In the years since this situation first arose — due to various court decisions — the standards and rules have become more stringent.
We're confident that our current processes and procedures are more than adequate to deal with any concerns.’
LAVENTHOL & HORWATH
Former giant's last days
The process of winding up Laventhol & Horwath, formerly the seventh largest accountancy firm in the US, which entered Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in November 1990 (see ACCOUNTANCY , December 1990, p 9), is now nearing its conclusion.
The last hurdle to liquidation was overcome in August when a New York bankruptcy court refused to reopen a class action negligence suit brought by 160,000 former investors in Jim Bakker's Praise the Lord ministry, which was once a Laventhol client.
The suit, filed in August 1990 and halted when the firm entered Chapter 11, accused the firm of wrongly giving the PTL ministry a clean audit before it collapsed, and was preventing continuation of L&H's liquidation.
After the court refused a stay, lawyers for the investors agreed to a settlement which puts them on an equal footing with other unsecured L&H creditors.
A bankruptcy plan, approved by the same court, can now go ahead.
Under the plan, L&H's 629 former partners are being asked to pay back over $40m over the next 10 years, with some partners' personal assessments totalling as much as $400,000. 475 partners are thought to have approved the plan, but the remainder have either expressed their intention to appeal or have declared themselves personally bankrupt.
RECESSION
Life after IVA for Hook Harris
Partners in the south coast firm of Hook Harris & Co, which hit the headlines two months ago when it entered into an individual voluntary arrangement with its creditors, have bought the two main practices from the joint supervisors of the IVA.
Gaynor Harris and her husband Charles Bullworthy have purchased the Southampton office, which Ms Harris set up in 1980 and ran as a sole practice until it merged with A E Hook & Co, an old established firm on the Isle of Wight.
The purchase, she said, was made with money ‘borrowed from family and friends’.
The practice will keep the name Hook Harris.
At the same time, Peter Warren and Gordon Barton have acquired the Isle of Wight practice, which is the largest on the island, with funding provided by another south coast firm, Ashdown Hurrey & Co, through its subsidiary limited company.
It will be known as Hook & Co.
The original firm ran into financial difficulties as a result of the recession (see also this issue, p 26): according to documents lodged at Newport County Court, a combination of falling fee income, increasing overheads, expensive borrowings, and ‘ineffective credit control and billing procedures resulting in an unacceptable level of bad debts, unbilled work in progress and overdue debts’ led the partners to seek protection under the IVA provisions of the Insolvency Act 1986.
‘In retrospect we did make some questionable decisions,’ Mr Warren told ACCOUNTANCY .
‘But we did nothing to feel ashamed of and, without the recession, we would have got through.’
Under the agreement with creditors, they have three years to realise the firm's assets and pay back as much of the debt as possible.
The total has already been reduced substantially, according to Ms Harris.
She is optimistic about the future of the Southampton practice.
She says she has not lost a single client and has already won several new audit clients.
And she reports that the recession seems to be easing in the area, with companies expressing renewed interest in investment and acquisitions.
This is not reflected on the Isle of Wight, says Mr Warren.
The bad weather has meant that farmers have not been able to bring the harvest in, and it has devastated the tourist industry.
‘However, I'm very optimistic about our future,’ he said.
‘We've lost four clients out of a total of 1,800 and I expect others will drift away, but we picked up a new client just this morning.’
DISCIPLINARY ACTION
Andrew Oakley expelled
Ernst & Young's former marketing partner Andrew Oakley has been expelled from the Institute after misappropriating more than £300,000 of firm funds between January and October 1991.
A Council member, well-known for his role as chairman of the Institute's Information Technology Group, Mr Oakley had also served on the 1985 Davison Working Party on Fraud.
He was dismissed by E&Y in March.
Elwyn Eilledge, E&Y's senior partner told ACCOUNTANCY : ‘It is a very sad event.
He does have a wife who does not have the best of health and that seems to have been the spark.’
The firm will not be taking legal action and hopes to recover the money.
Oakley: Expelled
CHANNEL 7
Practitioners urged to be cautious
Channel 7, the telephone and Viewdata listing company which angered accountants over a year ago (see ACCOUNTANCY , November 1990, p 13 and March 1991, p 11) is still in operation and, according to a recent complaint, is using the names of the Institute and major firms to persuade other accountants to sign up.
Open to the public via telephone or computer connection, the service claims to list 25,000 companies of all kinds.
For a fee, firms — often orally promised exclusivity in a certain area — will be placed on the list.
Referrals of potential clients should then result.
The complainant, a partner in a small practice from south of Manchester, said that during a meeting one of the company's representatives, Mr Hoy, effectively said that the Institute was satisfied with Channel 7's marketing approach from an ethical point of view.
Relying on this and photocopies of the Viewdata artwork for Pannell Kerr Forster and KPMG Peat Marwick, he paid £500 plus VAT for a year's subscription.
A 90-day option to upgrade to three years for a total of £1,048 was also offered.
Having been warned off Channel 7 by Pannells, he contacted the Institute only to find that it could not approve the service.
He consequently requested a refund.
Channel 7, which made no apology for the discrepancies, refused.
ACCOUNTANCY got in touch with Channel 7's marketing manager, George Hyde, who admitted that, to his recollection, there had been no contact with the Institute.
There had, however, been ‘extensive contact’ with the Law Society, which had decided that the system did not contravene the solicitors' code of practice.
Channel 7 had assumed that the codes for accountants and solicitors were ‘very much the same’ and, said Mr Hyde, they had not received any indication from the Institute that a problem existed.
Although he was wary of commenting on a specific meeting, Mr Hyde said the company ‘would not make it a matter of policy to say we have been in contact or received authorisation, if that hadn't been the case’.
He thought it likely that the client had ‘misunderstood’ the discussion.
But, he added, it was also possible that Channel 7's representative failed to make his ‘position’ clear or ‘stepped over the line’.
Our source remains adamant that Mr Hoy did say that Channel 7 had been in contact with the Institute.
Mr Hyde also provided ACCOUNTANCY with a list of 18 KPMG, PKF and Haines Watts offices that had been listed on the system at one time or another.
Several could not recall subscribing to Channel 7; one had refused to subscribe; one had signed up for a trial period at some point; and the majority had been unhappy with the service.
Problems included failure to produce Viewdata artwork for inspection, or to fulfil oral promises of exclusivity, and absence of client referrals.
Two firms that rang the service anonymously discovered they were not even listed.
Several small practitioners in the same area as the original complainant also said they had been approached by the company, but only one had parted with any money.
One partner, who suffered repeated phone calls from Channel 7 until he cut them off, said: ‘People who signed up must be lacking in street wisdom.’
While the Law Society confirmed that the service had been cleared by its Standards and Guidance Committee in 1990, a spokeswoman was quick to point out that they had not endorsed the company in any way.
Jack Maurice of the Institute's Ethics Committee also warned that, although Channel 7 may not be ethically improper, practitioners should ‘consider carefully whether to spend money on it’.
INTERIM REPORTS
GRE breaks new ground
Insurance group Guardian Royal Exchange has broken new ground by publishing a review by auditors Price Waterhouse in its interim results statement for the first half of 1992.
According to director of corporate communications Keith Luckton, GRE felt that issuing an interim report clearly labelled unaudited did not fully inform shareholders of the work done by the auditors during the year.
The company discussed the situation with PW which, while stressing it could not give an audit report, was prepared to say what it had done in the form of a review to GRE's directors.
PW's review states that the financial information in the interim report is the directors' responsibility and has been approved by them.
‘Our review consisted principally of obtaining an understanding of the process involved in the preparation of the information, applying analytical procedures to financial data, and making enquiries of group management responsible for financial and accounting matters.
‘We did not visit operating locations nor verify the group's assets and liabilities at 30 June.
Our review did not constitute an examination in accordance with auditing standards.’
In the final paragraph the auditors conclude: ‘In our opinion, the half-yearly financial information has been prepared with due care and using accounting policies consistent with those adopted by Guardian Royal Exchange plc in its statutory financial statements for the year ended 31 December 1991.’
Interim results rarely contain reports from auditors, except when the figures need to be audited because of a major transaction or flotation.
GRE's interim statement also includes a consolidated balance sheet and a cash flow statement for the first time.
This is because the group recognises shareholders' need for information more often than once a year, Mr Luckton explained.
The extra information in the interims complies with a Cadbury Committee recommendation that balance sheet information should be included in interim reports and that these should be reviewed by the auditors.
HELP!
Desperately seeking woman
Are you the smartly dressed, well-spoken accountant with long blonde hair, in her mid-30s, from North London or Luton, who volunteered to help in completing the Burstow Wildlife Sanctuary's accounts?
If so, could you return their records as soon as possible?
Last May an article about the Sanctuary was published in the London Evening Standard .
As a result, it received several offers of help, including one from the mystery blonde accountant who came down to the Sanctuary twice.
‘We were under pressure from the Charity Commission to sort ourselves out and she said that she had done charity accounts before,’ said Penny Boyd.
‘She seemed very plausible.’
Unfortunately, the woman in question picked up the piece of paper with her name and address on along with all the Sanctuary's records, and has not been seen since.
If you can help, please ring Ms Boyd on 0293 773075.
A night to remember.
Luciano Pavarotti took a night off from his sell-out performances of Tosca at Covent Garden last month to appear at a Masterclass for four up and coming young singers.
The class, which was sponsored by Kidsons Impey, was given in aid of the Amici di Verdi, a society for lovers of Verdi's music whose main aim is to assist young singers and musicians.
A packed Bloomsbury Theatre heard the great tenor work on arias from Verdi's Un Ballo in Maschera with singers Jillian Foster (soprano), Sarian Crevelle (mezzo soprano), Ya Lin Zhang (tenor) and Gerard Quinn (baritone).
‘Pavarotti was superb with the four singers,’ said an enthusiastic member of the audience.
‘It was a wonderful evening.’
TAX FACULTY EXAMINATIONS
IoT campaigns for rejection
The Institute of Taxation has stepped up its campaign to ensure that the Institute's Tax Faculty proposals for a specialist examination are killed off, with a call for all its chartered accountant members to reject the idea.
In an editorial in the August issue of its inhouse magazine,Taxation Practitioner , president Jennifer Ainsworth wrote that there should be a call for the faculty to withdraw its proposals.
‘The uncertainty and debate that is developing is not helpful to the profession as a whole.’
The debate, she added, ‘demonstrates the frustration that I and others clearly share.
Indeed, from where is there a proven pressure or need for another set of examinations?’.
She adds that the Faculty's proposed grandfathering clause watered down the value of the qualification as far as the new examination entrant is concerned.
‘I query whether the examination will be attractive to sufficient younger tax specialists, and thus will it justify the development and training costs?’
This is followed up by a second editorial in the September issue in which Ms Ainsworth urges IoT members to use their influence ‘to ensure that the examination proposals do not get support’.
The IoT's stance has angered members of the Tax Faculty who are currently considering their responses to the consultative document; it has also led to speculation that the IoT is scared of losing members.
Faculty chairman Peter Wyman told ACCOUNTANCY that he thought the editorials were ‘outrageous’.
He said that what the Faculty was proposing was really none of the IoT's business and he objected strongly to its interference.
‘If enough of our members want us to provide an exam for them, then we should do that.
I don't think it would be an adequate response from our Institute to say to its members that if they wanted a qualification in tax, they should go and join another body.
That's tantamount to saying the Institute is not a major player in tax.’
He added that he had made it clear to the IoT that the Faculty would be willing to explore co-operation over exams, but the IoT was not interested.
Meanwhile, the Faculty has received a number of responses to the consultative document although the deadline is not until the end of October.
So far, they appear to have been largely supportive.
INDIRECT TAX
New VAT exam
From 1 January next year VAT practitioners will be able to acquire their own specialist qualification, following the Institute of Indirect Tax Practitioners' decision to introduce examinations from 1 January next year as a condition of membership.
Until that time, membership will still be open to people who have shown themselves to possess a broad level of experience in indirect taxation matters.
According to the IITP — the majority of whose members are VAT practitioners — indepth examinations in VAT, which test intellectual, as well as technical, knowledge of the subject, do not exist.
VAT does form part of the Institute of Taxation exams, but it is covered ‘relatively superficially’ and would not provide enough expertise for the successful candidate to become a VAT consultant.
The IITP says that interest in the exam has been ‘enormous’.
The Board of Customs & Excise has also indicated ‘some pleasure’ at the proposals and the IITP is optimistic that it might end up as the internal examining body for the department.
The IITP was set up in July last year and launched last October.
It was felt that many indirect tax practitioners, and in particular those dealing with VAT, were former employees of Customs & Excise and therefore did not have a professional body to provide them with recognition, training and quality standards.
It now has around 200 members.
RECRUITMENT
Graduate intake falling fast
The level of graduate recruitment among the top eight accountancy firms has fallen by 9% over the past year, according to a survey of firms carried out by ACCOUNTANCY (see table below).
Of the eight firms listed, only two — KPMG Peat Marwick and Arthur Andersen — managed to keep graduate levels at the same level as last year, while top ranked Coopers & Lybrand and BDO Binder Hamlyn reduced their intakes by 13% and 17% respectively.
Graduate levels at Ernst & Young and Touche Ross fell 2%.
The largest reductions, however, came from Grant Thornton and Price Waterhouse, which reduced their intake by 71% and 23% respectively.
Operating under its new Business Adviser Trainee Scheme, Grant Thornton now only recruits graduates suitable for grooming as partners —‘accounting trainees’ are recruited from school leaver ranks.
Price Waterhouse is testing its ‘START’ scheme, which should reduce the number of graduates but increase the standard they are trained to.
Presently operating in the auditing and business services practice in London, North West, South West and Southampton, it will go nationwide if successful.
EDUCATION & TRAINING
Practical training extended
Insolvency and information technology will now count towards the practical experience trainees need to qualify as chartered accountants, under new rules which came into effect on 1 August.
The change is in recognition of the fact that many trainees are now specialising during the period leading to the qualification, rather than afterwards, says Institute education and training director Phil Armitage.
‘This was a key issue which came out in a consultation exercise we held when we published our interim report on practical training in 1991.’
The new rules, which integrate training requirements for both trainees and newly qualifieds doing the two-year work experience requirement for a practising certificate, also introduce a minimum 20 weeks' training in accounting.
This, the Institute stresses, remains a core requirement, but in recognition of the difficulties of separating accounting from auditing experience in many assignments, the two functions have been linked for qualification purposes.
The rules will also allow groups of offices within firms to become authorised to provide training as single entities, instead of having to obtain separate authorisation for each location.
Ms Ainsworth: No longer so friendly with the Institute
SLOOPING IT UP
The prospect of spending eight months aboard a 67-foot yacht racing the wrong way round the world against the prevailing winds is not something that most seasickness sufferers would relish.
But, ailment included, future Price Waterhouse trainee Justine Cotton was ecstatic when she gained a place on Chay Blyth's 28,000 mile British Steel Challenge.
‘I first heard about the race while I was in my first term at Exeter University,’ she told ACCOUNTANCY .
‘I'd already gone on a beginners’ sailing weekend, and although it was very rough — not beginners' weather at all— I really loved it.’
Undeterred by the Challenge's ‘toughest ever’ billing, she immediately decided to apply for a place.
‘It wasn't just the sailing that attracted me,’ she admits.
‘It was the challenge and adventure in itself.’
An interview with Chay followed and during Easter 1989, despite her lack of experience, she was given a place.
‘He wasn't interested in experience because the idea was to train people,’ she explains.
‘He said he was looking for enthusiasm and his gut instinct for people.’
In fact, she adds, the aim of the Challenge was to move away from elitism and to offer an opportunity to ‘normal people’.
This idea of fair play has gone on to permeate the Challenge as a whole.
Supported by a wide range of companies — including British Steel, which sponsored Chay when he first completed the route 21 years ago — each of the 10 steel-hulled ‘sloops’ are identical.
Crews are fairly divided according to age and experience, and all 130 competitors had to raise £14,850 for their berth — Justine is jointly sponsored by Price Waterhouse and Blackburn-based accountancy firm Porter Matthews and Marsden, for which she has been working.
Winning, by completing all four legs in the fastest aggregate time, will, she promises, be ‘down to skill’.
Her training was not as exhaustive as one might imagine, however.
‘We didn't do anything for a year because nothing was built,’ she says.
Even when the training boat was launched, simple logistics meant she went on just four five-day training courses.
But, since the allocation of crews in January — Justine will sail on the Rhone Poulenc , sponsored by the chemical group's English arm — her skipper has intensified the programme.
She has since sailed at St Malo, at a yacht school in Southampton, and completed the six-day Fastnet Cup race.
‘It was really hard and I was very tired,’ she confesses.
But despite having to face Cape Horn and the unpredictable ‘roaring forties’, she seems confident that she can handle her jobs, which include trimming the spinnaker and dealing with the yacht's plumbing.
‘It's quite physical, hard work,’ she says.
‘You really have to use your brain, you have to anticipate things and you can't sit back and think it will all be all right.’
In short, she says, ‘It's fantastic training for life.’
UP BUT NOT UNDER
A Welsh accountancy firm with a local rugby club as a client is nothing unusual.
An accountancy firm bailing out a floundering client from its own pocket and expecting nothing in return, on the other hand, might cause Austin Mitchell to look up in wonder.
Put the two cases together and you have something approaching an explanation.
‘Rugby is a religion down here,’ offers Paul Marshall, senior partner of the firm in question and president of the South Wales District Society, by way of excuse.
Abersychan RFC's main claim to fame is that it produced Bryn Meredith who, at 34 games, is Wales' most capped hooker.
A member of the Pontypool and District League, Abersychan has always been over-shadowed by its more famous neighbour, the Pontypool club itself.
Broomfield and Alexander, a seven partner firm based in south Wales, had been the club's auditors for many years when it hit financial difficulties.
‘They had a drinking club, which floundered, and the brewery was threatening to re-possess the field and sue the trustees,’ says Mr Marshall.
The clubhouse was closed to save overheads and the headquarters transferred to a local pub, The Buck.
But the club was still under threat and hit a low point last year when it failed to field a team for the 1991 season.
The Welsh Rugby Union intervened to save the pitch, and then Broomfield and Alexander decided to step in and pay the club's legal costs.
‘We've acted for the club for a long time and have always had a good relationship with them.
It seemed a pity to see them going out of business.’
The grateful club played its first game in over a year last month, but, surprisingly, not in Broomfield and Alexander colours.
‘We don't have our name anywhere around the pitch,’ says Mr Marshall.
‘We could have the name on their jerseys — but we'd have to pay for the strip!’
Abersychan appointed Mr Marshall as club president by way of thanks.
‘I'm not sure what it involves — it sounds a bit like a hand-in-pocket job!’
But, he adds, he might get a few international tickets out of it, which are as rare as gold dust.
Nor is Mr Marshall expecting a Hollywood-style transformation of the club's fortunes on the field.
‘They are only an average valleys side who change in the pub,’ he chuckles.
‘We are not talking Cardiff Arms Park.’
A career to remember.
Thomas Munn, an 80-year old sole practitioner from Bromley in Kent, is currently celebrating an amazing 62 years in the profession.
And, he promised ACCOUNTANCY , he still has every intention of continuing.
‘I joined the profession on 8 September 1930 with Mannington Hubbard in Hastings,’ he explained.
‘I left in 1940 to join the RAF, which I stayed with until November 1945, and then I went to Hacker Rubens & Co which has now become Hacker Young.’
Having successfully struck out on his own in 1962, he has since been involved with the South East London Society, and has been its treasurer for the past two years.
Praising his ability to remember Acts, sections, subsections, qualifying cases and even inspectors' names, John Williamson, the Society's chairman, said: ‘He's still with the small practitioners group and still sharing his knowledge with his colleagues.
When Tom speaks we all listen.’
Justine Cotton: Toughest ever challenge
IN BRIEF Number crunches
Wednesday 23 September is an historic day for the Institute.
It is to welcome its one hundred thousandth member to the fold with a small celebration and a presentation in honour of the occasion.
President Ian Plaistowe will hand over a silver paper knife to Janice Ince, a project accountant at Credit Suisse.
Janice, who moved to the bank in October 1991, trained and qualified with Coopers & Lybrand.
The cost of travel
British executives spend more than three years of their working lives travelling and waste £7.5bn a year in lost time every year — equivalent to a 4p cut in income tax.
Only two in five use the time to work.
The rest doze, day-dream or read the sports pages, according to a British Telecom and Gallup survey.
In another BT study,Away From Base , psychologist Dr Guy Fielding identifies four distinct travelling personalities — the ‘bee’ who works hard when travelling but gets impatient if the journey takes too long; the ‘chameleon’who finds it easy to sit back and relax despite travel disruptions; the reliable ‘beaver’who always gets the job done but prefers to be in constant contact when on the move; and the independent ‘cat’who really prefers to be at home and likes to ‘take his own world with him’when travelling.
Clearly vetoed
As a follow up to its advice on what not to wear to an interview (see ACCOUNTANCY , September, p 21), Robert Half recruitment consultants — obviously not snowed under with work at the moment — has joined forces with Accountemps to unveil some of the stranger CVs companies have received over the years.
Lengths, they say, vary from 10 scribbled lines to a bound 50-page volume.
Some were written in caligraphy, another with a child's stencil set.
One came in three languages.
Content often left little to the imagination, with one candidate listing ‘winning a prize for dressing up as Kylie Minogue at the Finchley carnival’ among his or her achievements, while another left nothing to chance and scrawled ‘YOU CAN'T LIVE WITHOUT ME!’at the end of his CV.
They could.
Dodging the bore.
Duncan Heenan, who four years ago became the first chartered accountant to swim the Channel (see ACCOUNTANCY , November 1988, p 68), is still, it seems, addicted to spending hours at a time submerged in cold, murky water.
On August Bank Holiday he swam along the Severn river from Tewkesbury to Gloucester, some 10 miles, raising £450 for the Children's Society.
The appalling summer weather meant Duncan had more to cope with than he bargained for — cold water, a swollen river and a lot of fallen branches, leaves and other debris.
‘I felt the cold more than usual,’ he says.
‘I couldn't close my fingers to pull on the water after an hour.’
He also had to time his swim carefully to avoid the famous Severn bore, spending an hour and a half in a pub along the way while it passed.
In all, he spent the best part of four hours in the water, before meeting up at Gloucester Cathedral with the Bishop of Tewkesbury (above), who had walked the 10 miles along the river bank (a much more sensible idea), the culmination of a week-long pilgrimage around his diocese.
Looking to its laurels
KPMG Peat Marwick Midland Region has become the first of the Big Six firms' practices to gain the Investors in People award.
It was pipped to the post for first UK practice by West Country-based Bishop Fleming, which received the right to display the IP's laurel wreath emblem in April.
Investors in People, a TEC initiative, requires employers to comply with 24 performance indicators relating to existing and new employees' development and training.
Reservations only
Ernst & Young in the US has come up with an interesting new way to reduce overheads, according to the Public Accounting Report .
Auditors and consultants who spend more than 50% of their time out of the LA and Chicago offices will no longer have their own desk space.
Instead, they will have to phone up and reserve one of a pool of 100 rotating offices.
The ‘hoteling system’ has already reduced E&Y's space requirements by 18%.
Be prepared
As the litigation epidemic sweeps the US, a Toronto accounting consultant has urged all Canadian firms, and not just those in high risk brackets, to practise safer auditing.
Mort Shapiro recommends: that firms take their time, since undue haste could diminish performance; that every stage should be documented; that accurate language should be used on all occasions; and that auditors stick to their checklists and deviate at their peril.
Finally, Mr Shapiro points out, practice makes perfect.
Viewing rates
Accountancy Television has announced the rates for the first annual subscriptions.
These range from £750 for an individual subscriber to £4,000 for a commercial organisation with 1,000 to 1,999 employees on site or an accountancy practice with 8–10 partners on site.
Larger firms and companies will be able to negotiate their rates.
Individual quotations will also be given to subscribers with multiple offices.
Subscribers can also save themselves £275 if they pay up early: they will have their BBC selector or decoder installed and maintained for one year at the site of their choice for free.
For further information, telephone ; for individual quotations ring .
Vote of confidence
In the light of a growing trend for shareholders to question the reappointment of their companies' auditors, Coopers & Lybrand must be delighted by the robust defence put forward on its behalf by British Telecom.
In its report on this year's agm, it makes space to answer questions raised by shareholders throughout the year, including: ‘Is it not time that BT had a change of auditor?’
You would be the losers, comes the prompt reply.
‘A change of auditor would mean shareholders losing the advantage of Coopers & Lybrand's very thorough experience of BT.
A new firm would have to invest in learning about the business, and the audit fee would have to reflect that.’
Gloom over London
Firms in the capital are still pessimistic about the future, according to a survey by the London Society of Chartered Accountants.
The survey, of 300 London firms, showed that the level of consultancy, investment and other business activities is dwindling and that many firms think that insolvency work has passed its peak.
Staff levels have reached a low ebb and many firms are not expecting salaries to keep pace with inflation in the immediate future.
There are a few glimmers of hope, however, since fewer firms are having trouble collecting fees and all but the larger firms are optimistic about increasing their client base.
Vested interest
The South Eastern Society of Chartered Accountants' diamond jubilee appeal has received a welcome boost from Olympic gold medal winner Sally Gunnell.
Sally has donated her official Barcelona running vest to the appeal, which has a goal of £60,000.
The signed vest will be auctioned at SESCA's annual dinner on 30 October.
Postal bids should be sent to .
UK business news
19 AUGUST — 15 SEPTEMBER 1992
Recession.
The RPI for August rose by 0.1% compared with July.
It was the smallest August increase in 10 years.
Airlines.
British Airways warned that it will have to either close or sell off its UK regional business if its cabin crews continue to strike over pay cuts.
The company is also negotiating the purchase of a minority stake in the French airline, Transport Aerien Transregional.
Construction.
First half profit before tax fell by 12% to £58m at BICC.
Chairman Robin Biggam said that he does not expect to see any improvement until 1993.
John Mowlem is planning to sell part of its stake in the loss-making London City Airport.
Taylor Woodrow reported a first half loss before tax of £16m (v £25.3m profit); its dividend has been cut from 1.86p to 0.5p.
Tarmac announced that it is closing down four plants and reducing production, which will lead to 300 job losses.
Cars.
An increase in imports in the first half of 1992 caused the motor industry's trade deficit to more than double to £1.37bn (v £617m).
Because of low export sales, Jaguar is to make a further 700 redundancies.
Iveco Ford is to lose another 100 jobs.
Continuing low demand for new cars has led Ford to cut production at all of its three UK assembly plants.
T Cowie was not successful in its £32m hostile takeover bid for Henlys.
Power.
British Gas announced a second quarter current cost loss before tax of £82m, compared with £183m profit in the same period last year.
The figure was blamed on warm weather, increased competition and the recession.
Interim profit before tax rose by 17% to £84.7m at Burmah Castrol.
Rentokil.
First half profit before tax, helped by strong European sales, rose by 21% to £51.1m at Rentokil.
Telecommunications.
British Telecom is planning to create a new network outside the UK.
It will invest £500m over the next decade in order to build four computerised exchanges (London, Sydney, New York and Frankfurt) and 28 switching centres worldwide.
Leisure.
After being refused funds by its banks, Mowat was placed in receivership.
Half year profit before tax at Ladbroke Group rose by 5% to £103.2m; the figure was helped by a drop in interest costs of £14m.
Insurance.
The UK's largest insurance broker, Willis Corroon, reported that first half profit before tax fell by 22% to £54.1m.
First half loss before tax fell from £88m to £39m at Guardian Royal Exchange and fell from £114.1m to £97.9m at Sun Alliance.
Prudential Corporation reported that first half profit before tax rose by 46% to £249m.
Maxwell.
With debts of £406m, Kevin Maxwell became Britain's biggest bankrupt.
He still faces charges of theft and conspiracy to defraud.
Stationery.
US group Gillette is to buy Parker Pen for £285m.
The acquisition will double Gillette's share of the world writing instrument market to 15%.
Banks.
Don McCrickard is resigning from his position as chief executive of TSB Group.
He will be replaced by Peter Ellwood.
Retail.
In the year to 31 May, W H Smith Group's profit before tax rose by 26.6% to £112.7m.
Ratners announced a loss before tax of £122.3m (v £112.1m profit) for the year to 1 February.
Food.
Cadbury Schweppes announced that first half profit before tax rose by 13% to £126m; eps was 10.27p (v 10.16p).
First half profit before tax fell by 17% to £70m at United Biscuits.
The fall was mainly attributed to poor results at Keebler, its US snacks and biscuits operation.
Pharmaceuticals.
First half profit before tax fell by 58% to £40.4m at Fisons.
Glaxo announced that profit before tax rose by 11% to £1.29bn in the year to 30 June.
SmithKline Beecham is making considerable changes in research and development that will include redundancies and new investments in R&D.
It is the last part of the rationalisation that took place after the merger of Beecham and SmithKline Beckman in 1989.
Industrial materials.
Cookson Group reported interim profit before tax of £34m (v £17m).
Building materials.
First half profit before tax at Blue Circle fell by 25% to £42.7m.
Property.
London & Metropolitan reported that losses before tax fell from £100.3m to £26m in 1991.
The group's UK bankers have agreed to extend its loan facilities for another year until June 1993.
Conglomerates.
First half profit before tax at BTR rose by 7% to £548m; the figure was boosted by the acquisition of Hawker Siddeley.
Textiles.
First half profit before tax at Coats Viyella rose by 10% to £52.9m.
Packaging.
Bowater announced that first half profit before tax rose by 19% to £62.4m.
Business services.
First half profit before tax rose by 28% to £117.1m at Inchcape.
Shipping.
Swan Hunter is to make 1,400 redundancies because the company has been unable to find any new contracts.
Yarrow Shipbuilders is to make 510 redundancies in its ship outfitting division.
The company said that when work becomes available, the same number will be re-employed.
Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Company reported that first half profit before tax rose from £73.1m to £101.1m.
Rail.
Charterail, the private rail freight company partly owned by British Rail, faces possible liquidation.
Virgin Group is expected to abandon its plan to run a train service in competition with British Rail; the charges that would be imposed by British Rail would prevent the scheme from being commercially viable.
analysis
US LIABILITY
The elephant and the fly swatter
The US Big Six have been noticeably slow to take action against the ‘litigation epidemic’ that has been threatening the stability of their business for a good two years.
As long ago as December 1990, Robert Levine, chief executive of Laventhol & Horwath, warned that the main reason for his firm filing for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection was its escalating litigation costs.
‘It wasn't the litigation we would lose that was the problem,’ he said at the time.
‘It was the cost of winning.’
More than 18 months later the firms have taken the exceptional step of issuing a joint statement of position.
But in terms of effect, the firms are taking aim at an elephant with a fly swatter.
They face seemingly insurmountable problems but are handicapped by a lack of public sympathy.
One case too many of a shopper suing after he tripped up in a supermarket is more likely to trigger reform than a hundred multimillion dollar claims against accountants.
US accountants face six specific obstacles when fighting a damages claim, none of which arises in UK law.
First, they must face trial by jury in civil actions, which allows the plaintiff's attorney to appeal to the jury's emotions — and US juries are rarely sympathetic towards a large firm with seemingly endless insurance cover.
Second, most lawyers take on cases on the basis that they will not ask for an upfront fee, but a percentage of the amount of damages won instead — often as much as 40%.
Americans regard the contingent fee system as a better substitute for legal aid, and in many cases it is, but it does encourage meritless suits, since — and this is the third problem — even if a frivolous case is dismissed on the first day in court, the defendant is still liable for his costs.
Fourth, US juries are able to add an arbitrary amount to a ruling in punitive damages.
This year for instance, a Texas jury found that shortcomings in the Coopers & Lybrand audit of MiniScribe amounted to $2.8m — yet the jury awarded $200m in punitive damages against the firm (see ACCOUNTANCY , March, p 16).
Coopers later settled out of court for a fraction of that sum.
Fifth, class action suits mean that a shareholder with just one share can sue on behalf of the entire body of shareholders and, finally, the widely misused Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organisations Act allows any firm that has been charged with fraud more than three times in the previous few years, whether or not it is found guilty, to be perceived as a corrupt organisation and therefore liable for triple damages.
‘US accountants are sued as routine for fraud in a negligence claim,’ says Tim Lawrence of Coopers' litigation support department, ‘so practically all the big firms are liable for triple damages.’
The Big Six, in their statement, aimed most of their wrath at joint and several liability, something UK accountants would also like to see changed.
But again, US accountants are more at risk from joint and several liability claims since not every state has strict rules limiting the scope of the auditors' duty of care.
There is, however, some light on the horizon.
At the Republican Convention last month George Bush expressed his concern about the whole question of liability in the US, and particularly about the amount of money trial lawyers make from suits that lead to doctors refusing to practise certain areas of medicine, and even to parents refusing to umpire childrens' baseball games in case a child is injured and they are sued.
‘That does suggest that there could be some general changes in the law,’ says Mr Lawrence.
‘Nothing Mr Bush said was specifically aimed at the profession — no-one gets elected on the strength of helping accountants — but there is hope.’
Will the US government step in?
AUDITING STANDARDS
No obvious way out for the APB
The Auditing Practices Board is facing the first test of its credibility.
Its two exposure drafts on Going Concern and Auditor's Reports on Financial Statements , issued in May, marked the start of a determined effort to bridge the expectation gap both by explaining auditors' responsibilities to the users of accounts and by extending those responsibilities, particularly in relation to the going concern problem.
The APB cannot afford to retreat too far from its proposals without raising doubts about its effectiveness, yet the major audit firms' criticisms of the two EDs are fundamental.
Both EDs would require auditors to refer in their reports to inherent uncertainties affecting the accounts.
The gist of the auditors' criticism is that this is primarily a financial reporting problem rather than an auditing one.
This has two implications: any disclosures of uncertainties belong in the accounts, not in the audit report; and there needs to be an accounting standard defining what disclosures are required before there can be an auditing standard.
There are also concerns about how realistic it is to expect directors, let alone auditors, to confirm for one year ahead of the date the accounts are approved that their company will be a going concern.
Arthur Andersen argues that this ‘goes beyond what can realistically and responsibly be done…in most cases it will be impracticable.’
Ernst & Young point out that: ‘In most companies, even large ones, detailed budgets are only produced in respect of the forthcoming year, and the quality of forecasting is frequently not good’.
It concludes that the APB ‘may well be asking for the impossible’.
There are particular worries about small companies where, as Ernst & Young puts it, ‘the problem is exacerbated’.
Several commentators express concern not only about the practicability of the exercise, but also about the additional costs it will impose.
The banks are also a problem.
Many companies rely on their continuing financial support, but this support is rarely assured for any distance into the future.
The British Bankers' Association points to ‘the impracticality of requiring auditors to obtain assurances on the willingness of a bank to continue its existing facilities in terms which are too demanding’.
Indeed, the whole exercise is circular, since ‘most banks would wish to review the audited accounts before committing themselves to renewing on demand facilities’.
It is hardly surprising that a number of commentators wish to see an agreement with the banks on what assurances they can give, before the ED becomes a standard.
Because of these difficulties, there is a widespread view that auditors will regularly be drawing attention to inherent uncertainties surrounding the going concern.
The Institute's Auditing Committee forecasts that ‘many audit reports on smaller companies would be qualified…and that such qualifications would recreate all the problems associated with the old ‘Example 6’ opinion'.
It also expresses concern that ‘the increasing number of going concern qualifications which we foresee this statement precipitating may force businesses into receivership that might otherwise survive.’
The APB cannot ignore such strong criticisms, but it cannot accept them without badly damaging its credibility.
There is no obvious way out.
brought to account
GAYNOR HARRIS, PARTNER IN HOOK HARRIS & CO When growth and stability turned to disaster As the recession continues, an increasing number of accountancy firms are facing financial difficulties.
But the profession was taken by surprise when Hook Harris, a well-known firm in the south, entered IVA.
Gaynor Harris told Julia Irvine the firm's story, in the hope that others will learn from its experience
Recent reports have indicated that a growing number of small and medium-sized accountancy firms are facing severe financial difficulties.
Some are looking to sell their practices or merge their way out of problems that have been brought on by the severest recession the UK has experienced since the 1930s.
But the practice market has collapsed and some less fortunate firms are being forced into entering individual voluntary arrangements (IVAs) to protect themselves from their creditors while trying to straighten out their finances.
The Institute says that it is now receiving a steady stream of IVA notifications every month, a phenomenon which, until the recession started, was extremely rare.
Indeed, in its newsletter,Good Practice , it says that the ‘current economic recession appears to have dragged high-earning professionals of all disciplines into its maelstrom’.
But the extent to which firms are foundering did not really hit home until two months ago when the news hit the headlines that Hook Harris, a highly reputable and apparently profitable firm, based in Southampton and Newport, Isle of Wight, had entered into an IVA with its creditors.
The documents lodged at the Newport County Court tell a grim story: losses of £148,000 in 1991, followed by further losses in the first five months of this year of £127,000; £2,309,993 worth of liabilities; assets at a net book value of £1,773,115; and a practice on a forced sale worth just £232,601.
The documents blame the firm's predicament on increasing overheads, large payments to outgoing partners, and the problems of managing the business in recession, resulting in an extraordinary level of ‘bad debts, unbilled work in progress and overdue debts’.
As in all these cases, there is another side to the story, which Hook Harris partner Gaynor Harris is keen to tell in the hope that other firms facing financial difficulties will benefit from it.
The figures in the documents, she points out, describe a ‘worst case scenario’.
They represent a crystallised situation, which would have arisen if Hook Harris had ceased trading and been sold off.
However, the partnership is continuing to practise, albeit within a radically different structure.
The firm, Hook Harris, came into existence in 1987 as the result of a merger between an old established Isle of Wight firm, A E Hook & Co, and Ms Harris's own practice in Southampton, Gaynor Harris.
A E Hook & Co, which had been set up in 1922 and ran offices in Sandown, Ryde and Newport, was earning a respectable fee income of around £600,000 but had decided that the island did not offer prospects for further material growth.
Gaynor Harris, with a fee income of £300,000, had reached ‘that size where it was financially sensible to have the support of a long-established stable client base’.
‘I was effectively providing the growth,’ Ms Harris says.
‘They were providing the stability.
That's how we saw it and that was the reason for the merger.’
The fact that she had recently married A E Hook's senior partner Charles Bullworthy was not a deciding factor, she stresses.
The post-merger period amounted to halcyon days for Hook Harris.
A sole practitioner, Mark Ledger, was brought in to head up the Salisbury office, which Ms Harris had set up prior to the merger; the new firm set up an insolvency department under Geoffrey Morgan; and 18 months later another sole practitioner, Philip Parmenter, was brought in to set up another office in Witney, Oxfordshire.
‘It was a successful merger.
Fee income was still growing — we were very happy with the growth rate and everything was going according to the five-year plan we had drawn up at the time of the merger.
We did lose four equity partners along the way and had to borrow £300,000 to repay their capital accounts, but, with a turnover of around £2m, we did not consider it a problem.’
In 1989, Lloyds Bank, the firm's landlords in Newport, announced that they did not wish to renew the lease on the Newport office.
Given that they would have to look for other offices, the partners decided to take the opportunity to merge the three Isle of Wight offices and reap the benefits of the resulting economies of scale.
The choice of suitable premises in Newport at the height of the property boom was not large.
The firm finally settled on a shell which required a complete internal fit — from putting in offices, loos and kitchens, to carpeting and heating.
‘It cost an enormous amount — £184,000.
None of it was extravagant expenditure — we didn't buy new desks or other unnecessary items.
We actually spent only the necessary amount to put the building into occupiable order.
‘But at that stage there was no sign of the recession.
We were seeing a steady growth in fee income of around 15% in the Newport office, and when we made the decision to move, there wasn't a single indicator that we might see a downturn.
Of course, in retrospect, the decision to close down Ryde and Sandown and the cost of the new offices turned out to be a major contributory factor to the problems that we now find ourselves in.
At the time, it made sound financial sense.’
The firm negotiated a 25-year lease on the new premises at a cost of around £200,000 a year (including rates and service charge) and in August 1990, the newly merged Isle of Wight practice moved in.
But within months the recession arrived and what had originally been considered a financially sound decision turned out to be an economic disaster.
Last year, the Newport office, whose practice relied largely on small clients, saw its fee income drop from well over £1m to £760,000.
The offices on the mainland also saw their fee income fall, although not to the same extent.
But the Southampton office, which was a much more sophisticated audit practice with larger clients, encountered an increasing incidence of bad debts.
‘I believe we suffered the downturn because of the way in which we kept our clients up to date, insofar as when the recession hit, our clients didn't need to come to us because the Revenue was on their backs.
So the drop in fee income was largely people delaying letting us do the work: it wasn't solely through lost work.
And indeed we're seeing that work coming through at the moment.
‘In Southampton we had a higher incidence of bad debts because of the size of our clients.
When one goes, it's quite a lot of money and you feel it.
Altogether, we've suffered around £200,000 bad debts.’
As things started to go wrong, perhaps inevitably the partners began to question the lack of synergy between the two main practices in the work they were doing.
This led in June 1991 to an agreed plan to split up the practice into three: the Isle of Wight, Southampton and Salisbury, and Witney.
At that stage, the partners approached their bankers, NatWest, and asked if they could operate separate bank accounts for each office.
‘What we wanted to do was identify for each separate office its cash inflow and outflow as a preparatory discipline, if you like, before the demerger.
All the offices were still within the partnership and all the partners still had joint and several responsibility, but the bank said no.
‘The decision worried us, of course, but we let it go.
The problem was that we were firefighting not just for ourselves but for so many of our clients, and firefighting takes up a lot of time and emotionally is a strain.
‘That was also another contributory factor to our situation: the dilemma between professional responsibility and the commercial problems of running a practice.
Because a client cannot pay you, you can't say you won't act for him, you can't tell him to go and sort the Inland Revenue out himself.
In my opinion, we must continue as professional people to honour our professional responsibilities to clients.
‘Obviously, you can't continue to do all the work that a client would like you to do.
There has to be a balance.
But often over the last couple of years our help has enabled a business to keep going.’
By September 1991, a combination of the impact of the recession, the high fixed costs of the Newport office and the loans to pay off the four partners had landed the firm with a £1.65m debt, £1m of which they saw as long-term borrowing and £650,000 as their working capital requirement.
This level of debt, Ms Harris says, is ‘not unrealistic’ for a firm with a fee income of a couple of a million pounds.
But the bank was getting jittery and turned down the firm's proposal to turn £1m of the debt into a long-term loan repayable over 15 years.
The partners had already started to restrict drawings on the account, and Ms Harris and Charles Bullworthy then put up a £150,000 guarantee, supported by a second charge on their house, in order to increase the practice facility.
By June this year the debt level had reached £2.3m.
The partners still saw the demerger as the solution to their problems (in fact the Witney office was hived off in March this year), so they brought in Arthur Andersen to help them in their negotiations with NatWest.
But the bank wasn't interested.
‘The bank didn't like the way we'd put it to them.
It didn't come back with a refusal and allow us to discuss alternative ways of achieving our objective.
It foreclosed.
‘What I regret is that we didn't force the bank into this situation 15 months ago when we first approached it over the demerger.
The liabilities would have been less.
I could have borrowed from family and friends to keep Southampton going with no problem, but I couldn't borrow enough to keep the totality going.’
Because of the way the pressure from creditors was building up, Arthur Andersen advised Hook Harris to go into an IVA.
A formal creditors' meeting was held in August where it was agreed that Hook Harris would be given three years to pay back its debts under the supervision of Andersen partners John Talbot and Martin Fishman.
Ironically, by entering into the IVA, the firm will achieve its objective of demerging, although in somewhat reduced circumstances.
The Isle of Wight practice, now known as Hook & Co, has been bought by former Hook Harris partners Peter Warren and Gordon Barton with finance from another south coast accounting firm, through its limited company, Ashdown Hurrey & Co Ltd.
The insolvency department has moved to Southampton based Lyon Pilcher, the Salisbury office is closing down with the loss of four jobs, and Gaynor Harris is back where she started with the Southampton practice (to be known as Hook Harris) which she has bought from the old partnership with Charles Bullworthy, with money borrowed from family and friends.
In the two months since the IVA was made, the total debt has been and is continuing to be materially reduced.
‘The preferential creditors are now in the process of being cleared and the leasing agreements are being picked up, so those are no longer liabilities of the old partnership.
The total liabilities, including the bank, are realistically around £1.9m.
‘It's difficult to predict how much of that will be paid off.
It depends on debtor collection.
We've got clients, for example, where we are waiting for the sale of land to get our monies in, so it's reasonable to expect that we'll see that within the next three years.
And each partner is making a contribution to the IVA out of the profits that we continue to generate.
But I'm anticipating a shortfall of somewhere between £600,000 to £800,000, which equates to the £1m that we wanted as a long-term 15-year loan.
You know, it's so sad.
All we needed was the bank's cooperation and a bit of a breathing space.
‘Throughout this our clients have remained loyal.
We've gone through the worst of the recession.
The fee income is beginning to build up again and we have no reason to assume that the offices will not revert to their historic profitability — apart from the fact that we've lost insolvency and our Salisbury office.’
She says that none of the staff at the Southampton office has been made redundant, although several who have left have not yet been replaced.
But with the resurgence in business, those who are left are having to work long hours to ensure that the quality of service to clients is not affected, and she believes that she will have to start recruiting again before long.
But, before that can happen there are several questions that need answering about the future of firms which have gone into IVAs.
Although all firms that go into IVAs are automatically referred to the Institute's Investigation Committee, the Committee's policy is that it will adjourn consideration of their cases to give the arrangements time to work, unless there is evidence of fraud, falsehood or gross recklessness.
‘I believe that if the Institute were to make one of its inspections, it would not find anything to give them cause for concern over the way in which we have conducted our professional work,’ Ms Harris says.
‘Arthur Andersen felt that we hadn't been as strong on the commercial management as we should have been.
We would argue that that reflects the dilemma we felt about our professional responsibility versus commercial awareness.
‘I don't think we ever thought, though, that the bank would not support us.
That has been the most tremendous shock — the bank's lack of appreciation of the problems facing professional practices, whether it's accountancy, law or whatever.
Nor do I think the bank had any idea of the effect its action would have: that it would potentially create a loss for itself and other creditors.’
The experience has left her inevitably bitter, angry and frustrated.
Apart from having to fight to save her home, she has had to contend with vitriolic press coverage.
She and Charles have had their lifestyle raked over — their flash cars (‘Let's put this in context: the Alfa Romeo and the Jaguar are both five years old’) and their £425,000 house (‘It's actually valued at £250,000 in the recession.
Anyway, surely two professional people, both chartered accountants and married to each other, should be able to live in a house that was once worth £425,000.
I mean, dammit all, Charles has been working for 40 years and I've been working for 22’).
In addition, she has had to face the emotional stress of the last 15 months.
‘One can't get rid of the emotion, one can't get rid of the sorrow that this has happened.
It's like a personal bereavement.
On top of that, there are the feelings of disgrace and embarrassment that a firm of chartered accountants of our size and good professional reputation should find itself in this position — even if the factors are outside your control.’
As far as other firms facing financial difficulties are concerned, she says that she would advise them to consider IVA at an early stage.
But explore all the options first, such as cost-cutting and restructuring borrowings, before calling in an insolvency practitioner: they tend to see everything in terms of insolvency legislation.
‘If firms were to ring me up, I'd give them some jolly good advice,’ she adds…
‘For — a price!’
How do you solve the dilemma between professional responsibility and the commercial problems of running a practice?
Because a client cannot pay you, you can't say we will no longer act.
In my opinion, as professional people we must continue to honour our professional responsibilities to our clients
Isle of Wight and the mainland: Times are tougher on the ground
Gaynor Harris: ‘It's like a personal bereavement’
I don't think we ever thought the bank would not support us.
That has been the most tremendous shock — the bank's lack of appreciation of the problems facing professional practices
BR privatisation
PRIVATE TRAINS: HEADING FOR THE BUFFERS?
Selling off an organisation that hasn't made a profit for 40 years always looked like being the toughest possible test of the privatisers' skills, and recent developments are not making things any easier
Alan Purkiss
One wet evening at the end of August, there was a meeting at Euston House, British Rail's art deco London headquarters, that could have fateful consequences for the future of railways in the UK.
Directors of Charterail, a pioneering road-rail transport venture, sat down with James Jerram, BR's finance and planning director.
They asked if BR — with its 22% stake — would help to save the company by putting in more money and cutting its haulage charges.
The answer was no.
But the financial press was premature in reporting Cork Gully's appointment as liquidator.
As ACCOUNTANCY goes to press, Charterail is making a last ditch attempt to find more funding and reopen negotiations with BR.
But the outcome looks bleak.
Charterail — the other shareholders are industrial group GKN and the venture capital groups Electra and Gartmore — exploited innovative ‘piggy-back’ technology enabling freight to be transferred rapidly between road and rail.
Ministers hailed it as pointing the way forward.
Its demise would be a blow to the Government's entire rail privatisation strategy; doubt has been cast on BR's commitment to working with the private sector, and companies such as Richard Branson's Virgin Group, which have been planning to move into the rail business, will think hard before going ahead.
In its two years of existence, Charterail has tried to demonstrate that the railways could be used not only for bulk freight such as coal, aggregates and steel, but were also flexible enough to shift fast-selling consumer goods efficiently.
Its customers included Pedigree Petfoods, the Safeway supermarket chain, Coca Cola, Nestle and Ranks Hovis McDougall.
Goods were loaded on to Charterail road trailers that could be driven on and off flat rail wagons with swivelling beds.
(Conventional railhead lifting equipment for transferring containers between trucks and trains is cumbersome and slow; piggy-back is much quicker and easier.)
The greater part of a journey was by rail; only the beginning and the end were by road.
Charterail was transporting a weekly trainload of Pedigree products to Orleans, in France, and saw itself as ideally placed to link into the pan-European distribution system that will develop with the opening of the Channel Tunnel.
Charterail's managing director, Robin Gisby, says BR's haulage charges — 30% of the company's costs — turned out to be much higher than expected.
BR had, he says, indicated that as freight volumes grew, rates would fall.
That did not happen.
Nor was the state monopoly prepared to drop its prices in response to tougher competition from road hauliers; recession has put many of these out of business, and brought a 20% fall in the rates demanded by the rest.
Attempts to make locomotives work harder and to get more miles per shift out of drivers proved frustrating.
‘The locomotive for our London to Glasgow train was based in Leicester,’ Mr Gisby says, ‘so it had to come from Leicester to London before it did any work.
That sort of thing meant productivity was extremely poor.’
Charterail's relationship with BR changed.
Until 5 June BR had a representative on Charterail's board.
This was James Jerram — the man with whom they later started negotiating to stave off collapse.
The last days of August also brought the news that BR was busy setting up its own road-rail distribution operation, called Haulmark, to be based at Woking, Surrey.
Virgin may now have to reconsider its plans to move into rail.
It currently aims to run business-class passenger trains, with airline-style service, on selected long-distance routes.
The pre-privatisation experiment is due to begin next year, with Virgin running refurbished IC125 diesel-hauled trains (all that BR can make available) under the wires of the newly-electrified east coast main line from London to Edinburgh.
It will be in direct competition with BR's InterCity service.
If it is successful, Virgin will add other destinations.
The InterCity operation itself, which operates without subsidy, stands to profit from the privatisation proposals, unveiled in a white paper in July.
The odds are that it will be franchised, as a whole or in part, to managers and employees, perhaps in partnership with other investors.
Overall, however, the railways are likely to be one of the toughest state sell-offs of them all, for BR has not made a profit for 40 years and is widely perceived as demoralised and run-down.
The railways account for only 7.5% of passenger travel in Britain; their share of the freight market is 8%.
State subsidy amounted to almost £1.1bn in the 12 months to 31 March, up from £700m the previous year.
The white paper,New Opportunities for the Railways , sets out a plan to split track and signalling from provision of services.
BR will be divided into an infrastructure authority, called Railtrack, and a residuary body to run passenger services until these have all been franchised to private operators.
Its freight and parcels businesses will be sold off; operators will get a right of access to the rail network; stations will be sold or leased to private firms.
The system will be held together and policed by a franchising authority and a rail regulator.
The Government would like to privatise tracks as well, but has put this off until some point in the future.
‘BR is a relatively efficient railway,’ public transport minister Roger Freeman told ACCOUNTANCY , ‘but where the private sector can provide a service, it will be more responsive to the needs and demands of customers.
It is a question, partly, of unlocking talent already in BR.’
Buyout bids by management and staff will be aided by legal and financial advice.
Mr Freeman is confident that private operation will bring ‘a transformation’ in quality of service.
‘I hope it won't be too long,’ the minister says, ‘before every single service will be operated by the private sector.
It will give people choice in the sense that there will be competition between companies in quality of service.’
John Welsby, a former transport department civil servant who came to British Rail 10 years ago and took over as chief executive in January last year, believes the new system could prove unwieldy.
He refrains from criticising the Government's plans explicitly, but he points out: ‘Whereas everything is under one roof at the moment, different types of activity are going to be under different roofs.
We will have franchisees and people who are not franchisees but just wish to run on open access.
We will have Railtrack.
We will have the franchisor, who will be responsible for awarding contracts and for contract administration.
And we will have the regulator, who will arbitrate if there are problems between Railtrack and prospective users.’
One of the probable bidders for passenger service franchises is Stagecoach, an international bus company based in Perth, Tayside.
Since 11 May, two Stagecoach carriages leased from BR have been included in overnight sleepers between London and Aberdeen.
Brian Cox, who runs the operation, says: ‘Anyone coming in for the first time is going to start by taking on what's already there.
During the five years, say, of a franchise, they will work out whether there's a long-term business that's worth investing in.
If there is, they will be looking for an early signal that their franchise will be renewed.
Then they'll begin to commit themselves to capital investment.’
The sort of money involved can be gauged from the fact that each of the 31 trains for InterCity's newly-electrified east coast main line cost £6m.
Four-car Networker electric trains being introduced by Network SouthEast on its Kent commuter lines are £3m each.
The latest Class 158 two-car diesels for Regional Railways — rural and commuter routes outside London and the South East — do not come under £1.1m each.
Even now, recession and the prospect of upheaval seem to be blighting investment.
At the end of July, BR put on ice an £800m modernisation scheme for the west coast main line between London, Birmingham, Manchester, Liverpool and Glasgow.
Although annual rail investment, at more than £1bn, is currently higher than it has been for three decades, that results from decisions taken two to three years ago.
More than half of the money is, in any case, needed for just one project — the Channel Tunnel.
Another difficulty posed by the Government's scheme is working out how to charge competing private operators for track use.
More is involved than fixing a charge for notional wear and tear on track and signalling, then adding a mark-up; pricing will have to reflect the fact that line congestion fluctuates according to the time of day, week and year.
Traditionally, BR has operated a priority system based on trains' speeds, with express passenger services at the top of the list, followed by suburban passenger, parcels, express freight and so on.
Freight does not move over large areas of London and the South East in the four-hour morning and evening peaks.
With track charging, that could change.
‘This has the making of becoming the biggest bureaucratic complexity since Lord Woolton set up the rationing system,’ BR chairman Sir Bob Reid wrote after the white paper was published.
Stagecoach's Mr Cox says his company is interested in taking on elements of Network SouthEast and ScotRail.
But he is worried that track charges will form too large a part of the total costs.
‘If the track authority is less cost-efficient than it might be, it's going to shackle what we can do as an operator,’ he says.
There is a precedent: four years ago, Sweden split its railway into a track authority (BV) and an operating company (SJ).
Both remained state-owned, but SJ slashed staff and turned a loss on service provision into profit.
Director-general Stig Larsson says, however, that privatisation will not be feasible for the foreseeable future — and he would like to see infrastructure brought under SJ's control.
‘BV has become a monopoly provider and SJ has no control over its main resource,’ he recently told Railway Gazette .
‘Response to problems such as signal failure can be slow and we get complaints from our customers.’
The Labour Party and the railway unions, RMT and Aslef, claim the white paper is a ‘cherry-pickers’ charter'.
A riposte to that argument was provided by Sea Containers, the shipping group headed by James Sherwood.
The company has approached the Government with a plan to take over Network SouthEast services, including branch and suburban routes, in a wide arc between London and the south coast towns of Eastbourne, Brighton, Portsmouth and Weymouth.
It is looking for a 60 year franchise that could be terminated by the Government at 10 year intervals.
The brief experience of Stagecoach, the only private operator running regular passenger services, has been mixed.
It jumped in to fill a gap when InterCity ended seated accommodation on most sleeping car trains.
Stewardess service and airline-style meals are provided in Stagecoach carriages, but alcohol is banned — drunken rowdiness was one reason why BR withdrew its seated service.
However, there are not enough customers yet.
‘We are still some way from viability,’ Brian Cox admits.
On the freight side, until the Charterail debacle, immediate prospects seemed more favourable.
BR's Trainload Freight operation, which carries bulk loads such as coal, aggregates and scrap metal, is profitable (though Railfreight Distribution, handling miscellaneous freight by the wagonload, is still deeply in the red).
For several years, two quarrying companies based in Somerset — Foster Yeoman and ARC — have used their own wagons and locomotives — driven and maintained by BR staff — to haul millions of tons of stone across Britain.
Foster Yeoman sees potential in selling spare capacity on its trains to other users.
It is worried, though, that Railtrack might load track charges to pay for safety measures.
The notion that railways would benefit from the management independence, access to capital markets and weakening of trade union power that go with privatisation has spread across the globe, though private railways are not plentiful.
Japan provides one of the best working examples.
Its loss-making state rail network was split into six geographically-based companies and one freight company in 1987.
Staffing was cut drastically, from almost 280,000 to little more than 200,000.
By 1990, the combined profit of the seven companies after interest payments was Y388bn (£1.6bn), compared with the old organisation's Y1,361bn loss in 1986.
At the moment, all the companies are state-owned; the government wants to sell shares in them, but the dire state of the Tokyo stock market has deterred it so far.
Back in Britain, the performance of the four regional companies — the Great Western, the Southern, the London Midland & Scottish and the London & North Eastern — that were nationalised in 1948 was by no means as dismal as is sometimes claimed.
In the 1930s, they earned enough to make payments on their debentures and, usually, on their preference shares, though ordinary shareholders got very little.
During the second world war, the government took control of the system, worked it to death without investing and, under a fixed ‘rental’ agreement of 1941, pocketed more than half of the railways' receipts.
Nonetheless, the main impulse for the nationalisation of the four companies — and of all other transport undertakings — was ideological rather than operational.
Performance did not improve — road and air increasingly cut into the rail markets — and the railways were now in the political arena, to be tugged this way and that with every change of government.
From the mid-1950s there was an accelerating slide into the red.
At the time, it was believed that obsolescence was to blame.
A colossal spending programme was put into action; at its peak, in 1960, investment approached the equivalent of £2bn today.
By 1962, steam engines had given way to diesel locomotives and practically the whole of the system's signalling had been renewed.
The belief was that investment would pull the system back into financial equilibrium.
It did not.
The government then, in Mr Welsby's words, ‘changed tack completely’ and brought in Dr Richard Beeching from ICI.
Finding that a third of the track and half the stations accounted for only 2% of traffic, he began a drastic programme of closures.
Despite the doctor's surgery, deficits began to climb again.
But it was not until 1974 that the establishment of the so-called public service obligation grant marked acceptance of the notion that the railways, though necessary on social grounds, could not hope to pay their way.
In 1982, towards the end of Sir Peter Parker's chairmanship, four business sectors were created: InterCity, Network South-East, Provincial (now called Regional Railways) and Freight.
Geographical organisations would still operate the railway, but their role was to supply train services to the business sectors.
In the past couple of years, Sir Bob Reid and John Welsby have taken the process to its logical conclusion in a further rejig called Organising for Quality.
Operational functions have been entirely subsumed into the business sectors.
Under Sir Robert Reid, chairman from 1983 to 1990 (and not to be confused with Sir Bob Reid, his successor), BR's efficiency was transformed.
State subsidy fell steadily, from £942.1m in 1984/85 to £586.8m in 1989/90.
(Such figures are a fraction of the subventions normal on the Continent, where the fare-payer is asked for less, the taxpayer for much more.
In 1989, for instance, subsidies for France's SNCF were 5.5 times what BR received.)
In the same five-year period, BR's passenger traffic went from about 18bn passenger-miles to 20.7bn (peaking at 21.3bn in 1988/89); freight traffic went from about 7.8bn tonne-miles to 10.4bn.
In the course of the decade, however, staffing was reduced from 170,000 to 130,000.
BR speaks with some justification of a ‘quiet revolution’ in the 1980s.
‘There is no question,’ John Welsby says, ‘that we run one of the most cost-effective railway systems in the world.
By any measure of productivity, BR comes out highly, compared with our European colleagues.’
He adds: ‘What people mean when they say we're not efficient is that they would prefer to have a higher quality of service.’
There's the rub.
But recession has blighted the high hopes of the late 1980s.
In the latest year, InterCity just scraped a surplus of £2m on turnover of £900m and Network SouthEast slipped back to a £180m deficit, reflecting a drop of 8% in commuter journeys into central London.
Though Trainload freight was in surplus, Railfreight Distribution pulled freight as a whole into a £50m loss.
The collapse of the property market reduced exploitation of BR's considerable real estate assets.
The subsidy soared.
Even staffing has risen again, to 133,000, mainly for safety reasons.
BR now says that to run Network South-East without subsidy would require fare increases of at least half, and the Government is not disposed to argue.
It says it will subsidise future private operators rather than permit them to raise London commuter fares to commercial levels.
‘Making the decision to come in is difficult for an investor,’ Sir Bob Reid said in a recent interview, ‘as there is no easy exit once you are in, and there is not a lot of money to be made in the railway business.’
Ministers could probably make the privatisation scheme work, if necessary, by pumping in higher subsidies than they are prepared to give BR, but that would be politically embarrassing.
The jury is out on whether the Government is ushering in a new golden age of private railways or whether, in the words of one of its sworn enemies — Jimmy Knapp, the RMT transport union leader — rail privatisation will turn out to be ‘the poll tax of the nineties’
Charterail's demise would be a blow to the Government's entire rail privatisation strategy; doubt has been cast on BR's commitment to the private sector
Charterail: A pioneer in road/rail transport
The sort of money involved can be gauged from the fact that each of the 31 trains for InterCity's newly-electrified east coast main line cost £6m
Transport minister Roger Freeman: Championing Stagecoach
‘What people mean when they say we're not efficient is that they would prefer to have a higher quality of service.’
There's the rub.
Japanese success story: Can it be repeated in the UK?
Quorn
SELLING SUBSTITUTES TO A SUSPICIOUS NATION The British are conservative eaters.
Are enough of them likely to embrace a distant relative of the mushroom to give Quorn a healthy slice of the market?
Daniel Butler
‘We're just trying to contain the market at the moment — at least until we've got the capacity to deal with the demand.’
Ralph Pickles, managing director of Marlow Foods, has good cause to be a trifle smug.
Marketing any new product is fraught with dangers — the vast majority are defeated by a lack of consumer awareness.
The perils of introducing a new foodstuff are far greater: we are highly conservative when it comes to food.
If it took years for the French to persuade us to buy their cheeses, then selling a microscopic plant grown in a factory must sound like a marketing nightmare.
Yet this is what Marlow Foods, a subsidiary of ICI, is attempting with Quorn.
‘It is a delicious new food for healthy eating,’ runs the marketing blurb.
‘Vegetable in origin, Quorn is a distant relative of the mushroom…[which]occurs naturally in the soil.’
The company is certainly putting its money where its mouth is.
ICI began to research meat alternatives in the 60s, but it was not until 1985 that the company could put finished products on the shelf.
The raw material,Fulsarium graminearium , is a tiny plant that is grown in vast vats, with glucose, oxygen and nitrogen providing the nutrition.
This is filtered off after a few days, and the company is left with sheets of a solid, somewhat resembling uncooked pastry, which is then flavoured and textured.
So far the gamble seems to have paid off.
Quorn was originally introduced in ready-meals such as Tesco's Kashmiri Korma; sales rose quickly and there are now more than 60 versions on sale.
An attempt to export the product to Belgium has been more successful than Marlow had anticipated.
Buoyed up by the promising start, the company took the plunge and introduced Quorn as an ingredient in its own right two years ago.
Beginning in what is usually considered the gastronomically adventurous South East, the gamble was backed by a £1m television advertising campaign that featured a barn full of happy animals celebrating their improvement in life expectancy.
Deciding this was a success, last autumn Marlow announced a £37m investment to expand annual production six-fold at its Stokesley plant in Cleveland from 1,200 to 7,000 tonnes, and it decided to make Quorn au naturel available nationwide.
Until the plant comes on stream in 1994 Marlow faces a demand it cannot cope with.
‘It's been three years since we conducted a national campaign,’ says Mr Pickles.
‘And selling it to Belgium was just to test the market.
We're already planning further investment to boost production.’
The company seems to be on to a winner — at least in theory.
With sales standing at £20m last year, Quorn already compares favourably with the £24m that is spent on much older alternatives, such as the soya-based tofu, tempeh and textured vegetable protein (TVP).
But this is only the tip of the iceberg.
The Vegetarian Society estimates that in 1991 there were 3.6m British vegetarians.
With sales of vegetarian products estimated at a minimum of £335m in 1990 by Marketing Strategies for Industry (and possibly as high as £1bn according to definitions), it is potentially a highly lucrative market to tap into, particularly when, according to Juliet Gellatley, campaigns director for the Vegetarian Society, the number of non-meat eaters rose by 94% between 1990 and 1991.
Nor is the trend confined to vegetarians.
There has been a huge increase in ‘healthy eating’, with 5m Britons currently declining to eat red meat.
It is this market, according to Ralph Pickles, that Marlow is trying to tap.
Quorn's potential is not limitless, however.
To begin with, its uses are somewhat limited by its bland taste — even enthusiasts agree that it needs to absorb flavours in a recipe such as a stir-fry or casserole to draw out its best qualities: though arguably it has slightly more taste and texture than tofu, tempeh and TVP.
Also important for its long-term prospects is its failure to win the approval of the Vegetarian Society, because albumen, extracted from eggs, is used in its manufacture.
And the eggs come from factory-farmed chickens.
The Society is also unhappy that it was extensively tested on animals before being launched: ‘There are many reasons for becoming a vegetarian,’ explains Ms Gellatley.
‘Cruelty to animals is one of them.
We can't endorse a product which involves battery farming.’
Mr Pickles shrugs his shoulders.
‘We need high-quality dried albumen,’ he says.
‘If anyone can find me a source guaranteed to be salmonella-free and from a free range source, I'll be only too happy to switch to it.’
But, he adds, the problem is not acute because Quorn is aimed chiefly at a ‘mainstream’ market — carnivores who want to try healthier eating, rather than‘pure’vegetarians.
Here Ms Gellatley agrees with him, admitting it is a useful addition to the range of meat-alternatives on offer.
‘Products which imitate meat are good for people who have just become vegetarians,’ she says.
‘It can be quite difficult for some people to give up meat suddenly and Quorn is an easy product to use — it's also very healthy.’
And the Society's sales director, Tony Nowell, who is responsible for issuing the ‘V’ seal of approval, is optimistic that Marlow will be able to find alternative sources of albumen.
But the question remains — is the nation ready for it?
Or will the growth, rapid so far, falter on public apathy or distrust?
The answer has to be mixed.
To begin with, the view that the vegetarian market's potential for expansion is ever upward is vigorously contested by the Meat and Livestock Commission.
It says that sales of meat have remained constant during the past 20 years, standing at 64.2 kg a head per year in 1970, dipping slightly to 63.4 kg in 1980, only to rise again to 65.4 kg in 1990.
Although, in turn, Ms Gellatley contests the Commission figures, she does not dispute the fact that meat sales vastly outweigh non-animal products.
In 1990 they stood at £16bn, completely dwarfing those of vegetarian products, however loosely defined.
And even an enthusiast like her admits that the growth in converts to her cause cannot continue at the present rate.
Another potential problem for Marlow is how the public reacts to the idea of Quorn.
It is certainly true that, as the company puts it, Quorn is ‘a distant relative of the mushroom’, but it would be equally true to describe it as related to mould, toadstools and dry rot.
Quorn remains a fungus and, compared to our continental cousins, the British are notoriously suspicious of fungi and reluctant to eat anything other than the familiar field mushroom.
Marlow is understandably keen to play down the word fungus, preferring to describe it as myco-protein and stress its undeniable virtues such as its high fibre and protein content, coupled with low fat and non-existent cholesterol.
This is a difficult path to tread, however.
Recent food scares such as the discovery of benzine in Perrier and the salmonella-ridden eggs alarm demonstrate how dramatically a product can crash in popularity when production methods become common knowledge.
While no one is suggesting that any health risks attach to Quorn, it need only take one popular comedian cracking jokes at Quorn's expense to generate major marketing problems.
Ralph Pickles shrugs off the threat.
‘We receive 30,000 letters a year and the question of ‘fungus’ is simply not an issue,’he says.
‘Anyway,’ he adds, ‘yoghurt is made with bacteria — but people don't walk around the place saying ‘Look, I'm eating germs!’'
In spite of his optimism, Quorn is not without its critics.
‘It's a synthetic processed product, a manufactured analogue of a food,’ says Derek Cooper, the veteran food writer and broadcaster.
‘I certainly wouldn't eat it.’
He distrusts industrial processing and wonders why, if people want a meat substitute, they don't turn to the much more ‘natural’ tofu or tempeh bean curd products — both based on 2,000 year-old recipes.
Scepticism apart, much more important to Quorn's long-term success has to be its price.
At £2.49 for a 250g pack (£4.50 a pound) it is not cheap.
It is difficult at the best of times to persuade consumers to try a new product, but when it is more expensive than rump steak the problem is exacerbated, particularly when one of the undeniable attractions of vegetarianism is that it is such a cheap alternative to eating meat.
Marlow argues that Quorn's high fibre content makes it filling and that the 250g pack is enough to feed four people, depending on the recipe.
But, as primarily a meat substitute aimed at former carnivores, the portion in the film-wrapped tray can look pathetically small to a population that has been raised on the traditional four to eight ounces of meat each meal.
And even if it does capture a market, there is always the risk it may find itself losing customers to cheaper rivals, such as tempeh and tofu, once the initial suspicions of meat alternatives are overcome.
In spite of the high price, however, Quorn is currently losing money, although Marlow refuses to admit how much.
‘If it were sold at the price it needs to be to make a profit it would be a collector's item,’ says Peter Osborne, Marlow's sales and marketing director.
Ralph Pickles says that although the product is not profitable yet, the price has been set to allow for expanded production.
It will be making money soon, he says.
Whatever the pitfalls and problems ahead, Peter Osborne and Ralph Pickles remain confident about Quorn's future, sure that this product is right for a market that cares about healthy eating.
They may well be right, whatever the sceptics say.
Certainly, bringing any new product to the market is a difficult operation, let alone one with the aesthetic problems of a tiny fungus.
But if our views are coloured by prejudice and familiarity, why do we already eat many foodstuffs that in theory should be much harder to swallow?
Imagine if Mr Osborne were to try to sell the concept of milk, eggs or, heaven forbid, blue cheese to the British for the first time — how would you rate his chances?
Ready meals: Mediterranean kebabs a la Quorn
It is difficult to persuade consumers to try a new product, but when it is more expensive than rump steak the problem is exacerbated, particularly when one of the attractions of vegetarianism is that it is such a cheap alternative to meat
Quorn au naturel: You can have it as chunks, and now…mince
contaminated land registers
ENVIRONMENTAL CONTENTION Health and cleanliness is the basic aim, but at least one of the Government's environmental measures is likely to mean headaches for accountants, lawyers, surveyors and other professionals
Peter Carty
Plans to draw up registers of potentially contaminated land are already being fiercely debated — although they haven't even left the drawing board yet.
The aims of the Environmental Protection Act 1990 seemed uncontentious.
Section 143 requires local authorities to compile registers of land that might be contaminated and open them for public inspection.
The latest proposals for the registers from the Department of the Environment were unveiled at the end of July.
They dilute earlier recommendations — land registration would be confined to 10% to 15% of the UK's estimated 100,000 potentially contaminated sites — but are still problematic for business.
According to Nigel Horner of environmental advisers The Chartered Green Partnership, the day to day running of companies will be widely affected.
And he says that the registers will not just impact on companies owning the land included.
According to Mr Horner, ‘commercial decisions are going to have to take into account the environmental costs of cleaning land that may have been contaminated’.
Mergers and acquisitions, in particular, will be affected.
‘They are inevitably going to heighten interest — on the part of potential lenders to and buyers of companies — into their potential liabilities,’ he explains.
Crucially, as well as setting up the registers, the Act permits local authorities to recover clean-up costs from owners.
A related piece of legislation is the Water Resources Act 1991, which gives the National Rivers Authority wide-ranging powers to combat water pollution including, again, the right to compel landowners to pay for remedial work.
But regulations for implementation of this legislation are also some way off.
Assessing companies' potential liabilities will be difficult.
Environmental liabilities are notoriously difficult to foresee and quantify, and there is as yet no experience under the Act to draw on.
Auditors will be faced with problems in assessing accounts in which land is material, or where a large tract is owned and there is therefore a significant risk of liability.
Unsurprisingly, Mr Horner's solution is for accountants to call in environmental experts, in much the same way as they now call in surveyors for property valuations.
But this will not plug holes in balance sheets or stem the legions of contingent liabilities.
Though — at the earliest — the registers will not be available before 1994, the property industry sees them as a further blow to a sector already reeling from recession.
John Organ, partner at property consultants Healey & Baker, thinks the plans for smaller registers are an improvement.
‘It's a hell of a lot better than it was before,’ he says, ‘because virtually every manufacturing use had a potential for inclusion.’
‘It's really only sites that are polluted by heavy industrial processes that will be targeted now for inclusion,’ he explains.
Contaminative uses indicated in the consultative document are gas, coke, bitumen, lead, steel and asbestos works; oil refineries; the majority of chemical plants; landfill sites; waste incinerators; plants for the chemical treatment of waste; and scrap metal works.
Mr Organ thinks that the number of sites on the registers is bound to increase.
The consultation paper itself states ominously, ‘the Government has it in mind to extend the list of uses by further regulation in due course’.
He points to significant effects on the scale of future property development.
According to Mr Organ the registers will curb development in the UK.
‘It will dramatically affect whether sites are developed or not,’ he predicts.
Away from the South East, in particular, lower land prices mean that clean-up expenses would be a much higher proportion of any investment, making many developments uneconomic.
Inevitably, environmental pressure groups are not happy with limitation of the registers' scope.
‘We are very concerned about the revised proposals because they are going to exclude the vast majority of contamination from the registers,’ says Sean Humber, waste campaigner with Friends of the Earth.
‘Many sites will still be unknown and the public will remain at risk.’
There's no hope for a breathing space for the business community as far as Mr Humber is concerned: ‘We will continue to campaign for the registers to include all sources of contamination,’ he says grimly, ‘and we will campaign for not just land liable to be contaminated to be included on the register, but then for that to be backed up by actual investigation of those sites and for that to be put on the registers as well.’
FoE does, however, have sympathy for businesses exposed to liabilities because they have unknowingly become owners of contaminated land that they did not themselves pollute; as a result, for example, of buying land defiled by a previous owner.
‘The problem is that the Government hasn't properly thought through its proposals for contaminated land,’ says Mr Humber.
He thinks that the fundamental failure in the proposals is a lack of measures to identify the original polluters and to make sure that they pay the clean-up costs.
It's not all doom and gloom.
The Chartered Green Partnership's Nigel Horner sees opportunities as well as problems for businesses.
Of land on the registers he says hopefully, ‘it's possible that in areas with planning restrictions, planning permission might be given more readily in order for it to be cleaned up as part of development’.
benchmarking
COMPARE AND COMPETE Interested in how your competitors are doing?
Of course you are.
But comparing rivals' performances has become a discipline in its own right, and the consultants are out in force
Brian Singleton-Green
Benchmarking is beginning to look like a fad.
We might even be aboard a bandwagon.
Books and articles on the subject are proliferating.
Consultancies are investing heavily in it.
And the actual practice of benchmarking is increasing both in depth and extent.
Essentially, it is an information-gathering exercise.
You compare your performance with other companies' to identify where and how far you need to catch up, and what practices you need to adopt in order to do so.
In principle, there is nothing new about this.
Companies operating in a competitive environment have always been interested in details of their competitors' performance, and the operation of market forces ensures that those that fail to match their competitors also fail to survive.
But the finding-out process has been formalised, with its own terminology.
And Mohamed Zairi's Competitive Benchmarking: An Executive Guide (Technical Communications (Publishing) Ltd, £26.50) calls it: ‘The most valuable tool that senior managers could ever aspire to.’
If you want to do a benchmarking  exercise there are various ways of going about it.
You can buy information derived from published sources, such as the Business Ratio Reports from ICC Information Group (the old Inter Company Comparisons) based on Companies House filings.
But benchmarking exercises are increasingly based on ad hoc exercises conducted by consultants.
There are sound reasons for using consultants.
A lot of the most useful information in benchmarking will come from your direct competitors, but they are unlikely to fancy giving you detailed information about themselves.
Consultants can get round this problem by acting as a neutral third party.
On your behalf they can approach other potential participants, negotiate a common format and basis for the figures, collect and collate the information, and send it out again in a form that disguises which figures belong to which company.
Non-competitive benchmarking is also important.
Your competitors may not be doing things in the best possible way.
There may be aspects of your business that are performed much better by non-competitors.
Consultants can be useful here as well.
They can help to identify which companies you ought to be looking at, they may have a database of relevant information, and if you are looking at information-gathering from a number of companies they can save you time and effort if they do the legwork.
Some companies believe in obtaining information direct from other businesses and are willing to disclose it themselves.
Rank Xerox (see panel) are benchmarking enthusiasts and are happy to talk to other companies about it.
Vern Zelmer, managing director of Rank Xerox (UK) Ltd, says that they swap information with IBM, DEC and other competitors, although there are inevitably limits on what sort of information is disclosed.
Rank Xerox also talks to non-competitors who excel in a particular function.
But Rank Xerox is large and well-known and this must make it easier for it to get to talk to people.
If you are small and unknown, a firm of consultants acting on your behalf or using its existing knowledge base may be more realistic.
If your organisation is big enough, internal benchmarking can be useful.
This compares the performance of different units within the group, and gets the weaker members to adopt the practices of the best.
When Xerox first embarked on benchmarking it helped that it had a Japanese partner, Fuji Xerox, that it could look to for information about Japanese practices.
Few western manufacturers are so lucky.
But there are obvious disadvantages in internal bench-marking; if the whole group is performing poorly, it is of little use to raise standards to those of the best of a bad bunch.
Supporters of benchmarking usually stress the invigorating effects of looking outside for comparisons.
Managements become complacent and inward looking, according to Robert C Camp's Benchmarking: The Search for Industry Best Practices That Lead to Superior Performances (Quality Press/Quality Resources, £34.95).
Comparing your performance with other companies' brings you back to the real world.
It is all too easy to assume that if you improve your performance by 5% a year, you are making satisfactory progress.
But if you look outside at what your competitors are doing, you may realise that you need to improve by 20%.
And if you look at non-competitors who are the best in particular functions, you may find that you could improve by 30%.
External comparisons bring a double bonus.
First, the realisation that an activity needs to be improved by x%; this is the eye-opening process.
Second, identifying other people's best practices gives you the benefit of their knowledge and experience; you don't have to try to work out the best way of performing a particular task — you just learn from whoever is already doing it that way.
This second benefit is the harder to achieve.
Participating in a benchmarking exercise may tell you that your performance in a particular area needs to improve, but unless you also find out how it is that other companies are beating your performance, you may not feel much the wiser.
Figures also need to be interpreted.
The reasons why your results look better or worse than another company's may have nothing to do with the quality of your performance.
Figures from different sources may not be genuinely comparable.
The growing interest in benchmarking has produced some impressive efforts from consultants.
Last year, for example, Ernst & Young completed an International Quality Study , a joint project with the American Quality Foundation; more than 500 companies in the US, Canada and Japan participated.
(The study's Top-Line Findings are free from Ernst & Young, while the detailed reports are available for a small charge.)
Is it just a fad?
It would be surprising if benchmarking attracts as much media attention in five years' time as it does now.
But it is undoubtedly a useful management tool and, in a competitive economy, it always will be.
The fuss will subside and the bandwagon will grind to a halt, but the practice will remain.
And if your company isn't benchmarking yet, it probably should be.
Unless you also find out how it is that other companies are beating your performance, you may not feel much the wiser
BENCHMARKING BANKS CONSULT BDO
BDO Consulting recently performed a benchmarking exercise for the London treasury operations of 15 banks.
They were originally approached by a client and, on the client's behalf, they then approached the other banks that participated in the exercise (as well as a number that refused to).
BDO then agreed with the participants what information would be prepared and on what bases, so as to ensure comparability.
This was ‘quite an exercise’, according to Tim Smith, a managing consultant with BDO.
BDO collected the results from the participants and presented them in report form.
The participating banks each knew who the other participants were, but the figures in the report were presented so that readers could not work out which figures came from which bank.
Hambros was one of the participants.
Michael Irwin, a director of Hambro Clearing Ltd, says that the exercise was useful, both ‘to identify what our costs were’ and to establish ‘that we were extremely cost-effective’in the business of clearing and settling transactions, where Hambros wants to sell its services to third parties.
On this score, the results apparently gave Hambros some comfort, although Mr Irwin adds that ‘it probably made us feel less complacent, especially on the treasury side, about how well we were doing in terms of our costs’.
Mr Irwin has some reservations about the exercise.
The population in the sample, he says, ‘was really very small, particularly in the area in which we participated’.
This made it difficult to draw conclusions.
Also, although the survey shows that there is an ‘opportunity’ to cut costs, it ‘doesn't provide an insight into how to change your costs.
The information that comes out is too high-level’.
Neil Holden, Hambro Clearing's finance director, adds that they had to put in ‘quite a lot of effort gathering the data.
That was a major exercise’.
Barclays participated too.
Joanna Taylor, group management accountant at Barclays' markets division says that the exercise was ‘extremely useful’.
This is partly because Barclays was already conducting, but quite separately, a product-costing exercise.
Unfortunately this exercise ‘didn't mean a lot in isolation.
Everyone said ‘So what?’
' The product costing exercise meant more to people when they could compare the results with other companies'.
Like Mr Irwin, Mrs Taylor has some reservations about the benchmarking experiment.
‘The biggest difficulty was that it was anonymous,’ she says.
This made interpretation more difficult, but it was still possible to draw ‘some broad conclusions’.
Again, like Hambros, Barclays found that ‘an awful lot of work’ had to go into converting its figures into the common format agreed for the exercise.
But Mrs Taylor concedes that this is unavoidable (‘No two companies analyse their costs in the same way,’ she says), and feels that ‘the insights from the exercise justify the efforts involved’.
Barclays: Efforts justified
RANK XEROX: A PASSION FOR CUSTOMER SATISFACTION
The Xerox Corporation's development of systematic benchmarking is a logical extension of its pioneering approach.
It acquired and developed the original photocopier technology and in its heyday it had a virtual monopoly and made huge profits.
Things changed dramatically after 1975 when the US Federal Trade Commission required Xerox to grant worldwide licences for its copier patents.
Xerox was soon on the receiving end of intense competition, notably from Japan.
In 1978, its profits were $1.2bn; next year they were halved.
Xerox responded by embarking on a benchmarking exercise, comparing itself with its Japanese competitors.
What it discovered was a shock.
Its ratio of indirect to direct costs was twice its competitors'.
Its product lead time was twice as long.
It was clocking up 10 times more assembly line rejects.
Seven times as many finished goods had defects.
For some products, its manufacturing cost was as high as its competitors' selling price.
Vern Zelmer, now managing director of Rank Xerox (UK) Ltd, recalls how things were at the time.
‘We were an extremely introverted company.
We had grown up with a monopoly situation and there was no semblance of looking outside.
Cost-cutting to us was taking 5% off things that were double what they ought to be.
We had to force ourselves to get our costs in line.
Benchmarking was a way of survival.’
Cost-cutting was only half the story.
Xerox also developed, in Mr Zelmer's words, ‘an absolute passion for customer satisfaction’.
This is partly a matter of winning and keeping customers.
But it also ties in with cutting costs.
According to Mr Zelmer, most of the difference in costs between Xerox and its competitors ‘was fundamentally related to not doing things right first time’, the costs of having to rework assembly line errors and rectify faults in finished goods.
If quality could be improved, customers would be happy and costs would be cut at the same time.
Over the next decade, Xerox caught up with the competition.
It now boasts that it has reduced the number of defects in delivered machines by a factor of 10, and cut production line defects by a factor of 13.
It has won quality awards in Japan and the US and has a publicly stated objective of 100% customer satisfaction by the end of 1993.
Xerox has, as Mr Zelmer puts it, ‘100,000 hearts and minds focused on customer satisfaction’.
Xerox now applies benchmarking across its entire operation as part of a total quality management process.
Each company unit regularly assesses its own performance against numerous bench-marks, and its self-assessment is then validated by senior managers from another part of the group.
The process is one of perpetual self-improvement.
It is not, Mr Zelmer stresses ‘a one-off exercise that you do and then rub your hands and congratulate yourself’.
Xerox: Passion for customer satisfaction
careers
A CAREER IN CORPORATE FINANCE Anybody can buy a pair of red braces, but the symbolic variety is only available to highly-qualified workaholics with the right personality profile
Christopher McCooey
Ask anyone familiar with the City what they associate with corporate finance and like as not you will be told ‘red braces, long lunches, big mouths, broad concepts’.
This macho stereotype is somewhat unflattering, but there is an element of truth in it — a career in corporate finance is certainly not for the shy and retiring.
What may be referred to as ‘presence’ is just as important as excellent paper qualifications.
An accountant, in order to stand any chance of a career in corporate finance, must have a good academic record (2.1 or better) at a recognised university (red brick or Oxbridge), must have trained with one of the top accountancy firms, and passed the exams at the first attempt.
And jobs are sought after.
‘The giddy heights of the middle and late 1980s are over,’ says Ann Semple of Michael Page.
‘Back then, corporate finance was expanding with a lot of merger and acquisition activity, as well as privatisations.
It is much quieter now.
Although things have picked up in the last six months, the work is more likely to be restructuring, rights issues or corporate rescues.
Even though hundreds of accountants might be interested in corporate finance, the few opportunities coming onto the market are heavily fought for.
Assuming you have the right background, only a handful are even called to interview.’
As well as the academic and professional qualifications, accountants who aspire to the de rigueur red braces must also have personal characteristics that set them apart.
They are more likely to play a competitive game of squash than relax with a swim, and feel more at home playing poker than Scrabble.
A successful corporate financier needs to be more commercial, more extrovert and more ambitious than the average number cruncher, with leadership skills for when he — and it is still very much a male preserve — heads a team.
But despite its glamorous image of foreign travel, meeting and dealing with firms' top executives, and making headlines in the financial press when the deal bursts onto the markets, you have to be very committed and prepared to work long and unsocial hours (often at weekends) and be comfortable dealing with people who are often under stress and, in consequence, rude.
You must also be capable of working without breaking confidentiality.
Those privy to sensitive information about mergers or acquisitions of companies worth millions or billions of pounds must not abuse that privilege.
Again, if you are involved in re-scheduling a company's debt, a news leakage during negotiations can have a dramatic effect on share prices and even precipitate a collapse.
Receivership is anathema to corporate financiers, who hate to see their fat fees going to those who just pick over the bones.
There is considerable rivalry between banks and accountancy firms when it comes to giving corporate financial advice.
Some accountants have attacked the merchant banks for their inflated self-image and snobbery.
Bankers retaliate by pointing out that accountants' advice is invariably based on historic record rather than future possibility, and that it is impossible for them to give impartial advice if they have been auditing their clients' books over the past years.
Traditionally the merchant banks have been the main financial advisers in a merger or acquisition deal — they traded very much on their reputation for knowing all the right people and being able to approach them at any time.
Accounting firms were also retained, but banks often considered them to be ‘piggy-backing’ on their deal, only providing some modest technical due diligence type advice.
Also, in the gung-ho days of M&A in the mid to late 1980s, banks rarely considered smaller deals — those under $50m were ‘left’ to the accountancy firms.
But since competition has increased (the British banks were joined by American, continental and Japanese ones as well as so-called M&A boutiques) and business activity decreased, the banks are seeking to give corporate financial advice anywhere they can — even involving $20m, low-profile deals.
Yet banks retain an important edge over accountancy firms — they have access to external capital, which their rivals do not.
Most accountancy firms concentrate on the lower end of the market, leaving the big deals to the banks.
The more cautious analytical corporate financier might feel more at home in an accountancy firm, but the wheeler-dealer type should opt for a bank.
But in any event, those in corporate finance, whether working for a bank, an accountancy firm, or an M&A boutique, talk of the excitement and the rush of adrenalin when a deal is near to completion, and the need for secrecy adds to the buzz.
Julie Byford, who manages the financial services team at the recruitment agency Badenoch & Clark, cites another quality that employers look for when recruiting corporate financiers.
‘It will greatly help your chances if you are fluent in a second language,’ she says.
‘There are so many more cross-border deals today, and if you can speak German or French or Japanese and you go for a job against somebody who is equally qualified but only speaks English, you will get hired.’
As might be expected, the financial rewards are considerable.
Newly-qualified ACAs, usually men in their mid to late twenties, can expect a salary of around £30,000, plus the usual banking benefits package of a subsidised mortgage, car and performance bonus.
The bonus can be based on the institution's performance, the corporate finance department's performance or the individual's own, or all three — it can be a small percentage of annual salary or, in good times, 100% or more.
So, for the right person, corporate finance is both a high-risk and high-reward career option.
A successful corporate financier needs to be more commercial, more extrovert and more ambitious than the average number cruncher
FORTUNATE TIMING
Peter Gardiner's career pattern seemed pre-ordained, as his father was a partner in Mac-Farlane and Gray, one of the two top accountancy firms in Stirling.
But after graduating he joined rival firm Scott Oswald to complete his formal accountancy training, although the understanding was that he would return to the family fold once he had qualified with the opposition, which he did in 1985.
He decided to go to Japan to study the martial art aikido — a consuming passion — and to learn the language.
He intended to stay six months before returning to the secure family practice.
He ended up staying two years, partly because he found out that the sinecure in Stirling had, to use an aikido expression, dissipated.
‘At a low point during my stay in Japan when I was having trouble with the language and the culture I phoned my father to say I was coming home,’ recalls the black sheep with the black belt.
‘But my father told me that he had sold his interest in the business!
This made me study harder than ever.’
In 1987 he returned to the UK not only with fluency in Japanese but also with a Japanese wife, Nako.
He went to the top eight accountancy firms in London, all of which offered him a job.
He chose Touche Ross because he knew that it had a tie-up with Tohmatsu, the biggest accountancy firm in Japan.
He was involved in a wide spread of work: mergers and acquisitions including due diligence work, listings' requirements work, reorganisations, refinancings and MBOs and MBIs.
After six months with the audit group, he was headhunted by the then head of corporate finance at Touche, Ian Mc-Isaac, who rightly thought that Japanese M&A work was just about to take off.
‘The timing was so fortunate for me,’ says Mr Gardiner, whose Scottish burr disappears completely when he speaks Japanese.
‘On my first day in corporate finance I was translating for a Japanese MD who was hoping to buy a British company.’
In 1989, Mr Gardiner requested, and was granted, a posting to Japan.
Tohmatsu had never had a European accountant on secondment before, but the Scot, who sounds like a Japanese native speaker on the phone, slotted in effortlessly.
He is now concentrating on providing M&A services to Japanese clients looking for acquisitions in Europe, Japanese clients looking for domestic acquisitions and European clients looking for Japanese acquisitions.
The work involves searching for companies to acquire, approaching them, forming a view on price, then negotiating on behalf of clients and carrying out due diligence work.
‘Corporate finance work can be stressful,’ he says with a nice line in understatement, ‘but my aikido provides a very good balance.
I train at least three times a week and have learned more about Japan and the Japanese from that than any textbook.’
I LIKE THAT BUZZ
After Tonbridge School and a degree in geography at Durham University, James Riley joined Price Waterhouse in September 1982.
He qualified with them in December 1985.
Although he was working on some big accounts — British Gas, Bankers Trust, Harris Queensway and Beecham — he was ambitious and keen for a little more action.
‘Price Waterhouse provided an excellent training and the work was interesting.
But as accountants, although we were respected for our expertise, like lawyers, our work was entirely reactive rather than proactive,’ says Mr Riley.
‘We weren't involved in real decision making.
We were just recording what had taken place and checking it.’
In the middle and late 1980s, the corporate takeover market was hotting up and Mr Riley began making overtures to British merchant banks with a view to joining a corporate finance department.
Four banks showed interest and in November 1986 he joined Kleinwort Benson after interviews with Michael Martin, then head of M&A, and David Clementi, now head of corporate finance.
Such interviews are particularly important to assess character and to see if the interpersonal chemistry is right.
In corporate finance, a small group of colleagues can be expected to work long hours together under considerable pressure and conditions of secrecy.
‘I'm glad I didn't choose Morgan Grenfell — a month later the Guinness affair broke,’ says Mr Riley.
‘Between 1987 and 1990 it seemed the sky was the limit.
There was so much going on, and in corporate finance you felt that you were very much at the sharper end.’
The corporate finance division has about 180 staff in five departments: corporate advisory, projects finance, securities, debt financing and international corporate finance.
Mr Riley joined the corporate advisory department and is now an assistant director; he heads a transaction team of 10 and is involved with recruitment.
‘We're always looking for people of the right calibre, although today, with the downturn in levels of activity, it's harder to get into corporate finance than it was five years ago,’ he warns.
Kleinwort Benson concentrates on giving what Mr Riley terms ‘best’ advice to clients.
This may involve telling them what they may not necessarily want to hear.
‘We surprise clients by recommending them not to proceed from time to time,’ he says.
In a business where fees are usually paid on a success only, rather than an hourly, basis, this may come a bit hard to people who have worked hard for two or three months on a deal only to see it fall at the last hurdle.
‘When I was an accountant I knew when I was going to be busy well in advance.
In corporate finance you may get a call at 4pm and have to prepare papers for a crucial business meeting at 9am the next morning.
I like that buzz.’
farming
GROWTH WITH A DIFFERENCE Farmers' incomes are at their lowest since the war, and many have decided they must diversify to survive
Christopher McCooey
‘There's no money in farming today,’ says Bob Dockerty, 48, who owns 230 acres of mixed arable farmland and hop gardens just outside the pretty National Trust village of Chiddingstone in Kent.
His family has been farming the same land for generations but this year he has sown no cereal crops and has not even bothered to string the hops in the hop gardens.
But he has never been busier and in the past year has taken on three full-time staff.
The reason?
This farmer is now a successful brewer of real ale called, appropriately enough, Larkins (the name Mr Dockerty's farm shares with the popular Kentish family created by H E Bates).
With his parents and sister involved as well, Larkins Brewery produces up to 30 barrels a week (each barrel is 36 gallons) and they are sold to discerning pubs in Kent and Sussex.
Farmers' incomes fell by 14% last year (continuing a 10 year decline).
After adjustment for inflation, it means that they are at their lowest since the war.
In order to compensate for this, farmers are having to do what the Dockertys have done — diversify.
The British farming industry has been particularly hard hit in recent years — apart from the severe cuts in European agricultural support (subsidies paid under the Common Agricultural Policy), farmers have had to contend with damaging food scares (mad cows and ‘Curried’ eggs).
Stringent regulations imposed by local authorities and other officials have also put British farmers at a disadvantage.
And like almost everyone else in business in Britain today, farmers have had to contend with persistently high interest rates.
The farming industry has seen its indebtedness, currently £7.4bn, double in 10 years.
During the 1980s, assets with obvious potential for realising value were used to raise capital and pay off debt (redundant farm workers' cottages were sold, barns and oast houses converted for residential use).
But most of that property has come onto the market now, which in any event is steeply down in value from the heady days of the late 1980s.
So farmers are looking hard for new sources of income and, to be fair, the Government is encouraging the search: grants are available for feasibility studies (50% of cost), for employing a marketing person (40% in the first year but decreasing after that) and for capital expenditure (25% up to a limit of £40,000).
These measures are having some effect.
According to a study by the agricultural/ — economics unit at Exeter University, the number of farms that have diversified has nearly doubled since the mid-1980s.
Today more than 40% of farms have some kind of non-traditional activity, occupying the time of around 77,500 workers.
Golf courses might seem a very obvious use for redundant farm land, but where they are most needed — in the crowded South East — they have met most resistance from the environmental and Nimby (not in my back yard) lobbies.
The environmentalists complain that too many chemicals and sprays are used to keep the greens and fairways looking good, to the detriment of wild flora and fauna, and that too much water is wasted keeping the grass green.
With 1,465 golf courses now in operation and planning approval granted for 762 more, the heyday of farmers selling their land for three times its agricultural value may be past.
Local councillors can be quite obstructive to new ventures by farmers.
Often the councillors are the same people who have gone to live in the pleasanter parts of rural England for peace and quiet, and they tend to take a dim view if local farmers apply for licences to run money-earning, but intrusive, leisure pursuits such as motor bike scrambling, model aeroplane clubs, clay pigeon shooting, go-carting and jet skiing.
Even if the county council does give its permission, there is no guarantee that the project will be successful.
The same Exeter University study found that four of the 10 farms it looked at were making losses on their non-traditional businesses.
Farmers, generally speaking, like to grow crops and look after livestock rather than sell — and they prefer privacy; but if they are to make a success of opening their farm to the public they need to be professional about it.
Gone are the days when a hand-painted sign advertising a ‘Real working farm experience’ meant the townie parents paid £10 and got to look at an old plough while their children cuddled a fat, flop-eared rabbit.
But farming tourists as opposed to farming crops and livestock can work, and successful farms often combine the two.
In Nottinghamshire, father and son John and Tim Clark have 1,450 acres.
The father does ‘real’ farming — mainly growing potatoes — on most of the land while the son runs the White Post Modern Farm Centre on just 15 acres.
‘Farm experience’ tickets cost £2.50, and in 1991 165,000 visitors ‘ooohed’at the ewes and ‘aaahed’at the Angoras.
‘Farmers are having to tune in to their unused assets,’ says Mr Dockerty.
‘Ponds for fishing, bottling water from springs, extracting sand and gravel and in-filling afterwards with rubbish, pony trails, nature trails, bed and breakfast.
It's very difficult to get professional advice that is apposite — you used to be able to get free advice from the Ministry of Agriculture but now they charge you for the privilege of being told how not to farm.’
Bob Dockerty: Caught in the act of quality control
venture capital
THEY'RE STILL BACKING GOOD IDEAS In spite of the recession, shrinking markets and high interest rates, 1,196 companies attracted venture capital backing last year.
Even embryonic companies will be funded if the deal looks right
Nigel Cope
These may not be the best of times for the venture capital industry, but they are far from disastrous.
‘The market tends to be good in times of recession,’ says Norman Murray, deputy chairman of Morgan Grenfell Development Capital, which launched its fund in 1989.
‘People are selling off unwanted peripherals which in better times might have been bought by a trade buyer.
Now the trade buyers are not coming forward, which favours the buyout funds.’
The market has altered, of course.
Sums invested are smaller (the average buyout was down last year to £1.9m from its peak of £2.6m in 1989.)
And debt equity ratios are far more cautious.
‘Most people are going for much more conservative finance,’ says Roger Brooke, chairman of Candover Investments, which has a reputation for large buyouts.
‘You wouldn't get any financing for an Isosceles now.’
Investment in start-ups and in early stage developments has been particularly badly hit, down from £128m in 1990 to just £58m last year.
But even in the teeth of a recession, companies large and small are successfully gaining the backing of the venture capital funds and paying them back handsomely.
The British School of Motoring was a £40m buyout in April 1990, backed by Morgan Grenfell Development Capital.
Led by former Price Waterhouse chartered accountant Paul Massey, BSM is now expanding considerably, although it has had to delay its stock market flotation.
The name BSM is  synonymous with learning to drive.
Most people could recite its slogan, ‘Every seven minutes someone passes with BSM’(now in fact it is more like every six minutes).
And who has not zipped past one of the BSM Mini Metros and fondly recalled their own experience of chronic problems with clutch control, seven point turns and botched emergency stops?
BSM has 18% of a highly fragmented market (many driving schools are just one man and a car), more than 2,000 vehicles and 130 outlets in the UK.
But in spite of its size and its history — it was founded in 1910 — BSM has kept a fairly low profile.
It rarely featured in the financial press, and did not appear to have much of a voice on driving matters — unusual for a company in its position.
BSM was just kind of…there.
The reason was that the company was privately owned by the Jacobs family, which preferred to stay out of the limelight, and just got on with running the business.
That all began to change in April 1990 when BSM was sold to its management, led by Paul Massey, for £40m.
Mr Massey, who had joined the group in 1985 and ended up as group finance director, recalls the early stages: ‘When Anthony Jacobs mentioned selling, I talked to him about the possibility of an MBO.
We trooped round a number of venture capital funds and discussed the options.
They looked at the low asset base and in the end it was decided to go for a trade sale.’
But when that proved impossible, Mr Massey got another chance and the ‘beauty parade’ of venture capitalists began again.
How did he choose?
‘It came down to personality,’ he says.
‘I felt that the people at Morgan Grenfell fitted my style.’
Norman Murray at Morgan Grenfell agrees.
‘Personal chemistry is the most important part of picking your partner,’ he says.
‘If the management and the institutions don't feel they are going to get on, there is little point in continuing.’
The BSM deal was more debt-heavy than most: just £500,000 of equity, laid against £l6m in loan stock, £15.5m in senior debt and the balance of £8m in the form of a bridging loan.
The size of the debt has put pressure on BSM's balance sheet.
While sales were up to £20m last year (from £15m in 1990) and operating profits were a very healthy £4m, interest of £3.4m payable on the debt wiped most of it away, leaving the company with a pre-tax profit of just £810,000.
‘It has been tough,’ Mr Massey concedes.
‘We haven't hit our targets, but we have come close.
Our backers tell us that, compared to others, we are actually doing pretty well.’
Since the MBO, BSM has started to refurbish its branches, launched a motorway test and sought to move closer to the corporate fleet market by offering courses on risk minimisation to corporate drivers.
It is also extending its fleet maintenance division and now has two service centres, one in Coventry and the other recently opened in Leamington.
The recession has meant that the group has had to put its plans to float on hold.
Initially Mr Massey had hoped to seek a listing within three years of the MBO.
Now he says he has no immediate plans for exit and has not ruled out a trade sale.
Morgan Grenfell seems happy and has not been looking over Mr Massey's shoulder.
‘I was not expecting a great deal of management input from them,’ he says.
‘I was looking for a sounding board and that's what I've got.’
Things went rather better, though hardly perfectly, at Taunton Cider, purveyor of cider brands Red Rock, Diamond White and Dry Blackthorn.
Just a year after chairman Peter Adams and his team completed a £72.5m buyout from Bass and Courage in May 1991 (which between then owned 80% of the stock), the group went public.
The listing was something of a wet blanket — half of the shares were left with the underwriting  institutions — but at least the company had got its listing away.
A couple of years ago this had looked impossible.
When Bass and Courage decided to divest themselves of Taunton, they appointed Schroders to handle a trade sale rather than an MBO.
‘We raised the possibility of an MBO and were told to get back in our box,’ says finance director Nick Pearch.
But with a lot of uncertainty in the market and with trade buyers thin on the ground, an MBO began to look more attractive.
Merchant bank Samuel Montagu introduced the management to Morgan Grenfell Development Capital.
‘We saw several venture companies and one of our first questions was: ‘How much of the equity can we get?’'recalls Mr Pearch.
‘Some said 5% and so the discussion ended pretty quickly.
There's no point putting your balls on the line for just 5%.’
With Morgan Grenfell the management came out with an equity stake of 15%.
Total equity was £3.5m (£650,000 from the management and employees), total debt £85m.
The group had a good first year, with pre-tax profits up from £14.3m to £18.6m.
Taunton's share of the cider market reached 35%, ranking it second to Bulmer (45%).
Taunton is as much a success story for the employees as for anyone else.
Of the 504 staff, only eight declined to invest.
They must be kicking themselves (or drowning their sorrows in Diamond White).
With the placing valuing the company at £153m, anyone who had invested £100 found it suddenly worth £4,000.
The three founding directors became paper millionaires.
But there have been no sightings of Ferrari Testarossas in the car park yet.
‘We're all too busy working,’ Mr Pearch says.
‘It's business as usual.’
The management at Perry Poultry might not have amassed this sort of paper wealth yet but, only founded in 1989, the company is already making a name for itself in the food business.
The company was formed by Alistair Ross, who in 1986 had sold a 3i-backed poultry business to Hillsdown Holdings.
Located in Bilston in the Black Country, Perry Poultry buys oven-ready poultry, which it processes for a prestigious range of customers including Marks & Spencer, Sainsbury's and Kentucky Fried Chicken (Perry makes Zingers, Kentucky's new line of spiced burgers).
Mr Ross had already built a substantial business when he began to approach banks for additional funding.
What he was after was not bank funding but advice on European Community finance that might be available.
When the banks proved unable to provide much assistance, he turned to 3i.
‘3i looked at the business and said they might be interested in buying an equity stake,’ says finance director Penny Smith.
Stephen Ross (no relation), a director with 3i in Birmingham, takes up the story: ‘We knew Alistair Ross and respected what he had done with the other poultry business.
We liked the team and we liked the sector.
But I think they were pretty surprised by our interest.’
The result was an injection of £250,000, which gave 3i a 15% stake.
The cash was used to install further production and marinading facilities.
Now the company has 270 staff (it started out with just 30 three years ago), has increased production by 20% over the past year and has a turnover of £l2m (it expects that to rise to £l4m next year).
Ms Smith says she is particularly impressed by 3i's hands-off approach: the venture capital giant does not even have a director on the board.
‘That's what we've liked about them,’ she says.
‘We turn to them if we need them.
Otherwise they let us get on with it.’
Also getting on with it is Carevision, exploiting a relatively new market in Britain — installing TV sets at hospital patients' bedsides.
It charges the patient £3 a day for the hire of the set and each hospital receives 10% of revenues.
It promises to be a tough task.
First the company has to sell the service to a young market, and it also has a major competitor: Thorn EMI, whose Hospitelli service currently has installations in 30 hospitals.
But the company has its believers.
The three founding directors — Paul Cassidy, Simon Church and Bob McKay — put in £80,000 when the company was formed in December 1990.
Then this April Schroder Ventures really got the company off the ground with £1m of development capital.
‘Originally we were going to self finance,’ says Simon Church.
‘We then looked at individuals and then started talking to four or five venture capital companies as well as merchant banks.
In the end it comes down to attitude and relationships.
We felt we were compatible with Schroders.’
One of the potential problems with Carevision was that it was a very young company with a management team that had not worked together before.
Getting the backing was a long process — over four months.
‘We were frustrated at the time but came out with a completely proven business plan,’ Mr Church says.
So far the company has installations at 12 hospitals, with many more contracts under discussion.
It hopes to achieve sales of £1m by March 1993 and then double sales until the turn of the century.
Even in the teeth of a recession, companies large and small are successfully gaining the backing of the venture capital funds and paying them back handsomely
BSM: Narrow misses on bumpy buyout ride, but doing well
Taunton Cider: Staff are drinking to successful investment
CAPITALISTS AND THEIR VENTURES Britain's venture capitalists now realise that their industry is subject to the economic cycle.
Is this a good time to invest with them?
Peter Temple
The current recession has demonstrated beyond doubt that the venture capital industry is subject to the economic cycle after all, and that annual rates of return on such investments of 40% or even 30% are a thing of the past.
The recent flotations of Kenwood, Anglian Windows, MFI and Taunton Cider — some albeit undersubscribed — might suggest that all is well on the management buyout (MBO) scene, but appearances can be deceptive.
For example, although MFI's flotation undoubtedly represents robust management performance, two refinancings were necessary; so will the original investors make much of a return?
Other recent flotations might just represent companies' taking advantage of windows through which to de-gear, rather than waiting for the exits that offer the optimum long-term return.
‘Venture capitalists’ is an appropriate name, because the quest for suitable deals is increasingly taking them away from straightforward MBOs.
Banking involvement in the MBO scene has contracted sharply as a whole tier of European and Far Eastern banks, which took on MBO debt in the eighties because of the lucrative margins available, melted away and left the field to a handful of long-standing domestic participants such as NatWest, Barclays and Bank of Scotland.
The consequence of this is one key problem that the venture capital industry faces: not so much related to the price of loan capital, but to its availability and the conditions under which it is lent.
The reduced number of banks participating in venture capital financing has meant a dramatic reduction in the availability of debt, and gearing levels demanded by the banks who do participate have fallen sharply from 7:1 or 8:1 at the height of the boom to 1:1 or less.
One result of this has been a contraction in the value that venture capitalists can put on for particular businesses.
Some argue that valuations may yet fall further and that care is still needed to avoid paying too much for the wrong deal.
MBO and venture capital fund investors are only slowly appreciating that the trade-off for the lower risk inherent in transactions that are more carefully selected and more conservatively structured than those typical in the mid-eighties has to be lower anticipated rates of return, whether the exit is via a trade sale or a flotation on to a less than receptive equity market.
Opinions differ about the breadth of opportunities now available.
Venture capital thrives on flux.
Sharp swings in business activity, changing corporate cash requirements and the perceived need for industry at large to focus its operations, are all likely to produce opportunities for divestment and hence for the application of venture capital.
The recession has also clearly produced forced sales of businesses as well as more measured ones.
But it is a moot point whether the likely slow pull out of recession over the next few years will produce the desired returns for investors unless the venture capitalists can, as they claim, really add value.
Some observers feel that the opportunities for the traditional MBO are now limited.
Many deals now add a management ingredient via a partial management buy-in to fill a management gap in an MBO.
Such transactions are known in the trade as ‘buy-in management buyouts’ or Bimbos.
For the venture capitalist who can supply the relevant manager to fill the gap, they offer the advantage of actually getting the transaction done.
But conventional management buy-ins, which are becoming more common as the supply of normal MBO transactions dries up, involve more risk, since the knowledge of the target's internal workings is no greater than that available to a trade buyer.
From the viewpoint of their investors, the value added offered by venture capitalists not only derives from the careful structuring of transactions but also from extreme selectivity in their choice of investments.
Enskilda Ventures, for instance, selects companies in the £20m to £l00m category in the UK, France and Germany, predominantly in the service and light industrial sectors, and companies in which there is a very obvious management task to be accomplished.
It studiously avoids areas such as computers and biotechnology.
Phildrew Ventures has a slightly different strategy.
It does not rule out specific industries, but looks for companies in the £l0m to £100m area that are well-established operations with a strong market position; big enough to support a sensible market structure; small enough to offer a reasonable growth opportunity; and where there are likely to be attractive opportunities for exit.
Additional risks can come via overambitious growth plans, vulnerability to technology or product development, over-gearing or through backing ‘one-man bands’.
Says Phildrew partner Ian Hawkins: ‘We are in the risk business, but we're not in the business of losing money.’
It is probably fair that venture capitalists have more say over a company's affairs than a conventional bank lender with the comfort of a secured arrangement.
Venture capitalists will normally expect, and get, at least one seat on the board, operating what Mr Hawkins calls an ‘eyes-on, rather than hands-on’ approach to management.
At one extreme, the venture capitalist's role is to play the part previously filled by the parent company.
Even then however, there is a reluctance to interfere too much in day to day management.
An MBO can offer the company's managers independence, and remove previous constraints such as lack of cash from the centre, lack of awareness and lack of opportunities.
What the venture capitalist structures into a transaction for the manager, aside from opportunities and greater freedom, is incentive.
Most MBO managers stand to become seriously rich if the venture succeeds, and this creates a commonality of interest between the managers and the venture capitalist.
So the notion that venture capitalists are prone to interfering in the businesses in which they invest is not, strictly speaking, a valid one, or if so not a criticism about which MBO managers would fret too much.
There are, in any case, few venture capital transactions in which these issues are not debated at length prior to signing, with the agreed principles then cemented into a shareholders' agreement.
Where differences arise, they are likely to stem from decisions that begin to vary from the previously agreed business plan.
‘Every investor has to back the judgment and ability of the management, but what we want to control is the exceptional event,’ says Enskilda Ventures' managing director Bert Wiegman.
According to seasoned players in the industry, there are several ways that the venture capitalist can add value for the manager: City introductions; the conservatism and inherent financial disciplines the investor imposes; and scouting for acquisition opportunities.
Most importantly, perhaps, the venture capitalist can be relied on to identify and negotiate the best possible exit route, since it is on this that the investors' return depends.
Venture capitalists can also help in less happy circumstances.
According to Ian Hawkins: ‘The recession has tested the ability of management to cope with a period of economic downturn deeper and longer than anyone expected, and the venture capitalists’ ability to negotiate their way through it.
The key ability is to know to address problems early and to know what you can reasonably expect the banks to do.
The venture capitalist has been there before; he should be able to recognise the warning signs and take appropriate action.’
In the end, the venture capitalist has his own customers to satisfy.
Says Bert Wiegman: ‘The smarter venture capitalists have realised that if they can't add value, they won't be able to raise new funds from investors.
You have to be able to prove you can do it.’
And though the industry is young, there are signs that it is moving tentatively towards the notion of performance league tables for venture capital fund managers.
The British Venture Capital Association, for example, is currently looking towards setting common standards for measuring performance.
Because of the long-term nature of the business (many funds run for five years or more), there are comparatively few firms that have been going long enough to supply relevant data.
Venture capitalists' optimism or otherwise about the medium and longer term tends to be governed to a degree by the number and quality of the deals on offer.
Most are now agreed, however, that there is a cycle that affects the pricing both of initial deals and exits, the supply of debt, and the general level of MBO investor confidence.
After overheating in 1989, the market may be verging on the over-cautious today.
There are different views of the scale of the opportunity that presents.
Many of the obvious MBO candidates have been identified and future deals, though more conservatively structured, may be inherently riskier.
Few venture capitalists feel that the UK equity market has the effervescence to be able to generate the level of returns seen in the past, and so are looking to continental buyers to supply the exit opportunities for cleanly-structured, discrete, well-managed UK companies.
Another feature of the next few years may be that the stronger venture capital firms will get stronger as the industry levels off and greater competition for business drives down returns.
A further trend could be for increasing numbers of small transactions with individual investors becoming involved, providing both management expertise and money, as some of those who benefited from the earlier buyout boom recycle their profits.
There is no doubt that the industry has developed sufficiently in the past decade for an MBO or similar venture capital-financed transaction always to be on the vendor's agenda if a disposal is being contemplated.
‘At the very least,’ says Ian Hawkins ‘it avoids their being crawled over by the competition.’
Most MBO managers stand to become seriously rich if the venture succeeds, and this creates a commonality of interest between the managers and the venture capitalist
personal finance: investment advisers
YOUR VERY OWN MANAGER There has been a surge recently in the number of smaller fund management companies keen to take on private clients
Flavia Hawksley
Many of the larger investment managers now concentrate on institutional funds or set very high minima of £1m or so for the private client portfolios they will take on.
Nevertheless, there are now more smaller fund management companies actively looking to manage portfolios for private clients, either as part of larger groups or as boutiques.
If you wish someone to manage your investments, you must first check that they are properly authorised to do so, either by one of the self-regulatory organisations — Lautro, Imro, Fimbra and SFA — or by a recognised professional body such as the Institute or the Law Society.
If the fund manager is part of a financial group it is advisable to consider possible conflicts of interest.
However, your assessment of whether the manager is reputable, experienced and has a good performance record will be of prime importance.
Although most investment managers will seek to run the portfolio on a discretionary basis, it is vital to be convinced that they will try to meet your particular needs for capital appreciation or income.
Getting to know the people running your portfolio and developing a relationship with them are essential.
Clearly the charging structure of the particular company will need to be examined.
Often this is an annual fee based on a percentage of the value of the portfolio plus dealing costs.
Most managers will send out regular half-yearly valuations and comment on the performance of the portfolio.
These reports should be studied to make sure that your portfolio is being run according to your aims.
Two firms of chartered accountants offer an in-house investment management service.
BDO Binder Hamlyn (phone 071–489 9000) has recently expanded its investment management service and has embarked on a joint venture with Matheson Investment managers to give a broader base and access to greater research and expertise.
It offers a discretionary portfolio management service to clients with a minimum of £100,000 to invest.
Annual charges start at 1% (minimum £1,000), decreasing to 0.75% from £500,000 to £2m, 0.5% between £2m and £5m and 0.2% on anything more.
There is no commission charge on transactions, save for the stockbroker's commission of around 0.25%.
And any commission received from, for example, unit trust management groups, would be passed on to the client and reinvested on his or her behalf.
Smith & Williamson (071–637 5377) also has in-house investment managers and offers full discretionary portfolio management mainly for the private client.
It has no formal minimum portfolio requirements and no minimum charge; on average charges are between 0.75% and 1% a year.
The majority of managers will offer discretionary and advisory services, though discretionary work forms the main part, and some are not prepared to take on strictly advisory portfolios.
‘We always encourage discretionary work,’ says Christopher Taylor-Young of Taylor-Young Investment Management Ltd (071–407 3452), ‘because in our view it's much more successful, and I think it's a better service.’
A discretionary service means that decisions can be made without having to track the client down —‘it's surprising how difficult it is to get hold of people’— before it's too late.
Mr Taylor-Young also says that costs are basically the same as for an advisory service so unless the client has time and is very keen to be in charge, it is advisable to opt for discretionary management.
His company is small and independent, which means there are no apparent conflicts of interest.
It prides itself on this fact and points out in its brochure that while a large group can offer a wide range of services ‘many of which you are unlikely to want…its investment managers suffer from real problems and conflicts of interest: supporting in-house issues, buying in-house unit trusts, helping its market makers and churning portfolios’.
Taylor-Young Investment Management accepts minimum investments of £50,000 for its unit and investment trust service and £100,000 for a wider portfolio.
It charges an initial fee of 1% and a 1% annual fee.
But, as with most investment managers, the actual fee charged may be negotiable.
If you prefer a manager who is part of a financial group such as Granville Investment Management (071–488 1212), part of the merchant bank, you will again have a tailor-made investment plan.
Granville's model portfolio — UK fixed interest 10%, UK equities core holdings 50%, UK equities smaller companies 20%, US 3%, Far East (including Japan) 5%, Europe 7%, cash 5% — will be adapted to the particular circumstances and objectives of each client.
You may opt for extra services such as private banking, insurance planning and tax reviews.
This fund manager has an annual charge of 1% on the first £150,000 invested, 0.75% on the next £850,000 and additional charges for transactions of between 0.1% and 1.25%.
Dunedin Fund Managers (031–315 2500) offers a discretionary portfolio service to private clients with a minimum of £500,000 to invest.
Fees start at 1% for the first £500,000, decreasing to 0.4% for the next £9.5m.
And, unlike many firms, Dunedin charges dealing costs at institutional rates, usually around 0.2% to 0.25% as opposed to, say, 1.65%.
It also operates in a different way, according to client director Robert Seaton: ‘We appoint a client director as opposed to a fund manager.’
This means that rather than having one person responsible for all the funds — UK, Europe, Far East and so on— the different geographical locations are split up and allocated to managers specialising in that area.
‘It means they benefit from institutional fund management as opposed to private client stockbroking where one man must know all the markets, and it's much more efficient,’ he stresses.
For individuals with substantially less money, Dunedin will take on a minimum of £10,000 for its discretionary unit trust management service.
Kleinwort Benson Private Bank (071–956 6600) will manage discretionary portfolios of £250,000 and more for an annual fee of 0.75% of the total portfolio.
This charge is offset by dealing costs that are charged at the normal rate, starting at around 1.65%.
But the first £25 charged on each deal is kept to pay for administrative costs.
For clients with between £50,000 and £250,000, Kleinwort Benson offers a discretionary unit trust service, with an annual charge of 0.25%, minimum £250, in addition to the normal charges associated with unit trusts (bid offer spreads of around 5% and annual management charges).
As well as investment management services, Rea Brothers (071–623 1155) offers private banking.
In addition it provides the client with a quarterly valuation, rather than the usual six monthly or annual review, and this includes a concise package of tax information for the client's accountant.
Minimum portfolios are usually £50,000, with a maximum annual fee of 1%, which may be negotiable.
Details of private client fund managers appear regularly in the Investors Chronicle ,Money Management and Crawford's Directory of City Connections (for larger groups).
STOCKBROKERS: STILL WILLING AND EAGER Post-Big Bang, many stockbrokers are subsidiaries of larger financial groups, but more than 200 of them still welcome private client business
Flavia Hawksley
Private individuals looking for a stockbroker to advise on or manage their investments may not know how to start.
Although many of the larger integrated securities firms such as UBS Philips & Drew, Barclays de Zoete Wedd, Warburg Securities and Hoare Govett do not generally cater for private clients now, many other firms do, offering a whole range of services including advisory or discretionary fund management.
There are more than 200 stockbroking firms eager to take on private clients, ranging from the independent, old-fashioned type of broker through to some of the larger international firms or subsidiaries of the clearing banks.
However, many brokers are now subsidiaries of larger financial groups.
The first point to establish when choosing a broker is what level of service you need.
Some stockbrokers run an execution-only service (ie buying, selling and settlement) without advice, at lower commission rates.
Such a service is particularly useful for people who only want to sell a few privatisation shares.
There is a growing tendency for brokers to offer a range of services encompassing personal financial planning, tax planning, insurance planning, and private banking in addition to discretionary and advisory portfolio management.
Many also issue a monthly newsletter giving investment advice.
What is the minimum size of portfolio brokers require?
While many stipulate portfolios of at least £50,000 or £100,000, some do not specify a minimum.
This cannot be taken literally.
Most will want a reasonable input — usually between £10,000 and £20,000, although the actual amount is often negotiable and depends very much on the client's circumstances.
Most brokers will deal on a one-off, execution-only basis for much smaller amounts.
Other aspects to consider are charges, possible conflicts of interest, and efficiency in dealing and settlement.
It may also be advisable to check the broker's performance record on discretionary service wherever possible.
Many stockbrokers have, in recent years, introduced annual fees on discretionary funds, calculated as a percentage of the total portfolio.
However, some have retained the more traditional method of charging commission on transactions only.
Critics say this spells trouble for clients as there may be more incentive for these brokers to churn the client's portfolio to generate an income for themselves.
Another argument in favour of fees over commission is that there will be more incentive for stockbrokers to take a real interest in their clients' portfolios, since any increase in their value will bear directly on the brokers' remuneration.
However, there is little doubt that people are not yet accustomed to the idea of paying fees and are tempted to avoid it even when the final result may be better.
Consequently there are still many brokers who have not yet introduced a fee.
Greig Middleton & Co (phone ) is one such broker.
It has been established for over 100 years, and has eight offices throughout the UK and a subsidiary in Guernsey.
It is keen to stress that it is ‘one of the few remaining brokerage houses that are genuinely independent’.
It also claims that its business has been growing faster than any of its competitors, basically because clients don't like paying fees.
‘We're picking clients up left, right and centre from all sorts of people who've been charging pretty fancy fees and really failing to do any better than we do,’ says Michael Read, head of the private client department.
He adds that the private client business produces an average of around 0.35% commission as opposed to the industry's norm of around 0.5%.
‘I think that clearly establishes that we don't churn.
We take a very responsible attitude towards the fund management business, which is why it's growing.’
He also explains that the reason he is happy to accept minimum portfolios of £25,000 is because ‘time and time again, small investors who come to us are pleased with the service and come back five or ten years later’, having inherited substantial sums.
Another firm, Keith Bayley Rogers & Co (071–378 0657) also continues only to charge commission on transactions, and stresses that it has a large and long-established client basis and no need to churn portfolios.
Its minimum for discretionary management is around £20,000.
James Capel (), one of the oldest and most respected stockbroking firms in the UK, was founded in 1775 shortly after the London Stock Exchange was established.
Now a subsidiary of Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation, it has offices all over the world.
It will take on minimum portfolios of £100,000 for discretionary management and £250,000 for advisory.
For investors with less, it offers a unit trust portfolio management service for a minimum of £25,000.
For discretionary management, it charges 0.6% on the first £500,000 invested with a minimum charge of £750, 0.3% on the next £500,000 and 0.15% on anything more.
It also offers a 40% discount on its standard commission rates for advisory work; these start at 1.11% for the first £10,000, with a minimum of £45 for a sale and £55 for a purchase.
For the advisory service clients are charged a flat rate of £250 annually and higher dealing costs.
Capel-Cure Myers Capital Management Ltd (), founded even before the Stock Exchange formally existed, has offices nationwide, but stresses that its investment scope is international.
Like many stockbroking firms it offers deposit facilities along with complete financial planning.
It does not state a minimum portfolio requirement but does make a small annual charge, maximum 0.1% of portfolio value, in addition to transaction charges.
Hill Osborne & Co (), established in the east Midlands since 1899, has a minimum portfolio requirement of £25,000.
It offers a range of services in addition to stockbroking, including personal financial planning and valuations for probate or tax purposes.
It charges commission on dealing only, starting at 1.75% for up to £7,000 of ordinary UK stock and diminishing thereafter.
Commission on small sales is charged at discretion.
PH Pope & Son (), a long-established independent firm based in Staffordshire, says it will not usually take on less than £20,000 for discretionary management but will do advisory work on less.
It produces a six-monthly valuation for both types of management and has no annual charge.
Commission rates on dealing start at 1.65% on the first £7,000 and then on a diminishing scale, with a minimum of £20 on both sale and purchase.
More information and a list of private client stockbrokers can be found in the Directory of Private Client Stockbrokers , available free from Apcims () or ProShare ().
SCOPE FOR THE DIY INVESTOR A wide range of execution-only dealing services awaits investors who prefer to make their own decisions
Robin Dunham
There is plenty of choice for the investor who wants to dispense with a broker's advice and simply issue specific instructions to buy or sell shares and deal with settlement.
The commission charged is usually lower than for advisory and discretionary business.
Some firms charge a joining fee, for example Fidelity, £25; Pilling Share Club, £20; Skipton, £5.
All the firms have detailed client agreement forms that need to be studied carefully.
Midland Bank offers a standard service at all its branches, and also has a share shop service at more than 120 branches.
This service is not restricted to Midland customers and the commission charged is the same as for the standard service, but with a maximum of £150.
Other Midland facilities include TeleTrade, a direct telephone service; specialist services for intermediaries and institutions; and, through First Direct, the only telephone share dealing service that never closes.
Barclays Bank has a share shop dealing service for leading equities.
Commission is 2%, with a minimum of £15.
ShareLink, which claims to be Europe's largest share dealing service, is open seven days a week: 8.30am to 6pm on weekdays, and 10am to 4pm at weekends, when many clients have more time to think about their investments.
Weekend orders are collected and then executed, subject to any limit instruction, first thing on Monday.
Also available is ShareLink InterDeal, which meets the needs of the intermediaries (solicitors, accountants and financial advisers) who arrange the buying and selling of their clients' shares.
NatWest has a Touchscreen execution-only service for selected stocks at certain branches.
Commission is 1.5% on deals of up to £9,999 (minimum £20).
Many of the larger UK listed companies now have special arrangements with brokers to offer a cheap dealing service in their shares.
British Gas ordinary shares can be sold easily, and at attractive rates, through NatWest Stockbrokers (phone ).
Rank Organisation has a low-cost share dealing service for its ordinary shares with Hoare Govett (); and Williams Holdings with Barclays Stockbrokers ().
Articles in the Investors Chronicle , 20 March, and in the Financial Times , 25/26 July, detailed some of these special low-cost deals, which often include personal equity plans, too.
emerging technologies
TELEVISION A PROBLEM OF DEFINITION As with the arrival of videorecorders, the development of high-definition television sets is beset with problems of standards
Nic Morris
Some time during the next decade ‘affordable’ high-definition television (HDTV) sets will reach the mass market, in the meantime the European consumer will shortly be offered a variety of ‘compromise’wide-screen TVs, falling somewhere between true HDTV and conventional models.
They will not offer the clarity of full-scale HDTV, which is more than twice that of conventional sets, but they will outperform them — and confuse the would-be consumer, who has little idea what HDTV is.
HDTV allows viewers to watch cinema-quality images on a cinema shaped screen in the comfort of their own homes.
On large scale cinema-type systems, HDTV can produce theatre quality images which, combined with CD-quality sound, create an ‘experience’ so life-like and realistic that the viewer can barely resist the urge to reach out and touch.
Japan: pioneering HDTV
A look at the recent history of HDTV in Japan makes interesting viewing.
The Japanese version of HDTV is called Muse.
And, according to the Nihon Keizai Simbun, the semi-public TV network NHK has been running HDTV broadcasts eight hours a day on a test basis since last year.
But HDTV has not caught on.
A high-definition TV set costs a lot more than any of the available alternatives.
Despite falling prices an HDTV set still costs a lot of yen (the equivalent of thousands of pounds) and although other wide-screen TVs offer a variety of less expensive alternatives, size remains a problem.
The benefits of HDTV are lost unless screens measure at least 36in across the diagonal, and are viewed in a darkened room.
By anybody's standards the sets are huge, and may currently measure as much as 5ft deep.
Even if they can afford to buy one, most Japanese don't really have the space for it.
European alternatives
The European Commission is determined that the Community's electronics industry will not fall to the Japanese.
As a result Europe's biggest electronics manufacturers have a lot of clout with the Commission.
So much so, that the Commission continues its backing of the HDMAC analogue transmission standard for HDTV, regardless of its being overtaken by more advanced digital technology and despite broadcasters and telecommunications trade associations lobbying against it, and a plethora of industry pundits accusing the EC of wasting millions of pounds of taxpayers' money.
The analogue system HDMAC was ahead of its time in the mid-eighties when its development began.
It was heralded as Europe's answer to the Japanese version of HDTV.
As a result Philips, Thomson and Nokia have all benefited from EC grants.
By phasing in HDMAC gradually, over a number of years, the European manufacturers hoped to time its introduction to take advantage of the increasing miniaturisation of some of the associated technologies, while avoiding the high costs associated with bringing the new digital technology to the market.
But the proposed analogue HDMAC could only ever be an interim standard, as it has been generally accepted, for some time, that analogue HDTV would eventually be superseded by digital HDTV.
The availability and use of digital HDTV now appears likely to become widespread sooner, rather than later.
The American Federal Communications Commission is expected to choose a US digital standard next year.
Being an analogue technology in an increasingly digital world is a drawback for HDMAC.
Likewise its incompatibility with the PAL (phase alternate line) colour television sets  currently being watched in millions of European homes.
Digital HDTV was always a threat, albeit in the long term.
But a recent development in its transmission, Digital Video Narrowband Emission (Divine), now looks very likely to supersede the analogue HDMAC as the preferred standard for HDTV in Europe — and well before the end of the decade.
Using Divine, Swedish Telecom, which is a consortium of six TV and telecoms companies, has succeeded in squeezing high-definition digital pictures into the transmission space used in a normal TV system.
Thus the popular EC argument that HDMAC is necessary because digital HDTV will not be a reality until at least the year 2000, has been turned on its head.
If the development of HDMAC and Divine continues on schedule, they are likely to make an impact on the market at around the same time, probably making HDMAC redundant from the word go.
As there is little doubt that digital is destined to eventually take over from analogue systems, HDMAC would seem to have little to recommend it to anyone but the European TV companies who are already financially committed to it.
As well as the threat posed by Divine, HDMAC also has to contend with PALplus, an enhanced version of PAL.
PALplus will enable broadcasters to transmit improved quality pictures for wide-screen TVs, in a format which can also be received by standard PAL sets, and viewed with CinemaScope black bands at the top and bottom of the screen.
European broadcasters have already tested and proven the technology, and the Community's largest TV manufacturer, Philips, expects to have a working PALplus chipset ready next year.
The combined effects of these recent developments should sound the death knell for HDMAC, as the transition from existing PAL to future digital HDTV is now feasible without the proposed HDMAC phase.
But the European Commission has so far shown no signs of stopping or even slowing down the HDMAC development programme.
If the EC and Europe's major television manufacturers persist with HDMAC, then the road to digital HDTV in Europe will become circuitous and unnecessarily expensive, with broadcasters and domestic consumers alike wasting money.
Whether or not European TV viewers will, unlike the Japanese, actually welcome these relatively large and expensive high-definition television sets into their living rooms remains to be seen.
Whatever happens, the TV viewer of the future looks likely to be presented with a bewildering array of alternative television systems, that are unlikely to do much for the sales of HDTV or any other wide-screen television.
The Commission is doing nothing to simplify a complex situation.
And in trying to protect the future of Europe's television manufacturers, may actually be helping them to cut their own throats.
ROBOTS READY AND WILLING Robots fulfil many dull and tedious jobs on the production line.
But now their use is extending beyond the factory floor
Lesley Meall
The cinema has shaped our perception of the robot, or more correctly, the android.
From Metropolis to R2-D2, C3-P0 and Robocop, only the robot able to demonstrate human characteristics has proven capable of inspiring the writers of science fiction and capturing the imagination of the public.
And, for as long as the robots of science fact were limited to the assembly lines of the automotive and a few other manufacturing industries, our general perception of the robot was unlikely to change.
But the industrial robot has come a long way since the early sixties when Joe Engelberger set up Unimation, the world's first industrial robot making company.
Thanks to the likes of Pam, Sam, Merlin and Sherlock the robot has worked its way off the shopfloor, out of the realms of science fiction and into hospitals and railway stations, and is about to find its way on to one or two motorway flyovers.
Big in Japan
The use of robots in industry is much higher in Japan than anywhere else.
And although labour shortages have forced the Japanese into making relatively heavy use of industrial robots, the maturity of the market and the direction it is taking nonetheless offer some indication of future trends elsewhere.
Within Japan the robot is increasingly likely to be found in use outside its traditional manufacturing environment, with domestic shipments to the non-manufacturing sector up 50% last year.
Komatsu Ltd, for example, has recently introduced a robot manipulator for use on construction sites, where it will be used to handle building materials.
Its positioning accuracy alone (+ or -1mm) has much to recommend it over the human alternative.
At Toshiba, workers at one of its research centres have relieved themselves of the burden of calibrating oscilloscopes by programming a robot hand to push, pull, twiddle and slide the controls as necessary.
This greatly simplifies what can be a fiddly and time-consuming process, and (as is frequently claimed to justify many forms of automation) frees human personnel for more interesting and productive work.
Both of these are obvious application areas for the robot, being similar in nature to the sorts of tasks already commonly performed by robots in manufacturing industry, such as materials handling, arc welding, machine tending and assembly.
The self-propelled robot currently cleaning the floors at Tokyo's railway station is a little more unusual.
And it has the capacity to clean 1,100 square metres an hour, a task that would take 10 humans.
As Japan's working population is increasingly likely to favour blue and white collar employment over farming, the Japanese are even planning to develop robot agricultural workers.
These robots will work by remote control, planting and harvesting crops in place of the millions of Japanese abandoning land jobs.
The Japanese education ministry has launched a five year project to produce machines that can repair themselves, thus reducing the need for human intervention.
And the University of Tokyo has already succeeded in developing a practical self-repairing photocopier — good news for anyone who is frequently frustrated in their attempts to use one.
But robots are not all good news — especially on the health front.
Companies such as Fuji and Mitsubishi are making progress in work on  artificial retinas.
And although industrial and space robots are obvious potential applications areas for these retinas, so is their use alongside other remote sensing equipment in automated substitutes for guide dogs.
But the robot can kill as well as cure.
One unfortunate Japanese worker died when a fatal punch was delivered by a robot that had received and acted on ‘errant’ electromagnetic signals from another device.
In a similar ‘misunderstanding’ the signal from a security guard's walkie-talkie closed down a major generator at a production plant.
Fortunately, these sorts of incidents are not common.
Despite their popularity in Japan, the country's robot-production growth is slowing down.
(According to the Japan Industrial Robot Association there was only a 10% increase during 1991.)
And although overseas sales are steadily growing, many countries, such as the US, Germany, Italy, and the UK, are producing their own robots, and using them innovatively in a variety of non-manufacturing applications.
Taking the strain
Robotic hospital porters called ‘Helpmates’ are already buzzing around US hospitals, delivering mail, medication and meals.
And they don't even need special tracks.
Developed by the Transitions Research Corporation of Connecticut (owned by Joe Engelberger), these refrigerator-sized robots find their way around with the aid of computerised floor maps, and can even, with the help of radio transmitters, use lifts to move from floor to floor.
They are available for both purchase and rental, and their introduction in the UK is already being discussed.
Armstrong Projects is Britain's first company to develop medical robots.
It has developed a surgery robot, and Pam, a robot that can transport bedridden patients.
Although it will probably be a long time before we are prepared to let robots perform operations on us, Pam will be ready for trials next year, and her potential for cutting the 750,000 nursing days lost each year through back strain may make her popular with medical staff and patients alike.
Cardboard cutout policemen have been known to reduce shoplifting in supermarkets, and cardboard patrol cars have been effective at slowing down motorway speeders.
If, as it seems, the mere sight of a policeman is enough to deter many potential law breakers then Sam (short for speed and aggression moderator) looks likely to have a successful future.
He has recently joined the West Mercia Police Force as the UK's first robot policeman, Sam.
From the ground up to his revolving papier-mache head he is 5ft 7 1/2 in tall, wears a full uniform, and despite being armed — with a radar gun — bears no resemblance to Robocop.
After spending a few months gauging public reaction, West Mercia Police intend to use him as a kerbside deterrent against speeding.
Directory enquiries users are already familiar with the synthesised voice that replies to their questions.
BT has gone a few steps further, and begun trials of its own telephone robot, capable of handling many of the routine tasks usually dealt with by its 25,000 human operators.
It can apparently recognise an impressive variety of regional and foreign accents.
Its planned introduction has caused adverse reaction from the Union of Communications Workers, which represents 40,000 BT employees.
The union is as yet unconvinced that BT's intentions are to use the robots for nothing more than to make their members' jobs ‘more interesting’.
In the US, the Communications Workers of America are similarly unimpressed with American Telephone and Telegraph's plans to introduce voice recognition services.
Earlier this year the CWA launched an advertising campaign against AT&T and its plans.
Where robots can be seen as potential replacements for people there are bound to be adverse reactions.
Less controversial, are applications where robots are undertaking tasks which would be impractical or even impossible for humans.
The National Rivers Authority has invented robots that can help catch polluters.
Merlin is a stainless steel dustbin-type drum that sits anchored in water.
Sherlock consists of two green boxes that are positioned on the river bank.
They are connected to a number of probes which are used to measure the water's acidity levels, temperature, murkiness and so on.
When the NRA was formed it inherited 12 fixed-site water-quality monitoring stations that would have been prohibitively expensive to modernise.
The robots' comparatively low cost (£17,500) combined with their mobility made Merlin and Sherlock the preferred option.
Equally attractive was their ability to monitor water quality 24-hours a day, seven days a week, 365 days a year completely unattended, and raise the alarm when pollution occurs.
The robots also enable the NRA to detect more cases of pollution than would otherwise be possible with their existing manpower.
A robot capable of entering sewers that are too small for human access has also recently become available in the UK.
Over 20 SikaRobots are already working on the Continent.
Dedicated to non-man entry sewer repair and maintenance, the Sika-Robot cuts costs by eliminating the need to excavate pipes.
It can be used to renovate leaking pipes, cracks, fractures and holes and can also remove ingrowing roots and calcium build up.
The future
Making people's jobs more interesting is the frequent benefit claimed of automation — the industrial robot is no exception.
Now the outstanding benefits are the robot's increasing cost effectiveness; its potential for relieving people of dull and repetitive tasks; and replacing inconsistency and inaccuracy, which all too often occur when humans are restricted to performing tedious and uninspiring tasks, with precision.
Despite the past experiences of many manufacturing workers, and the wariness of telecommunications workers, the industrial robot looks increasingly likely to be a positive rather than a negative influence in many working environments.
Robocop
software and systems
A NEW CULTURE FOR PEARL Pearl Assurance is one of the companies that are implementing IT solutions to take them beyond the year 2000
Michael Pollitt
Founded in 1864, Pearl Assurance is now one of the UK's leading financial services organisations.
A successful and hostile takeover bid in 1989 resulted in Pearl being acquired by Australian Mutual Provident Society, Australia's biggest institutional investor and one of the world's largest insurance companies.
Despite the difficult trading conditions of 1991, Pearl announced a substantial increase in profits after tax, and according to AMP managing director Ian Salmon: ‘The value of Pearl at the end of 1991 exceeded the amount AMP paid in its acquisition.’
Pearl is undergoing significant strategic and cultural change.
So far this has included a major relocation from London to Peterborough, new £100m headquarters, product rationalisation, a number of company-wide initiatives aimed at improving management efficiency and a £1m investment in a new core financial system.
Pearl employs nearly 10,000 staff.
The company's involvement with information technology (IT) for financial management is comparatively recent.
In the mid-eighties Pearl implemented an IBM mainframe-based general ledger and accounts payable system from Computer Associates.
As the company's first venture into IT for financial purposes, it did no more than automate existing manual processes.
By 1990, Pearl's financial system was falling far short of the company's changing needs in an increasingly competitive life assurance market.
Many of the problems stemmed from an inflexible accounting structure and cumbersome batch processing.
Eventually, the system proved incapable of producing timely and accurate management information.
Too much time was spent on systems considerations and too little on financial management.
Pearl was forced into awkward compromises: using PC-based spreadsheet models and wordprocessors to extract information.
A large management accounts team spent more time ‘number-crunching’ than interpreting the figures.
A fresh start
By April 1991 Pearl had recognised the urgent need for change.
A major strategic review of financial systems was initiated by Tony Richards, recently appointed general manager (finance).
Headed by project manager Nick Morris, a four strong multi-disciplinary team was established to examine Pearl's financial systems needs.
It was decided to include management information requirements as well as financial recording.
‘We have an increasing appetite for management information,’ says Mr Richards.
‘But it has to be accurate and timely.’
Although re-implementation of the existing system was a possibility, developing a new IT solution inhouse was never seriously considered.
Despite being financial experts, Pearl had no wish to re-invent the wheel against readily available package solutions.
Cost and development timescales of a bespoke system were totally unacceptable.
A move from the IBM 3090 mainframe to distributed IBM AS/400s was also dismissed because of performance and systems management considerations.
Every part of the Pearl Group was investigated, business requirements assimilated and key evaluation criteria produced.
Pearl enlisted the help of independent consultants Price Waterhouse at an early stage.
However, the consultants' role was carefully restricted.
As Mr Richards explains: ‘We wanted consultants to add value in certain key areas.’
For example, their experience helped construct an invitation to tender (ITT) document.
Mr Richard says: ‘It was more cost effective to use consultants to help draw up the ITT and provide quality assurance for our questions and requirements.
And this approach also helped compress our evaluation into a shorter time scale.’
But the company alone made important business investigations and decisions.
Issued in June 1991, Pearl's ITT for a new financial systems and management information system was sent to four potential suppliers: Quality Software Products (QSP); Computer Associates; Dun & Bradstreet Software (formed from MSA and McCormack & Dodge) and Walker.
Given its market knowledge, Price Waterhouse was able to provide a useful insight into each supplier.
This helped formulate some of the 600 questions and devise a reply scoring system.
Strategic objectives
Pearl's invitation to tender set out several important objectives.
The company required a fully-integrated IBM mainframe-based package solution from a single supplier for implementation by mid-1992.
Consistency with corporate IT objectives was also a factor; Pearl has a policy of migrating applications to IBM's DB2 relational database.
Suppliers had to demonstrate a clear product strategy for DB2.
In contrast to the existing system, the new solution had to be fully flexible, and able to meet the future demands of and grow with the company.
‘When you make investments nowadays you have to make them count,’ says Mr Richards.
Naturally, Pearl doesn't want to have to repeat this replacement process for some time.
‘We can't throw this system away in five years’ time, like Pearl is now doing with the first general ledger it installed in the mid-eighties.’
Pearl also intended to solve its financial management information problems by giving users a true real-time, on-line system.
Four major applications were considered in the ITT; general ledger, accounts payable, purchase order processing and fixed assets.
The first two applications were needed for the planned 1992 implementation.
Once all the tenders had been received, the answers were scored.
With Price Waterhouse's help, every question had been constructed to generate a simple yes or no answer.
By weighting important questions within sections, the results gave Pearl a valuable insight into the strengths and weaknesses of all four suppliers.
Follow-up questions, particularly into critical areas, were drawn up for intensive two-day visits.
Computer Associates was eliminated by the results of the ITT alone.
Pearl had specified a proven solution in current use, which this supplier was then unable to provide.
Installing new unproven software posed unacceptable risks to Pearl's tight implementation timetable.
The three remaining suppliers were then visited by Mr Richards and the project team.
These demanding on-site visits gave Pearl a better perspective on the tenders received.
Consequently, Dun & Bradstreet Software also failed to convince Pearl that it was the right choice for the future.
‘In today's fast moving business environment you need systems that are user-friendly and easily changed by users,’ says Mr Richards, ‘You don't want a dependency on information systems personnel when changes are needed.’
Overall ease of use was a significant deciding factor for Pearl.
Pearl also required full real-time integration; any dependency on batch updating was unacceptable.
This left only Walker and QSP to consider.
Several reference site visits and telephone enquiries to current users were then made.
Throughout its search for a solution, Pearl had been determined to be as objective as possible.
Price Waterhouse had been used to help with quality issues and to provide independent advice.
This commitment to objectivity and clarity of thinking proved useful when making the final decision.
But as Nick Morris, project manager, explains: ‘You must be wary of the temptation to evaluate on what appeals individually.
Don't forget you are representing the organisation with its own demands and needs.’
He adds: ‘When we reminded ourselves what Pearl required it was clear there was only one solution.’
All concerned felt that Quality Software Products' OLAS system the most logical choice.
In other circumstances another supplier may have prevailed.
According to Pearl, the final decision was based on what was discovered from the reference site visits.
As well as offering strong technical, functional and strategic advantages, QSP was a British supplier with a significant presence in the UK financial services industry.
Users include Allied Dunbar, Bank of England, Barclays Bank, Legal & General, Nationwide Building Society and Scottish Widows.
Actual implementation risks with OLAS were found to be significantly lower than the alternative.
Missing the mid-1992 implementation date was out of the question.
Supplier commitment
Board level approval for the £1m pound investment in systems, consultancy and training was granted in October 1991.
With QSP's help, Pearl then embarked on a very carefully planned implementation of general ledger and accounts payable.
The first major phase lasted three months and produced a design workbook — a complete specification of what Pearl wanted to do.
Pearl then took the very unusual step of asking QSP to ‘sign-off’ this design.
By asking for the supplier's commitment at this early stage, Pearl wanted a quality assurance check and formal assurance that it had realistic expectations.
In effect, Pearl asked QSP to ‘guarantee’ its own implementation of OLAS.
Produced by the same team that wrote the ITT, the design workbook also made Pearl users fully aware of all the design decisions.
Nobody in Pearl was left in any doubt as to what the OLAS system was expected to do.
Having completed the design workbook and received QSP's assurances, Pearl began its construction phase in January 1992.
Involving 14 people drawn from financial and management accounts as well as information systems departments, the target live date was set for 30 June 1992.
The scope of the system included 12 legal accounting entities in the Pearl Group.
Around 80 finance users required online access alongside an additional 200 cost-centre managers.
OLAS was also seen as another element of the major cultural change going on within Pearl.
As part of this, OLAS was set to provide a far higher level of user-related financial and management information.
This demanded some intensive pre-planning.
‘People out in the business will be using the system for enquiry and cost management services,’ explains Mr Richards.
‘That change requires a lot of preparation and training.’
A major training programme was started well in advance of the planned live date, first by developing a customised training course in conjunction with QSP.
This course was then delivered to all key staff prior to implementation.
New horizons
In parallel with a move to its new headquarters, Pearl's new financial accounting and management information system went live on time and within budget.
As a core financial system, available across the nationwide corporate data network, OLAS is having an effect groupwide.
‘Number crunching’ has been replaced by instant access to easily assimilated financial management information.
Management effort is now redirected into interpretation and decision making.
With the first major implementation target met, Pearl is turning its attentions to further developments.
An important business problem involving the transfer of 4m manual records covering old-style ‘industrial branch’ life policies will be solved using OLAS.
This type of insurance involves the four-weekly collection of premiums in policyholders' homes.
Implementation next year will save considerable administrative effort at head office.
At a strategic level, Pearl is already looking beyond its immediate needs.
‘We have a vision,’ says Mr Richards, ‘of making information available in an easy way, so the business can benefit.
By taking the mystique out of accounting and finance, we can allow the role of the financial department to add value to the business.’
This goes well with the new corporate dynamism at Peterborough.
Pearl's most recent results showed premium income exceeding £1bn, profits nearly doubled and market share substantially increased.
With the help of information technology, Pearl clearly intends to be one of the brightest jewels in the life assurance industry's crown.
By taking the mystique out of accounting and finance, we can allow the role of the financial department to add value to the business.
NETWORKING FOR THE 21ST CENTURY PCs all in a row — cost savings take second place to the benefits gained from sharing information
Alison Classe
As we approach the millennium, the price of computer power continues on its downward way.
The more computer power is available, the faster business can be transacted, and the heavier become the competitive penalties for not having to hand the right information about your business and its environment.
One oil company, for instance, considers it essential that details of every crude oil futures trade done anywhere in the world reach its head office computer system within two minutes of the trade's being concluded.
Consequently, whereas computer networks used to be regarded primarily as a way of sharing expensive equipment — for instance, by hooking several sites up to a single mainframe — now the emphasis is increasingly on the sharing of information.
Information sharing on LANs
We can observe this trend in the humble local area network.
Once, stringing PCs together was seen primarily as a way of sharing equipment like printers.
Now the motive is more often to allow multiple users to share data and applications.
Most common PC accounts packages now exist in network versions.
All but the simplest PC LANs are likely to have a central computer acting as a file or database server, dedicated to looking after the data on behalf of all the desktop machines.
The most familiar office LANs incorporate desktop PCs running the MS-DOS operating system, often in conjunction with the MS-Windows graphical user interface.
Servers can run DOS too, but this operating system is limited by the fact that it is designed to handle only one task at a time.
For heavier-duty applications, servers running Unix or IBM's OS/2 are often chosen.
Some netware (ie software for running LANs) provides its own operating system to run on the server.
A new candidate for the job of running the server is Microsoft's Windows NT (see ACCOUNTANCY , August, pp 59–60).
This operating system, due to be released soon, is complete in itself, unlike the existing Windows, which has to be run in conjunction with DOS.
NT will operate not only on powerful PCs but also on the Risc machines that are currently the preserve of Unix.
Some industry pundits predict that NT will usurp Unix and OS/2 to become the server operating system of choice, especially as it will offer the ability to run at least some applications designed for OS/2 or Unix.
There are pros and cons.
Being a Microsoft product, NT will not, arguably, be ‘open’ in the same sense as Unix.
On the other hand, NT will appeal to those who are already using Windows on their desktop machines.
As to which will prevail in the longer term, the jury remains out until NT makes its official appearance in 1993.
Meanwhile, it should be noted that you don't need a network to use Unix.
Unix computers can have dumb terminals attached to them directly in much the same way as the traditional office minicomputer.
But if instead of the terminals you substitute a network of personal computers or other intelligent workstations, you gain several advantages.
You can switch into standalone mode, and run your favourite spreadsheet or other personal productivity tool.
When you're running applications on the Unix ‘host’, you can share the work between the host and the workstation: the workstation can take care of local jobs such as the dialogue between system and user, while the Unix box handles data management and maybe other shared processing.
This type of ‘client-server’ architecture also makes it possible to provide a uniform way for users to talk to applications running on different platforms.
So, for instance, if you wanted access to a management information system on your Unix computer, to an accounts system running on a mainframe, and to a spreadsheet running locally on the PC, it would be possible to reach all of them via the same windowing front-end.
Large organisations, such as banks, are integrating ageing mainframe systems into networks of PCs running graphical user interfaces, in order to provide new-look, user-friendly systems without the expense and trauma of a total rewrite.
Information sharing on WANs
Beyond the four walls of the office, the networking technology is different but the objective is often similar.
Forward-looking companies such as Sumitomo (see panel) are implementing wide area networks (WANs) to maximise the value they obtain from corporate information.
Without holding unnecessary duplicate data, users at multiple sites on opposite sides of the globe can be given access to the same information.
As well as linking branches of a company, WANs offer the opportunity to transact business electronically with other companies.
One example is electronic data interchange, often required by the likes of car manufacturers to enable just-in-time inventory management; electronic funds transfer through the Bankers Automated Clearing System is another.
Gathering market information is an increasingly important consideration for many businesses and this too can be done over a WAN.
Speed and capacity
As we near 2000 we can expect to see not only more networking, but also networks that operate at higher speed and with greater capacity to cope with the increasing demands of modern computer applications such as‘multimedia’.
New technologies such as Frame Relay, Asynchronous Transfer Mode and Broadband ISDN (integrated services digital network) are coming along to speed up WAN communications.
There are corresponding improvements in the LAN arena, where new technologies involving fibre optic cable and improved approaches to routing traffic will not only increase the volume of traffic that can pass over the network, but also extend the distance it can travel.
‘Metropolitan area networks [MANs]’, somewhere between LANs and WANs, could extend over an area up to 100km in diameter.
An approach already common is to link a number of conventional Ethernet office LANs together with a fibre optic ‘backbone’.
For the user it is as if everyone were signed on to the same LAN.
Ultimately, the result will be a blurring of the boundaries between LAN and WAN.
Digitisation/integration
Another important trend is digitisation of voice traffic and the associated phenomenon of integration.
By handling all network traffic in digital form, it is possible to integrate the processing of voice, computer data and other types of communication such as videoconferencing and videotelephony.
Users of private WANs have been able to send both voice and data over the same lines for years.
Now those who depend on dial-up lines from public telephone systems can enjoy the benefits of integration as well.
Mercury, whose network has always been fully digital, and BT, which has a digital trunk network and is busy digitising its exchanges, both offer ISDN connections.
Install one of these and you can send computer data over the line without a modem; voice traffic will have to be converted to digital form by special phone or exchange equipment.
The advantages of digital networks include more accurate transmissions as well as more versatile and economic employment of lines.
If you integrate voice and data traffic over a private network you can obtain maximum value for money, paying for dial-up connections only when your own WAN is full.
ISDN is currently priced in fixed 64Kb/second chunks, which some see as a limitation: with the latest compression techniques in place, 64Kb is a bit excessive for phone calls, but it is insufficient for some other purposes.
More flexible pricing can be expected in the future.
It should become possible to pay for exactly the amount of bandwidth that you need —‘bandwith on demand’ is the buzz-phrase here.
Newer LAN/MAN technologies make it possible to integrate data and voice traffic locally too.
In other words, just one set of cabling round the office should cope with both the telephone system and the computer network.
Competition, outsourcing
Communications pricing will become more competitive as more players enter the deregulated telecommunications markets.
In the UK, for instance, communication line providers include not only BT and Mercury, but less obviously, suppliers such as National Network and British Rail Telecommunications, set up to sell excess capacity on the Post Office's and BR's networks respectively.
Competition in the area of international telecommunications is also heating up.
As usual, increased choice will complicate matters for the consumer.
There are some helpful rationalisations afoot: Mercury, together with 11 other telecomms companies, has recently set up a joint venture, FNA, to provide ‘unified communications services’ between the financial centres of the world.
FNA will provide ‘one-stop’ shopping for international network services, saving users the bother of shopping around in each country.
The complexity of the communications scene makes ‘outsourcing’ an increasingly attractive option.
TSB recently signed a £15m, five-year outsourcing contract with Mercury.
Like other manifestations of facilities management, these deals can save money as well as trouble, in particular by eliminating spare capacity.
A BT client, JP Morgan, has reportedly estimated that a $20m outsourcing deal will save it as much as $12.5m over its five-year life.
Outsourcing of international as well as domestic network operations is on the cards.
BT's most recent addition to its range of network services is Syncordia, a company set up to provide multinational concerns with tailor-made voice and data communications networks.
IBM is among the earliest customers.
Standardisation
Everything may be getting bigger, brighter and better in the network world, but the most important single trend is probably standardisation.
There are no unanimously agreed LAN standards, but if you want computers from different vendors to talk to one another, the chances are they can be hooked together, thanks to the efforts both of netware vendors and of the hardware manufacturers to make their products more ‘open’.
For WAN fans, the prevalence of X.25 packet-switching technology is making life simpler.
To facilitate international links between the public networks, efforts are being made to standardise different countries' ISDNs.
Europe is not too much of a problem; in the US, however, older networks are based on 56Kb units instead of 64Kb.
With the current state of play, what you want in the way of networking may not be easy or cheap but it is almost certainly possible.
Visualise a senior executive switching on a notebook PC in a hotel room, plugging the modem into the telephone socket and then settling down to tap into information stored on any of the organisation's computer systems, anywhere in the world, through a simple click-and-point action of the mouse.
Any organisation dismissing that vision as science-fiction had better look out.
The competition may already be at it.
Communications pricing will become more competitive as more players enter the deregulated telecommunications markets
SUMITOMO CAPITAL MARKETS: AN INTERNATIONAL NETWORKING OPERATION
Sumitomo Capital Markets has harnessed telecommunications and networking techniques to obtain competitive advantage in the management of its global trading operation.
Although each of its trading locations around the world maintains its own accounts records, these records can be consolidated in next to no time to obtain an accountant's-eye view of Sumitomo's overall position, because physically they are all stored on a single computer.
The corporation's trading operation is split across three locations: New York, London and Hong Kong.
Each of these locations has its own set of accounts.
Because of the way Sumitomo is incorporated, the London and Hong Kong accounts are consolidated together first, before consolidated figures for all three locations are generated.
The accounts are processed by the Systems Union SunAccount system, supplied by Eclipse Computing, and running on a Risc-based Unix computer from DEC.
To the group of accountants at each location, it looks to all intents and purposes as if the group has its own system.
But physically all the data is stored on a single computer, in New York, with remote access from London and Hong Kong and separate sets of accounting records for each location.
The London computer and the Hong Kong computer each hold and run a copy of the SunAccount application software.
If someone inputs a transaction in London, they do that on the local computer in the usual way.
But instead of writing the information on its own disk, the London computer instantly sends the information to its counterpart in New York, which stores it centrally, on its disk.
Similarly, if the London users want to enquire on the data, they initiate the enquiry on their local computer in the usual way, but behind the scenes the computer sends a message to its counterpart in New York asking for the data, which is then passed back across the network to be displayed on the enquirer's screen.
Kevin Scully, senior vice-president of Global Systems and Technology, says: ‘What we have can be described as a centralised database with applications that are decentralised on a global basis.
Accountants logging on in London see their own set of accounts, but all of the data is put on to the same database that New York and Hong Kong are using.’
Sumitomo has its own wide area network (WAN) linking the three sites.
Each location has a local area network (LAN) and these are linked across the global WAN.
The corporation set up the networks itself, negotiating for lines with the local suppliers: BT and Mercury in the UK, HKTel in Hong Kong and, in the US, about 10 vendors offering overseas circuits.
As well as lines, Sumitomo had to install filters at each end of the lines to check that traffic that ought to be kept on the LAN does not disappear on to the WAN.
There is also equipment to optimise the allocation of bandwidth.
Although the lines are available for both voice and data traffic, if there is a particularly large amount of data traffic the system will automatically cut back on the number of phone calls allowed on the WAN.
Sumitomo makes varied use of its networks.
‘Both data and voice are run through the WAN,’ says Mr Scully.
‘Our trading operation is run on it globally, and sometimes our market data and its back-up facility are run over it too: if Reuters went down in London we'd re-broadcast the information out of New York to London.
There is also our general ledger and hedging systems.
‘Altogether we have about 60–70 people in London and 20 in Hong Kong, and all of them have access to our data in New York.’
Mr Scully adds that security considerations may limit what data an individual can look at — London, for instance, cannot look at the accounts specific to Hong Kong.
The fact that the systems are networked is transparent to the users.
Data winging its way across the Atlantic or Pacific instead of just from one side of the office to the other may suggest a slower response to enquiries, but Mr Scully says there is no perceptible delay.
The accounting system has relatively few users — about five in London, 10 in New York and two in Hong Kong.
So the demands that system makes on the network are correspondingly modest.
The SunAccount software was able to cope with the networked set-up without modification.
‘The package was capable of handling different account groups.
All we had to do was to make sure we had powerful enough equipment on each side of the ‘lake’ to run the applications.’
At local level, Sumitomo uses its LANs to integrate various financial and office applications.
These are delivered to each desk on a single windowed workstation screen, regardless of where the application is actually running.
Mr Scully says: ‘At any time, I can have about seven or eight applications displayed on the workstation in front of me — those can include the trading system, market data, general ledger, hedging system, desktop publishing, graphics and spreadsheets.
‘Then we have an Email facility installed and running.
We're putting in electronic fax, also image processing, and we've built a system of information accessing called ‘folders’ that will let us get any type of document from anywhere around the world, whether it's stored on an ordinary disk, optical storage device or whatever.’
The SunAccounts system in New York went live early in 1990; London was added in mid-1991 and Hong Kong a few months later.
Mr Scully is in no doubt that the architecture Sumitomo has adopted gives significant business advantages.
‘Most people consolidate their information periodically and report it on a monthly basis: they tend to have huge consolidation exercises that go on for days.
Where other people run purchase and ledger on a monthly basis, we run purchase and ledger daily from all of our trading locations.
We know exactly what our position is on a daily basis, including the accounting viewpoint.’
Sumitomo has trading operations in New York (above), London and Hong Kong
WHAT'S NEW IN ACCOUNTING SYSTEMS
Pan-European accounting solutions
Altair offers a complete corporate financial management solution.
It has been designed as a pan-European system with multilanguage facilities, all of its ledgers can operate in multiple currencies, and it runs on a wide variety of hardware platforms and operating systems, including Unix and a variety of proprietary systems.
The system also incorporates an ‘intelligent’ interface to the Executive Information System Inphase.
The general ledger costs from £2,000, with additional ledgers from £1,300 each.
A 1–4 user version of the EIS costs £9,500.
For further details contact Altair Accounting Software on 0438 748000.
Tetra has introduced Chameleon 2000,an enhanced version of its established mid-range suite.
2000 comprises 25 modules including a new multicurrency gl, consolidation module and report writer, and covering finance, distribution and manufacturing.
Enhancements include more comprehensive pan-European functionality, a new user-interface, online archiving facilities and SQL support, with access to Informix databases via data manipulation and enquiry tools, including Lotus 1-2-3 and Wingz.
For details of local resellers call Tetra on .
Systems Union was omitted from the list of major suppliers of pan-European accounting systems in the article Across the Border and into the Tangle (see ACCOUNTANCY , September, pp 62–68).
For further details of Systems Union telephone 071–354 3131.
Monitoring WP usage
Emos Page and Time offers professional users of the Word Perfect WP package the opportunity to increase revenue.
Page and Time records the number of pages printed and the amount of time spent on each WP job.
All the user has to do is enter a client account number at the beginning of each job, and again before a document is printed.
It analyses and reports on the information recorded, so that it can be transferred to a firm's billing system.
For further details telephone .
Executive Information Systems briefing
Warwick Business School will be the venue for New Ways to Manage — Exploiting the Power of Information on 20 October.
The briefing will look at how major organisations such as Toshiba UK, Grand Metropolitan and National Westminster Bank develop and implement business strategy, and will consider ways to manage executives' changing information needs.
For further details telephone .
Softworld in EIS and Decision Support will be at the Heathrow Penta on 20–21 October.
For more information telephone .
women in accountancy
HELEN JAMESON Part-time and family-friendly
Most people who arrange to work flexible hours do so because they want to spend time with their families, as well as pursue a career.
Not so Helen Jameson, a management consultant with Price Waterhouse in London.
She approached her employers because she had decided she would like to set up her own business.
The fact that she is also now mother to two year old Emma, with another child on the way, is coincidental.
‘About three years ago, I started thinking I would like to try and start a business’, she says.
‘Quite a few friends were starting families at that time and they were having real problems sorting out childcare, and I decided I'd like to look at what opportunities there were for setting up in that field.’
When Helen told Price Waterhouse that this was what she wanted to do, she thought they would say it was all or nothing and tell her to pack her bags.
To her surprise, they agreed that she could continue to work for PW three days a week, leaving her two days to work on the business.
‘I guess their reasoning was that it would add to my experience.
I certainly feel that that has added considerably to my skills base and how I approach my work.
It's made me more entrepreneurial.’
So, in September 1989, Helen found herself working part time and researching what gaps there were in the childcare market.
There is, she says, a serious shortage of nursery places which means that, if they wish to return to work, women are forced to rely on other sources of childcare.
These can turn out to be expensive, making the return to work unfeasible for many middle to lower paid people; they can also prove to be unreliable, which means that working mothers can find themselves alienating their employers through no fault of their own.
The first idea she came up with was managing workplace nurseries for companies.
Through talking to people running nurseries, she met Madeline Watson, now her business partner.
Madeline had spent 20 years in education and childcare management and for the last 10 had been running nine nurseries for a charity in London.
‘We felt that between us we had the right mix of skills.’
The two partners tendered for several workplace nursery projects but in each case found themselves losing out to competitors who were already running nurseries.
What they needed, they decided, was to set up a nursery themselves to gain a corporate reputation.
It took nearly a year of searching as far afield as Slough to find suitable premises for the nursery.
It was Madeline who found the old printing works on the borders of Islington and Hackney.
Helen was in hospital giving birth to Emma.
‘It sounds the wrong way round to choose the area because of the premises.
But when we looked at the location, our feeling was that it was close to the City and there were professional couples living nearby.
In fact most of our parents live in the area and work either there or in the City.’
Finding the premises was easy compared to getting planning permission (the space was too small), negotiating the lease, supervising the building work and finding staff.
But the nursery finally opened last October with six children.
A year and several headaches later — like the waiting list that developed rapidly for places for the under twos — the number of children has increased to 15 (total capacity 30), more are expected and the nursery is operating to plan.
The partners have also started to build up a consultancy operation, offering advice to employers who are looking at offering ‘family friendly’ employee benefits.
‘We've also found ourselves looking at other aspects, like eldercare, which is increasingly becoming a problem for people who work.
And we're looking at more flexible working patterns, be it part-time working, career breaks, flexible hours and term-time working.
‘Sometimes employers only think of workplace nurseries and are put off by the expense.
In fact workplace nurseries are not suitable for most employers unless they employ a large number of staff in one location.
There are a number of practical things they can do, however: for a few hundred pounds, they can act as facilitators, helping their employees sort out their child-care problems.’
Through her involvement in the childcare sector, Helen has become interested in the wider problems facing women who wish to combine a career and family.
She, Madeline and other colleagues have set up a London branch of the National Private Day Nurseries Association to lobby Parliament on tax relief for childcare.
‘Tax relief is a thorny issue because it over-benefits those who are earning.
On the other hand, there are a lot of women who don't command high salaries but who still want to work, yet to pay for childcare out of taxed income makes it economically impossible.
The argument most often put forward against tax relief for childcare is that it would be extremely costly to the Exchequer.
But, as she points out, a lot of childcare is in the black economy, with people handing over cash and carers not paying NIC and PAYE, so — assuming that people don't declare their cash payments — the ‘dead weight’ cost would not be that high.
She is also lobbying for relief for nurseries from the uniform business rate, in the same way as educational establishments; she wants them to be zero-rated for VAT purposes and provided with loans for safety improvements and training.
But it's not just statutory change that is required.
Employers should be more aware of their employees' needs.
‘My theory has always been that working practices and the way that careers are structured are not really compatible with having a family as well.
In accountancy, for example, by the time you've done your training and spent some years establishing yourself, you then have your children just at the time when you're supposed to be going all out for partnership.
‘If firms want to take it seriously, they'll need to take a long hard look at what sort of performance objectives are being applied and whether they are actually appropriate.
Does it really matter about people being there from eight in the morning until eight at night?
Isn't it actually what they are doing with their time that counts?
Actually, what you'll find is that working mothers are extremely efficient because they have to be.’
Helen would also like to see all accountancy firms join up with Opportunity 2000 because, she says, it's a statement of intent.
‘The last thing I want to be seen as is a feminist agitator.
But I do think it matters in terms of recruitment.
If firms are not seen to be flexible, they are in danger of losing out.’
‘I am really pleased that over the last three years I have been able to show that part-time working can work without any difficulty.
I honestly don't think anyone at PW would have any complaint about how it's turned out.
In fact, if they do have a complaint, it's that they would probably like me to go back full time — which is very nice to know!’
finance & investment
BUSINESS EXPANSION SCHEMES
Autumn surge
Although the maximum tax relief an individual can obtain on BES investments in any tax year is limited to £40,000, investors can claim up to half of the relief for the previous year on investments made before 6 October (subject to a maximum of £5,000, assuming that they have not used the full £40,000 in that period).
In the present uncertain economic times, BES-assured tenancy schemes with some guarantee for the exit price are understandably popular with higher-rate taxpayers.
Close Brothers Investment is seeking to raise £15m for Bessa Blue Chip Companies, which will then acquire repossessed residential properties from Barclays Direct Mortgage Service, a division of Barclays Bank.
During the five-year BES period, these properties will be let under assured tenancies.
The shares are offered at 100p; minimum application 1,000.
After five years, Bessa Blue Chip has the option to require Barclays Bank to repurchase the properties at a high enough price to give shareholders 120p per share.
Thus, a higher-rate taxpayer who invests £10,000 in autumn 1992 should receive an income tax refund of £4,000 around March 1993 and after five years, in October 1997, should pocket £12,000.
This, says Close Brothers, is equivalent to an annual compound return of 13.7% completely free of income tax and CGT — a gross equivalent return of 22.8% a year.
However, intending investors are advised to study the risk factors outlined in the prospectus.
Initial closing date for this offer is 2 October 1992, and it will not be extended beyond 30 October 1992.
Phone Close Brothers on 071–638 5500 for full details.
Downing Corporate Finance (071–411 4700) aims to raise up to £5m for House the Homeless of London (Greenwich) under the BES.
The proceeds of the issue will be used to buy up to 76 residential properties in Greenwich.
It is intended to let the properties at affordable rents to families identified by the London Borough of Greenwich, where more than 1,600 householders are homeless.
Peabody Trust, one of the largest housing associations in the UK, can be required to purchase the properties after five years at a price intended to realise net assets per share of not less than 126p to investors.
The shares are being issued at 100p, and Downing cites an annual return of 15% net for a 40% taxpayer (annual grossed up equivalent return 25%).
Minimum investment is £1,000.
If investors need to obtain value from this investment within five years but after one year, the Royal Bank of Scotland will offer loans.
Latest closing date for the offer is 5 October 1992.
PENSIONS
Self control
Stockbrokers W I Carr are aiming the Helmsman Self-Managed Personal Pension at controlling directors, partners, self-employed and senior executives who want some say in the control of their investments.
The scheme can also be used to accept transfers from previous pension arrangements.
The management of each pension fund can be either discretionary (you can appoint your own investment manager) or advisory (you take all the investment decisions and instruct your adviser to act).
The charging structure involves an initial set-up fee of £350, an annual administration charge of ¼%; of fund (minimum £100, maximum £500) and an investment transaction charge for each purchase or sale.
All charges are subject to VAT.
The plan is considered suitable for individuals who want to contribute £10,000 a year or more.
W I Carr Pension Trustees act as trustee and administrator for the plan.
W I Carr is a subsidiary of Banque Indosuez, a leading French investment bank.
Ring  for more information.
I A Pritchard Stockbrokers () have launched Personal Pension Portfolio in association with Provident Life.
Based on a scheme put together for their own executives, it too gives individuals a say in the choice of investments.
Charges are £270 initial fee, £270 annual charge, and investment dealing at competitive rates.
HEALTH INSURANCE
Join the band
Medical Insurance Agency, an insurance service for doctors and dentists founded in 1907, is offering an extensive health insurance plan, available to all, called Clinicare.
Underwritten by the Economic Insurance Company, it offers two levels of cover — gold card or silver — and three hospital bands — ranging from most private hospitals in the UK, including London, at Band A, to NHS provincial teaching and general hospitals, and lower cost private hospitals, at Band C.
Gold card insurees can expect cover for: 26 weeks' hospital and nursing home accommodation; operating theatre fees, including the surgeon and anaesthetist; in-patient consultant fees, drugs and dressings; in and out-patient specialist services; accommodation for one parent if an insured child is under nine; home nursing cover; private ambulance cover; £30 in daily NHS cash benefits and maternity benefits of £100.
A premium waiver in case of the main policy holder's death or redundancy is also offered, plus a helpline, a second opinion and redundancy cover for up to 12 months.
(Silver card holders are not covered for nursing at home or NHS cash and maternity benefits.)
Clinicare, which does not require a medical examination on application, also covers existing illness after 24 months of continuous insurance — provided you have not visited the doctor for 12 months.
The 20% no-claims discount rises to 50% after five years' no-claims.
For more information, contact Clinicare on  
OFFSHORE FUNDS
Investment protection
Hypo Foreign & Colonial Marketing has launched Protected Capital Plus, an open-ended Jersey-based rollup fund which aims to provide security for the original investment while locking in any gains in the FT-SE 100 Share Index each quarter.
The fund's assets are placed on fixed deposit with AA credit-rated banks.
The interest earned net of costs is used to purchase futures and options contracts so as to obtain maximum exposure in each quarter to any upward movement in the FT-SE Index.
Any gains made are locked in at the end of the quarter.
Should the market fall, no loss of original capital is incurred: only the cost of the futures and options has to be borne.
Hypo F & C reckons to be able to achieve an average of 60% of any upward movement in the index.
The minimum investment is £5,000.
Dealing days are on the third Friday of March, June, September and December.
The fund will not pay a dividend; all gains will be rolled up in the price.
For UK residents any gains from this investment will be liable to income tax, and not CGT, on realisation.
It is possible to add to or realise the investment at each quarterly dealing day.
Charges are a maximum of 5% initial and 0.9% annual.
The fund is only available to UK investors through professional advisers.
According to Hypo F & C's calculations, the fund would have achieved an average annual growth rate of 13.7% in the period 1980 to 30 June 1992 as compared with an average annual growth rate of 11.1% from a high-rate building society account.
Protected Capital Plus Fund is one of 20 funds within Hypo F & C's Reserve Asset Fund.
Further details are available from Hypo Foreign & Colonial Marketing on .
BANKING
Best money market rates
Tyndall's Managed Deposit Account gives corporate and individual investors the opportunity to obtain best money market rates of interest on their funds.
Under this account, Tyndall will advise which of four deposit periods — one week, one month, two months and three months — offers the best compounded annual rate.
The quote will then be held until noon the following banking day.
The service is available for sums of £10,000 to £250,000.
Depositors' funds are placed with HM Treasury, authorised banks, local authorities and building societies in Great Britain; Tyndall does not lend to other customers.
There are no management or account charges.
An unlimited number of sub-accounts are available to financial advisers.
There is instant access to funds at each maturity date.
For the latest rates, phone 0272 744720.
For further details, contact Tyndall & Co.
VENTURE CAPITAL
Capital contacts
The Local Investment Networking Company (LINC) helps put start-ups and growing businesses seeking to raise £10,000 to £250,000 in touch with investors.
They must be prepared to offer an equity share in their business.
Raising this much finance from conventional sources is normally difficult, but LINC claims that 20% of the businesses accepted this year have subsequently been funded by registered investors.
LINC, sponsored by Lloyds Bank, BP and chartered accountants Levy Gee, is operated by a consortium of local enterprise agencies and managed from the London Enterprise Agency's offices.
It publishes a monthly bulletin featuring all the latest small business opportunities.
Examples from the August bulletin include a growing North Staffordshire company involved in decorating and printing bone chinaware, earthenware, glassware and so on, which is seeking £30,000 for expansion, and a company based in the south west that has launched a range of power cables and requires £75,000.
Most LINC investors, who must have between £10,000 and £250,000 available for investment, look for opportunities near their homes and sometimes also provide the companies with management services.
They generally do not expect a short-term return.
Businesses searching for financial assistance can be start-ups or already trading, and should normally have a business plan.
Investor meetings give potential backers the opportunity to hear five or six business propositions.
LINC also operates an automatic database matching service.
Among the successful fundings are £150,000 for a child day care centre in the south east and £75,000 for a northern organic waste treatment business.
For more information contact Fiona Conoley at LINC, London Enterprise Agency, 4 Snow Hill, London EC1A 2BS (phone ).
INSURANCE BONDS
Building society bypass
Providence Capitol Life Assurance's Building Society Bond is aimed at basic and higher rate taxpayers.
It is designed to offer them a net return higher than that available direct from any building society deposit account.
The bond invests in deposits with top building societies and, because of the large sums involved, will usually be able to negotiate a higher gross rate than is normally available.
The minimum investment is £10,000.
Interest accrues daily and it is possible to receive a monthly income; otherwise it will be left to grow.
All or part of the investment can be withdrawn without notice or penalty, provided the minimum balance stays at £10,000.
The return will be variable, as building societies change the rates paid to investors.
Providence Capitol () is liable to tax on income within the fund at the rate applicable to a life assurance company, so the fund builds up net of basic rate income tax.
68  
WHAT'S AROUND
Key man insurance.
Legal & General's Business Protection Plan now enables firms to claim 80% of the sum assured when terminal illness is diagnosed and death is expected within 12 months.
Maximum benefit that can be advanced is £1.6m.
For full details, ring .
Car insurance.
Eagle Star is offering its motor policyholders special discounts on alarms and steering wheel locks.
Ring .
For clubs and charities.
The Treasurer's Account from Barnsley Building Society offers interest rising to 8.8% gross for amounts over £50,000.
Minimum investment is £500 and interest is paid annually.
The account is aimed at club treasurers, charities and companies.
Ring  for full details.
For first time buyers.
Leeds Permanent Building Society's First-time Buyer Mortgage charges a discounted rate for the first 12 months of 8.95% (11% APR) for loans up to 90% of value or 9.45% (11.2% APR) on loans of over 90% to 95% of value.
These mortgages are available on all repayment methods.
For more information, phone .
Environmentally friendly.
Homeowners Friendly Society () has designed the Green Chip Investment Fund for investments of £1,000 or more.
Around half of the fund is invested in blue chip equities which practise positive environmental policies — eg British Gas, Body Shop, British Telecom, Sainsbury's, Allied-Lyons — and the remainder in bonds, gilts and top yielding building society accounts.
There is no maximum or minimum period.
Charges are 5% initial and 1% annual.
Better rates.
General Accident Life () has improved its rates for key man policies.
It will insure the life of a 39 year old male non-smoker for £300,000 for five years at a monthly premium of £40.50.
New mortgage.
Home-mover from Newbury Building Society gives house purchasers a discount on the standard mortgage rate of 10.75% for a year if they are putting at least £20,000 towards the price.
The discount rises from 1/2 % for £20,000 — £29,999 equity to 1% for £40,000 and over.
The loans must be below 75% of the purchase price.
Call  for more information.
Fixed rate home loan.
Skipton Building Society has fixed the mortgage rate for all borrowers who take out house and contents only insurance with the society at 9.25% until 30 September 1993 and then 10.2% until 30 September 1995.
First time buyers can borrow up to 95% of the valuation or purchase price; product fee is £150.
For full details dial 0756 700500.
Bond scheme.
Arsenal Football Club is issuing more bonds to help finance the conversion to all-seated accommodation.
‘A’ bond holders (£1,500) can subscribe for season tickets for the North Bank Stand at £240 for season 1993/94; ‘B’bond holders (£1,100) at £195.
For the following nine seasons the club has guaranteed not to increase these season ticket prices by more than the annual rate of inflation.
Phone 0345 1989 for more information.
Guaranteed income bonds.
General Portfolio Life () has increased its interest rates.
Its Guaranteed Income Bond (investment £5,000 — £9,999) pays a net annual rate for 1 year of 6.90%, 2 years 7.40%, 3 years 7.50%, 4 years 7.70% and 5 years 7.80%.
economic trends
Clinton's eyes and Bush's tales The economic policies that Bill Clinton and George Bush have announced seem to rely too much on old measures that have failed the US economy in the past; can they work this time?
Labour Day in a US election year traditionally heralds the beginning of the end in the race for the presidency.
This year was no exception, with both candidates making rallying speeches to the troops and snide digs at one another.
Arkansas Governor Bill Clinton, the Democrats' blue-eyed boy, is still in the lead, despite a better than expected boost to George Bush's campaign at the recent Republican convention.
According to the latest electoral forecast from Washington-based political analyst Charles Cook, Clinton is ahead in 18 states with 222 votes, while Bush is slowly closing the gap with 192 votes in 22 states.
However, polls can turn out to be unreliable — as the UK discovered in its own general election earlier this year — and Cook places 11 states and their 124 votes in the toss-up column; so the president may yet find himself coming home from behind, as he said in his Labour Day speech, like his famous predecessor, Harry Truman.
Although Bush has managed to reduce Clinton's lead since the convention, Clinton is still in a better position to win.
He needs only 39% of the toss-up votes to claim a majority, compared with the 63% Bush requires.
Also, Clinton's total is firmer than Bush's.
Cook puts 86% of Clinton's total in the probable column compared to only 57% for Bush.
So if Bill Clinton  becomes the 42nd president of the United States, what action could we expect him to take to stimulate America's ailing economy?
Back in June he issued his plan,Putting People First: A National Economic Strategy for America,which has been largely incorporated into the Democratic platform.
This spelled out the clear ‘vision’ that he would take into his presidency.
It was well received by the electorate and, with a cooperative Democratic Congress behind him, he could expect to implement a majority of the plan's ideas.
Its centrepiece is a Rebuild America Fund, involving a $20bn annual Federal contribution to a massive infrastructure investment programme.
This amount would be leveraged with state, local, private sector and pension fund contributions (although the specific pension fund role isn't spelled out).
There would be a major shift in resources to infra-structure-related companies, particularly in the three areas Clinton has identified as priorities: transportation, communications and environmental systems.
Although such investment will inevitably benefit US companies, especially those in equipment manufacture, steel-making and construction, there will also be opportunities for foreign companies — Clinton has plans for a high-speed rail network, for example, equipment for which is currently not made by US companies — and one can imagine a fierce ‘Buy America’ debate over any major public works piece of legislation.
He also intends to make resources available for the development of ‘smart’ highway technology and high-tech short-haul aircraft.
On the communications front, Clinton's programme would help fund a national information network linking homes, businesses, classrooms and libraries.
The goal is to construct this network by 2015.
And he has also argued for a tougher approach to environmental enforcement and development of environmental technology.
Other forms of tax will also play a major role in Clinton's plan to stimulate economic growth.
Under the heading ‘tax fairness’, he has identified wealthy individuals, executive compensation, ‘runaway plants’(US companies that close down their plants and ship their employees abroad) and the US subsidiaries of foreign companies as targets for tax increases.
He intends to raise the top rate of tax from 31% to 36% and wants to apply a 10% millionaires' surtax, leading to a top rate of approximately 40%.
At the same time, he will enact a middle class tax cut, expand the earned income tax credit and reform welfare and child support enforcement.
Tax breaks will be on offer for community development and to encourage private investment, including a 50% tax exclusion for small businesses making long-term investments and tax credits for research and development.
Another major element of Putting People First involves containment of healthcare costs.
Clinton favours national health spending caps and managed care networks to keep health costs from rising faster than average incomes, and the play or pay concept (whereby employers either provide employees with healthcare benefits or pay the government a tax that it uses to provide medical benefits) to guarantee universal health care coverage.
He also plans drug pricing restrictions and insurance industry reform.
Defence spending is also a target, to release funding for other proposed initiatives.
Clinton would slash $37.5bn from Bush's defence budget proposals for fiscal years 1993–96.
Elsewhere, 100,000 government jobs will go, along with 25% of White House staff, and 3% would be cut from the Federal agency administrative costs.
So Clinton has come up with a mixed bag of tricks: some of his proposals will be interpreted as inflationary (the new mandates on business, for example— including a requirement that all employers spend a minimum of 1.5% of payroll on continuing education and training).
His deficit-reduction plans would offset this, but the impact is mitigated by his taking a leaf from the Republican's book and relying on increased economic growth for about half the deficit reduction below the baseline deficit forecast.
If, however, the electorate does buck the trend and return George Bush to the White House, the president will face a tougher task than Clinton would in pushing his economic programme through Congress.
During Bush's first term, the Democrat-dominated Congress was a constant thorn in his side and, at the Republican convention, he offered several ideas on how he would deal with what will be a newly elected Congress.
One way is to intimidate them.
He is trying to take advantage of Congress's low public standing by threatening to veto appropriations bills, particularly the one that funds Congress, and by promoting term limits.
A second approach Bush mentioned was that he would meet the 150 or so new House of Representatives members before they become captives of the leadership or the lobbyists.
Finally, Bush will try to avoid Congress altogether.
One way of doing this would be to add a box to US tax returns, which taxpayers would tick if they wanted to donate money to reducing the US deficit (the tax check-off scheme).
This method is already used to raise funds for election campaigns.
Despite these plans, though, Bush is likely to have just as difficult a time with the new Congress.
Republicans are likely to pick up seats in the House, so he might have more leverage there, but this will be counter-balanced by the probable increase in the number of Democratic seats in the Senate.
As a lame duck, he will even have to contend with an unruly Republican contingent in Congress, as the fight to succeed him will begin immediately.
And what is certain to provide fuel for a partisan battleground next year, if he wins, is the string of tax cut proposals on his agenda.
Draconian spending cuts through a cap on welfare and other non-discretionary (entitlement) spending, which would lead to nearly £300bn worth of savings over five years, defence cuts, a domestic freeze and the taxpayer check-off which could result in a maximum of $50bn in spending cuts, would make up the shortfall created by his proposed tax incentives.
These include a capital gains tax cut, a 15% investment tax allowance and across-the-board tax rate cuts.
What Bush is proposing is risky.
He only has specific proposals for 10% of the total entitlement spending cap, yet the across the board tax rate cuts would lose $25bn a year in revenue for each percentage point reduced, and conservatives are calling for a three point cut.
Tax measures in Bush's health plan — including a tax credit or deduction for out-of-pocket health expenses and managed care incentives — would lose a further $35bn a year in revenue, and no financing has been identified yet.
Add proposed record spending levels on research and development, infrastructure, education, enterprise zones and job training, as well as real estate and profamily incentives, and there may well be good reason to fear that the overall budget deficit may be the constraint that yields if spending cuts can't be found to finance all of these initiatives.
Another key element of Bush's economic programme is the promotion of free trade and investment.
The recently negotiated North American Free Trade Agreement is the best example.
He continues to work on the stalled Uruguay Round of GATT talks, and in his speech to the American Legion in August, he talked about more bilateral agreements with other parts of the world.
Clinton also favours trade liberalisation.
But Bush has stressed the issue more in his campaign, and Clinton may have to move slower in order to incorporate environmental and worker rights provisions into trade pacts.
Whoever wins, their plans to boost the economy will face political obstacles and will not have an instant effect.
In the meantime, the US economy continues to decline.
commentary
Reluctant partners in the Westminster stand-off A successful national industrial base will not be built unless industry and government cooperate — now
Howard Davies Confederation of British Industry
Conservative administrations of the 1980s were certainly right to maintain that governments must not get involved in ‘picking winners’ and directing companies' strategies.
The traditional career patterns followed in this country have not produced ministers or civil servants with either the skills or the experience to perform such a task; and, moreover, business leaders would not welcome the loss of the freedom to run their affairs as they think best.
It does not follow, however, that there is no role for government in the strategic direction of the nation's industry as a whole.
Part of the reason for governments' ‘averted gaze’ has, of course, been the wish to avoid being seen as the obvious source of subsidy and support for struggling enterprises.
In fact, what we have witnessed has been the spectacle of governments running so hard to get away from this concept that they have been unable to hear the voice of the British business community, pleading that the interest it would like the government to show in its affairs is of a different nature altogether.
Recent changes in Westminster and Whitehall hold out hope that this ‘stand-off’ may be coming to an end.
Michael Heseltine's creation of a new Industrial Competitiveness Division at the Department of Trade and Industry is a positive step in the right direction.
Now, certainly, there is scope for cooperation and agreement between industry and government over the essential pre-conditions for a successful national industrial base.
At the Confederation of British Industry, we have already done a large amount of research into the sources of international competitiveness, and we now welcome the interest that the Government is showing in some of our conclusions.
One point on which we are agreed is that instability in the economy is a definite hindrance.
The exporter who has to plan for his company's future in a climate of uncertainty about exchange rates is like the man forced to build his house on sand.
That is why our continuing membership of the Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM) is of such importance to British business.
Its effect on the rate of inflation is already beginning to show through.
The sooner the markets develop confidence in the Government's commitment to the ERM, the sooner it will be possible to get our interest rates down as well, and thus provide a much-needed boost for companies' ability to invest for the future.
But stability alone is not enough to ensure the prosperity of British industry.
We need the Government to be assiduous in its attempts to eliminate the obstacles that hinder companies' ability to compete effectively in the international environment.
In many areas it is simply impossible for them to go out and win a big share in an intensely competitive market without the Government's explicit support and cooperation.
The areas ripe for action are legion: working to reduce the costs of energy to industry's intensive users by gaining access for them to European supply grids, and by lobbying other European governments to withdraw subsidies from their competitors in other countries; pressing for the even enforcement of regulations across all European Community countries; or even in assisting British companies to win major contracts in countries with a less ‘hands-off’ approach to industry.
Certainly I don't think that the DTI's ministers and officials will find their jobs any less interesting when they begin to take up our cause in this way.
But other areas of government need to be involved as well.
Years of under-investment in the physical and human infrastructure have built up into serious supply-side problems affecting the performance of both private and public sector organisations.
Our workforce is significantly less well-educated than our principal competitors'.
Comparison of the road and rail systems here with those in France reveals only too clearly the consequences of neglect; the French typically spend around 1% of GDP on their transport infrastructure, while we have managed barely half that figure.
There is a clear need for the Government to make a statement of its commitment to the cause of building the UK's industrial performance to match its competitors'.
Such a statement would be a useful reference point when it came to making tough decisions in the public expenditure rounds — between pay rises and investment projects, for instance.
It would provide a reminder that the impact of Government policies on business should be taken into account before they are implemented, not left until afterwards, when the choice could be between damage to our competitiveness and a damaging climb-down by the Government.
Perhaps most importantly, a clear statement of the Government's interest could do a great deal to improve industry's poor image in the eyes of the media and of young people, a factor which has made a major contribution to our failure as a nation to make the best of our reserves of natural talent.
It seems a lot to ask.
And yet, even here within the UK, there are places where you can see something like this already in action, a sort of national industrial strategy in microcosm.
The network of Training Enterprise Councils (TEC) has been set up to allow strategies for dealing with vocational training, employment needs, new enterprise and economic development to be handled at a local level by a single local body, which benefits from the practical experience and local knowledge of the employers and others who serve on its board.
The results so far are encouraging, although problems have arisen because of the requirement for business people to operate under the inflexible and bureaucratic financial controls to which government agencies have become inured over the years.
These problems need to be straightened out quickly if the extraordinary commitment of the TECs' board members is not to be allowed to trickle away.
There is in short, a long agenda for action, and little time to spare.
We shall be continuing to impress that simple message on the Government.
The sooner the markets develop confidence in the Government's commitment to the ERM, the sooner it will be possible to get our interest rates down and thus provide a much-needed boost for companies' ability to invest for the future
How ICI halved the value of its shareholders' funds 20 years of 10% a year inflation has had a significant impact on the accounts of ICI and GEC
Professor David Myddelton Cranfield School of Management
ICI and GEC, two of Britain's largest and best-known companies, have each reported total retained profits of about £4,500m over the last 20 years.
I shall be looking here at the effect of adjusting their published accounts between 1972 and 1991 to allow for inflation.
Constant purchasing power (CPP) accounting uses nearly all the same conventions and standards as historical cost (HC) accounting, except that it measures profit or loss not in terms of money but against a yardstick of maintaining purchasing power capital.
Preparing CPP accounts involves some crude assumptions, so the adjusted figures are only a guide.
It makes sense to account in terms of money when inflation is low.
It is easy, and roughly measures purchasing power too.
But since 1970 UK inflation has averaged nearly 10% a year, an unprecedented peacetime rate in sterling's 1,000-year history.
The pound has lost 90% of its purchasing power in a single generation.
In the maelstrom of such rapid currency debasement, it is purchasing power, not money, which really matters.
You only have to think of your salary, or the value of your house, to get the point.
Both ICI and GEC have large overseas interests.
In preparing group accounts, therefore, both companies translate foreign currencies into terms of pounds, using suitable exchange rates.
Of course it would be meaningless to add and subtract different units of measurement like pounds and dollars.
Both companies, however, carelessly add together the money costs of fixed assets they acquired in different years.
Yet a 1978 pound had the purchasing power of about 2½ 1992 pounds — a larger difference than between a 1991 pound and a 1991 dollar!
Thus, in effect, ICI and GEC — and all UK companies which use historical cost money accounting — are adding and subtracting apples and oranges.
The result is nonsense.
The impact of inflation
Inflation accounting or constant purchasing power accounting makes three main adjustments to HC accounts.
First, depending on the date of purchase, it increases the amount of fixed assets, which also increases depreciation expense and losses on disposal of fixed assets.
Second, it reports losses of purchasing power on net monetary assets held or gains on net liabilities.
(For simplicity, I include stocks as monetary assets.
That is not strictly correct, but for practical purposes it is normally close enough.)
Third, it expresses each year's results in terms of constant purchasing power, not in current money.
This affects trends over time, and allows averaging of different periods' results.
ICI's HC depreciation has been about 90% of reported HC profit after tax; and with an average plant life of 15 years, the CPP amount is 100% higher.
GEC's HC depreciation has been only about 40% of reported HC profit after tax: and with a shorter average plant life, the CPP amount is only 50% higher.
Hence the CPP adjustment of depreciation is 90% of ICI's HC profit after tax on average, but only 20% of GEC's.
On the other hand, GEC's net monetary assets (including stocks) averaged 92 £1,650m over the period (ICI averaged almost none).
With currency debasement of 9% a year since 1972, GEC's cash mountain lost purchasing power at nearly 92 £150m a year for 20 years.
That is more than the extra CPP depreciation.
Over the period, ICI's reported HC sales rose from less than £2bn to nearly £13bn; and GEC's HC sales (excluding related companies) rose from £1bn to nearly £6bn.
But both companies' increase in money sales merely matched the six-fold increase in the retail prices index over the 20 years.
In real (CPP) terms, ICI's sales have been flat throughout the period, at around 92 £12bn to 92 £15bn; as have GEC's real sales, at around half ICI's level.
A table (see below) comparing opening and closing equity book value helps to summarise the main changes over a long period.
Note that GEC actually reduced its share capital over the period.
If ICI and GEC had capitalised goodwill and amortised it against profit (as ED 47 proposes, in line with US practice), then the differences between HC and CPP results would have been even larger than they are.
A concern for shareholders
Inflation adjustments can make a big difference.
For example, ICI's published HC accounts report profits every year.
But I reckon the company has made CPP losses in more than half of the last 15 years.
Hence, over that period, total corporation tax has exceeded ICI's total real profits before tax.
Whereas reported HC retained profits for ICI total £4¾bn, on a CPP basis the company has paid 92 £4bn of dividends out of purchasing power capital.
Hence in real terms the book value of ICI's equity has shrunk from 92 £8bn in 1971 to 92 £3bn in 1991.
HC return on equity often greatly exceeds the CPP rate of return.
For ICI the excess is more than 10 percentage points in 16 years out of the 20 years.
For GEC the excess is more than 10 percentage points in eight years, and more than 5 percentage points in 18 years, out of the 20 years.
Average rates of return over the whole period were: ICI — HC 15%, CPP 1 ½%; GEC — HC 19%, CPP 10 ½%.; e ICI's HC dividend cover from 1973 to 1987 averaged three times; but ICI's CPP earnings have not fully covered the dividend paid in 16 of the 17 years since 1975.
Between 1974 and 1984, GEC's HC dividend cover averaged over five times, but only 2 ¼%; on a CPP basis.
At least GEC's real dividend has grown by over 10% a year since 1978.
But ICI's real dividend per share in 1992 is lower than it was as far back as 1959.
Smith's omissions
It is ironic that Terry Smith's recent book,Accounting for Growth , which caused quite a fuss (see also this issue, p 89), completely ignored two major reasons why UK HC accounts are currently so inadequate.
One serious distortion of UK accounts stems from writing off purchased goodwill directly against reserves.
SSAP 22 allows this practice (which can result in negative equity!), and most UK companies affected follow it.
I have not discussed how much worse ICI and GEC's results would look if they amortised more than 92 £2bn goodwill against profit.
The second, and most important, problem with UK accounts is the impact of inflation.
As I have shown, inflation affects profits, assets, and trends over time.
Failure to adjust UK accounts for inflation can mean (as in ICI's case) ignoring the distinction between profit and loss.
What matters in accounting, if that doesn't?
Do building societies have a future?
The building society industry faces major changes — including a reduction in numbers over the next 10 years
David Barchard Financial Times
The autumn of 1992 is probably the bleakest moment in the last 60 years of building society history.
Societies are under grave pressure on both sides of their businesses, and when the crisis does end, the building society world may look very different from the way it did in 1990.
The mortgage market has been in the doldrums for three years and lending is shrinking steadily, partly because there is only a trickle of new customers and partly because existing customers are paying off at least part of their mortgages when they can.
Many other customers — about 305,000 in all — are more than six months behind with their payments.
Building societies are going easy on customers in arrears at the moment because their selling many more repossessed homes in this market would simply drive prices down even further.
Privately, lenders admit that of customers in arrears for more than six months, there are more than 150,000 who probably cannot be saved.
Things are no better in the building societies' savings business.
Throughout this year they have faced strong competition from National Savings and, throughout the summer months, new savings flowed away from building society accounts, although accrued interest of £8bn helped offset the immediate impact of this outflow.
Many societies are close to their legal ceilings for commercial money market borrowing.
So the stark fact is that, even if there were a mortgage recovery, the societies would not have the funds to cope with an increase in borrowing.
Further collapse feared
There is no sign of a recovery.
September looked set to be a dead month for mortgages, prompting fears of a further collapse in the market.
If that happens, pressures on the weaker societies will mount.
‘My scenario is that falling house prices will drive up bad debts further, causing lenders to try and cut their costs as provisions start to eat into their capital bases,’ says one former chief executive of a large mortgage lender.
A top 10 building society agrees privately.
‘The 5% increase in house prices which we were expecting this year would have solved most of our problems, including the brunt of the arrears and repossessions,’ it says.
Both speakers believe that active government intervention in the housing market is now urgently needed before things get even worse.
John Wriglesworth, housing finance analyst at UBS Phillips & Drew, is currently forecasting a further drop of up to 10% in house prices next year.
This dire short-term market squeeze has at least temporarily put paid to the idea that the building society industry is making a graceful adaptation to the 1980s' deregulation of the financial services market.
Societies are still very strongly capitalised, according to figures from the Building Society Commission, the industry regulator.
Most large societies have also made heavy provisions against bad debts.
Guidelines for provisioning (hitherto unknown in the industry) were tightened up again this autumn for the second year in succession.
Forced to merge?
Heavy provisions have already driven some societies into losses: something else which used to be unknown in the industry.
Leamington Spa, the 17th largest society in 1990, was the first to exit from the market via a merger after declaring a loss.
Even more spectacular was the fate of Town & Country, the 19th largest society, which declare a whopping £43m loss after provisions of £58m last year.
Town & Country found a rescuer in Woolwich, which was willing to take it over.
Halifax, the largest society, refused to play this role.
Mr Wriglesworth is confident that this story will not be repeated in 1992.
‘There will be no need to rescue a top 20 society this year,’ he confidently predicts.
He may be right, but one or two large societies do look weaker in terms of bad debt experience and capital strength than the rest of the pack.
Jim Birrell, chief executive of Halifax, has made it clear that Halifax will not allow itself to be frogmarched into a potentially damaging merger with a large but weak society.
Smaller societies are a different matter.
Most larger societies are eager to grow by swallowing small ones.
The size of the societies falls away very sharply after the top five, and even more so below the top 20, so risks in a merger are much more limited.
There seems to be a general expectation that the tiny societies will finally disappear in the next 20 years.
Until very recently this was not because they were inherently unprofitable: many small societies proportionately held their own very well until the early 1990s as far as their capital strength and profitability were concerned.
But mistaken loan decisions or pricing policies swiftly come home to roost in an organisation with a balance sheet of only a few hundred million.
Last year saw a brief run by depositors on one small society, the Southdown, which later merged with Leeds Permanent, the fifth largest society.
This year, however, has seen life getting much tougher for the smaller societies.
‘The smaller societies have been chasing savings business hard,’ says the chief executive of one top 10 society.
‘The C & D category societies (the smallest) have picked up a lot of savings business by offering high interest rates, but that money has to be lent out and the sort of mortgage business they have been picking up at the rates they charge looks very doubtful to me.
I am frankly fearful of what may lie ahead for some of them.’
How far will the industry contract?
On current trends, the band of survivors at the start of the 21st century is likely to number between 20 and 30.
Just how many societies survive may depend on another fundamental problem for the industry.
Their form of mutual ownership has become an anachronism.
Not only does it limit their ability to raise capital and power to do business, it also creates a management oligarchy.
There is no immediate sign that societies will shed mutual status.
Some — the Woolwich, for example— are wedded to the idea of mutual ownership and hope to survive indefinitely as mutually-owned retail banks.
Other societies would probably have followed Abbey National with stock market flotations in the early 1990s but for the hostility of the Building Societies Commission and the housing market recession.
Now at least one top 10 society says privately that it is thinking seriously of becoming a plc in a few years.
If it does, this time round others will almost certainly follow.
Making the most of a vital resource The profession has decided to do something positive about women
Susan Gompels Women in Accountancy
Women in business today still find themselves in a male-dominated environment where only 20% of managers are women.
There are sound economic reasons why this now has to change.
By the year 2000, it is expected that women will represent almost 50% of the workforce, so, assuming women have the same potential management skills as men, and bearing in mind that women gained 45% of first degrees in 1989, companies that fail to recruit or promote them are cutting their reservoir of managerial talent by half.
So why are there so few women in senior positions?
The Institute of Directors has a total membership of 33,500, only 2,600 of them women.
In a recent survey, the IoD found that 43% of its female members were childless.
This seems to support the view that fewer women reach the top because of the difficulties they face if they try to combine family life and work commitments.
Even if women do return to work after having children, the majority go to a new employer and often to a job at a lower status than the one they left.
So far only a small number of women have made it to the top.
In the professions, including accountancy, they seem to fare better.
Obtaining any professional qualification requires not only vocation and commitment, but also great investment in both personal and financial terms.
It is perhaps the understandable reluctance to see such assets wasted that explains the determination, tenacity and moderate success of women in accountancy.
In addition, accountancy can offer flexible working hours and training patterns that enable women to remain active in the profession despite wider family commitments.
In the future, harsh economic necessity will dictate that businesses will have to consider employing and promoting more women if they are to survive.
For instance, it is estimated that around 1m of the 1.7m new jobs forecast for the mid 1990s will be in the professional and managerial areas, and demographics suggest that a substantial proportion of them will have to be filled by women.
It is therefore becoming increasingly important that firms develop practices and policies designed to overcome the difficulties many women face.
Furthermore, with more women seeking to enter the profession — almost 70% of the Institute's female membership is under the age of 35, while 36% of its students currently training are women — more initiatives are required to ensure that the investment in training is not wasted and that the economic value of a vital resource is fully realised.
Taking the initiative
With this in mind, representatives from the six major accountancy bodies have come together to form Women in Accountancy.
The group's 10 members, who represent the CCAB bodies, meet on a quarterly basis to examine the issues currently affecting women in the profession.
Increasing demands and enquiries from members and firms highlight the need for such a group, and for action by the accountancy bodies both individually and collectively.
Women in Accountancy aims to encourage women members within the six accountancy bodies by channelling ideas, exchanging information and providing input to their organisations, while at the same time offering a practical forum for processing any issues that the bodies wish to develop.
In addition, the group has identified a number of topics of particular interest.
These include the possibility of issuing equal opportunity guidelines for use by the profession and of formalising ‘networking’ opportunities for women.
Women in Accountancy will also consider ways of cooperating with other professional bodies.
For example, the West Midlands Regional Health Service has set itself the target of achieving a minimum of 33% of women non-executive directors who will advise on and develop the Regional Health Authority's policy.
The training and professional experience of women accountants means that they are ideal candidates for such high level posts.
While there are many imaginative programmes being put forward by firms and the accountancy bodies themselves, and indeed many initiatives already in place, the vast majority of women are unaware of these developments.
With this in mind, the group aims to coordinate and publicise the existing initiatives, and to encourage and develop new ones.
I believe that it is important that we are able to offer our members timely and constructive assistance, and that we encourage new ways of working which facilitate greater choice and effectiveness.
I hope any women members who have personal experiences they wish to share, ideas about what we could/should be doing, or who are interested in the establishment of Women in Accountancy will get in touch, so that I can ensure that their views and ideas are included in the group's discussion and activities.
Would a DG solve the profession's problems?
However attractive the idea of a director general sounds, it could create more problems than it would solve
Brian Singleton-Green Editor, Accountancy
The call by some district societies for a director general for the Institute (see ACCOUNTANCY , September, p 11) is a symptom of the difficulties facing the profession.
Its reputation is certainly at a low point, but in assessing a DG's likely effectiveness, one needs to identify exactly what the problems are.
The profession's worst problem is creative accounting.
The only answer to this is to develop a comprehensive programme of accounting standards and to enforce them vigorously.
This is what the Financial Reporting Council and its operating bodies — the Accounting Standards Board, the Financial Reporting Review Panel and the Urgent Issues Task Force — are there to do.
All that the Institute can do is to support them (which it does).
Until the FRC and its cohorts have made substantial progress in imposing uniformity in accounting matters, the profession will continue to be criticised because companies account for the same things in different ways.
A DG could do nothing about this.
We just have to grin and bear it.
The second underlying problem is unexpected company collapses, which are popularly assumed to indicate audit failures.
There are two strong PR positions that the Institute might theoretically take on this issue; neither is tenable.
One option would be to deny that the events in question do represent audit failures and to roundly condemn those who criticise the profession for the alleged lapses.
But some of the alleged failures may turn out to be actual failures, and the Institute may have to take disciplinary action against the firms in question.
The Institute could not possibly prejudge matters by proclaiming the auditors' innocence from the outset.
The second strong PR option would be to take the opposite line, to say how outrageous it is that there is all this terrible auditing going on, and to promise painful retribution for the wrongdoers.
This would be equally untenable.
The Institute cannot make instant assumptions of guilt, any more than of innocence.
Until an alleged audit failure has been properly investigated, which usually takes some years, the Institute knows no better than anybody else whether there really has been any negligence or wrongdoing.
This leaves it in an appallingly weak PR position, but it is unavoidable, and appointing a DG would do nothing to improve it.
Apart from these public problems, the profession also has an internal problem.
This is the question of self-regulation, which is of concern to the Institute's practising members, particularly smaller firms.
Over the past few years the Institute, under statute, has started to regulate its members' insolvency, financial services and auditing work.
This has resulted in some members leaving these areas of practice, or having to face higher costs, or coping with an intrusion into their affairs that they resent.
Some members will feel that the Institute, instead of regulating them, ought to have protected them from regulation.
Hence the calls in some quarters for the Institute to become a trade association defending members' interests, rather than a regulatory body.
And hence the calls now for a DG to strengthen the Institute's lobbying to defend members against any further regulatory encroachments.
There are fairly narrow limits to how much the Institute's lobbying is ever likely to achieve.
If the Government decides to regulate a particular area of activity, whether because of public pressure following financial scandals or because of an EC directive, the profession is not going to be able either to make it go against public opinion or to relieve it of its responsibilities under the Treaty of Rome.
When it comes to the technical content of the legislation, if this falls within chartered accountants' competence, then the Institute is probably as successful in its lobbying as comparable bodies such as the Law Society or the CBI.
The Institute does suffer from the two weaknesses that other accountancy bodies may contradict it and that even its own members may pursue a different line in talking or writing to the government.
The trouble is that nobody can speak for the whole profession because of the various ways in which the profession is divided.
A DG would not be able to overcome this.
Some advocates of a DG also want him (or her) to give the Institute a higher public profile, and they often draw analogies with the CBI.
The public profile of the CBI's director general mainly derives from his willingness to pronounce in public on issues of political interest, his fluency and persuasiveness in doing so and the fact that he can claim to speak for British industry.
The Institute could attempt to set up such a figure, but he would face considerable difficulties.
Do English and Welsh chartered accountants, as such, have a distinctive line on public issues?
Would the DG's success be jeopardised if spokesmen for rival accountancy bodies attempted to undermine him?
Do most members want the Institute to adopt politically controversial postures?
Would members and firms who disagreed with a DG's pronouncements be content to remain silent?
It is easy to foresee a DG very quickly falling flat on his face or stirring up more problems than he started with.
How would a DG affect the Institute's present leadership structure?
The London Society suggests that a DG ‘should not usurp the role of the secretary and chief executive nor replace the president’.
This is unrealistic.
A DG who did not lead the Institute's secretariat would be left hanging in mid air; the role of the secretary and chief executive would have to be usurped if a DG is to achieve anything.
So would the role of the president, who would cease to be the Institute's effective leader.
The London Society implicitly recognises this when it goes on to argue that a DG would allow the president's post to become part-time, thereby allowing the senior partner of a major practice to take it on.
But why should Brandon Gough or Jim Butler want to play even part-time second fiddle to an Institute DG?
If most members did want a director general for the Institute, then their wishes should obviously prevail.
But nobody should be under the illusion that it is likely to solve any problems.
Until an alleged audit failure is investigated, the Institute does not know whether there has been negligence.
This leaves it in an appallingly weak PR position, but appointing a DG would do nothing to improve it.
readers ask
Director's benefit in kind
Our client is the sole director of a private company in which he has a substantial interest.
Many years ago the company purchased a property for its investment potential, but as a result of the slump in property prices the company could not sell without making a substantial loss.
Our client has been making regular visits to the property, usually at weekends, during which he maintains it as well as performing a security function.
His trips usually involve an overnight stay, and he pays the company rent for this occasional occupation.
No one else rents the property, although our client does sometimes have guests to stay overnight during his weekend visits.
The inspector is arguing that the director is in receipt of an assessable Schedule E benefit in kind in respect of the living accommodation the company provides.
The relevant provisions are in s 145 and 146 ICTA 1988.
The inspector considers that there are assessable Schedule E emoluments for all years, since the property was purchased assessable on the director.
As the cost of the property was substantial, the annual values are also substantial, and even taking into account the rent the director pays the company, the chargeable emoluments are substantial.
The inspector's calculations are based on an assumption that the property is available throughout the year, although s 145(1) of the Act states that emoluments are chargeable where living accommodation is provided in any period.
Do you consider that the inspector is right to assess emoluments on the director, and if so is it correct to charge emoluments for the whole year when the director only uses the property for a few weekends in each year?
On the face of the facts given, the inspector of taxes does appear to be ‘turning a text into a pretext’.
Ss 145 and 146, ICTA 1988 refer to situations ‘where living accommodation is provided for a person in any period by reason of his employment’.
Has this occurred in this case?
From the facts given:
1.
The director (presumably) has his own home and does not live at the company premises.
2.
The property was purchased for investment purposes, and is still owned only because of the current property slump.
3.
Weekend visits by the director incorporate security and maintenance — ie protecting the company's asset.
4.
The director pays rent to the company.
5.
Entertainment of company clients may take place at the property, although this is just an assumption.
Because of the sole directorship, the Revenue is trying to ride roughshod through the facts of the case and turn it into a mini investigation.
If the purposes of the director's occupation are as set out in the query, then the case should be resisted strongly, based on the five points stated, and also, particularly, on the basis of the phrase in ss 145 and 146 quoted in the second paragraph of this reply.
The director has not been provided with living accommodation by reason of his office, and any occupation of the property by him is purely incidental.
Retirement relief on sale of milk quota
In 1986/87 a farmer client sold his prize dairy herd because he found that at 67 he was too old to cope with the rigorous work involved.
After prolonged negotiation he sold his milk quota in two separate tranches.
165,000 litres in October 1987 and 85,513 litres in February 1988 fetched £80,029 in total.
No land was sold.
The quota was not leased in the period between the sale of the herd and the sales of the quota.
The farmer subsequently purchased 90 ewes and 40 cattle for fattening, and ploughed 37 acres for wheat growing.
The Revenue has raised an assessment charging tax in excess of £20,000 and has refused retirement relief on the sale of the milk quota because no land was sold; farming continued after the sale (in the Revenue's view the provisions of s 53(2)TA88 mean that when a farmer changes the nature of his farming there is a continuation of the old trade and that the old and the new are equally applicable for CGT purposes); the sales of the herd and milk quota were not effected at the same time.
We have argued in favour of retirement relief, as land is merely one of several business assets and as such does not have to be part of a disposal for that disposal to constitute a significant part of the business.
Also, our client's farming activity after the disposal was of a very different nature in terms of the type of stock and the reduction in labour-intensiveness.
The case has now been listed for hearing before the Commissioners.
Do we have a strong enough case to challenge the Revenue?
On the face of it, the decision in three cases suggests that the reader's client has little hope.
In McGregor v Adcock 51 TC 692, decided in 1977, a 70 year old farmer sold five of his 35 acres for development, and the Court held that there had been a sale of assets of the business and not part of the business, thus denying retirement relief.
This decision was followed in 1988 in Atkinson v Dancer (1988) STC 758 when a farmer sold nine of his 89 acres.
Similar principles were applied in Mannion v Johnston (1988) STC 758, heard at the same time, where two separate disposals of less than half the farm land were held to be merely limited changes of scale and not a disposal of part of the business.
The facts in the current case are quite different.
Although no land has been sold, it appears that the sale of the herd and two subsequent disposals of the milk quota constituted together the sale of a complete business.
A quite different farming business then commenced.
S 69, FA 1985, which replaced ss 124, 125, CGTA 1979, and is itself now part of the Taxation of Capital Gains Act 1992, makes it clear that, in connection with a retirement relief claim, a disposal of business assets is a disposal of the whole or part of a business, or a disposal of one or more assets which, at the time at which a business ceased to be carried on, were in use for the purposes of that business.
While agreeing that, for income tax purposes only, the old definition that ‘all farming carried on…is one trade’(s 53(2), ICTA 1988) applies, CGT principles, and in particular the legislation regarding retirement relief, are quite different.
It seems that this is a case that will stand or fall on its own particular facts.
We are not told about the proceeds from the sale of the land in 1986/87, but if £20,000 tax is at stake, expert professional advice could be worthwhile.
If the reader or his partner(s) are members of the Faculty of Taxation of the Institute, it is recommended that an approach is made to tax counsel for an opinion under the special terms available before hearing by the Commissioners.
If counsel so advises, any appeal should probably be heard before the Special Commissioners rather than the General Commissioners.
Goods not paid for
We have been asked to look into the affairs of AB Ltd in liquidation: the company owes one of our clients some £800.
AB's business was sold to XY Ltd as a going concern prior to the liquidator's appointment, at which point no stock remained with AB.
Included in the £50,620 stock sold are items our client sold to AB for about £800.
The liquidator says that he cannot say how much of the stock was supplied by our client, nor does he have any information as to whether or not the amount received from debtors includes any amount for the sale of AB stock originally supplied by our client.
The amount due from XY at 25 March 1992 had not been finally agreed.
AB went into liquidation in March 1991, our client having supplied goods and invoices dated January and February 1991.
The liquidator does not know of the existence of stock records in support of £50,620, and XY Ltd, in taking over the stock, stated they did not have schedules/lists which would enable them to identify what they took over.
Selling goods that have not been paid for appears to need redress.
Is there a way this injustice could be dealt with?
The fact that goods have not been paid for does not prevent ownership in them passing to the purchaser unless, of course, they are subject to a properly communicated and valid retention clause.
Even then, since the purchaser is a person who has ‘bought or agreed to buy’ the goods, he can give a good title to a third party.
Therefore XY Ltd would appear to have a good title to the goods one way or another.
We are not quite sure who sold the business to XY Ltd as a going concern — presumably it was either a receiver of AB Ltd or AB's directors prior to liquidation.
In either event it is usual for the seller to carefully review and identify the company's liabilities and ensure that the purchaser's assumption of those liabilities is included in the contract.
Strictly speaking, the creditor's consent to the transfer of his debt is required by novation.
You can assign benefits but not burdens in English law, but the intention is that the purchaser will pay the debts, and that is an end of the matter.
If there is any suggestion of misfeasance here concerned with the transfer of the assets of AB Ltd to XY Ltd, then s 212 of the Insolvency Act 1986 may apply.
This provides a remedy through the court against any person who has mishandled or appropriated property.
Such a person may be ordered to make restitution in whatever way the court thinks appropriate.
The section extends to insolvency practitioners and directors and managers.
It is a summary remedy which should enable a person in default to be brought swiftly to account.
See also the case Casey v Breachwood Motors Ltd (Times Law Reports 29 July 1992), where the court lifted the veil of incorporation to allow the plaintiff to proceed against the second company.
No tea with the taxman
We recently visited an inspector of taxes with a client.
Although the meeting lasted about two hours, we were offered no refreshment, and we are wondering whether there are any statutory regulations in this connection.
While we do not expect the Revenue to provide a canteen service, presumably the inspectors and their staff have tea-making facilities at their offices.
Please let us know whether we and/or our client would have any rights in this matter?
This is an interesting question and there is probably more to it than meets the eye.
Reports that have reached us suggest that the Inland Revenue has been attempting to shake off its former austere image by offering some visitors refreshment.
The absence of such courtesies during a two hour meeting suggests that the purpose of the meeting may have been the initial ‘interrogation’ in an accounts investigation.
The Revenue's tactics in such cases have recently inspired headlines in the national press, and it is understood that the Accounts Investigation Interviews manual suggests that the inspector should establish a deliberately austere atmosphere during such a meeting.
This would definitely rule out the provision of tea or coffee, which would be seen as a way of putting the taxpayer at ease — which is the last thing the inspector would wish to achieve.
We know of no statutory regulations or taxpayer's rights.
However, the current Government has made much of the Citizen's Charter, and the Taypayer's Charter instructs the Revenue to be ‘courteous at all times.’
The lack of liquid refreshment during a two hour meeting could be seen as a lack of courtesy and, if this occurs again, it is suggested that a tactful reference to the need for a drink be made during the meeting — the result may be only a glass of water, but that is better than nothing!
Tax relief for guarantee payment
The bank asked a client of ours to give personal guarantees to cover his company's borrowing requirements.
The client was a director of the company and it was a condition that he signed guarantees for the funding of the business to continue.
The company subsequently went into receivership and the bank called in the personal guarantees.
The client director had to pay the bank £10,000.
Can this expense be offset against the director's Schedule E assessment on the grounds that the guarantee had been given wholly, necessarily and exclusively for the purpose of the business?
If so, how would a claim be made?
Would it be set against a Schedule E liability in the year the guarantee was made, or against the Schedule E liability in the year the payment was made?
What would be the situation if the payment was higher than the income tax suffered in that particular year?
Would a repayment be generated or would the excess be carried back/forward against Schedule E liabilities from other years?
Your comments, please.
Had the client been a trader assessable under Schedule D, Case 1, then relief for the loss under the guarantee would very likely be available under income tax provisions, similar to the allowance for bad debt losses.
There is substantial case law on guarantee payments and losses, but no instances of relief being granted under the strict provision of s 198(1), ICTA 1988 for an employee or director assessable under Schedule E.
The best that can be achieved then, assuming that the guarantee was given after 11 April 1978, is a CGT loss claim of £10,000 under s 136(4) (11), CGTA 1979.
Obviously this would only be of benefit if there were capital gains against which the loss can be set off in the current or future years.
Interest on home loans
I have a query with the new inspector of taxes for 1990/91 in connection with the calculation of relief from loan interest paid in respect of the purchase of my main residence in the south of England.
I bought the house in 1983 with the assistance of two loans, £30,000 from Halifax and £10,000 from Standard Life, supported by four Standard Life endowment policies on my life at £10,000 each.
The loans were granted simultaneously on the date of purchase, although in order of charge on the property, the Halifax loan is the first charge and the Standard Life the second.
Interest on the Halifax loan is paid under MIRAS while that on Standard Life, generally at a slightly higher rate, is paid gross.
The new inspector advises me that he is restricting the loan interest relief to that payable on the Halifax loan on the basis that ‘the net MIRAS arrangements have been fully utilised by the Halifax loan’.
I contend that while his observation is accurate it is irrelevant for the purposes of compiling income tax assessments.
Is it not the case that the various systems of PAYE, tax codes, MIRAS, tax credits from dividends and so on are simply methods of collecting and giving relief for income tax at source and that they are not designed, nor do they have the authority, to be methods of assessment?
To limit loan interest relief on the basis that the net MIRAS arrangements have been fully utilised gives the MIRAS system the status of a method of assessment and must therefore be incorrect.
As the loans totalling £40,000 were granted simultaneously there can be no first £30,000.
The previous inspector had always accepted my suggestion that the loan interest relief for tax purposes was a pro-rata fraction of the total gross interest paid, determined by the loan relief limit.
For 1990/91, as in previous years, this loan relief limit was £30,000 and therefore the pro-rata function would be £30,000 over £40,000 times the total gross interest paid.
This is then deducted along with other allowances and deductions from total income to arrive at taxable income.
The appropriate tax rates are then applied to calculate the total income tax due and it is only at this stage that the MIRAS system is introduced into the assessment.
The income tax relief already given under MIRAS should be offset against PAYE deductions, income tax deducted from dividends etc in order to arrive at the net income tax already suffered.
A comparison with the total income tax due will disclose either an over or under payment of income tax.
The inspector of taxes has failed to distinguish between the concepts of tax relief allowable on interest paid to purchase a private residence — and the operation of MIRAS.
These are quite separate issues, and although it may be administratively convenient for the inspector to designate the interest on the MIRAS loan only as tax deductible for 1990/91 because the original loan was £30,000, he is quite wrong.
S 357(3) (b), ICTA 1988 makes the position quite clear: ‘Where interest is payable on more than one loan or treated as made to the borrower and the loans were made simultaneously, it should be treated as payable on one loan.’
S 357(3) (b) should be quoted to the inspector, who should then be asked to agree the interest relief for 1990/91 on the proportionate basis the reader sets out.
Writing off a lease
A limited company client bought a lease from another company for £5,000, which was deemed to be a fair market price reflecting the differential in the market rent and the actual rent payable.
The lease was acquired on 28 April 1989 and expired on 25 March 1991.
The lease was for offices and a workshop which my client then occupied.
I have written off the cost on a straight line basis in the accounts and the inspector has disallowed this for tax purposes.
The cost was exclusively for the benefit of the business and could not be carried forward in the accounts as an asset after the lease expired.
The client still operates from the same premises, having negotiated a new lease at the expiry of the old one.
The fact that the vendor company and my client are both controlled by the same individual is, I believe, irrelevant, as the unexpired portion of the lease was professionally valued by an independent third party.
Is there any way tax relief may be claimed on the cost of this lease?
The reader does not disclose the term of the original lease which expired on 25 March 1991.
If the lease concerned was one of up to 50 years, and the premium was assessable on the vendor under the Sch A provisions within ss 34–39, ICTA 1988, then an equivalent tax claim may be made by the ultimate lessee company within s 87(9), ICTA 1988.
The effect of this would be that the additional premium of £5,000 would be treated as additional rent for the period 28 April 1989 to 25 March 1991 and would, in effect, make the transaction tax neutral within companies controlled by the same individual.
The lessee company ought also to check whether the original tenant paid a premium or other rent qualifying for relief; if he did, the assignee company will acquire a right to a tax deduction based on that payment.
If the premium paid does not fall within the above legislation, then no allowance can be claimed.
In MacTaggart v B&G Strump 10 TC 17, decided before s 89 was enacted, it was held that such a payment was a capital payment.
The only way, in those circumstances, that relief might be obtained is to press the inspector of taxes to assess the vendor company under Sch A. But would that be self-defeating within two companies controlled by the same individual?
Purchase of shares
I am a non-executive director of a listed company and intend to sell a small part of my shareholding to meet personal commitments as soon as the company has announced its final results.
I shall of course notify the company straight away, but how soon must it inform the London Stock Exchange and what details must it supply?
I have obtained the permission of the chairman to sell the shares as required by the company's inhouse rules for directors' dealings.
Under the London Stock Exchange's Admission of Securities to Listing (‘Yellow Book’) a listed company must immediately notify the Company Announcements Office of dealings in its securities by directors.
The notification must include the nature of the transaction, the nature and extent of the director's interest in it and the date on which the transaction was effected.
This is in addition to the details of the price and of the number, or amount and class of securities concerned.
taxation
ACT 2, STRATEGIES AND TRAPS The second and final part of this series reviews a number of basic ACT planning stategies and potential traps
Peter Rayney
Many quoted companies, which must satisfy their shareholders' dividend expectations, are beginning to build up considerable amounts of unrelieved or surplus advance corporation tax (ACT).
This often occurs where a company is paying significant dividends from profits earned overseas.
ACT can only be offset against the UK tax on overseas income after deducting double tax relief (see my article in ACCOUNTANCY , November 1990, p 84).
As the UK rate is now relatively low, this often means that companies are unable to deduct any ACT against their overseas income.
The surplus ACT problem has also been exacerbated in the current recession by falling UK profits.
The generation of surplus ACT has a detrimental effect on the company's reported earnings, since it must usually be written off in the accounts.
ACT restrictions may also limit the amount of dividend that proprietors of family companies would like to pay themselves.
A large number of companies are therefore taking more of an interest in the ways to use ACT, and in related ACT planning techniques.
Last month (p 93), I outlined the main ways in which a company can relieve its ACT.
If a company's ACT cannot be used to reduce its current year tax liability, it will become surplus.
Surplus ACT can be recovered by carrying it back against prior year's liabilities for up to six years.
Any remaining balance of ACT must be carried forward to reduce future tax liabilities.
A parent company has the additional facility of being able to surrender ACT for use by its 51% subsidiaries.
Where the prospect of recovery is remote, the surplus ACT effectively becomes a tax cost of paying dividends.
Cash flow advantages
One of the simplest planning points is to ensure that the timing of dividend and ACT payments is arranged to give the maximum cash flow advantage.
It will normally be beneficial for a company to pay a dividend just before its year end.
This will minimise the period between the ACT payment and its recovery against the corporation tax liability.
Of course, for family companies, such tax planning may have to be balanced against the shareholders' natural desire to have their money as soon as possible!
A further ACT cash flow benefit arises if dividends are paid just after the end of the CT61 return quarter, which will gain up to three months breathing space before the ACT has to be paid over.
For corporation tax purposes, a dividend is treated as paid on the date when it becomes due and payable (s 834(1), Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988).
A final dividend is due and payable on the date it is declared, unless the resolution declaring it specifies some other date (Hurll v IRC (1922) 8 TC 292).
In contrast, an interim dividend only becomes due when it is paid (Potel v IRC (1970) 4 TC 658).
Investment policy
A company does not have to pay any ACT if its franked investment income (FII) exceeds its franked payments.
If a company or group has a potential surplus ACT problem, it may therefore consider acquiring a stream of FII (by purchasing shares in UK companies) or by acquiring a company with surplus FII (see below).
On the other hand, it may be more efficient to make the same investment to acquire additional taxable profits to absorb the ACT.
The relevant calculations would have to be prepared.
Using a group's ACT capacity
If a holding company cannot immediately recover ACT against its own corporation tax liabilities, it should consider making use of its subsidiaries' ACT capacity (ie tax liabilities available for offset in the previous six years).
As I pointed out last month, ACT surrendered from a holding company is not available for carry-back in the recipient subsidiary.
However, it is possible for the subsidiary company to pay up a dividend, thus generating its own ACT, which is available for carry back.
If a group income election is in place, as will often be the case, the dividend (or part of it) can be paid up outside the group income election in order to generate the required ACT.
The holding company will receive the dividend as FII, which can be used to eliminate or reduce the ACT on its own dividends.
The broad effect of this arrangement is to relocate ACT in the subsidiary company, which can then be carried back.
Given that a year's ACT capacity will normally be falling outside the ‘six year’ period at each year-end, a company with potential surplus ACT problems will need to act promptly.
An example of this type of arrangement is given in the panel.
If a subsidiary does not have enough reserves to pay the required dividend, its reserves could be augmented (without creating a corresponding tax charge) in a number of ways, for example by transferring an asset to another group company at fair value, although the potential effect of the CGT value shifting legislation would have to be considered.
Acquiring companies
It is possible for a company or group to acquire further ACT capacity by purchasing a company that has it.
The acquired company (B Ltd) is usually transferred between the company (A Ltd) with actual or potential surplus ACT and an existing subsidiary (C Ltd) that has profits from which a dividend can be paid.
C Ltd would then pay up a dividend to the newly acquired B Ltd as group income.
B Ltd would then pay up a dividend outside a group income election as a franked payment to A Ltd.
The ACT generated in B Ltd on the franked payment can then be used to recoup its tax liabilities paid in the past six years.
The dividend will of course be paid out of B Ltd's post-acquisition profits.
A dividend cannot be paid out of a subsidiary's pre-acquisition profits if this reduces the carrying value of a holding company's investment in that subsidiary.
Alternatively, it may be possible to acquire a company (D Ltd) with surplus FII, which would be interposed between A Ltd and C Ltd.
In this case, C Ltd would pay its dividend to D Ltd within the group income election.
D Ltd would then, in turn, make a franked payment to A Ltd.
As D Ltd has surplus FII, no ACT would arise in that company, and A Ltd's surplus ACT would be recovered by offset of the FII from D Ltd.
Beware the Revenue
It has been rumoured in recent months that the Inland Revenue is seeking to attack the arrangements mentioned above either under the Furniss v Dawson doctrine or under the ‘transactions in securities’ legislation in s 703, ICTA 1988.
It is understood that a number of applications for advance clearance under s 707 for such arrangements have been refused.
Against this background many advisers would not recommend applying for advance clearance, as it may heighten the transaction's profile in the Revenue's eyes.
The Revenue would counteract the perceived ‘tax advantage’ by denying the tax credit on the FII in the parent company.
Although it is by no means certain that the courts would uphold such a contention, groups should nevertheless exercise care in this area.
In my view, the Revenue's contention is much less tenable with regard to the payment of dividends by a group's existing subsidiaries, even though the Revenue argues that an abnormal dividend is itself a ‘transaction in securities’, applying the dicta in Greenberg v CIR (1971) 47 TC 240.
Stock dividends
In recent years, a number of large quoted UK companies have adopted the stock dividend alternative in order to mitigate their surplus ACT problems.
The main advantage is that no ACT is payable when a company issues additional shares to a shareholder in lieu of a cash dividend.
The issue of such shares is treated as giving rise to an income tax liability on the recipient shareholder, but only at the higher rate of income tax.
The shareholder is not charged to basic rate tax, although the notional basic rate tax cannot be repaid (s 249, ICTA 1988).
The reduction in the amount of ACT the company pays (which would otherwise be surplus) will only be attractive if there is sufficient take-up by its shareholders to make the related administration and costs worthwhile.
Dormant company pitfall
S 239(3), ICTA 1988 states that surplus ACT can only be carried back if it arises in a corporation tax accounting period.
If a company pays a dividend during a ‘dormant’ period — ie when it is not within the charge to corporation tax — the Inland Revenue has been known to argue that the company will not be able to carry the ACT back against its prior tax liabilities.
This means that the ACT will remain unrelieved, effectively representing a cost of paying the dividend.
Where the dormant company is part of the group, the dividend can be paid without ACT under the group income election and the problem does not therefore arise.
For ‘stand alone’ dormant companies, the answer is to bring the company back within the scope of charge to corporation tax (s 12(2) (a), ICTA 1988).
This can be done, for example, if the company acquires a source of income, such as opening a bank deposit account.
This will ensure that the appropriate corporation tax accounting period can be created, and the company is then free to pay the dividend and carry back the relevant ACT.
ACCOUNTANCY
Bound to help
Everyone needs to refer to back issues of ACCOUNTANCY from time to time, and there are two ways we can help.
ACCOUNTANCY binders are attractively presented in red with the ACCOUNTANCY logo and the Institute crest embossed in gold.
With your binder you receive a tab with the volume numbers relevant to the issues in your binder (1991 or 1992).
We also offer bound volumes of the magazine.
These, too, are in red, and gold embossed with the ACCOUNTANCY logo and Institute crest.
Each bound volume holds six issues and carries the volume number.
Binders can be purchased for £8 (including postage).
Bound volumes are priced at £33 each (including postage).
Both are available from Sue Austin, Subscriptions Manager, — ACCOUNTANCY,.
students
TRANSFER PRICING EXPLAINED — 2 A look at more complicated set-ups and a discussion of some practical methods of transfer pricing
Ken Garrett
In last month's ACCOUNTANCY (see p 96), I discussed the importance and aims of a good transfer pricing policy.
I also showed how to arrive at a successful transfer price where there was no market for the intermediate product.
This second article looks at more complicated set-ups and discusses practical methods of transfer pricing.
When there is a market for the intermediate product, it is usual to assume that each division can trade with that market if it wants to.
If there is a restriction on trade, then the autonomy of the division is being interfered with and divisional performance may not be fairly measured.
The easiest case to consider is when there is a ‘perfect’ market for the intermediate product.
Then a division can trade as much as it wants with that market at the market price.
The transfer price must be equal to the market price if it is to be at all relevant.
If it is lower, the transferring division will not sell, if it is higher, the receiving division will not buy.
In this perfect market, with no transport costs, it does not matter whether or not goods are transferred directly from one division to another.
Production in one division does not have to match production in the other as surplus can be sold to the market or shortfalls bought from the market.
It becomes irrelevant that the two divisions are part of one company; each division will seek to find the volume of trade that maximises its profits, and this will not affect the other division.
What is good for a division is good for the group, and goal congruence — maximisation of group profits — is achieved.
Where there is an imperfect intermediate market, things are more complicated.
But, as with the examples given in last month's article, the solution has two stages.
First, solve the pricing problem: what is the pricing and volume strategy that maximises group profit?
Then, knowing what we want the group to achieve, set a transfer price that gets each division to decide to operate at the volume we want.
Before looking at a numerical example, let's look at the principles (see Figure 1).
From the group's viewpoint, there is one source of costs and two sources of revenue:
Costs are incurred in Division A.
Revenue can be earned by Division A selling directly to the intermediate market.
Net revenue can be earned by Division B selling the final product.
You can therefore think of this as a price discrimination problem with one producer and two markets.
This article does not propose to explain the theory behind profit maximisation with price discrimination.
However, you may remember from your pricing work that profit maximisation occurs when the marginal revenues in each market are equal to each other, and equal to the marginal cost of production.
This rule will allow us to work out the optimum plan for the group.
Once we know what we want the group to do, we can look at each division separately.
Division A will see its own price discrimination problem; Division B has a simpler problem.
Remember that each division will seek to maximise its own profit using the normal rules.
Now let's look at an example (see Figure 2).
Theoretical transfer pricing is all very well, but in practice not many companies will know their marginal cost and revenue functions.
As with most forms of pricing we must look for more practical methods.
Remember the desirable qualities of a transfer price: it should promote goal congruence by leading to the proper economic decisions; every division should have some profit so that they are all well-motivated; the transfer price should lead to a fair measurement of divisional performance; interference with a division's decisions should be kept to a minimum.
Not all practical methods of transfer pricing will meet these aims at the same time and compromises may have to be made.
Figure 3 shows one serious problem we want to avoid.
As goods are passed up to a division, the transfer price may include elements to cover profit and fixed costs.
The selling division will make a profit, but the receiving division will regard all of the transfer price as a variable cost.
Fixed costs and inter-divisional profit are thus transformed into variable costs.
If you do not know what the true variable costs are, how can you make correct decisions?
The common practical transfer pricing methods are:
1.
Variable cost/standard variable cost.
As each transfer price embodies just the sum of variable costs so far, this method is good for decision making.
However,actual variable cost has the disadvantage that if the producer is inefficient, then the inefficiencies get passed up the line; the divisions receiving the goods get lumbered.
Standard variable cost is better as any inefficiencies stay in the transferring division and the receiving division starts with a clean slate.
The main disadvantage of this method is that transferring divisions make neither profit nor contribution, so their motivation is poor.
2.
Variable cost plus lump sum.
On a day to day basis, goods are transferred at variable or standard variable cost.
After each period a charge is made to the receiving division to cover overheads and profit.
The charge can be based on some sort of apportionment of the total contribution.
This method hopes to get the best of both worlds: stocks are transferred at variable cost (good for decision making), and profits can be made by each division (good for motivation).
3.
Full cost/full cost plus.
This gives the problem that was illustrated in Figure 3.
There might be plenty of profit for each division (motivation) but decisions could be poor as fixed costs and profit are mistaken for variable costs.
4.
Dual pricing.
Here, one transfer price (usually representing cumulative variable costs) is charged to the buying division, while another (which will be high enough to allow profit) is credited to the selling division.
The selling division is thus motivated and the buying division has information it can use to arrive at proper economic decisions.
Obviously, when it comes to consolidating the divisions, adjustments will have to be made.
5.
Market prices.
If there is a market for the intermediate product, then transferring at the market price is usually sound.
It is good for appraising divisions as each is treated as though it were independent and, provided the divisions are efficient, they should be able to make profits.
However, it is possible for market prices to lead to sub-optimal decisions.
Look at Figure 3 again; the transfer price could be one that is set equal to the market price.
If Division B could not sell all it could make at £120, it would reject other sales once the price had dropped to just less than £90.
Below £90, Division B would make a negative contribution.
As explained in the previous article, sales are worthwhile for the group until the price drops to £70, as the group as a whole makes a contribution.
Some form of coordination is needed to keep track of cumulative variable costs and to set transfer prices so that group profits are maximised.
Indeed, as a general problem, it is unlikely that two divisions will arrive amicably at a suitable transfer price.
It is normal for a transfer price to be imposed and then to let the divisions get on with making their own decisions.
As managers, we hope that they will do the right thing.
The easiest case to consider is when there is a ‘perfect’ market for the intermediate product.
Then a division can trade as much as it wants with that market at the market price
Theoretical transfer pricing is all very well, but in practice not many companies will know their marginal cost and revenue functions.
As with most forms of pricing we must look for more practical methods
accounting issues
Accounting for Growth: no accounting for the fuss Terry Smith's book contains relatively little new information.
So why did it attract so much comment?
My expectations of Terry Smith's Accounting for Growth (Century Business Books, h/b £19.99, p/b £12.99) were conditioned by the brouhaha which attended its publication.
I expected new information.
Perhaps there would be some trenchant criticism of the accounting techniques used by some significant companies and sanctioned by eminent auditors, or new ideas about the direction that accounting standards might take.
To a large extent, I was disappointed.
The book represents an attempt to explain the series of unexpected corporate failures over the past few years and why it was that company accounts do not appear to have given adequate warning of what was to happen.
Mr Smith's explanation begins by reviewing the accounting techniques for acquisition and disposal of subsidiaries.
He describes the reasons for takeover activity being so fevered in the 1980s and shows how accounts reflected them.
In doing so he exposes the pre-acquisition write-down, the timing of recognition of deferred consideration and the impact of disposals.
In a similar vein, the book goes on to review off balance sheet finance, capitalisation of costs, capital instruments, brand accounting and currency mismatching.
In each case, examples of the disclosures in accounts are provided to show what information was available to indicate what had been going on.
The book creates the impression that accounts are a jungle into which the untutored layman should not venture without good rations and a reliable guide.
Mr Smith then provides a list of survival techniques.
First, he advises the user of accounts to read them backwards.
In other words, the reader should ignore the PR specialist's material at the front of the annual report and begin with the statutory accounts which normally appear at the end.
Then the reader is advised to read the accounting policies and compare them with the policies used in the previous year and with those competitors use.
The user should then be in a position to start reading the accounts using the ‘filters’ recommended by Mr Smith.
He recommends that the reader attempt to identify questions through the figures (such as‘Why is the tax charge so low?’) which might be directed to the company's management (or an analyst) or which might lead the reader to avoid investment if he does not like the answer.
Readers are then advised to watch out for transfers between balance sheet and p&l account to identify cases where companies have enhanced profits at the expense of their balance sheets.
To avoid the inevitable degree of subjectivity, Mr Smith suggests that cash is king and that readers should look to the health of a company's cash flow.
Finally, Mr Smith suggests that, if the reader is in doubt, he should not invest.
Mr Smith's survival techniques are sound and I cannot imagine that any accountant would gainsay them.
They are also unexceptionable.
Why, then, should this book cause so much controversy?
After all, the examples cited in the book and much of the information have been published before, in other books, in articles, and in the report published by UBS Phillips & Drew in 1991.
Why the surprise now?
One reason might lie in Mr Smith's suggestion that there is a link between a company's use of ‘creative’ accounting techniques and the market performance of its shares.
As evidence, Mr Smith cites the relative share price performance during 1991 of the companies which had high scores for creative accounting in the 1991 report.
This evidence is unconvincing.
Only a few companies are cited and the period is relatively short.
The results are uneven and one wonders what the result would have been if Mr Smith had examined all the companies covered by the original report for a longer period.
Perhaps another reason is that the book may be seen as another step in the loss of accounting's innocence.
Opinions may be expressed in accounts and directors may be able to select accounting policies, but readers often react as though those choices are made by unprejudiced seekers after truth.
Surely, readers will say, an unqualified audit opinion that the accounts show a true and fair view suggests a degree of objectivity and reliability?
The truth is that there has always been an element of unreality in this view.
Mr Smith himself quotes the example of Brentford Nylons from the 1970s, but there are many examples from the past of accounts not being this innocent.
In the 1980s, changes in the law, and market pressures made this feature of accounting more prevalent and more dangerous.
When the 1981 Companies Act implemented the Fourth EC Company Law Directive, it was not generally recognised how the nature of financial reporting would be affected.
British diplomacy had ensured that the true and fair view remained as the objective of accounts preparation.
In practice, the lack of codified rules defining a true and fair view was a serious weakness because when lawyers were employed to interpret the rules, they proved to be vulnerable.
As a result, the range of permissible accounting treatments was seen to be amazingly broad.
It should not have been a surprise that companies sought to use that range of permissible techniques to present their results in the best light.
The Government of the day believed that takeover activity was the means by which the stockmarkets ensured that companies were motivated to become as efficient and successful as possible.
Faced with the threat of predatory takeover bids, companies strove to ensure that their accounts emphasised success.
The predators strove to emphasise their own achievements.
All of this took place against the background of the British economy's long-term decline.
However commendable prudence may be as an accounting concept, decline will put it under pressure.
Perhaps Mr Smith's book and the reaction to it imply that accounts should not have been like this: that it should be possible to take them as a straightforward objective statement of performance.
If this is the implication, it is utopian.
Accounts have always been fallible and they are likely always to be so.
They use hierarchic language which will always need interpretation.
The notion of transparent reporting which can be understood by the untutored layman is a chimera.
This is not to suggest that the criticisms made by Mr Smith should simply be accepted as an unavoidable fact of life.
It is important that the ASB's programme of activity to increase clarity and dependability in financial reporting should be strengthened and supported.
But, it is important to recognise that accounts will remain fallible.
Perhaps the development by lay shareholders of the scepticism implied by Mr Smith's survival techniques could make a substantial contribution to avoiding a repetition of the public shock that attended the corporate failures at the end of the 1980s.
Mr Smith's book will not surprise professionals.
It will of course anger some because its concentration on problems implicitly denies the possibility of good financial reporting.
In this sense, the book is not balanced.
But the layman would do well to make use of its survival techniques.
The book may be seen as another step in the loss of accounting's innocence
The crunch comes for international harmonisation The International Accounting Standards Committee's comparability project is reaching a critical stage
The International Accounting Standards Committee's comparability and improvements project enters a crucial phase this month when the IASC Board considers the draft revised standards on inventories, research and development activities, and capitalisation of borrowing costs.
The purpose of the comparability and improvements project is to revise existing international accounting standards to permit fewer free choices of accounting treatment for like transactions and events and to require better disclosures.
The revised standards will also include better implementation guidance so that the standards can be interpreted in the same way by different preparers and auditors of financial statements as well as national standard setting bodies and other regulatory authorities.
These improvements should ensure that IASs meet the needs of capital markets and the international business community for truly international standards of accounting and disclosure.
The first stage of the project was E 32,Comparability of Financial Statements , issued in January 1989.
It dealt with 29 instances of existing IASs' allowing a free choice of accounting treatment for like transactions and events.
IASC received more than 160 comment letters on the proposals.
Following reconsideration of each issue in the light of comments received, the IASC issued a Statement of Intent on the comparability of financial statements in July 1990, which sets out 21 E 32 proposals which will be incorporated in revised IASs without substantive changes, and five E 32 proposals that have been deferred pending further work on financial instruments.
In many cases, E 32 and the Statement of Intent remove free choice by specifying one accounting treatment as the required treatment.
In a limited number of cases, they continue to allow a choice but have identified one treatment as the benchmark and another as an allowed alternative.
In some circumstances, the alternative reflects a different measurement basis from the benchmark treatment — for example, the choice between historical cost and revaluation-based carrying amounts.
The Board recognises that it is both impracticable and inappropriate to remove, in the foreseeable future, some of the remaining alternative accounting treatments permitted.
The three E 32 issues on which the Board agreed to make substantive changes relate to inventories, research and development costs, and borrowing costs.
Regarding inventories, E 32 proposed that FIFO or weighted average cost should be the preferred formulae for the assignment of costs to inventories and that LIFO should be an allowed alternative treatment.
While the majority of the comments on E 32 supported this proposal, the Board was persuaded by the forceful arguments in other comment letters that LIFO should not be an allowable formula under International Accounting Standards.
Many comments contended that LIFO is conceptually flawed because it fails to assign current costs to inventories held and so distorts the balance sheet.
Thus the Statement of Intent proposed that FIFO and weighted average costs should be the only permitted formulae.
This revised proposal was reflected in E 38,Inventories , where it attracted considerable comment, with a sizeable minority, not surprisingly, arguing for the retention of LIFO.
In particular, the International Organisation of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) has concluded that LIFO is one of the accounting alternatives that should be retained in revised IASs.
The IASC Board reconsidered the LIFO issue at its June meeting this year in the light of comments received on E 38, and tentatively agreed that the use of LIFO should not be permitted.
It will consider a draft standard prepared on this basis this month.
In respect of IAS 9,Research and Development Costs , and IAS 23,Borrowing Costs , E 32 proposed that immediate recognition as an expense should be the preferred treatment for all such costs.
However, capitalisation would be permitted as an allowed alternative treatment when specified criteria were satisfied.
Again the Board was persuaded by the arguments of large minorities that it should require the capitalisation of these costs when the specified criteria are met.
The rationale behind this argument is that the criteria are consistent with the criteria for recognising an asset in the IASC's Framework for the Preparation and Presentation of Financial Statements .
Therefore, when the criteria are met, the expenditure should be required to be capitalised in order to maintain consistency with the Framework.
The revised proposals were reflected in E 37,Research and Development Activities , and E 39,Capitalisation of Borrowing Costs .
Again, the proposals have attracted a considerable number of comments, with a minority favouring a return to the proposals in E 32.
Following reconsideration of the issue in the light of the comments received on E 37 and E 39 in June, the Board tentatively reconfirmed the Statement of Intent decisions.
The Board will consider the draft revised standards based on E 37 and E 39 this month.
These drafts emphasise that expensing such costs is the normal accounting treatment and that the asset recognition criteria will be met only occasionally.
To date, the IASC has published six additional exposure drafts covering 16 of the 21 E 32 and Statement of Intent proposals which should be incorporated in revised international accounting standards without substantive change.
The revised standards are currently subject to exposure, but the Board does not intend to reconsider the decisions it took in approving the Statement of Intent.
These exposure drafts, which are still outstanding for comment, are: E 41,Revenue Recognition ; E 42,Construction Contracts ; E 43,Property, Plant and Equipment ; E 44,The Effects of Changes in Foreign Exchange Rates ; E 45,Business Combinations ; and E 46,Extraordinary Items, Fundamental Errors and Changes in Accounting Policies (see also ACCOUNTANCY , July, p 95, and September, p 106).
At this month's meeting, the Board is expected to approve the issue of an exposure draft on retirement benefit costs in the financial statements of employers.
This means that the Board will have issued exposure drafts for 10 of the 11 standards affected by the Statement of Intent.
The exception relates to the issues on investments which will be dealt with as part of the review of IAS 25,Accounting for Investments , after the financial instruments project is completed.
Reconsideration of the issues raised in E 37, E 38 and E 39 and the finalisation of the standards on each will enable the Board to reconfirm the package of changes set out in the Statement of Intent on the comparability of financial statements.
Once this package is confirmed, the Board will be well placed to fulfil its present plan to complete revised standards for those standards affected by the Statement of Intent by the end of 1993.
The IASC Board tentatively agreed in June that the use of LIFO should not be permitted
Accounting stripped down to the core The latest chapters in the ASB's Statement of Principles deal with some fundamental issues
The Accounting Standards Board recently published two further chapters of its Statement of Principles in discussion draft form (see ACCOUNTANCY , August, p 14).
These chapters will form the core of the whole Statement, and deal with some fundamental issues.
They also go further than the equivalent parts of the International Accounting Standards Committee's Framework for the Preparation and Presentation of Financial Statements , and contain some significant new principles.
The first of the two chapters defines seven elements that go to make up financial statements: assets, liabilities, equity, gains, losses, contributions from owners and distributions to owners.
Assets are defined as ‘rights or other access to future economic benefits controlled by an entity as a result of past transactions or events’.
The term ‘access’ is rather more abstract than the term ‘resource’used by the IASC.
This is because even a so-called tangible asset represents not so much a physical item as the rights to use that physical item, which in turn derive from ownership or other rights.
Not all assets, of course, are tangible.
Nor is it invariably the case that there must be a legal right.
For example, an entity may have an asset (access to future economic benefits) as a result of past advertising that is expected to result in increased future sales (and hence profitability).
In such a case there is no item of property, nor is there a person who owes an obligation to the entity.
It suffices that customers are expected to act in a way that will provide economic benefits to the entity.
The definition of a liability is complementary to that of an asset.
Liabilities are ‘an entity's obligations to transfer economic benefits as a result of past transactions or events’.
One of the most obvious implications of this definition is that if there is no obligation, there is no liability: it follows that costs to be incurred in the future are not liabilities while the entity retains the discretion to avoid them.
Such items would only become liabilities when contracts are placed for the goods to be provided or the work to be carried out.
Just as assets are usually but not invariably founded on legal rights, so a legal obligation is a common feature of a liability but is not always present.
For example, commercial considerations might require that an option to acquire an item of property be exercised: in this case the exercise price of the option could be a liability.
Equity is defined as ‘the ownership interest in the entity: it is the residual amount found by deducting all liabilities of the entity from all of the entity's assets’.
The definitions of the other elements of the financial statements — gains, losses, contributions from owners and distributions to owners — are all in terms of increases and decreases in equity.
What distinguishes the last two from gains and losses is that they are transactions involving owners in their capacity as owners.
Other points covered in the elements chapter include the complementary nature of assets and liabilities, how in some cases identifying a liability leads to identification of an asset, as well as the question of offsetting — the circumstances in which it is correct to aggregate debit and credit items to form a single net asset or liability.
Once it is determined that an entity has an item that meets the definition of one of the elements, the next question to answer is whether that item should be recognised in the financial statements.
This is the subject of the second chapter, which sets out three basic criteria that need to be fulfilled for recognition to be appropriate.
The first is that the item meets the definition of an element of financial statements.
This may sound obvious, but it is important to note that certain deferred debits and credits currently recognised would fail this test.
The second criterion is that ‘there is sufficient evidence that the change in assets or liabilities inherent in the item has occurred (including, where appropriate, evidence that a future inflow or outflow of benefit will occur)’.
This need for evidence arises because the world is inherently uncertain.
While perfect certainty that an element exists is not needed for recognition, there must be sufficient evidence that this is so.
The chapter considers the three types of past event that may trigger recognition — transactions, contracts for future performance and other events — and the circumstances in which each gives rise to sufficient evidence.
Transactions involving an arm's length transfer of assets or liabilities always call for recognition.
On the other hand, contracts will only provide sufficient evidence where they give rise to a ‘firm commitment’: the reporting entity's obligation resulting from the contract can be enforced by an external party, and the circumstances are such that if necessary it will be so enforced.
Most routine sale and purchase orders will not give rise to such firm commitments, as the entity could cancel them at will without incurring a severe penalty.
However, some contracts not currently recognised do give rise to firm commitments — for example, both operating and finance leases commonly do so, and under the principles in the chapter, the assets and liabilities stemming from both should be recognised.
The third criterion for recognition is that the item can be measured at a monetary amount with sufficient reliability.
There are three common means of obtaining a reliable measure.
First, where the item has resulted from a recent arm's length transaction, the item can be measured at the transaction price (ie at ‘historical cost’).
Second, where there is no transaction price but there is a reasonably efficient market for the item, a market-based measure (eg replacement cost or net realisable value) can be used.
Finally, for a group of homogeneous but not identical items, the expected value of the entire group can be used.
Where none of these three situations applies, the chapter proposes that the item be measured at the expected value of its future outcomes (provided this can be ascertained with sufficient reliability).
The chapter does not follow the IASC's approach of distinguishing items that are ‘probable’ to occur from those that are not, with only the former being recognised.
Rather, all items should be recognised where a sufficiently reliable measure can be obtained, although the more likely it is that an item will have an outcome of zero, the lower its recognised amount will be.
The chapter also proposes specific conditions for recognising gains in the p&l account — these are that the gain should be both earned and realised.
These two conditions ensure that only gains for which there is a high degree of certainty (of both their existence and amount) are included in the p&l account.
Where there is less certainty, the gain should be recognised in the statement of total recognised gains and losses — an example is a gain arising on the revaluation of a property.
While perfect certainty that an element exists is not needed for recognition, there must be sufficient evidence that this is so
accounting solutions
Convertible capital bonds
A company issues a 9% convertible capital bond that allows the holders to convert into the company's ordinary shares at a future date.
The terms also provide that the company may require any remaining bond holders to convert their bonds, on maturity, into ordinary shares in the company, which would be sold on their behalf.
The company would meet any shortfall between proceeds of sale and the amount of the bonds.
How should the bond be disclosed in the company's accounts?
Convertible debt is distinctive in that the holder has the option to convert into shares in the company rather than accept repayment in cash.
Legally, such capital instruments are debt and should therefore be disclosed within liabilities.
However, where the conversion into shares is probable, many companies maintain that to classify the bonds as liabilities would be misleading because, as no economic benefits (cash) will be transferred to the bond holders, there can be no liability.
Thus, it is argued that where conversion is probable, the debt should be reported not as a liability but as, or near, equity.
Such treatment can only be justified if it is necessary to give a true and fair view.
The ASB discussion paper,Accounting for capital instruments , recognises that although convertible debt has some equity features, it is not legally possible to show it as equity without invoking the true and fair override or to put mezzanine finance in a separate category on the balance sheet (ie to provide an item in the formats to cover debt that is akin to equity and equity that is akin to debt).
So the convertible bond should be classified as a liability.
In addition, the ASB proposes that convertible bonds should be distinguished from other debts on the face of the balance sheet.
Details of the redemption terms and circumstances, means of determining the amount payable upon redemption, conversion terms and circumstances and means of determining the number and class of shares issued on conversion should be given in the notes.
Disclosures relating to long-term loans are also required under the Companies Act 1985 and the Stock Exchange Regulations.
Non-audit fees
A UK company has a US parent, which often instructs it to look at possible acquisitions around the world.
The company instructed its auditors to perform a working capital review on a potential acquisition of a company established in India.
The auditors instructed their Calcutta office, which is an associate of the UK firm, to carry out the work.
The Calcutta office billed the UK office for the work and the UK auditors in turn billed their UK client.
The client will in due course bill its parent for the work.
Should these fees be disclosed as non-audit fees under the new regulations?
Would the answer be different if the Calcutta office billed the US parent direct?
For financial years ending on or after 30 September 1992, companies that are not small or medium-sized must disclose the aggregate remuneration (including expenses and benefits-in-kind) in respect of work carried out by their auditors and their associates for non-audit services supplied to the company and to an associated undertaking (ie a UK subsidiary) of the company where the auditors (or their associates) are auditors of that undertaking (SI 1991/2128).
The definition of ‘associates’ is complex, and the regulations require the auditors to provide directors with information to identify their associates.
Disclosure is not required for non-audit services supplied to subsidiaries not audited by the parent company's auditor and to overseas subsidiaries.
The disclosure requirements apply to all UK companies in a group.
Disclosure is required ‘in respect of work carried out in’ the financial year.
There is no requirement to disclose the nature of non-audit services.
In relation to the question, although the work is to be performed for, and eventually paid for by, the US parent, it is the UK auditor who has been contracted to do the work.
The fact that the work has been referred to and is performed by an overseas associate is irrelevant in this context.
Accordingly, disclosure of the fees paid is required in the UK company's accounts.
Whether disclosure is required if the Calcutta office bills the US parent direct will depend on who requisitions the work.
If the Calcutta office does the work at the request of the US parent, no disclosure is required in the UK accounts.
However, if the UK company asks the Calcutta office to carry out the work, disclosure is required, as the auditor's associate is doing the work for the UK company.
Leasing and pension funds
A company enters into a sale and finance leaseback agreement with its pension fund, to sell the fund the company's headquarters at its current fair market value and then lease it back on a 25 year finance lease.
How should the agreement be accounted for in the pension scheme accounts?
The net investment in a finance lease should be recorded as a debtor in the pension scheme's accounts with the gross earnings normally allocated to accounting periods to give a constant periodic rate of return on the net cash investment.
In addition, the Occupational Pension Schemes (Investment of Scheme's Resources) Regulations 1992 (SI 1992/246) apply — they came into force on 9 March 1992.
These regulations restrict the proportion of the resources that an occupational pension scheme may invest in employer-related investments, subject to certain exceptions, to not more than 5% of the current market value of the pension scheme's resources (of which land and buildings used by, or subject to a lease in favour of, the employer and employer-related loans are examples).
Under the transitional provisions, where, on 9 March 1992, employer-related investments that existed on 17 February 1992 exceeded the 5% limit, the fund in question may be required to reduce its net investment in the lease to a level not exceeding 5% of its resources on the earliest date on which payment can be enforced (assuming the agreement was effected prior to 17 February 1992).
In this particular case it would be gradually, over 25 years from the date of inception.
Therefore the company will not be able to enter into any similar leases with, or borrow money from, the scheme.
Disclosure in the scheme's accounts is also required for all self-investments, whether or not the 5% limit is exceeded.
These include a list of employer-related investments; the proportion of the scheme's resources invested in employer-related investments; if this exceeds 5%, information on whether and, if so, how, the percentage will be reduced; and a statement indicating whether the investments are in accordance with the regulations.
reports & accounts
DIXONS
Retailer spells out board's responsibilities
Retailer Dixons includes a directors' responsibilities statement on a separate page with the auditors' report.
This appears in the annual report and accounts for the 53 weeks ended 2 May 1992.
The report states that ‘the directors are required by UK company law to prepare financial statements for each financial period which give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the group as at the end of the financial period.
In preparing the financial statements, suitable accounting policies have been used and applied consistently, and reasonable and prudent judgments and estimates have been made.
‘Applicable accounting standards have been followed,’ the report continues.
‘The directors are also responsible for maintaining adequate accounting records, for safeguarding the assets of the group, and for preventing and detecting fraud and other irregularities.’
The Dixons annual report includes a whole page headed Corporate Governance.
As well as covering the board split between executive and non-executive directors and the standing committees, this includes information about the group's pension schemes.
Asset management is delegated to two independent companies.
On 5 April 1992, shares in Dixons represented 1.8% of the investment portfolio, which had a market value of £127.3m.
The principal pension scheme's accounts are audited by a firm other than Touche Ross, which acts for Dixons Group plc.
Now they know what their directors do
TOMKINS
Post-retirement package includes healthcare
Tomkins, the industrial management company, spells out its accounting policy for post-retirement benefits other than pensions in the financial review section of its annual report and accounts for the year ended 2 May 1992.
Healthcare on the pay-as-you-go basis is mainly what is involved.
Managing director of finance Ian Duncan writes that ‘anticipating the introduction of the new US accounting standard FAS 106, we have made provision over recent years to cover the aggregate liability calculated using the accrual method and have decided to amend the balance sheet classification so that it is shown separately under ‘provisions for liabilities and charges’ in the notes to the accounts'.
The accounting policies note states that certain US subsidiaries of Tomkins provide for post-retirement benefits other than pensions.
They are accounted for on the accruals basis.
The provisions for liabilities and charges note reveals that the charge for post-retirement benefits was £4.561m in the year and that the amount of the provision at 2 May 1991 totalled £21.624m.
‘Tomkins encourages each company to set up its own retirement benefits plan, with at least one trustee unrelated to Tomkins.
All our pension fund assets are managed by independent, professional fund managers, each of whom has specific instructions that no asset may be invested in or loaned to Tomkins, in any way,’ Mr Duncan explains.
Tomkins made no major acquisitions during 1991/92, and therefore decided that this was an ideal opportunity ‘to ensure that we are obtaining the best quality audit worldwide, consistent with a justifiable level of cost’.
After a presentation by each of the major firms, Tomkins invited Arthur Andersen to become auditors, replacing Moores Rowland and the other auditors to group companies.
Interestingly, the auditors' remuneration and expenses charge fell from £895,000 to £785,000.
Group pre-tax profits rose by 18% to £132.11m (v £112.098m).
The financial press has devoted much space to the 54% increase in chief executive Greg Hutchings' remuneration to £995,000 (v £646,000).
This is analysed in the notes to the accounts as salary £503,000 (v £443,000) and incentive compensation £492,000 (v £203,000).
The incentive compensation is directly related to shareholder benefit, says the note, in that it is formula-based on a combination of growth in earnings and dividends per share and increase in ordinary share price.
FERROMET GROUP
Auditors present heavily qualified report
Metals trader Ferromet Group has received a heavily qualified audit report from Touche Ross on its accounts for the year ended 31 December 1991.
At the end of a full page report, the auditors conclude that ‘because of the significance of the matters referred to in the preceding paragraphs, we are unable to form an opinion as to whether the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the company and the group at 31 December 1991 and of the loss and source and application of funds of the group for the year then ended and whether the financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 1985’.
On 17 March 1992, an involuntary petition for relief under Chapter 11 was filed against Ferromet Resources Inc, the company's main subsidiary.
It is clear that the shares in Ferromet Resources Inc have no economic value.
As a result of that financial position, the audit of the accounts of Ferromet Resources Inc and its non-UK subsidiaries for 1991 has been suspended.
The financial information in the group's accounts relating to Ferromet Resources Inc and its subsidiaries has been based on unaudited management accounts for 1991.
Ferromet Group has made full provision in its financial statements against the investment in and amounts due from Ferromet Resources Inc and its subsidiaries.
The auditors point out that ‘the consolidated financial statements include £8.883m of net liabilities and a loss before taxation for the year of £13.069m relating to the subsidiaries subject to these proceedings.
We have not, therefore, been able to satisfy ourselves as to the amounts included in respect of these subsidiaries, or the effects, if any, that the proceedings may have upon the consolidated financial statements.’
The auditors add that the going concern basis is not appropriate for subsidiaries Ferromet Alloys Ltd and Ferromet Resources (UK) plc, which were sold to Ferromet Group by Ferromet Resources Inc with effect from 31 December 1991.
The annual report includes a pro-forma consolidated balance sheet at 31 December 1991 excluding Ferromet Resources Inc, Ferromet Resources (UK) plc, Ferromet Alloys Ltd and all subsidiaries of Ferromet Resources Inc.
Touche Ross has audited this pro-forma and states that it is properly prepared on the basis set out.
BUILDING SOCIETIES
Provisions vary as lenders face recession
The latest accounts from the Greenwich and Cumberland building societies usefully illustrate how the residential property market is holding up in different parts of the UK.
Greenwich, which reported that house prices in its main areas of operation had continued to fall, provided £1.013m (v £322,000) against loans and advances in the year ended 30 April 1992.
Pre-tax profit for the year fell to £809,000 (v £1.154m).
This society's accounting policy on provisions is that ‘provisions are made to reduce the value of loans and advances to the amount which the directors consider is likely to be ultimately received’.
‘Specific provision is made where the property is in possession and/or where the account is in arrear,’ the report says.
‘In calculating the provision in the latter instance, an assessment is made of the likelihood of the property being taken into possession based on relevant past experience and current market conditions.
‘A general provision is made to cover losses on advances impaired at the balance sheet date which, although not yet specifically identified, are known from experience to exist in the portfolio of advances.
Where the property is in possession, credit is deferred in respect of interest deemed to be irrecoverable.’
The £1.013m charge for the year comprised £452,000 specific and £10,000 general provision against advances secured on residential property, and £551,000 against other advances secured on land.
Total provisions at the year end came to £409,000 specific and £60,000 general against advances on residential property and £581,000 specific against other advances secured on land.
At 30 April 1992 advances secured on residential property amounted to £101.378m, and other advances secured on land £6.673m.
Cumberland, which claims its mortgage arrears are 45% less than the national average and made no mortgage loss whatsoever, provided £528,540 (v £56,400) against loans, advances and guarantees in the year ended 31 March 1992.
This was made up of a £621,800 increase in the specific provision and a reduction of £98,000 in the general provision against residential property, and a £4,740 increase in the specific provision against unsecured loans.
At 31 March 1992 the specific provision against residential property totalled £623,800, and the general and specific provisions against unsecured loans £19,650.
Advances secured on residential property amounted to £351.404m, other advances secured on land £22.994m and other commercial assets £428,667.
Cumberland's accounting policy on losses on loans and advances is to make specific provisions to cover losses on commercial assets.
‘Throughout the year and at the year end,’ the report says, ‘individual assessments are made of each loan in respect of which the underlying property is in the possession of the Society to ascertain whether a loss is likely and to estimate any such losses with reasonable accuracy, taking into account the likely selling prices of the properties.
‘The Society also looks at the loans that are six months or more in arrears but have not been taken into possession, and adds a percentage of such arrears to the specific provision figure.
‘Loans not in possession or not in arrears for in excess of six months are provided for on an individual basis if circumstances so warrant.’
The Building Societies Commission is thinking of tightening the guidelines on making provisions against losses.
RATNERS GROUP
Borrowing provisions breached
KPMG Peats has drawn members' attention to the notes describing the arrangements with Ratners' lenders in the group's accounts for the 52 weeks ended 1 February 1992.
The auditors have not, however, qualified their opinion.
As a result of breaches of certain borrowing provisions, most of the group's borrowings have become repayable on demand.
Under a new facilities agreement, the lenders have agreed to maintain the existing loans and facilities to June 1993 subject to termination rights and to compliance with new covenants.
The directors are satisfied that the group will be able to operate within the new agreement's provisions, and believe that Ratners will be able to negotiate further arrangements afterwards.
RECENT RESULTS
Airedale Holdings.
KPMG Peat Marwick has qualified the retailer and builders merchant's accounts for the year ended 28 March 1992 on a going concern basis.
The auditors say that ‘the validity of this assumption is dependent on the group continuing to receive support from its lenders’.
The capital and interest payments on the company's loans are rolled up until 31 December 1992, when the existing borrowing facilities are due to expire.
Louis Sherwood asserts in his chairman's report that ‘the directors are confident that satisfactory new arrangements will be put in place well before that time’.
SOVAC.
The French banking and financial group allocates three pages of its 1991 annual report and accounts to human resources.
Topics covered include personnel, compensation policy (salaries, bonuses, profit sharing, total payroll) and training.
Greene King.
The brewing group provides a business segment analysis for the 52 weeks ended 31 May 1992 over production & distribution, wholesaling, retailing and wine merchants.
For the 53 weeks ended 3 May 1992, Scottish and Newcastle adopts beer, retail and leisure as separate classes of business for its segmental analysis.
Marston Thompson & Evershed does not analyse the separate contributions from its brewing, wholesaling and retailing operations in its financial statements for 52 weeks ended 28 March 1992.
SOCIAL AUDIT
Not just commercial criteria
Traidcraft, which imports and sells a range of goods from developing countries, is to publish a report evaluating the impact of the company's activities against non-financial criteria.
This social report, which will appear for the first time in respect of the year ended 31 March 1993, will include personnel issues, relationships with producers, educational and development impact, shareholder relations, and environmental impact.
It will be scrutinised by external assessors appointed by the company in general meeting in a similar way to the auditing of the financial statements by independent accountants.
Richard Evans, Traidcraft's external affairs director, told ACCOUNTANCY : ‘The sort of people who will act as assessors will be experienced in the evaluation of overseas development projects.’
He said that it might take two to three years to arrive at the complete version of the social audit, which will be sent to all shareholders with the financial statements.
As a first step, the directors have published an interim review covering the year to 31 March 1992.
It provides full details of the impact of Traidcraft's activities on the environment: the company operates a levy on the sale of hardwood products to help reforestation and is taking steps to use recyclable packaging.
The report also offers details of staff turnover, distribution according to grade and gender at 1 April 1992, training, development, and equal opportunities policies.
A growing number of large companies are including information on environmental issues in their annual reports, although as the Institute's Financial Reporting 1991–92 points out, it ‘is as yet at an experimental stage and assessment of its value is still tentative’.
professional briefing
INSTITUTE
Open Council meetings
Institute members are reminded that Institute Council meetings will be held in open session from 7 October.
Space is limited, however, and members are asked to let the Clerk to the Council (Les Smith on ext 2584) know in advance if they wish to attend.
Copies of the agenda are also available on request.
The meetings are normally held in the Council Chamber at Moorgate Place on the first Wednesday of every month (except September).
Most start at 10.30am, but occasionally this is brought forward to 10am if the agenda is particularly lengthy.
STANDARDS
Solicitors' accounts rules
A fourth edition of the Law Society's Accounts Manual has now been published.
It incorporates consolidated texts of the Solicitors' Accounts Rules 1991 and the Accountants' Report Rules 1991, together with changes made to the Rules in April 1992.
Copies are available, price £8.95, from the Law Society,, or by post from the Law Society's Finance Department,.
FASB statement on investment contracts
The Financial Accounting Standards Board has issued a new Statement, No 110,Reporting by Defined Benefit Pension Plans of Investment Contracts , which contains an amendment to an earlier Statement, No 35.
Statement 35 requires defined benefit pension plans to report plan investments at fair value unless they are contracts with insurance companies.
However, in practice this exception has been interpreted as applying to similar contracts issued by other entities.
The new Statement now requires plans to report all investment contracts issued by insurance enterprises or other entities at fair value, except where they incorporate mortality or morbidity risk.
Statement 110 applies to all financial statements for fiscal years beginning on or after 15 December 1992, but need not be applied to deposit administration and immediate participation guarantee contracts entered into before 20 March 1992.
Copies of the Statement are available from the FASB Order Department,.
FASB exposure draft on GAAP
Mutual life insurance companies should follow all applicable authoritative accounting pronouncements — such as those issued by the Financial Accounting Standards Board — if they are to describe their financial statements as being in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles, according to a new FASB exposure draft.
Although such a statement might seem to be stating the obvious, apparently a number of mutual insurance companies and other regulated enterprises, whose financial statements are prepared on the basis of statutory accounting rules, have been stating that they conform with GAAP even though the statutory rules and GAAP differ.
The proposal is specifically aimed at the insurance companies, but FASB also intends it to apply to other entities issuing financial statements which purport to conform with GAAP.
If adopted, it would apply to calendar year 1993 statements.
Copies of Proposed Interpretation: Applicability of Generally Accepted Accounting Principles to Mutual Life Insurance Enterprises are available (one copy free) from the FASB Order Department,.
The deadline for comments is 16 November.
CITY REGULATION
Banks' interim profits
From 1 January 1993 UK banks will only be able to include their interim profits in tier 1 capital if they have been verified by their external auditor.
This is in accordance with the EC Own Funds Directive (89/299/EEC of 17 April 1989).
The Bank of England at present allows current year profits of UK banks to be included in tier 1 capital if they publish an interim statement.
By international rules, banks are required to maintain 8% capital resources, of which at least 4% has to be in tier 1, mainly equity.
If the interim profits are verified by a bank's internal audit department, then they will be included in tier 2 capital.
In the absence of any verification, interim profits will not be included in the capital base.
A Bank of England notice,Verification of Interim Profits in the Context of the Own Funds Directive (BSD/1992/5), outlines the scope of work the Bank will expect external or internal auditors to do in verifying current year interim profits.
External auditors will have to submit an opinion on whether the interim results are fairly stated.
Internal auditors will have to countersign a copy of form BSD (2).
Interim losses will continue to be deducted immediately from tier 1 capital.
Copies of the notice are available from the Bank of England, Threadneedle Street, London EC2R 8AH.
Takeover Panel raps PR firm
The Takeover Panel has criticised Burson-Marsteller, public relations consultants to aerospace and electronics group Dowty, for unauthorised conversations with certain journalists and investment analysts during the course of the bid from engineering group TI.
The Panel said that the conversations imparted material new information which had not been made public or could not be made public.
The Code requires that information released during an offer should be made equally available to all shareholders.
The Panel has also found that Lazards, financial advisers to Dowty, ‘were unable to control the release of information by their client's public relations advisers and are also criticised’.
Life companies' adverts
Lautro has ordered 13 life assurance companies to withdraw some of their advertising for single premium with profits bonds, and two were requested to write to clients with a fuller explanation of the bond's characteristics.
The bonds, which offer a fixed rate return for a stated period subject generally to some conditions, have been marketed by some sales agents as an alternative to building society deposit accounts.
SIB's regulatory review
Phillip Thorpe, deputy chief executive of the Securities and Futures Authority, has been seconded for six months to assist Andrew Large, chairman of the Securities and Investments Board, in his review of the way the SIB carries out its regulatory responsibilities.
After considering the report from IMRO on regulation of two Maxwell companies, the SIB decided to examine the way it oversees the bodies it recognises.
Association for pension fund trustees
The Pension Trustees Forum is a new association designed to give a specialist service to trustees in areas such as training, information and discussion.
Membership is open to trustees of occupational pension funds, directors of corporate pension trustees and those who have a fiduciary relationship with a pension fund.
Associate membership is available to actuaries, solicitors, advisers and others involved in the pensions movement.
Further details are available from Pension Trustees Forum,.
Pensions Ombudsman's first report
In his first year of operation from April 1991, the Pensions Ombudsman received more than 2,100 complaints.
Many of these were rejected, however, as they originated more than three years ago.
Of the 47 cases decided, Mr Platt ruled wholly in favour of the complainant in 18 and partly in four.
His decisions are binding on both parties, subject only to the High Court on a point of law.
Most of the complaints concerned delay in paying a transfer value from one scheme to another, and problems with winding-up schemes.
Copies of the Annual Report of the Pensions Ombudsman 1991/92 , are available, price £6.85, from HMSO.
WESTMINSTER UPDATE
Late filing of accounts dates clarified
Following the introduction of civil penalties for late filing of accounts from 1 July (see ACCOUNTANCY , August, p 85), Companies House has confirmed that the periods allowed for the filing of company accounts actually expire at midnight on the date in the last month for filing which corresponds to the last day of the company's accounting reference period.
Consequently, a private company which has 10 months in which to file its accounts, and has an accounting reference date of 30 September, must file its accounts at Companies House on 30 July at the latest and not on 31 July.
Companies Act 1989 — commencement dates
The following are revised dates for the implementation of the remaining sections of the 1989 Companies Act.
The dates are only a general indication and not definitive.
Spring 1993 : Part IV, registration of charges (following a consultation exercise in the autumn); s 142, abolition of deemed notice; s 145 minor amendments, Sch 19 para 13.
Autumn 1993 : s 134, disclosure of interest in shares and regulations under s 134(5) and (6).
To be decided : Part V, other company law amendments; ss 128 (partnership company: Table G) and 133 (redeemable shares); Part VII, financial markets and insolvency; Part VIII, amendments to the Financial Services Act 1986; and the remainder of s 192 (except the insertion of s 47A into the Financial Services Act).
For more information, ring the Department of Trade and Industry ontel.
Pan-European entity proposals — Institute memorandum
Proposals to create pan-European entities to reflect national concepts of the cooperative society, the mutual society and the association are not necessary, according to the Institute.
The proposals to create new types of pan-European entity were put forward in a consultative document issued jointly by HM Treasury, the Home Office, the Registry of Friendly Societies, the Charity Commission and the Department of Employment.
In its reply, in a memorandum to HM Treasury, the Institute said that it was not convinced that the proposals were needed.
However, since adoption of the proposals was voluntary and existing organisations could continue as before, ‘there could be no objection in principle to them’.
The Institute's main concern is that the new entities should be expressly subject to national legislation governing the activity undertaken.
Copies of FRAG 24/92 are available free (send sae) from the Publications Department at the Institute.
Telephone .
Pension funds in the EC Lords' report
The House of Lords Select Committee on the EC has welcomed the proposed Directive on the Freedom of Management and Investment of Funds held by Institutions for Retirement Provision.
The draft directive seeks to remove any national barriers preventing pension scheme administrators in one member state from employing an authorised investment manager in another, or limiting the investment of a pension fund's assets to the securities of the member state concerned.
It also contains principles that all member states should observe in the conduct of pensions investment, on the grounds of prudence.
They are designed to prevent member states from using these prudential provisions to limit investment to their own government securities or shares.
The committee considers that the draft is acceptable from the subsidiarity standpoint, as it aims to establish cross-border freedom of services and investment.
The report will be debated in the House of Lords after the summer recess.
Copies of the 4th Report (Session 1992/93) from the House of Lords Select Committee on the European Communities,Pension Funds ,(HL Paper 15), is available, price £19.40, from HMSO.
Information systems security — DTI recommendations
A report, which has been prepared by the Department of Trade and Industry in association with DISC, the information technology group of the British Standards Institution, contains a series of recommendations intended to improve the security of all information systems.
Following detailed interviews with business and technical managers from the public and private sectors, the proposals suggest: the introduction of an accreditation scheme for IT security (including an independent audit of an organisation's security); production of generic guidelines and checklists aimed at helping organisations improve their own security procedures and training; research to improve computer access control mechanisms, especially for personal computer and network users; and, finally, awareness campaigns.
Copies of the report,User Requirements for IT Security Standards,are available free from Information and Manufacturing Technologies Division, Department of Trade and Industry,.
Pensions for migrant workers — consultative paper
The Department of Social Security has published a consultation paper covering the subject of occupational pensions for migrant workers in the EC.
At the moment, a worker moving between jobs in different countries could lose his future occupational pension benefits — a situation which could be exacerbated next year when the single market is implemented and more workers start moving jobs to different member states.
The consultation paper (which follows a discussion document on obstacles to the free movement of workers caused by occupational pension rules issued by the European Commission in July 1991) includes a draft resolution which states that migrant workers should not be forced to fear any undue loss of rights to future benefits.
The UK Government intends to use its presidency of the Council of Ministers to make progress on the issues raised.
Copies of the consultation paper are available free from Mr Bird, Room 11/21, The Adelphi, 1–11 John Adam Street, London WC2 6HT.
Disqualification of directors — Insolvency Service report
There has been a major increase over the last year in the number of disqualification proceedings taken out against directors, according to the Insolvency Service.
As a result of improved reporting of unfit conduct by Official Receivers and insolvency practitioners, the number rose by 40% to 700 in the 12 months to 31 March 1992.
At the same time, the number of convictions rose from 251 in 1990/91 to 326.
Cases cited in the Service's annual report include one involving three members of a family disqualified for a total of 24 years for the part they played in the failure of a plant hire company.
The company was compulsorily wound up after trading for 10 months with a deficiency of around £150,000.
The Court heard that one of the directors had acted while an undischarged bankrupt, aided and abetted by the others, and that they had caused the company to trade without reasonable prospect of payment of creditors' claims, to retain Crown monies to finance insolvent trading and to abuse banking procedures.
The bankrupt was sentenced to 12 months' imprisonment.
In another case, a director of an investment company was disqualified for 10 years and his co-director for six years because they had caused the company to continue trading while insolvent, had transferred assets to other companies which subsequently failed, and had been seriously negligent.
When the company was compulsorily wound up, it owed more than £1m.
The Service also reports an increase both in the number of reports of criminal offences by Official Receivers, and in the number of directors convicted.
Copies of the report are available free from the Insolvency Service, Room 706, Bridge Place, 88–89 Eccleston Square, Lon- 
LAW Edited by Denis Keenan
Statutory Instruments
Building societies — SI 1992/1547 (£1.05).
This Order,which is now in force , extends the powers of building societies with commercial assets of at least £100m to make advances on the security of land in any member state of the European Community other than the UK (where, clearly, they already have that power).
The Order makes provisions for the classification of these advances within the asset classification provisions of the Building Societies Act 1986, and the Order provides for the general treatment of the advances, under the 1986 Act, to correspond to the treatment of advances secured on land in the UK.
Greater timeshare protection to be introduced
Implementation of a new Timeshare Act, which provides buyers with a 14-day ‘cooling off’ period during which they may withdraw from a timeshare agreement, has been announced by Consumer Affairs Minister Baroness Denton.
The Act, which comes into effect on 12 October, legally obliges the seller to provide the buyer with a notice setting out the right to cancel and a blank cancellation form before signing the agreement.
The same conditions apply in respect of any timeshare credit agreement.
If the seller does not fulfil this task, the buyer's right to cancel is extended indefinitely or until he takes action that can be construed as accepting the agreement.
Should a buyer cancel, he is automatically entitled to claim back advance payments and the seller is not allowed to levy a cancellation fee.
Failure to comply with the Act — which only covers agreements entered into under UK law or where one or both parties are in the UK at the time — can result in fines of up to £5,000 on summary conviction.
They are unlimited on indictment.
Copies of the Timeshare Act 1992 are available, price £2.75, from HMSO.
LAW CASE REVIEW Edited by Denis Keenan
Injunction granted against receiver
Receivers a bank appointed under the terms of a debenture did themselves a disservice recently when they failed to pay themselves first out of the proceeds of the receivership, as they were entitled to do under the terms of their appointment.
Mr and Mrs Rottenberg were directors of Britknit (International) Ltd and Lounova (1982) Ltd (B and L).
B and L borrowed large sums from First National Commercial Bank plc, secured by a debenture.
B and L were unable to keep up with their loan repayments and the bank appointed administrative receivers.
The receivers proceeded with the receivership and managed to repay the bank in full.
They had not paid themselves first, in spite of the debenture's terms, but had paid off the mortgage.
The only matter remaining was to quantify what was properly due to the receivers as remuneration before bringing the receivership to an end.
B and L said that the sums the receivers properly ought to pay themselves could be met out of the liquid assets in the receivers' hands.
The receivers disagreed and said that they needed to raise a further £22,000 and wanted to realise one further property belonging to B and L.
The matter came to the Chancery Division where B and L tried to obtain an injunction restraining the receivers from selling any more property until the question of the disputed remuneration had been settled (see Rottenberg & Others v Monjack & Another, The Times , 2 July 1992).
It was agreed that the receivers' first duty was to the secured creditors.
B and L's counsel argued that the position was changed when the receivership ended, in the sense that all liabilities had been identified and there was enough money to settle them.
Mr Justice Cooke said that if receivers went beyond the point where they had completed their duties, they might be liable to account as trespassers.
In this case, the mortgagee had been paid and only the receivers were awaiting their remuneration and costs.
The fact that the amount due to them was disputed meant that it was uncertain whether they had reached the point beyond which they might be considered trespassers by dealing with B and L's goods.
Counsel for the receivers argued that until they had terminated the receivership, B and L could not control them.
The issue was that the receivers had sufficient liquid assets to pay themselves and then terminate the receivership if they only paid themselves the amount of remuneration which B and L thought was due to them.
Mr Justice Cooke said that if a receiver failed to terminate a receivership although he had funds that would have achieved just that, then he should be treated as if his authority had ceased.
His Lordship concluded that the company could restrain the receivers from proceeding further when they had sufficient assets to redeem the receivership, and if there was a serious issue to be tried as to whether that point had been reached, then an injunction could be granted.
The serious issue was the dispute over the proper amount of remuneration.
B and L were granted an injunction restraining the receivers from any further sales until the question of the disputed remuneration was settled.
Comment.
Both this case, and Gomba Holdings UK Ltd v Minories Finance Ltd,which dealt with the taxation of a receiver's costs (see ACCOUNTANCY , August, p 86), indicate that the days of undisputed acceptance of insolvency practitioners' fees are over — perhaps a natural reaction, given the recession and the priority given to the payment of such fees in an insolvency.
A sale at undervalue
The Court of Appeal has decided that the Court has unfettered discretion to order a sale of mortgaged property against the lender's wishes even though the mortgage will not be redeemed by the proceeds, if it would be unfair to the borrowers to postpone a sale (see Palk v Mortgage Services Funding plc [1992],The Times , 7 August).
In January 1990, Anthony Palk (P) obtained an advance of £300,000 from Mortgage Services Funding (MSF).
The loan was secured by a mortgage on the house he and his wife, Margaret, owned at Cross in Hand, Heathfield, East Sussex.
P only managed to pay the first three instalments.
His business had started to founder and his company had gone into insolvent liquidation.
In July 1990, P concluded that he could not cope with the mounting arrears under the mortgage, and his other debts.
So in March 1991 he negotiated the sale of the house for £283,000, though the amount needed to redeem the mortgage was by then £358,587.
Not unnaturally, he wished to proceed with the sale because, by reducing the amount owed, it would have stopped interest from accruing at such an alarming rate.
MSF would not agree to the sale, so P applied to the Court for an order that the house be sold.
MSF applied for a possession order, which was postponed pending the outcome of the application for an order for sale.
MSF thought that the best solution was to put the house on a short-term lease and sell when the market improved.
P did not agree.
The sum due under the mortgage was increasing by £43,000 a year and lettings were unlikely to produce more than £13,000 to £14,000 a year — so the overall debt would grow by some £30,000 a year.
Moreover, the likely rental would not even match the interest Mr and Mrs P would save if the house were sold and they were credited with the net proceeds of sale.
Mr and Mrs P saw no prospect of the housing market's recovering at a rate fast enough to overtake the income shortfall or, still less, the rate at which their overall debt was steadily increasing.
S 91 of the Law of Property Act 1925 gives the Court discretion to order the sale of a mortgaged property.
The Vice-Chancellor, Sir Donald Nicholls, said that the section gave the Court discretion in the widest sense, and in His Lordship's view, the case was one in which a sale should be directed, even though there would be a deficiency.
It was just and equitable to order a sale because otherwise unfairness and injustice would result.
MSF would be at liberty to make an offer for the property.
Comment.
In Target Home Loans v Clothier [1992],The Times , 7 August, the Court of Appeal delayed an order for possession by the lenders for three months to allow the borrowers to sell the mortgaged property.
The borrowers, Mr and Mrs Clothier, had a £225,000 advance on their home in Silverdale Avenue, Walton-on-Thames.
They had ceased to make monthly repayments in July 1990 and by April 1992 the arrears exceeded £64,000.
The lenders, Target Home Loans, sought immediate possession so they could sell the house, although the defendants had instructed estate agents and had reduced the asking price to £495,000.
The Court of Appeal deferred the possession order for three months.
Lord Justice Nolan said that the Clothiers had suffered in their business and were not dishonest.
There was no way their commitment could be met other than by a sale.
The prospect of achieving early sale would be better if effected by the borrowers while in occupation rather than by the lenders.
These cases are an indication of the liberal attitude currently being taken by the courts, which have obviously recognised that the old saying that a security on a dwelling is ‘as safe as houses’ has become a bit of a mockery.
A will without words
Mrs Wordingham received an income for life (some £8,000 a year) as a result of her father's will.
The will empowered her to appoint her life interest (after her death) to her husband.
Her father's will also made provision for the destination of this life interest should she fail to make any such appointment: the money would be payable to a number of her distant relatives.
Mrs Wordingham herself made a will in 1975.
In that she exercised the power of appointment and appointed her husband (provided that he survived her by 30 days) to receive the income from her father's estate.
In 1979 she made a new will; after making changes to some specific bequests, she again appointed her husband to receive the income from her father's estate.
She made another new will in 1989.
She prepared a list of changes and instructed the solicitor that, apart from the specified alterations, she did not want to alter her existing will.
Unfortunately, the 1989 will was drafted and signed without making any appointment of the income from her father's estate.
The solicitor who drafted the will later acknowledged that he had made a mistake.
After Mrs Wordingham's death later in 1989, Mr Wordingham applied to the High Court for rectification of the will under s 20(1) (a) of the Administration of Justice Act 1982, which states that ‘if the court is satisfied that a will is so expressed that it fails to carry out the testator's intentions, in consequence —(a) of a clerical error…it may order that the will shall be rectified so as to carry out his intentions…‘.
The case was heard by Mr Edward Evans-Lombe QC sitting as a deputy judge of the High Court (see Wordingham v Royal Exchange Trust Co Ltd [1992]3 A11 ER 204).
The Royal Exchange Trust Co Ltd was made a defendant as the executor and trustee of the will; the company also represented the interests of the people who would benefit in default of an appointment of the income.
Mr Evans-Lombe said that it was plain that Mrs Wordingham had intended that her husband should receive the income under her 1989 will, and that its omission was the result of a mistake by the solicitor in carrying out his instructions.
The issue in the proceedings was whether that mistake by the solicitor was a ‘clerical error’ within the meaning of s 20(1) (a).
There was no direct authority on the construction of that provision.
After referring to textbooks on the subject and to cases referring to clerical errors in other contexts, Mr Evans-Lombe said that the term ‘clerical error’ in s 20(1) (a) meant an error made in the process of recording the testator's intended words in the drafting or transcription of the will.
He stressed that the meaning was to be contrasted with an error made in carrying out the testator's intentions by the draftsman's words, and also with a mistaken choice of words because of a failure to understand the testator's intentions (a matter covered by s 20(1) (b) of the Act.
In consequence, he held that the solicitor had made a clerical error in failing to carry out Mrs Wordingham's instructions, and he ordered the will to be rectified.
Mr Evans-Lombe concluded by saying that, if he were wrong in holding that s 20(1) (a) permitted words to be added to a will, he would have held that the 1989 will should be struck down as failing to give true effect to Mrs Wordingham's intentions.
This would revive the 1979 will with its power of appointment, and he thought that that more closely approximated to those intentions than the 1989 will without any such power.
EMPLOYMENT
First director disqualification for safety offence
The disqualification provisions of the Company Directors Disqualification Act 1986 are usually considered only in the context of offences in relation to company legislation, such as failing to file documents, and fiscal misconduct.
But the result of a prosecution at Lewes Crown Court, noted in the August issue of the magazine Health and Safety at Work , deserves careful consideration.
In June 1990 a Health and Safety Executive inspector served a prohibition notice on Chapman Chalk Supplies Ltd at Filching Quarry, Jevington, Sussex.
The inspector contended that the quarry was being operated dangerously in terms of rock falls from the quarry face.
Rodney James Chapman, a director of the company, asked an industrial tribunal to lift the prohibition notice, but the tribunal upheld it except for a small area where the quarry might be worked but only under a safety system agreed by and worked out with the Inspectorate.
The company was charged with contravention of the terms of the prohibition notice under s 33 of the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974, because no safe system of work had been proposed to or agreed by the HSE.
The company was fined £5,000 and ordered to pay costs of some £3,500.
Mr Chapman was prosecuted under s 37 of the 1974 Act, which states that where an offence under any of the relevant statutory provisions committed by a corporate body is proved to have been committed with the consent or connivance of, or to have been attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary, or similar officer, or a person who was purporting to act in any such capacity, he, as well as the corporate body, shall be guilty of that offence.
Mr Chapman pleaded guilty and was fined £5,000.
But because he was guilty of an indictable offence, he was also disqualified by the Assistant Recorder from being a company director for two years under the Company Directors Disqualification Act 1986.
Trade Union Bill
In the July issue of ACCOUNTANCY (see p 99), we noted that the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Bill 1992 had been re-introduced into the House of Lords.
It received Royal Assent on 16 July and comes into force on 16 October.
The Act brings together much existing employment legislation and is a welcome consolidation.
However, it should be noted that Secretary of State for Employment Gillian Shephard has announced that the Government intends to bring forward more employment legislation.
This new legislation would create, in particular: a right for users of public services to restrain unlawful industrial action; the provision of a right for union members to obtain more information on their unions' financial affairs, including union leaders' salaries; protection against the use of what are called ‘check-off’ arrangements under which subscriptions to the union are deducted from the workers' pay; and greater freedom for people to join the union of their choice.
So the consolidation may not last long.
Derecognition of trade unions
A significant current trend in employment law is the derecognition of trade unions and the introduction of personal contracts with employees instead, usually with a pay increase as an incentive to accept the new arrangements.
But how does this square with s 23 of the Employment Protection (Consolidation) Act 1978 (see now s 146, Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992)?
The relevant provisions state that an employee has the right not to have action short of dismissal taken against him ‘as an individual’ by his employer to: prevent his belonging to an independent trade union; or prevent him from taking part in the activities of an independent union; or compel him to join any trade union.
An employee may complain, under what is now s 149 of the 1992 Act, to an industrial tribunal if these provisions are infringed, and the tribunal can, among other things, award the employee monetary compensation.
The matter came before the Employment Appeal Tribunal in Associated Newspapers plc v Wilson [1992]455,Industrial Relations Legal Intelligence Bulletin 7 .
During 1989, the company decided to end its collective bargaining agreement with the chapels of the National Union of Journalists.
The union was informed that a collective agreement — which as usual was not binding — between the company and the NUJ was to be terminated on 1 April 1990 and the company gave the union proper notice.
The company then planned to introduce new individual contracts for all journalists and to give a 4.5% pay rise to those who accepted and signed new contracts by 1 January 1990.
There were no significant changes in the employees' substantive terms and conditions, except in relation to union recognition.
By 1 April 1990 Mr Wilson, a Daily Mail journalist, and 14 of his colleagues had still not signed new contracts.
They were denied the 4.5% pay increase and continued to work under their existing contracts, including the terms incorporated into those contracts under the collective agreement.
Mr Wilson complained to an industrial tribunal that the company had taken action, short of dismissal, against him for the purpose of deterring him from being or penalising him for being a member of the NUJ, contrary to s 23 of the EP(C)A.
The claim failed when the EAT held that neither the derecognition of an established trade union, nor the disadvantages for employees resulting from that derecognition, was action taken against Mr Wilson ‘as an individual’ for the purpose of penalising him or deterring him from being a union member.
Comment.
Mr Wilson is apparently taking his case to the Court of Appeal.
This is a developing area of the law, since there are other cases in the pipeline awaiting the EAT's decision on the effect of what is now s 146 of the 1992 Act.
An operation leads to discrimination
In the August issue of ACCOUNTANCY (see p 88), we noted a claim for sex discrimination brought by Bridget Reynolds against Mitsubishi Trust and Banking Corporation.
Ms Reynolds had been fired from her £20,000 a year job after taking time off to have a hysterectomy on the recommendation of the company doctor.
The Chelsea Industrial Tribunal has now awarded her £9,000.
It is likely that the Bank will appeal.
The working week
The Council of EC Social Affairs Ministers has agreed concessions under which the UK has been allowed to opt out of the proposed EC Directive which imposes a maximum working week of 48 hours.
It is now left to the individual to choose whether to work longer hours, and those willing to work on Sunday can continue to do so.
Disabled persons
An Employment Policy Institute report,Disabled in the Labour Market: Economic Report,Volume 7, states that 75% of employers are failing to ensure that 3% of their staff are registered disabled.
It is an offence for companies to recruit a non-disabled worker when they are below the quota.
Statutory Instrument
Employment and training
SI 1992/1420 (£1.90).
This Order,which is now in force , imposes a levy on employers in the engineering construction industry (including employers who are not mainly engaged in engineering construction activities; for them, the levy will be imposed only in respect of their engineering construction activities).
The levy, which exists to raise contributions to the Engineering Construction Board's expenses, is imposed in respect of the 28th levy period and will be assessed by the Board in accordance with Art 3 of this Order.
There will, as usual, be a right of appeal against an assessment to an industrial tribunal.
tax briefing
TAX Compiled by Chris Greene and Christina Maddalena of Clark Whitehill
Filling in forms P11D
The question of whether the cash equivalent of providing a benefit to an employee should be calculated as the marginal cost or average cost of providing the benefit is currently under consideration by the House of Lords in the case of Pepper v Hart .
The lower courts have approved the average cost basis, as contended by the Crown.
The Inland Revenue, however, has acknowledged that the delay in receiving their Lordships' decision could give rise to difficulties for employers completing forms P11D (return of employees' expenses and benefits) for 1991/92 and 1992/93.
It has therefore confirmed the approach that will be adopted — at least until the case is finally decided.
An average cost basis is required to be returned in situations where: it is the existing, explicit, basis of valuation; the Revenue has specifically left an employee's affairs open pending the outcome of the case; the benefits were first provided in 1991/92; or benefits have not been reported in the past due to fraud or negligence.
Cases which depend on the result of Pepper v Hart will be left open and methods of valuing benefits previously agreed or accepted in practice will not be disturbed for 1991/92 or earlier years.
In particular, there will be no change in treatment where the basis of valuation has been explicitly or implicitly agreed or accepted, or the view has reasonably been taken that there is no, or only negligible, benefit.
The Revenue has also indicated that past years will not be re-examined solely as a result of the decision.
These arrangements will continue in respect of 1992/93 even if the House of Lords finds for the Crown.
Information about the Revenue's approach is included in Issue 4 of the Tax Bulletin .
This is subject to Crown copyright.
Gross mistakes
Checks carried out by the Inland Revenue on a sample of bank and building society accounts have revealed that some people have incorrectly registered to receive interest payments without deduction of income tax.
Since April 1991, banks and building societies have deducted basic rate tax from interest, but savers can reclaim tax if it is more than that to which they are liable if, say, they have unused personal allowances.
Additionally, people who can say in advance that their income will be less than their tax allowances can register to receive their interest gross.
This can be done, however, only where a taxpayer's total income is below the level of their personal allowances.
It is not possible, for example, to register for gross interest to be paid on one account (with the interest covered by tax allowances) and to have interest credited to other accounts under deduction of tax.
Pensioners must also take care to include their retirement pensions in their total income calculation.
Anyone who thinks they may have become liable to tax since they registered should tell their bank or building society to cancel the registration as soon as possible.
The Revenue will not impose interest or penalties on anyone who has simply misunderstood the position, but will consider doing so where someone has knowingly made false or fraudulent declarations on the registration form, or deliberately failed to inform their bank or building society that they had become liable to tax.
Stricter PRP rules
The Inland Revenue is now applying stricter rules in considering applications for Profit Related Pay (PRP) scheme registration.
PRP is that part of pay which varies with changes in the profits of the business in which the employee works, and is eligible for tax relief if paid under a scheme which has been registered by the Revenue.
For periods beginning on or after 1 April 1991, payments are tax free up to 20% of pay, or £4,000 if lower.
A PRP scheme must contain provisions by which the amount distributable as PRP is determined.
This amount may be calculated as a fixed percentage of profit for a period, or by adjusting a notional pool of a specified amount by the percentage change in profits compared with the preceding period.
The effect of this rule is that the fixed percentage or the amount of the notional pool is specified in the scheme, but the amount of the distributable pool can be determined only after a profit period has ended.
Under a new Statement of Practice (SP 7/92), schemes will no longer be considered for registration where the fixed percentage or the specified amount of the notional pool depend on a formula which cannot be determined at the time of writing the scheme.
The Revenue has become aware that some schemes have been registered which do not adequately observe the strict requirements of the legislation.
Schemes already registered, however, will not have their registration withdrawn.
PAYE and NIC — employers' payslip booklets
The Inland Revenue has reviewed the arrangements under which it issues booklets of payslips spanning two deduction years to employers, a considerable number of whom had complained.
It is clear, the Revenue says, that the arrangements have not produced the anticipated benefits either in resource costs or customer service.
As a result, it has decided to revert to supplying employers, yearly, with booklets containing payslips which relate to one deduction year.
The bulk issue will be timed to take place as close to the start of the new deduction year as operational scheduling permits.
Under the proposed new arrangements, booklets issued for the remainder of 1992/93 will contain only enough payslips to take employers to the end of the deduction year, and they will be accompanied by an explanatory leaflet.
In February or March next year, the Revenue will send out a bulk issue of payslips for the year 1993/94 only.
The booklet covers will be amended to reintroduce a ‘record of payments’ section.
A further explanatory leaflet will also be sent, aimed at those employers who have received booklets issued before September 1992, containing payslips for the year 1993/94.
For more information or comment, contact Roy Williamson, Room 828, South West Wing, Bush House, Strand, London WC2B 4RD.
Settlements — corporate demerger receipts
Recent counsel's opinions have confirmed that, although an exempt distribution (s 213, TA 1988) of shares in a demerger to trustee shareholders is not treated as trust income for tax purposes, under trust law the shares so distributed are the trust's income.
Thus, in the case of an interest in possession trust, according to the Law Society Gazette , the trustees should ensure that the shares or the proceeds thereof are not added to the capital of the trust but are passed to the beneficiaries of the trust income.
This interpretation of trust law is founded on well established authorities and could probably be overturned only by a decision of the House of Lords.
Individuals who receive such a distribution are treated as having received a payment of capital.
Financial instruments taxation
The tax treatment of financial instruments companies use to manage interest rate risk is to be reformed.
Over the last decade or so, new types of financial instrument have been developed to help businesses manage the risks from fluctuations in interest and exchange rates.
These instruments do not fit well into existing tax law, raising uncertainties and anomalies.
A consultative document was released in August 1991 to tackle the problem.
Discussions with representative bodies gave a clear consensus in favour of the proposals to tax, as income, payments and receipts under a range of such instruments.
The Government has now authorised the preparation of draft legislation.
Exchange treatment to be reformed
The tax treatment of companies' foreign exchange gains and losses is to be reformed, and the Government has now authorised the preparation of draft legislation.
Under the present system, gains and losses arising from currency fluctuations are not always taken into account for tax purposes in the same way, or even at all.
Proposals were therefore announced in March 1991 to recognise exchange differences on monetary assets and liabilities as income at the time they accrue.
Discussions with representative bodies resulted in some amendments to the proposals, notably the inclusion of a ‘matching’ provision to allow exchange differences on a borrowing, which ‘match’those on a non-monetary asset, to be deferred until the asset is disposed of.
There will be further consultations when the draft legislation is published.
TAX CASE REVIEW Compiled by Chris Greene and Christina Maddalena of Clark Whitehill
Release of close company loans
Loans from a close company to participators in that company were ‘released’ within the meaning of s 287(1), TA 1970 where, under an agreement between the company, the participators and a third party, the third party assumed and then settled the debt.
So held the Court of Appeal in Collins v Addies and Greenfield v Baines [1992]STI 766.
The taxpayers, C and G, were directors and shareholders of an unlimited close company.
On 11 November 1980, C and G contracted to sell their shares in the company to a fellow shareholder and director of the company, B. Under the terms of the agreement, the taxpayers, B, and the company, executed a deed of novation whereby the company released the taxpayers from liability on their current accounts (which stood in total at £79,000) up to a limit of £68,000.
B was substituted as the company's debtor, and then repaid the whole of the £79,000.
The taxpayers deposited the difference of £11,000 with B's solicitors.
The original current accounts constituted loans to participators under s 286, TA 1970, and C and G were assessed to income tax for 1980/81 on the grounds that by substituting B for the taxpayers as debtor, the company ‘released’ the taxpayers from their obligation to repay the loans under s 287(1), TA 1970.
The grossed up amount of the debt should therefore be included in the taxpayers' total incomes for higher rate tax purposes.
The taxpayers appealed to a Special Commissioner, contending that the novation did not constitute a ‘release’ because it was neither wholly voluntary or gratuitous, nor made for less than full consideration.
For the purposes of s 287(1), the meaning of the term should be confined to releases not given for full consideration, on the grounds that such a limitation was required by the context of s 287(1) itself and by the provisions of TA 1970 relating to company distributions as a whole (ss 233–237 and 282–286).
In particular, s 286(5) provided relief where a loan was repaid by the debtor or a third party or where the company agreed that the loan should be settled by payment in kind.
It was illogical to accept that an accord and satisfaction fell within s 286(5) but fell outside s 287(1), which referred to where a company releases or writes off the whole or part of the debt.
The Special Commissioner dismissed their appeal, as did Mr Justice Millett in the High Court (see ACCOUNTANCY , September 1991, p 50).
The taxpayers appealed to the Court of Appeal.
Dismissing the taxpayers' appeals, Lord Justice Nourse said that the ordinary meaning of ‘release’ comprehended both a release given for full consideration and one given gratuitously, or for less than full consideration, and there was no warrant for putting the limitation, as contended by the tax-payers, on the word ‘releases’in s 287(1).
If Parliament had intended the word to mean ‘releases other than for value’, it could and had to say so.
It was accepted that s 287 had to be construed as one with s 286.
However, ‘release’ did not include any transaction which either consisted of, or amounted to, repayment of the loan if the transaction, when viewed in isolation, had the effect of releasing the debtor from the obligation to repay.
A novation resulted in the loan's remaining outstanding; the loan was not repaid and there was nothing equivalent to a repayment.
Accordingly, the company had ‘released’ the taxpayers from the obligation to repay the loans for the purposes of s 287(1) by virtue of the deed of novation, and the taxpayers' appeals would be dismissed.
Lord Justices Glidewell and Stocker agreed.
Taxpayer's small problem
A taxpayer was not entitled to elect to deduct the entire allowable expenditure on certain shares in computing the taxable gain on a capital distribution under s 72(4), CGTA 1979, as the distribution was not small.
So held the Court of Appeal in O'Rourke v Binks [1992]STI 716, allowing the Crown's appeal against the Special Commissioners' decision and dismissing the taxpayer's cross-appeal.
The taxpayer owned 560,500 shares (allowable cost £214,602) in C Ltd, which in turn held 75,328 shares in Lasmo.
C Ltd and R plc agreed to merge, the taxpayer receiving 840,750 shares (market value £1,336,792) in R plc and C Ltd's holding of 75,328 Lasmo shares (market value £246,699) in exchange for his holding in C Ltd.
The inspector calculated the taxpayer's gain on the basis that the receipt of the Lasmo shares amounted to a capital distribution under s 72(1), CGTA 1979 and apportioned the allowable expenditure in accordance with the part-disposal provisions of s 35, CGTA 1979.
The taxpayer appealed against his 1982/3 capital gains tax assessment on the grounds that the allowable expenditure of £214,602 was less than the amount of the £246,699 capital distribution, and he could therefore elect under s 72(4) to reduce the amount distributed by the entire allowable expenditure on his C Ltd shares; and that the capital distribution, at 15.58% of the total consideration, was ‘small, as compared with the value of the shares in respect of which it was distributed’(s 72(2)).
The Special Commissioner found that the taxpayer was entitled to elect for the amount distributed to be reduced by the allowable expenditure in accordance with s 74(4), since, as a matter of construction, the provision applied to all capital distributions in respect of shares regardless of the relative amount.
However, the capital distribution at 15.58% of the total consideration was not ‘small’.
Mr Justice Vinelott affirmed the Special Commissioner's decision in the High Court (see ACCOUNTANCY , November 1991, p 52) and the Crown appealed, with the taxpayer making a cross-appeal.
The Crown contended that on a true construction of s 72, an election under s 74(4) was available only where the capital distribution was small, and that since, in this case, the capital distribution was not small, the inspector's apportionment calculation in accordance with s 35 was therefore correct.
Allowing the Crown's appeal, and dismissing the taxpayer's cross-appeal, Lord Justice Scott said that on a first reading of s 72 it was natural to read subsection (4) as one of a group of subsections dealing only with cases where the amount of capital distribution was comparatively small.
The taxpayer, however, contended that, on a literal reading, its meaning was clear and unambiguous and accordingly there was no alternative but to give effect to the express statutory language.
The contrast between the implied limitation of the section read in its statutory context, and the absence of any express limitation, produced an ambiguity.
It was thus permissible, as an aid to identifying the legislative intention behind s 72(4), to consider the anomalies that the absence of any limitation to its scope would produce, the antecedent legislation and the manner in which other types of small distributions were dealt within CGTA 1979.
To apply the words literally would defeat the legislature's obvious intention and produce a wholly unreasonable result.
S 72(4) could be read as including the limitation, ‘in a case in which the amount distributed was small compared with the value of the shares in respect of which it was distributed’, and none of its express words would thereby be distorted.
The question of what constituted a small distribution as compared with the value of the shares was a question of fact and degree for the Special Commissioner.
It had not been shown that the Special Commissioner had misdirected himself or that he had erred in law or that he had arrived at a wholly insupportable conclusion.
Accordingly, the taxpayer was not entitled to make an election under s 72(4).
Lord Justices Stuart-Smith and Lloyd concurred.
Charitable gift taxable
A gift to a charity of shares in a close company gave rise to a charge to capital transfer tax where the company had an interest in possession in a trust.
The gift was correctly treated as the coming to an end of the share transferor's deemed interest in the trust and was therefore chargeable, as provided by paras 4(1) and (2), Sch 5, FA 1975.
The gift of shares was treated as being a transfer of value of the relevant part of the settled property, and therefore no exemption was available as a gift of property to a charity in accordance with para 15(3) (ba), Sch 6, FA 1975, according to the Chancery Division of the High Court in Powell-Cotton v IRC [1992]STI 663.
In 1940 the taxpayer (P) obtained a life interest in a trust on the execution of a deed of resettlement.
The trust assets comprised real estate and other capital monies.
In 1941 P sold his life interest in the trust to a close company, Quex Park Estate Co (Q), for a consideration of 25,000 ordinary £1 shares in Q. In 1964 P repurchased part of his life interest in the trust, the ‘retained part’ continuing to be vested in the company.
By October 1982, P held 8,993 of the 46,000 shares of Q in issue, and was therefore treated as entitled to 8,993/46,000 of the interest in possession in the retained part by virtue of para 24(5), Sch 5, FA 1975.
In October 1982, P gifted 2,999 shares to a charity.
The Inland Revenue Commissioners determined that the gift was a chargeable transfer of value of 2,999/46,000 of the retained part (8,993/46,000 of the life interest) by virtue of para 4(2), Sch 5, FA 1975.
The subsection provided that on the coming to an end of an interest in possession in settled property, there was a chargeable transfer of value equal to the value of the property in which the interest subsisted.
P appealed to the High Court, contending that no part of his interest ‘came to an end’ within para 4(2); he had merely disposed of shares in Q. Similarly, para 4(2) was not deemed to operate by virtue of para 4(1), which provided that a disposal of an interest in possession of any property was not a transfer of value, but should be treated as the coming to the end of an interest in possession, bringing into play para 4(2).
Alternatively, P contended that, if there was a transfer of value under para 4(2), then the transfer was exempt under para 10(1), Sch 6, FA 1975, as being ‘attributable to property given to a charity’.
This exemption was not excluded by para 15(3) (ba), Sch 6 since the ‘property’ was shares and not an interest in possession.
Dismissing the taxpayer's appeal, Mr Justice Vinelott said that the overriding purpose of para 24(5), Sch 5, FA 1975 was to ensure that the participators in a close company, which was entitled to an interest in possession, were to be treated for the purposes of capital transfer tax as if they had been entitled to interests in possession according to their rights and interests in the company.
The legislative intention was to give rise to a charge whenever there was a change in the proportion of the settled property in which any participator was deemed to be entitled, whether the change had arisen on death, or on termination of the interest, or on a disposition or deemed disposition.
The taxpayer's appeal in this regard would therefore be dismissed.
Furthermore, in valuing the shares transferred by the taxpayer, the company's right to the income of the retained part had to be disregarded, since to regard the company as having a beneficial interest in the trust would be inconsistent with the beneficial ownership attributed to the participators.
The taxpayer's contention with regard to the exemption under para 10(1), Sch 6 was also incorrect.
As the taxpayer was deemed to have the beneficial interest in that part of the interest in possession vested in the company, the property transferred was not shares but the vested interest in possession and so para 15(3) (ba), Sch 6 did not apply.
The exemption under para 10(1) was therefore excluded by para 15(3) (ba), Sch 6.
The taxpayer's appeal was dismissed.
Chinese videos
The profits of a Hong Kong company which granted fixed fee sub-licences of video films to overseas customers were held to be ‘arising in’ and ‘derived from’Hong Kong by the Privy Council in Commissioner of Inland Revenue v HK-TVB International Ltd [1992]STI 745.
The taxpayer company (HK-TVB), a Hong Kong company, was granted from its parent in 1981 the right to exploit Chinese dialect video films outside Hong Kong.
In the years 1980/81 to 1983/84, HK-TVB granted sub-licences to customers abroad for fixed sums paid in Hong Kong.
Representatives were sent abroad to solicit customers, and the fixed sum was either agreed there or subsequently by letter or telex, with the documentation prepared in Hong Kong and sent for the customer's signature.
Alternatively, the documentation would be signed by both parties abroad, or by concluding all negotiations by telex.
The taxpayer also provided facilities in Hong Kong for the duplication of any sub-licensed film.
The fee for this was either added to the licence fee or invoiced separately, prior to despatch of the film to the customer.
S 14 of the Inland Revenue Ordinance (Hong Kong) provided that‘profits tax should be charged…on every person carrying on a…business in [Hong Kong]…in respect of his assessable profits arising in or derived from [Hong Kong]…from such…business’.
S 2 of the Ordinance provided that‘profits arising in or derived from Hong Kong’ should include ‘all business transacted in Hong Kong, whether directly or through an agent’.
The Commissioner of Inland Revenue made and confirmed assessments on the taxpayer for those years in respect of the profits from sub-licensing the films.
The Board of Review allowed the taxpayer's appeal, but the High Court found for the Commissioner.
The Court of Appeal reversed the High Court's decision, and the Commissioner appealed to the Privy Council.
In allowing the Commissioner's appeal, Lord Jauncey of Tullichettle referred to the decision in IRC v Hong Seng Bank Ltd [1990]and the dictum of Atkin LJ in Smith & Co v Greenwood [1921]: ‘I think that the question is, where do the operations take place from which the profits in substance arise?’
The proper approach was to ascertain what were the operations which produced the relevant profits, and where those operations took place.
The taxpayer had carried on in Hong Kong the business of exploiting rights by granting sub-licences to overseas customers.
The fact that such rights were only exercisable overseas was irrelevant, because the taxpayer had no financial interest in the exercise of those rights by the sub-licencees.
It was wrong to suppose that the rights from which profits accrued to the taxpayer were located outside Hong Kong.
Any overseas profits accrued not to it, but to the sub-businesses.
The profits assessed on the taxpayer ‘arose in’ or were ‘derived from’Hong Kong and as such were subject to profits tax under s 14, Inland Revenue Ordinance (Hong Kong).
The Commissioner's appeal was allowed.
Admissible evidence
Transactions in shares, not necessarily at arm's length or for cash, and previous agreements with the Inland Revenue with regard to their valuation, were held to be admissible evidence in relation to the valuation of the shares.
So held the Court of Session in IRC v Stenhouse's Trustees [1992]STI 120, quashing a ruling by the Special Commissioners.
The trustees of the late H C Stenhouse's inter vivos trust appealed against an assessment to capital transfer tax in respect of a capital distribution, on 17 March 1978, of shares in H and SW (unquoted investment companies), and SH.
H principally held shares in SW, which in turn held shares in Stenhouse Holdings Ltd, a quoted company.
The Crown had intended to introduce evidence of the number of transactions in shares between the members of the Stenhouse family and associated family trusts, and also of earlier agreements between the trustees and the Revenue as to the appropriate formula for valuing shares in H and SW.
However, the admissibility of such evidence was questioned when the Crown cross-questioned Professor Macleod, an expert witness for the trustees.
He had estimated the value of the shares in H and SW on the basis of,inter alia , the companies' accounts and the general approach of stock market investors to investment trust companies and the level of yield such investors might expect.
The trustees objected to the Crown's asking if Professor Macleod had considered actual transactions in, or agreements relating to the valuation of, shares in H and SW.
The Special Commissioner ruled in this dispute that, for the purpose of valuing shares in private companies for which there was no market, under s 38, FA 1975 only arm's length sales for cash in shares in the same companies were admissible as evidence.
Furthermore, previous agreements on valuation for share distribution purposes were inadmissible.
The Crown applied to the Outer House of the Court of Session to quash the ruling, contending that the evidence it had tried to present had to be deemed relevant, even if not determinative or of very great weight.
The trustees argued that the valuation issue was to ascertain the property's hypothetical value in a hypothetical sale between a hypothetical vendor and purchaser.
Thus, transactions in shares could only be taken into account to the extent ruled by the Special Commissioner.
In accepting the Crown's application, Lord Coulsfield said that the general rule of law was that evidence which was relevant to the issue was admissible unless excluded by some peremptory rule of law.
Evidence was relevant if it was in some way logically connected with the matters in dispute or if it was consistent with, or inconsistent with, or gave rise to a logical inference from, the facts in issue.
The case in question had been argued as one of relevance of evidence.
Valuations were a matter of fact and expert opinion, and according to the Lord President (Clyde) in Duke of Portland v Woods Trustees [1926], a true valuation could be made only after employing more than one measure, each legitimate but none necessarily conclusive by itself.
The question whether any weight was to be attached to evidence of actual transactions, and if so how much, was one of fact.
Some of the transactions the Crown sought to rely on were not at arm's length and might therefore be of no assistance, but there might be other transactions which had taken place between parties who were genuinely trying to strike an open market value, and there was no reason why such cases should be ignored.
Accordingly, there was no basis for ruling out as necessarily inadmissible ab ante the evidence which the Crown sought to lead.
Whether any particular part of that evidence was of assistance had to be a question of fact.
The same line of reasoning was applicable to the admissibility of evidence relating to previous agreements.
In other fields (such as valuation for rating) evidence of agreements reached had regularly been admitted as evidence of the value which would have been arrived at in hypothetical transactions.
There was no reason to regard such evidence as inadmissible in the present case.
There might be every reason for treating such evidence with care, but the reasons were not sufficient to form a legal barrier to submitting the evidence at all.
The Commissioner had gone too far and had given a ruling that would have had the effect of preventing the Crown from leading evidence which, as a matter of law, was admissible.
Accordingly, the ruling would be quashed and the case remitted to the Special Commissioners.
Penalties considered
In awarding penalties for failure to comply with precepts issued under s 51, TMA 1970, the General Commissioners had taken all the relevant circumstances into account and the Court would not vary the amounts determined, according to the Chancery Division in Delapage Ltd v Highbury General Commissioners and IRC [1992]STI 205.
The taxpayer companies, Delapage Ltd and Twinsectra Ltd, each appealed against assessments in respect of the years to 31 March 1987 and 1988.
On 11 December 1990, the General Commissioners issued precepts, under s 51(1), TMA 1970, requiring the companies to provide them with information and the accounts relating to the appeals, specifying a time limit of 50 days.
The companies wrote to the Clerk to the Commissioners on 31 January 1991, stating their intention to apply for a 90-day extension at the next meeting, explaining why they would not be able to comply with the precepts in the 50-day time limit.
At the following meeting on 5 February 1991, in view of the continuing delay, the General Commissioners awarded initial penalties of £50 for failure to comply with the precepts in respect of each appeal under s 98, TMA 1970, and adjourned the hearing.
On 23 April 1991, information which satisfied the requirements of two of the four precepts in issue was produced.
Under s 98, the maximum penalty for the delay by this date would have been £4,560.
However, the companies again maintained that the original 50-day time limit had been unrealistic.
The General Commissioners, after considering the relevant facts, in particular that the accounts should have been submitted three or four years previously, awarded each company a penalty of £2,000.
The companies appealed to the High Court under s 53, TMA 1970, contending that the penalties were excessive.
Dismissing the appeals, Mr Justice Mummery said that the onus of proving that the penalty was excessive was on the taxpayers.
The companies had not discharged that onus and the fact that the Commissioners did not award the maximum penalties showed that they were fully aware of the difficulties the companies faced.
The Court would not interfere with the Commissioners' decision, and the appeals would be dismissed.
Triple assessments
Where more than one assessment was raised under different statutory provisions in respect of the same amount then, provided these were clearly alternative assessments, they were not void.
However, the Inland Revenue could seek to recover the tax due by summary judgment under only one of the alternative assessments, since to do otherwise would be vexatious.
The Court of Appeal so held in IRC v Wilkinson [1992]STI 481.
For the years 1977/78 to 1978/79 the taxpayer was assessed to tax under Sch D Case I, Sch D, Case VI, under s 488, TA 1970, and capital gains tax rules.
The amount assessed was the same in respect of the same years.
In a covering letter sent with the assessments, the inspector indicated that once the returns for the years were submitted, the taxpayer's claim that he had been incorrectly assessed more than once would be accepted.
The assessments became final, as the taxpayer did not appeal against them, and in September 1987 a writ was issued to recover the tax due under all six assessments.
Subsequently, the statement of claim was amended so that it was restricted to the tax assessment under s 488, TA 1970.
In May 1991, the Crown was granted summary judgment for the sum of £1,185,971 — the tax assessed by virtue of s 488, TA 1970 in the two relevant years.
The taxpayer appealed against the order on the grounds that the assessments were void ab initio because the inspector's letter showed that the assessments were cumulative and as such outside the powers conferred on the Revenue in s 29, TMA 1970.
There was thus no need for the statutory machinery for appeals against assessments to be used.
The High Court allowed the taxpayer's appeal and the Crown was given leave to appeal.
Lord Justice Scott said that, although on the face of the inspector's covering letter the assessments appeared cumulative, it was clear from the individual assessments and the terms of the letter that only one sum would be assessed on whichever basis was ultimately appropriate.
The matter would have been resolved if the taxpayer had appealed, but he was not obliged to do so.
When the assessments became final, they could not lose their character as alternative assessments and the Crown had to elect to enforce one.
The writ issued in September 1987 was therefore vexatious, but the contentious element was removed when the claim was restricted.
Once the alternative assessments ceased to be enforceable, the taxpayer became liable to the tax assessed, and this was not capable of any serious challenge.
The Crown was thus entitled to the summary judgment.
Lord Justices Neill and Steyn concurred with the decision.
No return
The taxpayer's claim that he could not comply with a s 8, TMA 1970 notice requiring him to submit tax returns as he was not in possession of the full facts to enable him to complete the returns properly was rejected in the High Court in Alexander v Wallington General Commissioners and IRC [1992]STI 264.
The General Commissioners found that the taxpayer had wilfully refused to submit tax returns for the years 1988/89 and 1989/90 despite the receipt of a notice under s 8, TMA 1970 to deliver the returns.
As the Commissioners could not accept that there were any mitigating circumstances, the maximum penalty of £300 for each year was imposed.
The taxpayer contended that he did not have full information available to enable him to complete the returns.
He would thus have been guilty of perjury if he had submitted them when they were not to the best of his knowledge correct and complete.
He appealed to the High Court accordingly.
In dismissing the taxpayer's appeal, Mr Justice Rattee said that the taxpayer could have made the returns accompanied by an indication that there were matters still outstanding which might affect the contents of the returns.
The mere fact that he did not have all the information could not be an excuse for not complying with the notice under s 8, TMA 1970.
The taxpayer's appeal was accordingly dismissed.
Prevaricating accountant's penalties confirmed
The High Court confirmed an award of penalties by the General Commissioners against a taxpayer for failing to provide the information required by a precept in Stoll v High Wycombe General Commissioners and IRC [1992]STI 212.
The taxpayer, it said, had not established that it was beyond his powers to obtain the information.
Following the issue of a precept in July 1990, the taxpayer, an accountant, produced some of the information which it required shortly before the Commissioners' hearing.
As there had been no time for it to be considered, the hearing was adjourned until November 1990.
The taxpayer had also failed to produce the information the precept required in respect of his building society accounts.
At the November hearing, the taxpayer said he had written to the building society in May and August and had telephoned them in September but still did not have the required details.
The Commissioners awarded an initial penalty of £125, as they were not satisfied that all reasonable steps had been taken to obtain the information.
The taxpayer did not attend the next meeting in January 1991, having written to the Clerk to the Commissioners seeking an adjournment.
The Commissioners awarded a further penalty of £1,080, finding that the taxpayer was prevaricating and that as a professional man he had failed to give proper priority to disclosing building society information in full and in good time.
The taxpayer was unsuccessful in his appeal that the Commissioners' conclusion was not justified by the facts before them.
VAT Compiled by John Brown and Suzanne Chadwick of Ernst & Young
Importation of containers, palettes and packings
HM Customs & Excise have announced that, with immediate effect, certain types of palettes, containers or packings despatched from other EC member states and temporarily imported into the UK may be admitted without any formalities.
Importers may claim relief from VAT on the packings without having to complete any Customs declarations or paying security, provided that certain conditions are met.
The containers, palettes or packings must originate, or be, in free circulation within the EC and must not already have benefited from any VAT exemption.
The packings must also be marked in such a way as to enable the person responsible for their movements to be identified; that person must undertake to supply any Customs officer with any information that may be necessary to ensure the proper application of this simplified procedure.
Containers, palettes or packings temporarily imported into the UK under this simplified procedure must be re-exported within 12 months.
Alternatively, an equal number of palettes of the same type and largely the same value must be exported in their place within 12 months.
These new procedures result from an agreement reached between EC member states.
Review of VAT notices and leaflets
HM Customs & Excise are to review the arrangements for producing and distributing VAT notices and leaflets.
There are currently 27 notices and 106 leaflets in circulation.
The notices give general information on particular aspects of the tax, while leaflets provide more specialised guidance for specific trades or on the liability of certain supplies.
The intention is to make these publications easily readable with the objective of providing quick and basic answers to queries.
Legal commentary and technical background are avoided as far as possible.
Various suggestions relating to the use of indexing, layout, simple explanation of changes, and the use of examples are being considered within the review of the leaflets.
The review will also cover the arrangements for distributing publications to local VAT offices.
VAT publications
HM Customs & Excise have issued the following new and revised VAT notices and leaflets: Leaflet 700/13/A/92,VAT Publications , dated 1 July 1992; Notice 719,VAT Refunds for Do It Yourself Builders , dated 1 July 1992; and Notice 742 C,Land and Property Law , dated 1 June 1992.
Institute
Report of the Disciplinary Committee
Disciplinary Committee 16 June 1992
1.
(FCA)of , having been found guilty of misconduct contrary to Bye-law 76(a) (i) in that he in Cardiff between 26 March 1991 and 4 February 1992 purported to exercise a lien over the papers of his former client when he was not entitled to do so and having been guilty of a breach of Bye-law 76(a) (ii) in that he in Cardiff between 22 May 1991 and 4 February 1992 failed to deal properly and promptly with professional enquiries from Chartered Accountants in respect of the affairs of his former client and having been found guilty of a breach of Bye-law 76(a) (iv) in that he in Cardiff between 17 December 1991 and 4 February 1992 failed to provide information required of him by the Investigation Committee on 17 December 1991 in exercise of its powers under Bye-law 80(a) concerning the affairs of his former client was reprimanded, fined £750 and ordered to pay £l, 000 by way of costs.
(ceased to be a member of the Institute on 14 July 1992 for failing to pay the Disciplinary Committee fine and costs in due time under the terms of Bye-law 41.)
2.
(FCA)of  having been found to be in breach of Bye-law 76(a) and liable to disciplinary action under Bye-law 76(a) (i) in that he in London between 31 July 1985 and 28 February 1990 audited the accounts of a limited company, a company in which his wife was a shareholder and at various times an office holder, resulting in him not being free of any interest which might detract or be seen to detract from his professional independence and integrity was reprimanded and ordered to pay £600 by way of costs.
3.
(FCA)of  having been found guilty of misconduct within the meaning of Bye-law 76(a) and liable to disciplinary action under Bye-law 76(a) (i) in that he in the Magistrates Court was convicted of eight offences of being knowingly concerned in the fraudulent evasion of Value Added Tax contrary to Section 39(1) of the Value Added Tax Act 1983 was excluded from membership of the Institute and ordered to pay £250 by way of costs.
4.
(FCA)of  who had been found to be in breach of Bye-law 76(b) and liable to disciplinary action under Bye-law 76(a) (ii) in that he in London between 8 November 1990 and 3 March 1992 failed to deal properly and promptly with professional enquiries from chartered accountants in respect of a client and having been in breach of Bye-law 76(a) (iv) in that he in London between 7 January 1992 and 3 February 1992 failed to provide information required of him by the Investigation Committee on 7 January 1992 in exercise of its powers under Bye-law 80(a) concerning professional enquiries made by chartered accountants was reprimanded, fined £750 and ordered to pay £500 by way of costs.
The Committee also ordered that  take advice from the Professional Referrals Service.
5.  of , a firm having been found to be in breach of Investment Business Regulation 1.50 in that in Stockbridge between 1 June 1991 and 3 March 1992 the firm failed to pay its Investment Business Authorisation Fee for the year ending 31 December 1991 and having been in breach of Bye-law 76(a) (iv) as applied by Investment Business Regulation 6.09 in that the firm at Stockbridge between 19 December 1991 and 28 January 1992 failed to provide information required of it by the Investigation Committee on 19 December 1991 in exercise of its powers under Bye-law 80(a) concerning the payment of its Investment Business Authorisation Fee for the year ending 31 December 1991 was reprimanded and ordered to pay £l, 000 by way of costs.
6.
(FCA)of , who had been found to be in breach of Bye-law 76(a) and liable to disciplinary action under Bye-law 76(a) (i) in that he at Grimsby between 6 March 1989 and 15 July 1991 whilst Financial Director of a limited company misappropriated monies totalling an amount in excess of £90,000 was excluded from membership of the Institute and ordered to pay £350 by way of costs
7.
(ACA)of  who had been found to be in breach of Bye-law 76(a) and liable to disciplinary action under Bye-law 76(a) (i) in that he at Iver, on or about 16 August 1991, drafted a letter to be signed ‘(ACA)’ and permitted its use in circumstances which were not consistent with the good reputation of the profession of accountancy was reprimanded, fined £500 and ordered to pay £500 by way of costs.
8.
(FCA)of  who had been found to be in breach of Bye-law 76(a) and liable to disciplinary action under Bye-law 76(a) (i) in that he at Ivybridge between 1 April 1988 and 30 April 1990 whilst Treasurer of an organisation failed to deal properly and promptly with the financial affairs of the organisation for which he was responsible by virtue of the said office and in that he on or about 9 February 1990 improperly drew a cheque on the account of an organisation to settle a liability not incurred by them was reprimanded, fined £500 and ordered to pay £350 by way of costs.
9.
(FCA)of  who had been found to be in breach of Bye-law 76(b) and liable to disciplinary action under Bye-law 76(a) (ii) in that he in London on or about 23 April 1988 signed an audit report on the accounts of a limited company for the year ended 31 March 1988 which
(a) was not in accordance with recommended auditing standards and
(b) failed to mention that the said accounts were not in the form required by section 228 and paragraph 1 (1) of Schedule 4 of the Companies Act 1985 and
(c) failed to provide an explanation for the absence of the profit and loss account as required by the Companies Act 1985 and
(d) failed to refer to the non-depreciation of freehold property in accordance with Statement of Standard Accounting Practice number 12
and in that he in London between 31 March 1989 and 23 May 1991 signed an audit report on the accounts of a limited company for the year ended 31 March 1989 which
(a) was not in accordance with recommended auditing standards and
(b) failed to mention that the said accounts were not in the form required by section 228 and paragraph 1 (1) of Schedule 4 of the Companies Act 1985 and
(c) failed to provide an explanation for the absence of the profit and loss account as required by the Companies Act 1985 and
(d) failed to refer to the non-depreciation of freehold property in accordance with Statement of Standard Accounting Practice number 12
and in that he in London between 31 March 1990 and 23 May 1991 signed an audit report on the accounts of a limited company for the year ended 31 March 1990 which
(a) was not in accordance with recommended auditing standards and
(b) failed to mention that the said accounts were not in the form required by section 228 and paragraph 1 (1) of Schedule 4 of the Companies Act 1985 and
(c) failed to provide an explanation for the absence of the profit and loss account as required by the Companies Act 1985 and
(d) failed to refer to the non-depreciation of freehold property in accordance with Statement of Standard Accounting Practice number 12
was reprimanded, fined £500 and ordered to pay £500 by way of costs.
10.
(FCA)of  who had been found to be in breach of Bye-law 76(a) and liable to disciplinary action under Bye-law 76(a) (i) in that he at Waltham Cross on or about 28 May 1991 drafted a letter of resignation as auditor of a limited company on behalf of his firm in terms not consistent with the good reputation of the profession of accountancy was reprimanded, fined £500 and ordered to pay £500 by way of costs.
11.
(FCA)of  who had been found to be in breach of Bye-law 76(a) and liable to disciplinary action under Bye-law 76(a) (i) in that he in London between 9 January 1991 and 30 October 1991, whilst a partner in a firm of chartered accountants, misappropriated monies in excess of £300,000 was excluded from membership of the Institute and ordered to pay £350 by way of costs.
12.
(FCA)of  having been found to be in breach of Investment Business Regulation 6.03 in that the firm at Shipley between 16 March 1989 and 12 March 1991 sent business letters relating to its investment business without bearing the legend ‘Authorised by the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales to carry on investment business’ contrary to Investment Business Regulation 2.02 and in that the firm at Shipley between 9 September 1988 and 1 October 1989 entered or required its Principal to enter into an association or arrangement with a person which might result in the defendant being constrained or induced to refer or introduce a client to a person who was not an independent intermediary with a view to that person giving investment advice contrary to Investment Business Regulation 2.03 and in that the firm at Shipley between 16 March 1986 and 31 October 1989 failed before recommending or effecting for a client a transaction in units in an authorised unit trust or a recognised collective investment scheme, to take reasonable steps to establish that other more advantageous or suitable policies or units were not available contrary to Investment Business Regulation 2.11 and in that the firm at Shipley between 1 November 1989 and 16 October 1991 having given advice to a client which was such that when acted upon it resulted in commission being received by the defendant, failed to notify the said client in writing of the amount and terms of such commission as soon as that information was available, contrary to Investment Business Regulation 2.32 was reprimanded, fined £3,000 and ordered to pay £500 by way of costs.
13.
(FCA)of  who had been found to be in breach of Bye-law 76(a) and liable to disciplinary action under Bye-law 76(a) (i) in that he at Peterborough between 21 June 1991 and 1 October 1991 passed clients' monies through his firm's office account was reprimanded, fined £l, 000 and ordered to pay £250 by way of costs.
14.
(FCA)of  who had been found to be in breach of Investment Business Regulation 2.32 in that in High Wycombe between 31 March 1989 and 14 June 1991 it failed to notify clients in writing of the amount and terms of commission received as a result of advice given to those clients and having been in breach of Investment Business Regulation 5.03 in that in High Wycombe between 31 March 1989 and 14 June 1991 it failed to give notice to its Bank that all money standing to the credit of its Investment Business Client Bank Account was to be held by the firm as a trustee or agent within the terms of the regulation was reprimanded, fined £l, 000 and ordered to pay £250 by way of costs.
15.
(FCA)of  who had been found to be in breach of Bye-law 76(a) and liable to disciplinary action under Bye-law 76(a) (i) in that between 6 July 1983 and 9 September 1991 when joint liquidator of a limited company failed timeously to submit accounts to Companies House was reprimanded, fined £500 and ordered to pay £250 by way of costs.
16.
(FCA)of  who had been found to be in breach of Bye-law 76(a) and liable to disciplinary action under Bye-law 76(a) (i) in that at Ware between 30 April 1978 and 1 October 1984 his firm audited the accounts of a limited company when his wife held shares in that Company was reprimanded, fined £1,000 and ordered
ACCOUNTANCY BOOKS
Three new titles to look out for
Accountancy Books publishes more than 400 books covering key areas for the profession.
Among the titles to be published this autumn are:
Disciplinary Committee — 14 July 1992
Investigation Committee Consent Orders — 30 June 1992
Applying GAAP 1992/93: A Practical Guide to Financial Reporting D Chopping, Moore Stephens Price £29.95
Applying GAAP gives clear, practical and concise guidance on accounting standards.
It analyses the implications of the Companies Act 1989 and all accounting and financial reporting standards and exposure drafts issued by the Accounting Standards Board up to August 1992, including FRS 2.
Applying GAAP is a very practical guide, tackling each standard in a concise way and forming a complete reference source.
An ideal text for students.
The JMU Visit: Are You Ready?
R Kemp Price £15 (Special discount for JMU Visit course attendees — £7.50)
This booklet is a practical and concise guide to what to expect from a JMU visit and how to prepare.
The author, a former senior JMU inspector himself, explains what the procedures are and how they are likely to be carried out.
He covers how inspection visits are organised and conducted, the evidence the inspectors will be looking for to indicate quality control, the essential features of proper file maintenance and how to complete the pre-visit questionnaire.
Taxation of Specialised Occupations and Professions Grant Thornton Price £38.50
Now in its third edition, this text brings together in one volume the guide-lines for people in jobs with special tax problems.
It covers more than 30 professions including entertainers, barristers, doctors and dentists, farmers, hoteliers and MPs.
In addition the book gives guidance on special situations, for example people receiving gratuities, temporary visitors to the UK, hire purchase transactions and sub-contractors.
It also gives details of the latest relevant tax cases.
The third edition is completely up to date including the effects of the 1992 Finance Act and the Taxation of Chargeable Gains Act 1992.
All titles are available from Accountancy Books, PO Box 620, Central Milton Keynes, MK9 2JX.
Please send cheques with orders.
Credit card telephone orders can be made on 0908 668833.
For a copy of the latest publications catalogue, please call .
accounting
BANKS AND BUILDING SOCIETIES: COMING INTO LINE Building societies were at the forefront of financial sector reporting in 1987.
But since then the gap between them and the banks has narrowed a situation the building societies favour
Harry Venet
The combined impact of the 1986 Building Societies Act and the ensuing Building Societies (Accounts and Related Provisions) Regulations 1987 was widely regarded, at the time, as placing the standard of building societies' accounts firmly at the forefront of the financial services industry.
The introduction of summary financial statements ensured that building society members did not have to cope with extensive, detailed financial information that they did not want and could not be expected to understand.
And, for the first time, the full annual report offered the financially more sophisticated a wide-ranging analysis of results (given separately for the society and the group) and business activities that were not required of other institutions.
In the normal course of events, one would expect those high standards to suffice for more than five years; but these are not normal times.
In fact, the potential need to revise the 1987 regulations was identified even before they were published, as a result of the Bank Accounts Directive (86/635/EEC) which, in spite of its name, applies to all forms of credit institutions, including building societies.
The directive deals with the same matters with respect to credit institutions that the Fourth and Seventh Company Law Directives dealt with for the generality of companies.
The Fourth Directive (78/660/EEC), implemented by the Companies Act 1981, introduced rules governing the form and content of company accounts, the valuation methods to be used, and requirements for audit and publication.
The Seventh Directive (83/349/EEC), which dealt mainly with the requirement for parent undertakings to prepare consolidated accounts, was implemented by the Companies Act 1989.
The Building Societies Commission has always considered it desirable to develop disclosure requirements for building societies roughly in parallel with those for the rest of the banking sector.
Accordingly, the 1987 regulations picked up a large part of the requirements of the Bank Accounts Directive, but not all of them.
Full implementation was delayed until after the Companies Act 1989 had come into effect.
Full implementation of the directive, however, would not of itself meet all the accounting requirements of credit institutions.
Best practice is always a moving target, and in the six years since the directive was issued there have been a number of developments in domestic and international financial reporting that needed to be reflected by credit institutions.
However, the Department of Trade and Industry and the Building Societies Commission have accepted representations from the industry that additional disclosure requirements should be developed outside the statutory framework, through Statements of Recommended Practice.
These would be produced by the British Bankers Association and the Building Societies Association, though the DTI reserves the right to re-examine the legislative option if progress towards any particular SORP becomes unduly delayed.
Full implementation of the directive is required in respect of accounting periods ending on or after 31 December 1993, although the Commission has allowed societies with other accounting dates to change for their 1993 year ends if they so choose.
Whichever option societies take, comparative figures for the new disclosures will be required.
The new requirements are largely set out in the Building Societies (Accounts and Related Provisions) Regulations 1992, although where the change necessitated a change to the 1986 Act itself, that has been effected through the s 104 mechanism, which enables company law to be applied to building societies by Order.
The Order concerned (SI 1991 No 1729) replaces references to ‘subsidiary’ in Part VIII of the Act with ‘subsidiary undertaking’and deletes the sections (72(5) and (6)) that allowed societies' group accounts not to deal with subsidiaries in certain circumstances.
Both changes parallel changes made to companies legislation by the Companies Act 1989.
It is not practicable, here, to refer in detail to every change from the 1987 regulations to the 1992 regulations, whether or not occasioned by the requirements of the directive.
What I have tried to do is to highlight the changes of greatest significance to a wider audience; preparers and auditors of building society accounts will need to refer to the 1992 regulations themselves for a comprehensive assessment of all the changes.
Nor have I referred to the minor changes made to the 1987 regulations in 1990 and 1991, which have already been applied in the accounts of most societies and will be familiar to their preparers and auditors by now.
The largest single impact on the 1992 regulations arising out of the directive is the introduction of rules governing the preparation of consolidated accounts.
They are contained in the new Sch 4 to the 1992 regulations, ‘Form and content of the annual accounts of a group accounts society’, and they largely reflect existing accounting practice.
The rules contained in Sch 4 are based on the Seventh Company Law Directive.
In general they follow the requirements of company law (Sch 4A, Companies Act 1985, which was introduced by Sch 2, Companies Act 1989).
The following are the principal differences:
Relevant subsidiary undertakings joining the group are accounted for on the acquisition basis.
Merger accounting, where substantially the whole of the consideration takes the form of equity shares, would be unusual in a building society context.
There are no provisions by which unincorporated joint ventures may be dealt with in the accounts by proportional consolidation.
For building societies there are rules dealing with the translation of foreign currency amounts.
Any difference between the current year's translation of opening balances and the amounts dealt with in the previous year's consolidation may be taken to or from general reserve; income and expenditure accounts may be translated at average rates for the financial year.
Sch 6 to the 1992 regulations sets out the information in respect of associated bodies that must be included in the notes to societies' accounts.
Except for some irrelevant provisions, such as those relating to merger relief and intermediate holding companies, Sch 5 to the Companies Act has been followed almost exactly.
The most significant changes made to building societies' own accounts relate to the balance sheet and its two dominant asset groups — liquid assets and commercial assets.
The new disclosure requirements for liquid assets involve a revised balance sheet presentation as well as a change in the way the maturity analysis is presented in the notes.
In future, balance sheets will analyse liquid assets into cash in hand and balances with the Bank of England; Treasury bills and other eligible bills (distinguishing between the two); loans and advances to credit institutions; debt securities (issued by public bodies and by others); and other liquid assets.
This new analysis not only presents greater detail than before, it also reflects the more extensive investment powers now available to building societies than were available in 1987, when the old regulations were made.
The new maturity analysis of liquid assets requires separate disclosure for debt securities and loans and advances to credit institutions.
Debt securities are to be analysed into those due in not more than one year, between one and five years and over five years, with accrued interest shown separately.
Similar rules apply to loans and advances to credit institutions, with the additional categories of amounts payable on demand or at seven days' notice and those payable within three months, although here where amounts are repayable by instalments each instalment is to be treated as a separate amount.
Similar analyses are required under the 1992 regulations in respect of retail and non-retail funds, which is to be expected, but also in respect of commercial assets, which was less predictable and is a potential source of confusion and misunderstanding.
The term ‘commercial assets’ encompasses a wide range of asset categories, but by far the most significant element is represented by residential mortgages.
The great majority of these are likely to fall into the ‘over five years’ category, which will produce, prima facie, a stark mismatch when compared with retail liabilities repayable on demand.
Also, the need to treat each instalment as a separate amount for ageing purposes means that a great deal of care will need to be given to the analysis of repayment mortgages.
The maturity analysis of commercial assets is one of the disclosure changes brought about by the directive; another is the inclusion on the face of the balance sheet by way of memorandum of contingent liabilities and commitments.
For this purpose, ‘contingent liabilities’ includes all transactions guaranteeing, underwriting, or pledging assets as collateral security for, obligations of a third party and ‘commitments’includes every irrevocable commitment that would give rise to a credit risk.
These definitions are significantly more positive than those contained in the Companies Act 1985, and they make no allowance for the likelihood of the contingencies crystallising into actual liabilities; this is apparently in conflict with SSAP 18,Accounting for Contingencies , which requires remote contingencies to be excluded from accounts disclosures.
Disclosure is only one of the areas dealt with in the regulations; they also set out the principles and rules to be followed in preparing building societies' accounts.
The number of changes is too great to catalogue here, but one, in particular, is worthy of mention — liquid assets, which in some cases may be either fixed or current.
Readers will be familiar with the definition of a fixed asset as an asset intended for use on a continuing basis in the reporting entity's activities.
Securities held on that basis are described in the 1992 regulations as ‘financial fixed assets’.
Financial fixed assets of building societies are accounted for at maturity value, plus or minus any premium or discount on purchase, which is amortised systematically over the security's life.
Current asset investments are valued at the lower of cost and net realisable value, although for transferable securities held as current assets the higher of cost and market value may be adopted.
Provisions to take current assets to net realisable value must be written back to the extent that the reasons for making the provision no longer apply.
In commenting to its members on the distinction between fixed and current financial assets, the Building Societies Association has undertaken to consider guidance on the criteria they should apply.
It notes that it is possible to argue that societies' liquid assets are mostly fixed, mostly current or neither fixed nor current!
The guidance, when it appears, should make interesting reading.
The letter from the Commission that drew the 1992 regulations to the attention of chief executives highlighted one area where they were incomplete as soon as they were published.
Because building societies have a statutory responsibility to present statements of the source and application of funds, FRS 1,Cash Flow Statements , does not apply to them.
However, the Commission believes that it should, and proposes to make legislative changes (after ‘appropriate consultation’ with interested parties) in time for the 1 January 1993 implementation date.
On that topic, it is interesting to note that the 1992 regulations require societies to state in their accounts whether they have been prepared in accordance with applicable accounting standards.
However, the Accounting Standards Board technically has no legal standing with building societies, so which standards are ‘applicable’?
The answer is that they all are, because they apply to all financial statements intended to give a true and fair view, so they should be followed by societies.
I began by noting that in 1987 building societies were at the forefront of financial sector reporting, but the influence, in particular, of the EC has narrowed the gap over the past five years, so that the rules applicable to banks (The Companies Act 1985 (Bank Accounts) Regulations 1991) and building societies (the 1992 regulations) are now very much in line.
Building societies' responses to the consultation on the 1992 regulations tend to favour that situation, and so the two are likely to move forward in parallel for the foreseeable future.
Building societies: Accounting changes for liquid assets and commercial assets
THE NEW REGULATIONS
The new regulations for building society accounts take effect next year.
They have resulted from:
the EC Bank Accounts Directive;
accounting changes in the Companies Act 1989.
The principal changes include:
rules for preparing consolidated accounts;
maturity analyses of assets and liabilities;
the distinction between fixed and current liquid assets;
memoranda of contingencies and commitments on the face of the balance sheet.
restraints on competition
THE IMPORTANCE OF BEING REASONABLE No one wants departing employees to take the firm's best clients with them, but courts will not always uphold restraint clauses
Greville Janner
If you want to protect yourself, your company or your firm from unfair competition from departed colleagues or employees, the time to think about it is now, or, preferably, when they join you.
In brief, the rules are that departed colleagues or employees may compete against you from the day they go, directly or indirectly, locally or nationally, or as they see fit.
The exceptions are their use of a narrow category of supremely confidential information; and (much more likely and practical) where their contracts of employment contain enforceable restraint clauses.
In 1986 the Court of Appeal laid down the basic rules on competition by ex-employees in Faccenda Chicken Ltd v Fowler 1986 IRLR 69.
In a nutshell, there are three types of information:
Anything in the public sphere — published, for instance, in the press or in annual reports.
Anyone can make use of that as they see fit.
Highly confidential and sensitive matters — such as business plans, projections or formulae — which must not be used.
The rest is the information locked up in people's brains and which cannot be left behind.
This may be used, unless there is a valid, binding restraint clause — or ‘restrictive covenant’— in the employee's contract.
Note that the category of strictly sensitive information is, in practice, narrow and hard to establish, so if you want protection, you will need restraint clauses.
A restrictive clause will only be upheld if it is ‘reasonable’ from everyone's viewpoint.
This means that it must not be wider than is reasonably necessary for the protection of the employer's business; it must not place an unreasonable restraint on the employee's freedom to earn his or her living; and it must not be too wide from the public viewpoint.
Each covenant is looked at in the light of the people, the business or the profession and all the circumstances involved.
First, you look at time and area (or radius).
For instance, if yours is a worldwide practice, and the person leaving has contacts with clients in many countries, it may be reasonable for the clause to extend throughout the world.
It should also be reasonable for it to cover areas where your colleague has influence to attract clients away.
If, though, the practice is a local one, with clients in one city or county, then a clause extending beyond that area would almost certainly be declared void.
Again, a 12 month restraint on competition might be enforceable against a partner or a senior executive or even a top manager.
But it would probably be too long for someone further down.
If the restraint is confined to acting on behalf of people who were clients of your firm during the subsistence of the employment, it may be valid.
If it covers people who were clients before or who could become clients afterwards, it will be void.
So at one end of the scale, the courts upheld a restrictive covenant in the contract of an employee of an international armaments manufacturer called Maxim Nordenfeldt, which extended throughout the world for the whole of the man's life.
At the other end, a court refused to enforce a six-month restraint against a Mayfair hairdresser, extending for a radius of half a mile.
Clearly, this is not an area for do-it-yourself drafting.
Those of us who draft these clauses have to look at similar cases, to see which restraints the courts have upheld and which they have declared void.
Even then, there can be no certainty because no two situations are alike.
This uncertainty also affects tactics.
It is a mistake to put in a clause that you know will not be enforceable in the hope that employees will be afraid of it and will not try to compete when they leave.
When testing time arrives, you have a choice.
You either have to go to court knowing that you are likely to lose.
Or you take no action, in which case no one else will know that the clause is unenforceable.
My advice, then, is to make the clauses ultra reasonable — as defined as they can be, while still providing essential protection.
And employ experts to do the drafting.
There is an important, recent example.
In Office Angels Ltd v Rainer-Thomas , 1991 IRLR 214, the Court of Appeal held that restrictive covenants were void.
Office Angels is an employment agency.
Its rules prohibit an employee in one branch from soliciting clients in another branch's area.
The handbook includes terms that are incorporated into employees' contracts:
The employee would not, for six months after termination of employment, solicit custom from any person who may have been a company client during the employment.
Within six months after termination, the employee would not ‘engage in or undertake the trade or business of an employment agency’ in Greater London, within a 1km radius of his or her old branch.
Ms Rainer-Thomas and a colleague were employed in the City of London.
They left and helped to set up a competitive operation within the kilometre circle.
The Court of Appeal said that the court must look at the wording and surrounding circumstances to find out what interest the clause was intended to protect.
In this case, the purpose was to prevent ‘dealing with the clients of the company and to safeguard the company's goodwill’.
The risk addressed was that former employees might take advantage of contacts and influence over clients acquired during their employment, and divert business to themselves.
If the clause had been drafted in narrower terms, covering only clients of that branch, then, the judges said: ‘There is little doubt that it would have been valid.’
But it was ‘irredeemably too wide’, covering any client of the company, anywhere in the country — or, probably, in the world.
This left the restriction against engaging in or undertaking the trade or business of an employment agency within the kilometre circle, for six months.
This was ‘not reasonable in the interests of the party’, affording ‘no more adequate protection in respect of the client connection’.
It did not simply cover recruitment from within the circle.
If valid, said the court, the clause would have imposed ‘an important and onerous restriction’ on the defendants.
The clause was ‘wider than necessary for protection of that trade’.
It placed a disproportionately severe restriction on the defendant's right to compete after leaving the employment and went further than was reasonable in the interests of the parties.
Again, a professionally drafted clause was held unreasonable.
So what chance have accountants got of successfully drafting their own?
Answer: about as much chance as lawyers have in preparing adequate audit.
See the panel for best advice.
Greville Janner QC MP is a veteran member of the Select Committee on Employment, specialising in employment law.
Examine the employment contracts of relevant employees, considering whether the restraints clauses would be appropriate.
If there are none, employees may compete when they leave, as, when and how they see fit.
If you decide that a restraint clause would be appropriate do not try to draft it yourself.
The Office Angels case shows once again that your chances of doing so with success are minimal, which means:
referring the drafting to experts — your company lawyers or their advisers, and
applying precisely the same rules to your own contract.
BEST ADVICE
internal audit
BEST PRACTICE: A TECHNIQUE FOR REDUCING COSTS Building on multisite knowledge and experience of internal audit, the concept of best practice — learning from the experience of others — was developed at Lucas Automotive.
Its use has led to real benefits for the group
Jim Helliwell
The need for businesses to reduce costs has seldom been greater.
Pressed on the one hand by the forces of recession and on the other by increasing competition, no business can afford to ignore the need for yet another look at its operating cost base.
Lucas Automotive, the major sector in the Lucas Industries business, is addressing this need with a series of ‘best practice’ reviews across its European operations.
The results are sometimes surprising, occasionally dramatic, but always worthwhile.
The best practice approach adopted by Lucas Automotive is based on two simple premises: that in any activity carried out by two or more groups of people, one group will be better at it than the others; and that there will be real benefits to be achieved by the other groups learning from the experience of the ‘best’ group.
As an inhouse technique the best practice reviews are low cost, and the findings are readily acceptable since they derive from the way familiar colleagues in the same overall business carry out their tasks.
With approximately 20 major sites in Europe, the company is ideally placed to take advantage of a wide range of experience in its automotive component businesses.
A five-stage process
The best practice approach falls into five sequential stages: topic selection; enquiry and analysis; discussion; conclusions; and communication.
To justify a review, a topic must cover an activity common to most sites and incur sufficient costs to make the potential savings a worthwhile target.
As resources are limited, priorities for reviews must be established, and in fixing these there is inevitably, and correctly, an element of going for ‘soft’ targets — those where it is likely that significant benefits can most easily be achieved.
The objective is always the same, however, and this is to aim for a real, worthwhile improvement in bottom line performance.
Sometimes this may come from a reduction in the number of people needed to carry out a particular task.
Just as often, however, it may come from other benefits, such as lower working capital or reduced energy consumption.
Most of the early topics for review, such as debtor management, payment systems and self-billing, were selected by head office, but as confidence in the technique has grown, suggestions for further reviews have increasingly come from individual sites; programme and project management and risk evaluation in project appraisals are examples.
Enquiry and analysis
The key to success in the best practice approach is the involvement, and subsequently the commitment, of as many people as possible.
No analysis is begun, therefore, before a substantial amount of preliminary enquiry and discussion has taken place with those having ‘hands on’ involvement in the activity to be studied.
Apart from the obvious benefits of this wider involvement the initial enquiries ensure that the questions on which the analysis will subsequently be based are realistic and important to the activity to be reviewed.
The analysis stage is invariably carried out on the basis of written responses to a questionnaire.
To an extent, the questionnaire approach can be sterile and impersonal, but questions are only included after a good deal of face to face discussion.
The approach has a number of important advantages:
a standard format ensures that each site responds to precisely the same questions;
respondents are able to assemble the information at a time convenient to them;
the analysis of the responses is simplified as they are (generally) entirely uniform.
Considerable care has to be taken in the preparation of each questionnaire.
A ‘dummy run’ with at least one site is a useful precaution against pitfalls and misunderstandings.
Generally, questions are worded so that a simple ‘yes’ or ‘no’, or a tick, is all that is required.
Some statistical data is always included and, again, care is needed to avoid any ambiguity.
Analysing the returned questionnaires, while critical to the success of the whole approach, is invariably the easiest and quickest part of each review.
This is because it is essentially a desk exercise requiring no more than a summation of information provided against a standard requirement.
By the time the enquiry and analysis stage is concluded, relatively clear views are formed as to where best practice exists.
No firm conclusions are drawn, however, before going through the succeeding ‘discussion’ stage.
Discussion
As the widest possible involvement is the key to the success of the whole best practice review technique, the interim findings are thoroughly discussed with two or three managers who have the necessary practical experience of the activity being studied before any final conclusions and recommendations are published.
Generally it is helpful to carry out these discussions with managers from sites who have been shown to be performing well (at least above average) in the relevant activity.
Throughout the discussions information provided by the other sites is kept confidential.
Maintaining confidentiality does not detract, however, from the inevitable effect of ‘peer pressure’ on the below-average performers once the conclusions have been published and the ‘best’standards quantified.
Invariably, the discussions that follow the analysis confirm the preliminary findings.
Frequently, however, they also highlight aspects or draw attention to important details that might otherwise be missed.
Experience has also shown the discussion stage to be an important part of the ‘gaining of commitment’ objective.
Even without this, it would be a very necessary routine as a means of adding a broader dimension to the findings leading to the subsequently confirmed conclusions.
The conclusions
Few exercises or investigations are of value unless they reach a clear conclusion and best practice reviews are no exception.
Three important aspects of the published conclusions are that:
they should not be too long — two pages at most;
they should include a defined level of performance (based, of course, on actual experience);
they should include the key elements that are perceived to be important in achieving the identified and attainable level of ‘best’ performance.
Lucas's published conclusion (see panel) followed the review of payment and payroll systems and to a large extent this set the pattern for all future best practice documents.
The preparation of such a document is always time consuming.
It is never completed without considerable discussion and several rewrites.
In the end, it is this concise statement more than any other that will set the direction, and probably the pace, for improvement across all sites as they seek to attain a level of performance that has been demonstrated as fully attainable elsewhere in the same company.
Communication
Communicating the conclusions of best practice reviews is an activity that might well benefit from a best practice review itself.
The objective is simple — to ensure that others learn from the experience of the identified ‘best’ and raise their own level of performance to that which has been shown to be attainable.
The reality is something much more difficult.
Initially, a straightforward written communication was used — a best practice write-up.
As experience grew this was followed in selected cases with workshops at which key managers and staff discussed the findings and prepared their own action plans.
The full value of such workshops has yet to be confirmed but there is no doubt that they represent a valuable communication tool.
In addition, a manual is prepared, summarising the conclusions of the reviews carried out to date and to which the conclusions of future reviews will be added.
It is likely, however, that the most potent and effective form of communication will prove to be personal contact — through seminars, workshops, site visits and perhaps through short-term secondments that will feed proven experience from ‘best’ sites to others where there is scope for improvement.
The search for best practice in communications is continuing and all options, including in-company videos, remain open.
Quantifying savings
An essential part of the final communication, whatever form it takes, is the quantification of savings.
This is important to individual sites so that they can make their own assessment of the value to them of adopting what has been identified as best practice elsewhere.
To the centre it is important as an overall measure of the value of the best practice approach.
Typical potential savings have been 5% on debtor levels, 2% on energy costs and 25% on payroll preparation.
Monetary values depend on the size of the organisation but for a company the size of Lucas Automotive the potential savings from each review have generally run into hundreds of thousands of pounds.
Continuous improvement
Based on the experience to date some clear conclusions can be drawn from the best practice approach:
there is always scope for improvement in any activity;
many improvements will not be instantly achievable — most will take time and some will take quite a lot of time;
the inhouse best practice technique represents a valid, low-cost approach for identifying what can be achieved and the key elements needed for better performance;
the savings achievable (better bottom line performance) vastly outweigh the modest cost of undertaking the reviews;
the recommendations have been shown to be readily accepted both by line and functional management;
very often the reviews will identify ‘best people’ as well as best practice.
This last finding was one that became apparent very early on in the reviews.
The difference in levels of achievement between highly able and well-motivated staff and those with lesser ability and motivation, albeit with everyone working to common systems and uniformly defined routines, can be remarkable.
There is a very clear pointer here for a change in emphasis from systems development towards people development if the necessary higher standards are to be achieved — but this is another subject.
The benefits to be derived from the best practice technique are not in doubt, but it will take time for the full bottom line effect to flow through.
Equally important, however, is the acknowledgement that whatever is best practice today will almost certainly not be tomorrow.
Very substantial improvements have been identified and are being realised but nothing stands still.
If there is one overriding message that has been reinforced by the experience so far it is that the most productive approach is one that flows from an attitude of, and a commitment to, continuous improvement.
What began as a means of seeing how things might be done better is now a philosophy of ensuring that things go on being done better towards a goal which will be forever just over the horizon.
Lucas's Epic: Electronic diesel engine management system for commercial vehicles
PAYROLL SYSTEMS
A site that has adopted a state of the art approach to its payroll systems will have:
simplified the systems as far as possible
eliminated all full-time pre-payroll clerical activities
implemented automated clocking and time recording systems
converted all employees to payment by bank transfer
adopted a policy of continuous improvement
achieved a level of efficiency within the following range: