

Live dangerously, be an auditor
There used to be a rather cosy assumption among audit firms that they would never actually go bust.
Although for some years now people have been suing them for outrageous sums well beyond any amount that could ever be insured, when it came to the crunch litigants always settled out of court for a far lower figure.
Occasionally the partners would have to make a contribution to the settlement, but never such as to seriously damage their personal wealth.
Times have changed and the world has grown colder and nastier.
When the US firm of Laventhol & Horwath folded in the face of a mass of litigation, the court required its partners to find $40m of their own money to help pay the creditors, and some of the partners have gone bankrupt.
There are plenty of reasons why such a result is less likely in the UK than in the US, none why it is impossible.
Successful litigants who are vindictive, or excessively conscientious, or who fear that they will be liable to litigation themselves if they fail to extract everything possible from a claim, might well pursue the individual partners for their assets.
Before Laventhol & Horwath, people said that it would never happen; now they know that it can.
Yet few audit firms have chosen to protect themselves by becoming limited companies, an option that has been open to them since October last year.
There are various reasons for this.
There are tax disadvantages in incorporation (although A Simpler System for Taxing the Self-employed may reduce them in due course).
Profits would have to be disclosed.
People like the culture of partnership.
Incorporation would not prevent the firm from being wiped out, only its owners.
Individuals who could be held responsible for the negligence in question (for example, if it were an audit, those who were in charge of it, and perhaps the head of the audit function in the firm, and even its managing director) might still be sued individually (managing partners may feel as a result that they personally would have little to gain from incorporation).
On the other hand, the assets of the remaining 30 or 300 former partners would be protected; their stake in the firm might disappear of course, but not their home.
One would have thought that if firms of auditors were as worried by the threat of litigation as they sometimes suggest, then they would at least have availed themselves of this elementary safeguard.
But none of the larger firms has done so yet, so the obvious conclusion to be drawn is that either they prefer to live dangerously or they still don't believe that anyone would actually go after them for their personal assets.
Let's hope they've got it right.
technical summary
Accounting records guidance
The Institute's Technical Department has published a booklet on Accounting Records and the Smaller Company , price £2 (p 97).
Accounting for bank advances
The British Bankers' Association has published a Statement of Recommended Accounting Practice on accounting for advances.
The SORP, which the Accounting Standards Board has approved, applies to financial years beginning on or after 23 December 1992 (p 97).
Pension law review consultation
The Pension Law Review Committee has published a consultation document,The Law and Regulation of Occupational Pensions .
Comments are requested by 15 December (p 98).
Model form for s 212 investigations
The Department of Trade and Industry's Companies Division has come up with a new model form, intended to help companies to investigate ownership of their shares under s 212 of the Companies Act 1985 (p 100).
Summary financial statements
Public companies will be able to offer debenture and stockholders the option to receive summary financial statements, if draft regulations, contained in a recently published Department of Trade and Industry consultation document, get the go-ahead (p 100).
Payments to accountants
It has been held that payments to a bankrupt's accountants were not a preference under s 340 of the Insolvency Act 1986 (p 101).
Unauthorised access to a computer
The Court of Appeal has held that an offence can be committed under the Computer Misuse Act 1990 by the unauthorised use of one computer.
It had previously been held in a lower court that a second computer had to be involved (p 101).
Maternity leave: right to return
The Employment Appeal Tribunal has held that a woman who is entitled to return to work, but is made redundant while still on maternity leave, is to be regarded as unfairly dismissed if the employer does not offer a suitable alternative vacancy or prove that no such vacancy exists.
Also, an employer must establish a method of selection for redundancy which is fair and which is applied reasonably in the case of each individual employee (p 102).
Managing director not an employee
The Employment Appeal Tribunal has decided that a managing director was not an employee of his company and therefore not entitled to a redundancy payment from the Department of Employment when the company became insolvent.
The managing director did not have a written contract of employment or other documentation recording any agreement or contract between him and the company (p 104).
New health and safety rules
The Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations 1992, which will come into effect on 1 January 1993, have been laid before Parliament.
Employers will have to assess health and safety risks to employees and others who may be affected and arrange for the implementation of measures identified by the risk assessment (p 104).
Ex gratia payments on termination of employment
The Inland Revenue has stated that it is not possible to set hard and fast rules to determine whether an ex gratia payment made to an employee who intends to seek further employment will be treated as made in connection with retirement (p 105).
Allocation of married couple's allowance
Married couples may now apply to have either the whole or half of their 1993/94 married couple's allowance allocated to the wife (p 105).
Rollover relief in groups continued
For the time being, rollover relief may still be obtained by one trading company in a group, even when the replacement asset is acquired by another trading member of the same group (p 105)
Discounts on training reminder
The Inland Revenue has issued a reminder that UK resident trainees may deduct basic rate tax of 25% from fees paid for study, examination or assessment, excluding the cost of books and equipment.
The training organisation will then be able to recover the tax from the Revenue (p 105).
Pension business tax repayments
Regulations effecting provisional repayments of tax to insurance companies have been laid before the House of Commons (p 105).
Public revenue dividends: late payment of tax
From 14 November, anyone liable to basic rate income tax on paying public revenue dividends, foreign dividends, or proceeds of coupons, will be subject to interest charges if the tax is paid late (p 106).
All Star Fuel Card: NI contributions
PHH AllStar Ltd are advising people who used an All Star Fuel Card to purchase private fuel during the 1989/90 tax year not to pay National Insurance contributions on it until a test case which PHH is currently bringing against the Department of Social Security is decided (p 106).
New Customs warehouse facility
HM Customs & Excise have announced the introduction of a new warehouse facility from 1 January 1993.
From that date, warehousing will be available for imports of non-Community goods which are liable only to import VAT (p 108).
letters
Channel 7's sales pitch
Sir,— I was interested in your article about Channel 7 (see ACCOUNTANCY , October, p 17).
A representative from Channel 7 visited this office in September with the same story as your article described, following a very aggressive sales pitch during a telephone call the previous week from the UK.
The Channel 7 man claimed he had received clearance from the German Wirtschaftspruferkammer allowing member firms to advertise their services outside Germany (it is forbidden in Germany) but that unfortunately he did not have a copy with him.
We insisted on seeing this letter and have never heard from him since.
Enquiries through other sources in the UK encouraged us to ignore the issue.
Tax exams: IoT replies
Sir,— I am grateful to you for having given me a right of reply to the article which appeared on p 20 of the October issue of ACCOUNTANCY ,IoT campaigns for rejection .
The Institute of Taxation does not seek to interfere in the internal operations of the Tax Faculty, and it is wrong of Peter Wyman to suggest the contrary.
Indeed, to the extent that the Faculty raises standards of knowledge amongst chartered accountants who practise taxation, its advent is to be positively welcomed.
The IoT Council is firmly of the view that self-regulation of the tax profession is in the best interests of practitioners and the public.
To ensure that this objective is maintained, it is essential that the highest levels of technical and ethical standards are set and monitored by the professional bodies.
Unseemly, internecine brawls, however, will be more likely to result in some form of state regulation.
I found it disappointing, therefore, that your article omitted to mention the significant degree of cooperation that exists between the IoT and the Faculty.
Both are members of the Special Committee of Tax Law Consultative Bodies, the two organisations combined to produce joint ethical guidelines for practitioners on dealings with the Inland Revenue, and working parties of both bodies are currently engaged on formulating common ethical guidance for members in relation to indirect tax matters.
You will be aware that the IoT and the Faculty have jointly promoted the ‘Pay and File Roadshow’.
The IoT would welcome continued cooperation.
It is only over the question of Faculty examinations and the associated ‘grandfathering’ provisions that there is a material divergence of views between the two bodies.
We consider the proposal to introduce Faculty examinations to be unnecessary and unhelpful to the profession as a whole for a number of reasons.
Faculty examinations are unnecessary because there already exists a suitable alternative in the form of the IoT examination.
Indeed, the Consultative Paper, para 9, states that ‘…it is envisaged that successful candidates will have demonstrated a knowledge of taxation at least equal to that required to pass the Associate examination of the IoT…
’ The IoT examination is widely accepted as being of a uniquely high standard, and the revised syllabus for 1994, incorporating a new paper on Tax Ethics and Administration, will ensure that the IoT examination retains its relevance for the future.
The revised syllabus was devised after wide consultations with the profession, including major employers of tax professionals.
Faculty examinations are also unnecessary because they will add greatly to training and development costs.
The tutorial bodies will have to gear themselves to cater for two sets of examinations at different times.
The result would be higher costs for students (and their employers) than if there were only one set of examinations.
I must correct one statement attributed in the article to Mr Wyman.
It was not the Faculty that offered to cooperate with the IoT over examinations, but the IoT which made the offer to the Faculty.
I can repeat that the IoT would be very happy for the Faculty to treat the IoT examination as the necessary qualification for its members to become Faculty Fellows.
Chartered accountants who passed the IoT examination would be entitled to join the Faculty, or the IoT, or both.
Personally, I would hope they would do both.
Finally, Faculty examinations are unnecessary because they would create confusion in the minds of the general public and fragment the tax profession, at a time when there is a premium on cooperation.
By the time this letter is published, the Faculty examination consultation period will have expired.
I hope that, whatever the outcome, Peter and his colleagues will have ceased to regard the IoT as an ‘enemy’, and recognise the merit in what we have been saying and abandon the separate examination proposal.
He might, at that stage, even persuade me to join!
Lamentable lack of grace
Sir,— Your correspondent, R W Christopher in the October issue (see p 7), highlights the lamentable spread to Companies House of the sort of bureaucratic nonsense emanating from Brussels.
The English language has long been quite clear and readily understood: ‘10 months after’ means exactly that, ie 10 calendar months.
The attempt to hound companies over a debatable interpretation of one day's delay shows a particularly nasty form of small-mindedness.
Companies House relies heavily on the cooperation of accountants to achieve its admirable objective of prompt filing of accounts.
This is not the way to maintain it in what is for many accountants a difficult transitional period.
Whatever happened to days of grace?
Drop this dreadful jargon
Sir,— I note we now have a ‘mission’(Institute Manifesto to Members ).
Please, dear Institute, can we drop this dreadful jargon.
I appreciate that our bigger firms have caught this from the US but, be bold, resist!
The Oxford dictionary gives minimal comfort for using the word in this manner and it surely strikes the UK ear as pompous or worse, over-zealous.
I confidently predict that ‘mission’ will not survive three years in our general business parlance, so please throw it out now.
Call for fresh air, not tea…
Sir,— My first reaction on reading the reader's question, ‘No tea with the taxman’(ACCOUNTANCY , October, p 80), was one of hilarity that a member should feel it necessary to complain that for a meeting lasting as long as‘about two hours’ the member and client were not offered refreshments.
But then I wondered.
The letter even speaks of their ‘rights in the matter’, and it is perhaps  surprising that the question was not asked whether there was a case for complaint to the European Court of Justice.
Is there really any difference between the question raised by your reader, and the seriousness of the reply, and the work attitudes still prevalent in the UK?
These are perhaps best illustrated by the workmen who, for example, seem to be incapable of doing anything without 20-minute tea breaks, management which seems uninterested in providing proper supervision, or boards which seem more interested in finding ways of jacking up their remuneration package irrespective of performance, or complaining to Government about interest rates, rather than wondering why they are not making some of the flood of goods which our continental competitors find it profitable to sell to the UK.
It is these attitudes which reflect the fundamental problem with the UK economy, and I think your questioner should have received short shrift to say the least.
We might all benefit from a little more of the fresh air and work ethics which one so commonly finds in North American and continental business circles.
…answered by the taxman
Sir,— In your October issue (Readers Ask, p 80) there appeared an enquiry from a colleague regarding refreshments at meetings in the Tax Office.
Your readers may be amused by an incident in which I have been involved.
The inspector of taxes wished to hold a meeting with my clients who were reluctant to attend the Tax Office for this purpose.
I suggested the comfort and hospitality of a meeting room in my offices.
Rather than concede a point to me, the inspector insisted that the meeting be held, in true spy novel fashion, in the open air.
When next you see, in the chill autumn air, surrounded by swirling mists, a small group huddled in deep conversation on the third park bench to the left of the children's railway in your local park, do remember it is probably an ‘in-depth’ interview with a taxpayer.
In the meantime, I am off to find a loose brick in the local bandstand as a suitable ‘post box’ to match the latest Revenue regime in my area.
The woes of Gaynor Harris
Sir,— I read the article in the October issue,When growth and stability turned to disaster (see p 26), with a good deal of interest having worked with a professional firm in the Isle of Wight in the fifties, and knowing something of the type of clientele referred to.
The expectations of chartered accountants working in a location such as this have certainly changed since then if Ms Harris' ideas are to be given any credence — I am sure Charles Bullworthy will remember the fifties well.
The whole episode illustrates the problems facing businesses caused by over-extending themselves and living beyond their means — there was little substance to the so-called boom of the 80s and we are paying for it today.
Ms Harris ought to have been preaching this to her clients and taking note of it herself.
IVA seems to be an unacceptable way of avoiding genuine creditors and not an option to be taken by professionals.
Having read the article I turned to p 110,Report of the Disciplinary Committee,and wondered about the double standards which seem to exist in every walk of life today.
Remote control audit
Sir,— I read with interest the letter in your October issue (see p 97) from an accountant finding that auditors can prepare audited accounts without visiting the company's premises.
I qualified with one of the then Big Eight, but subsequently joined a smaller practice where the only difference between audit and accounts preparation work was the size of the fee.
Not only was it rare to visit clients' premises, but the ‘audited’ accounts produced usually contained an amount for stock which was simply plucked out of the air by the client.
No breakdown of the figure was ever supplied, let alone actually attending the stocktake or checking the valuation.
Not wishing to compromise my own standards, I left this firm very quickly.
I am sure that the majority of small firms do carry out proper audits, but equally, I suspect that such low standards are more common than we like to think.
Piper's pre-eminence
Sir,— Contrary to your assertion (see ACCOUNTANCY , October, p 14) that ‘When the Scottish Institute employed Charlie Clark…it had no idea what a talent it had acquired,’ we certainly knew of Charlie's pre-eminence as a piper.
Indeed in 1984 he presented to the president a pipe-march he had composed with the ringing title of The Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland .
The Institute then went on to recruit a piper and drummer also from the Royal Scots to assist in its property management, giving rise to rumours that a second battalion was covertly being raised in Edinburgh.
With the passage of time, I think that it can now safely be revealed that the deciding factor in the failure of the 1989 English/Scottish Institutional merger was the marked reluctance of the Queen Street pipes and drums to convert to Morris-men.
What a relief
Sir,— Surely the most momentous legal opinion of this decade — nay, this century — was that of the VAT Tribunal (Dr Auto Repair: LON/92/220Y) which held that ‘…no accountant is expected to be omniscient’!
president's page
Ethics: a year of progress
Our profession's reputation depends in part on our commitment to maintaining and, where necessary, raising ethical standards.
Our success in this respect depends on three interlocking elements.
First, there must be a continuing and lively debate on ethical matters to ensure that ethical guidance is kept up-to-date.
This is critical for all our members.
But it is particularly true of the world of the practising accountant, where the services clients demand, and the pressures and expectations of the public, are constantly changing.
Representatives of outside organisations must be closely involved in that debate to help ensure that serious regard is paid to the long-term public interest when changes to ethical guidance are considered.
Second, there must be a facility whereby members of the profession can establish the acceptability of their behaviour before they embark on it — let us call it ‘ethical support’.
And finally, there must be effective enforcement, which requires both monitoring activity to ‘throw up’ failures by members to maintain the ethical high ground, and effective discipline of those failures in all cases where that is appropriate.
I have referred to enforcement more than once already since I became president, and I should like to leave the Institute's ethical support services for another occasion.
However, with the recent completion of the first year of the Chartered Accountants Joint Ethics Committee (CAJEC), this is an appropriate time to consider the first of those three elements — the need for continuing debate inside and outside the profession.
CAJEC came into being officially on 1 July 1991.
Its first major achievement was the launch of a substantially revised Guide to Professional Ethics, in February of this year.
That was not, of course, achieved in six or seven months: the beginnings of the process go back several years, when our ‘old’ domestic Ethics Committee set up, in conjunction with the other Institutes, a joint Working Party on Independence and the Audit.
What has happened in the intervening period has been a progressive drawing-together of the ethical activities and interests of ourselves, ICAS and ICAI.
Its culmination is the Joint Committee, as a result of which the three UK and Irish Institutes now speak with one voice on ethical issues.
That has to be to the long-term benefit of the profession and of the wider community.
Even before the new Guide had been issued, CAJEC announced that it was setting up a Standard Review Group to monitor continuously the need for new ethical guidance.
In particular, the Group suggested that guidance on the subjects of specialist valuations (when carried out by audit firms) and opinion shopping was needed.
Exposure drafts of ethical guidance on those topics have just been the subject of extensive consultation.
The consultation process now extends, as a matter of policy, to interested parties outside the profession — users, other regulators, and consumer organisations, for example.
As a result, the standard CAJEC consultation list now includes more than 300 consultees.
The purpose behind external consultation is twofold: first, the profession benefits from a breadth of viewpoint and expertise which would otherwise be missing.
Second, the guidance, when it is issued, can demonstrate a mandate from the public as well as the profession.
It would be wrong for me to anticipate what the final conclusions of CAJEC, and the Councils of the Institutes (which will ultimately have to make the decision on the current ‘hot’ topics) will be.
It is, however, fair to say that the possible restrictions proposed in the consultation paper on a firm's provision of specialist valuations (brand valuations, for instance) to audit clients provide a clear illustration of the approach to ethics the Institutes must maintain.
If, after proper analysis and consultation on the long-term benefits and implications of a new piece of guidance, they decide on a policy which restricts some members' ability to earn fees in the short term, then that is part of the price of being a profession.
Opinion shopping arises when a firm's opinion is sought, by an organisation which is not an existing audit client, on the accounting treatments appropriate to its particular circumstances.
These are matters about which the auditors will ultimately have to reach a decision.
The rationale behind the exposure draft is that the auditors may be improperly pressurised into adopting the opinion the outside firm has given, and that this opinion may have been given with inadequate knowledge of the circumstances.
CAJEC already has a number of other controversial topics on its ‘active list’.
The Standing Review Group has identified additional areas for study, from the point of view of possibly developing new guidance or revising existing guidance.
This has resulted in a work programme which will occupy the Committee through into mid-1993, at least.
It includes the following subjects:
predatory pricing (often referred to as ‘low-balling’);
in the light of the Cadbury Report, the implications of an auditor's reporting on system design/implementation by his or her firm, and the desirability of rotation of audit partners;
the implications of former partners' joining audit client companies;
revision of the existing guidance on Changes in a Professional Appointment;
jointly with the Institute's Tax Faculty, guidance on the ethical aspects of taxation work.
In addition, a joint consultation exercise with the Ethics Committee of the Society of Practitioners of Insolvency on a revised insolvency statement is well under way .
I should like to congratulate CAJEC's first chairman, Jock Worsley, and his team on a job well begun, and to wish them continuing success in the future — in the mutual interest of the profession and the public it serves.
news
JORDAN AND STONE
Small fine was inevitable
The £1,000 fine the Institute's Disciplinary Committee levied on Michael Jordan, senior partner of Cork Gully, and Richard Stone, head of corporate finance at Coopers & Lybrand, was the maximum allowed under the Committee's byelaws.
The Committee decided that the two had breached Institute byelaws when, in October 1990, they accepted the appointment as administrators to the collapsed Polly Peck International, in spite of a ‘continuing professional relationship’ between PPI's chairman, Asil Nadir, and Coopers.
The Committee stressed that neither Mr Jordan nor Mr Stone ‘intentionally failed to ascertain’ Coopers' prior connections with Polly Peck.
Both consistently denied that they had any case to answer.
Mr Jordan and Mr Stone have until 12 November to register an appeal, which would be heard by a committee chaired by a Lord Justice of Appeal.
The announcement attracted criticism that the punishment was too lenient when compared with the amount of fees accountancy firms pull in from insolvency work.
But as Brian Harris, the Institute's director of Professional Conduct, pointed out, the Disciplinary Committee had its hands tied because the transgression took place before a resolution raising the ceiling on fines took effect.
‘At the time the conduct in question occurred, the fines were limited to £1,000,’ he said.
‘Cases relating to conduct occurring since December 1990 can attract unlimited fines.
The amounts were changed because of the absurdity of the amount.’
Institute Council member Douglas Llambias said the fine ‘was out of all proportion to a guilty verdict’, and added that if the fines were capped, ‘we should have been publicising that for the last 12 months.
This has placed the Institute in the position of being seen by the majority of its members and the public as inept’.
The Disciplinary Committee does, however, have the power to withdraw practising certificates, which on this occasion it decided not to do.
More importantly, the pair's insolvency licences could come under review, since any case coming before the Disciplinary Committee involving insolvency practitioners is automatically referred to the Insolvency Licensing Committee, which has the power to withdraw licences.
The Committee will not begin to look into this case until any possible appeal has been resolved.
FINANCIAL REPORTING REVIEW PANEL
Trafalgar House yields on restatement
A practical testing of Professor David Tweedie's long-held wish for a ‘hanging case’ for the Financial Reporting Review Panel was frustrated at the last minute when Trafalgar House backed down and agreed to restate its 1991 figures in its next published accounts.
The Review Panel had been considering Trafalgar's accounts for the year to 30 September 1991 since February, but the company had consistently refused to capitulate.
Trafalgar eventually gave in when the Panel threatened to take up its option to apply to the courts for an order under the 1985 Companies Act, which might have forced the company directors to pay for the production of revised accounts themselves.
Trafalgar's 1991 accounts caused comment as soon as they were published earlier this year (see ACCOUNTANCY , February, p 38).
The Financial Times commented that the accounts ‘perhaps demonstrate why the remuneration of its auditors jumped 20% this year’.
The main point that the Review Panel took issue with was Trafalgar's decision to revalue and transfer a number of commercial properties from developments for sale, part of current assets, to tangible fixed assets.
The revaluation resulted in a £68m write-down of wholly-owned properties and a £34.7m write-down of property associates', both written off directly against a revaluation reserve of only £84m.
In his statement, Trafalgar's chief executive Sir Eric Parker FCA said that ‘in view of the state of the commercial property market, we decided at the beginning of the year to retain certain properties rather than selling high quality assets at unattractive prices’.
The properties were previously shown at the lower of cost and net realisable value, as required by the Companies Act.
Keeping them in current assets would have resulted in any write-down on revaluation passing through the p&l account.
The total write-down on £102.7m would have seriously dented Trafalgar's £122.4m of pre-tax profits for 1991.
In July, the Urgent Issues Task Force released a consensus clarifying the treatment of transfers from current assets to fixed assets.
‘Of particular concern,’ said the UITF in its abstract, ‘is the possibility that companies could avoid charging the p&l account with write-downs to net realisable value arising on unsold trading assets.’
Although the UITF consensus was undoubtedly triggered by Trafalgar's accounts, it comes into effect for accounting periods ending on or after 23 December, and so, technically, Trafalgar did not breach it.
It is thought that the Panel considered that the accounts breached the true and fair spirit of the Companies Act, rather than a specific rule.
Trafalgar resisted restating the accounts since it did not believe it had done anything wrong.
The Panel also questioned the amount of Advanced Corporation Tax carried forward in Trafalgar's balance sheet, and a number of other areas, including disclosures relating to Trafalgar's 40% ownership in BREL Group and whether Trafalgar complied with the statutory format required for the p&l account.
After taking independent legal and accounting advice, the Trafalgar directors refused to accept the Panel's view on the two key issues — the transfer of assets and the treatment of ACT — but in the face of a threat of legal action, the Panel announced that ‘the directors have undertaken to make the appropriate changes and adjustments in the 1992 accounts to meet the Panel's concerns’.
As a result of the adjustments, Trafalgar says the 1991 comparative figures will show a £102.7m deficit on revaluation of properties as a charge to the p&l account.
Its policy on ACT will also be revised, which is expected to show a £20m increase in its 1991 tax charge and an increase in the write-off in the 1992 accounts.
The affair illustrates the powerful effect the Panel's legal clout has on companies — the threat of bad publicity is enough, irrespective of whether the company thinks it has a good case or not.
Fortunately, the Panel did not have to test its theory in court this time, although Review Panel secretary Sydney Treadgold told ACCOUNTANCY that ‘we were prepared to go if necessary’.
He added that, as Panel procedures dictate, Trafalgar's auditors, Touche Ross, have been reported to the appropriate regulatory body, since the accounts were unqualified.
Sir Eric: Under fire
AUDITING
Expectation gap can be bridged
The profession will have to take positive steps if it is to make any progress in bridging the expectation gap.
It must not rely on its long established and unsuccessful policy of educating the public about the true nature of the auditors' duties.
It will have to embrace the role of detecting fraud, widen its responsibilities beyond the shareholders as a group, and spin off its audit regulatory role to an independent agency.
These are the controversial conclusions of a report,The Audit Expectations Gap in the United Kingdom , written by academics Christopher Humphrey, Peter Moizer and Stuart Turley, and published by the Institute's Research Board.
‘The historical resistance of the expectations gap,’ it says, ‘points to something more than just an ‘ignorance'’gap and suggests there exists scope for the profession to respond more actively to the views and demands of those relying on the audit function.’
Restricting auditors' responsibilities just to shareholders, it says, inadequately reflects the wider role of audited financial statements and brings into question the need for a statutory audit.
Auditors should be responsible to a wider audience, including potential shareholders and existing and potential creditors.
Auditors should recognise the public's ‘enduring’ expectation that they should detect material fraud and accept the role, it says.
‘It is very difficult to see that the public can be educated to accept anything less than the fact that if there is a fraud present in an organisation which prevents the financial statements from showing a true and fair view, then it is up to the auditors to find it.’
Finally, the report suggests the creation of an independent regulatory agency to oversee the appointment, fee determination and practices of auditors of large companies.
The authors believe that a major reason for the public's perception that auditors lack independence is their ‘weak structural position’, and that the only way to overcome this is for audit regulation to be taken away from the profession.
This ‘office for auditing’ could also open up audit practices to greater public scrutiny by monitoring their efficiency.
‘The existence of such a body is seen as giving more appropriate recognition to the commercial and practical realities of an auditing services market dominated by a small number of large accounting firms.’
ACCOUNTING
Radical approach to goodwill and intangibles
Intangibles — including internally generated brands — should be treated as assets and recognised in the balance sheet, provided that their existence and amount can be satisfactorily justified, according to a new report published by the Institute's Research Board.
The report,Goodwill and Other Intangibles , by academics John Arnold, Don Egginton, Linda Kirkham, Richard Macve and Ken Peasnell (see also ACCOUNTANCY , June, p 35), says that goodwill divides into three components: the fair value of separately identifiable intangible assets; the present value of benefits arising from jointness of activities and market imperfections (such as monopoly position and barriers to entry); and over- or underpayment.
Intangibles included in the first two components may be capitalised as assets, provided that the company's directors and auditors are satisfied that the amount at which they are capitalised is no greater than their recoverable amount.
They should then be amortised against profit over their useful economic life.
The third component should be written off against profit if it represents an overpayment or transferred to reserves if an underpayment.
In no circumstances, the report stresses, should any part of goodwill be written off against reserves.
The academics argue that, if intangibles are to be included in the balance sheet, companies will have to disclose more information to enable users to form judgments about the reliability of the valuations.
‘Our recommendations,’ they conclude, ‘should be seen as an integrated package.
We believe that they offer a way forward in the thorny debate about the accounting treatment of goodwill and other intangibles.’
No yuppie jazzdom here.
Habitues of the Institute's old restaurant are in for a big surprise.
As part of the deal with Prue Leith, it has had a major facelift.
Prepare yourself for a red, black and white decor, Caesar's heads all over the wall, a kinetic sunburst chandelier and a black and white sculpture.
According to Ms Leith, the designers have gone for a ‘serious and conventional restaurant’ look ‘which will not frighten members with too much yuppie jazzdom’, but which is also fun —‘witty, modern and stylish enough to encourage them to come’.
Reactions have been mixed, ranging from love it to loathe it.
Lord Mayor of London Sir Brian Jenkins (below with Ms Leith) seemed lost for words in trying to describe the sculpture…‘that extraordinary thing’…which now stands, he said, where former Institute secretary John Hough used to lunch.
But, he said, he'd enjoyed eating in the restaurant for the last 20 years and he was pleased to see it revived.
There is more consensus on the food, which is excellent.
And, as one cynic pointed out, ‘If you're running out of conversation, at least you can talk about the decor’!
For bookings, phone .
ACCOUNTING STANDARDS BOARD
All change for the p&l
Companies' p&l accounts will undergo a radical change over the next few months as the Accounting Standards Board's FRS 3, which deals with the structure and content of the p&l account, comes into effect.
The Standard is to be published imminently and is expected to apply to accounting periods ending on or after 23 June 1993, although earlier take-up will be encouraged.
The FRS is not expected to differ greatly from FRED 1,The Structure of Financial Statements — Reporting of Financial Performance (see ACCOUNTANCY , January, p 86), but the ASB is thought to have extended the options for including the breakdown into continuing and discontinued operations in the notes, rather than on the face of the p&l account.
As a result, the p&l account need not necessarily be multi-columned, an issue that drew a lot of comment and criticism when FRED 1 and its preceding discussion draft was released.
The revenue investment proposals, the area of biggest concern for commentators, were dropped from FRED 1 when it became clear that there was virtually no support for them — a watered-down version of the proposals subsequently appeared in a discussion draft, putting forward the ASB's suggestions for an Operating and Financial Review.
FRS 3 will also effectively kill off extraordinary items — the ASB is adamant that any geographical or political event happening within a company's environment should be counted as part of normal business risk — and reduce what ASB chairman David Tweedie has seen as the abuse of earnings per share.
THE FIRMS
The Big Six are here to stay
The Big Six are in an unassailable position and no new firm formed through mergers in the second tier will ever be able to catch up with them, according to former Arthur Andersen senior partner Ian Hay Davison.
Nor will the number shrink from six, because the recent megamergers have shown that, far from being a sensible move, such a regrouping reduces partnership profitability, clients are lost through conflicts of interest and economies of scale are not attained.
‘My conclusion,’ Mr Davison told his audience at the recent Irish Institute conference in Galway, ‘is that no rational person would contemplate a merger between the Big Six.’
Mr Davison's view of the unbridgeable gap between the Big Six and the second tier firms was based, he said, on three facts.
First, of the top 12 international firms' world audit market share, the Big Six now accounted for 87.7% and their share was growing.
In 1981 they audited 708 of the Times top 1,000; by 1991 this had gone up to 815.
Second, this situation was unlikely to reverse itself because of institutional investors' faith in the Big Six.
‘The public can't tell the Big Six apart.
You know perfectly well that your shares won't suffer whichever one you go to.
If you move elsewhere however, you would have to start explaining yourself.’
Third, he said, the Big Six have a substantial revenue advantage because they are much more profitable than second tier firms.
The average revenue per partner in a big firm is £960,000, while in a second tier firm it is £390,000.
The next 10 years, Mr Davison said, would see a steady but slower growth rate (around 1%) for the Big Six.
Competition would be fierce and the race for new clients, new products and new offices more desperate — he did not rule out the possibility that one of the Big Six would acquire a second tier firm.
Questions of office profitability would lead to greater centralisation, as firms such as KPMG and Touche recognise that it is more expensive to run their ‘franchise’ structures.
But none of them would be tempted to incorporate: capital is already available to them; incorporation would not give them protection from litigation; and, perhaps most importantly, they would lose their most precious asset — and their achilles heel — their privacy.
This might happen anyway since the biggest threat that the firms will face, Mr Davison predicted, is increasing Government interference.
OPENNESS
Council goes public for the first time
The Institute's Council held its first open meeting last month, in front of representatives from the national and accountancy press.
Open meetings were first suggested by a working party set up last year to discuss the introduction of a ‘sunshine policy’ at the Institute (see ACCOUNTANCY , February, p 13).
As the working party suggested, a section of the Council meeting dealing with private Institute business was held in closed session.
At the open meeting, Council reviewed the procedures for electing the Institute's vice-president, voting to allow canvassing by nominees but deciding that the names of nominators should not appear on the voting papers.
Council will decide at a later date whether to make public the number of votes cast.
The next vice-presidential elections will begin next month, with the result announced in March 1993.
Later on in the meeting, Council member David Lindsay called for a full report on Training Outside Public Practice, following his discovery that 62 of the 77 students currently training under TOPP are employed by the National Audit Office.
Mr Lindsay was worried that the lone TOPP students in some regional offices might feel isolated, and that many companies which initially showed enthusiasm for the idea have now cooled off.
WOMEN
Institute joins Opportunity 2000
The Institute has taken a leaf out of CIMA's book and joined Opportunity 2000, the business-led initiative launched by John Major, which aims to put more women into top management jobs by the beginning of the next century (see ACCOUNTANCY , December 1991, p 15).
It is currently drawing up the goals it intends to achieve, which, as an Opportunity 2000 signatory, it is required to announce publicly.
This will take place at a celebration breakfast for Opportunity 2000's first anniversary on 17 November at the Park Lane Hotel.
‘This is something that we should be doing both as an employer of a substantial number of people, and as a means of providing information to firms for them to consider for themselves whether or not they want to join Opportunity 2000, or whether they wish to pursue any of the initiatives outside it,’ Institute secretary Andrew Colquhoun told ACCOUNTANCY .
He pointed to the fact that in recent months the Institute itself had appointed two women, both chartered accountants and ‘from the ranks’ of Institute staff, to senior positions within the secretariat for the first time.
The lack of women at the top is borne out by the findings of the latest Arthur Andersen Corporate Register , published by Hemmington Scott.
A survey of the 2,000 or so companies quoted on The Stock Exchange, it showed that less than 5% of executive directors were women (428), and that the future did not look much better — when the numbers of men and women in management and on the board were added together, the ratio was one woman to every 35 men.
FEE INCOME
PW growth rate slows
Price Waterhouse's UK practice would have experienced a negative growth rate in fee income in the year to June 1992, if it had not been for the firm's corporate recovery arm.
An increase of 31% (to £40.1m) in fees for work in this area over the year — including the administration of the Maxwell Communication Corporation, and debt rescheduling for Heron Corporation and WPP — lifted PW's total income to £395.1m, up 2% on last year's.
Corporate finance and privatisation, in particular, did well, increasing fee income by 19% to £16m.
Elsewhere, the picture was distinctly gloomy.
Although tax consultancy fee income rose by 3% to £105m, this compares with a total increase of 134% over the previous three years.
The 2% drop in audit and business advisory services is blamed largely on a combination of the recession, fierce competition and ‘severe downward pressure’ on fees, while the knock-on effect of clients' postponing discretionary spending was a 5% drop in management consultancy fee income.
A less ebullient than usual Ian Brindle, PW's senior partner, said that the firm's fee income figures reflected the full impact of the recession.
‘However, in the context of the worst recession in living memory, the small increase in our fees represents a significant achievement.’
He added that his forecast for the economy — if he had one — was pessimistic.
‘Our fortunes follow those of our clients and there is no sign from our clients’ businesses that we can look forward to any upturn in the short to medium term.’
Silver moment.
Janice Ince, the Institute's one hundred thousandth member, receives a commemorative silver paperknife from Institute president Ian Plaistowe.
Ms Ince, who works for Credit Suisse, was admitted to membership on 1 July this year.
AUDIT FEES
No growth from top 100 companies
The total audit fees paid by the current constituents of the FT-SE 100 Share Index in their last financial years show virtually no change from the amount paid in the previous year.
Indeed, 29 of the companies paid unchanged audit fees.
In the face of recession, not only in the UK, large companies are clearly trying to keep strict control over costs.
When we last surveyed the audit fees of the FT-SE 100 constituents (see ACCOUNTANCY , November 1991, p 12), total audit fees rose by just over 2%, as compared with a much more buoyant 11% — although at the time considered to be modest — the year before (see ACCOUNTANCY , November 1990, p 14).
When considering these findings it should be borne in mind that many companies round up the fees paid to the nearest million pounds (or one place of decimals of a million pounds) and that foreign currency movements can cause distortions.
A high proportion of the constituents of the index have considerable overseas activities.
Also, the constituents of the index do change as entry depends on the size of equity market capitalisation of each company; a review takes place every three months.
A feature of the index is the presence of privatised utilities — 11 out of the 100 companies; initially audit fees for such clients have tended to rise following flotation, presumably because of the extra reporting requirements, but subsequently the utilities adopt a tough cost-conscious approach.
In their last financial year, these 11 utilities raised their audit fees by 20% in total, thanks to an increase of 29% at British Gas, 100% at North West Water, Scottish Power and Severn Trent, 50% at Anglian Water and 20% at Thames Water.
The two companies paying the highest audit fees remain British Petroleum £7.4m (v £7.2m) and BTR £7m (unchanged).
Significant rises in audit fees were recorded at: Guinness (+30%), where turnover rose 16% to £4,067m; Williams Holdings (+30%), where profits included a contribution of 42 weeks' trading for major acquisition Yale & Valor; Burmah Castrol (+18%); Rank Organisation (+33%), where turnover jumped to £2,114m (v £1,333m) after inclusion of a full year from major acquisition Mecca Leisure; and Rentokil (+19%) where pretax profits rose by 27%.
Major falls occurred at: Bass -33%; Coats Viyella -32%; English China Clays -31%; Arjo Wiggins -27%; NFC -20%; Pearson -18%; and BAT Industries -18%.
The Big Six retain their domination of appointments.
Coopers & Lybrand and Price Waterhouse each audit 24½ (joint audits counted as half to each firm), followed by KPMG Peat Marwick 20, Ernst & Young 19, Touche Ross 6 and Arthur Andersen 3.
Only three other firms have any assignments with the 100 companies: Clark Whitehill at Sainsbury, BDO Binder Hamlyn at Southern Electric and Pannell Kerr Forster at Williams Holdings.
For financial periods beginning after 1 October 1991, companies must also disclose the fees paid to auditors for non-audit work, although this will only cover services provided in the UK.
Some companies have already voluntarily disclosed similar information.
Anglian Water paid £0.3m for non-audit work; BAA disclosed accountants' fees of £2.328m (v £1.806m); Coats Viyella non-audit related fees £0.4m (v NA); Guinness fees for other services — UK £2.981m (v £1.269m), rest of the world £1.768m (v £733,000); and Reed International payments to auditors for non-audit services £0.9m.
Tesco's auditors also received £0.2m in respect of non-audit work.
Paid up and filed through.
400 people — including representatives of the Revenue — packed the London Metropole last month for the Pay and File Roadshow.
‘It certainly clarified particular areas for me,’ said Tax Faculty chairman Peter Wyman.
‘The biggest point that hit me was how much Pay and File was going to be about cash management — juggling around with over- and underpayments.
It almost becomes a treasury, rather than a tax exercise.’
BCAB CONFERENCE
From beancounters to best practice
More than 150 delegates gathered at Bristol last month for the Board for Chartered Accountants in Business's first ever national conference.
Roger Lawson, Institute vice-president, summed up the mood when he told delegates that ‘the days when accountants in industry and business were criticised, at times justifiably, as beancounters, are over’.
The conference produced some lively debate and occasionally some widely differing viewpoints.
Mr Lawson, for instance, speaking on why chartered accountants are the keystone of business, said he felt that the Cadbury Code of Best Practice was ‘a missed opportunity’.
‘Companies that will observe the Code are by and large acting honourably at present,’ he said, ‘and those companies that are not will find ways around the spirit of the Code.’
He added that the answer was enforcement, the most effective method of which would be for The Stock Exchange to make compliance a listing condition.
‘Personally, I am disappointed that The Stock Exchange has indicated that it is not interested in following this route.’
Mr Lawson also disagreed with the idea of non-executive directors ‘becoming policemen’.
‘They would be trading a low reward for a very high risk.
Non-executive directors can only make a limited contribution to a company given that they have little knowledge of its day-to-day working.’
Not surprisingly, however, Hugh Collum, chairman of the 100 Group and a member of the Cadbury Committee, offered an opposing view.
He felt that ‘shareholder pressure’ would ensure compliance with the Code, but added that ‘if self-regulation does not work, a more bureaucratic legislative solution would be inevitable’.
Speaking on the future of international standards, Mr Collum fired a broadside at the International Accounting Standards Committee.
‘It needs to acquire some teeth from somewhere,’ he said.
‘It must become more focused, concentrate its attention on the core issues, get agreement with them, with as few alternative versions as possible, and get these agreements enforced nationally.’
Mr Collum felt that implementation of international standards in the future would fall more and more to the Accounting Standards Board, although ideally he felt leadership should come from the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Financial Accounting Standards Board in the US and, ‘if it can ever get its act together’, the European Commission.
‘We have to recognise the primary role that will be played by bodies like the SEC, FASB and the ASB,’ he concluded.
‘IASC and the other professional bodies must be prepared to row behind them.’
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
‘Old boy network’ slated
More than two thirds of non-executive directors of Stock Exchange companies are appointed through the ‘old boy network’, a practice that is ‘outdated, amateur and threatens the ability of boards to function effectively as a team’, according to PRONED.
As a result, there is general disillusionment with the NED's current role.
A survey of Stock Exchange companies, carried out by The Stock Exchange and PRONED, found that 86% of all chairmen, non-executive and executive directors, institutions and auditors were dissatisfied with the NED appointment process and most were disappointed about NEDs' effectiveness afterwards.
Yet, says Sir Adrian Cadbury, chairman of PRONED, the organisation which seeks to promote wider use of non-executive directors, it is overwhelmingly accepted that NEDs with the right qualities are essential in an effective board.
Writing in PRONED's 10th annual report, Sir Adrian urges chairmen to adopt a more professional process for selecting NEDs and to give board members a greater say in their appointment.
This would mean that they would acquire a better understanding and respect for the NED's role.
‘Companies would benefit by drawing from a wider pool of talent and ability than is currently considered,’ he writes, ‘and it would enable them to appoint more women.
‘It makes sense to look beyond the limited circle which chairmen and their boards normally have in mind.’
Chairmen rely on the old boy network in the belief that it is hard to find appropriately qualified NEDs, adds PRONED managing director Colin St Johnston.
But PRONED alone had more than 800 people on its register.
WALKER GREENBANK
Arthur Young sued over takeover
Walker Greenbank, the wall-covering group, has taken its former auditor, Arthur Young, to court over the firm's failure to detect an alleged fraud in one of its subsidiaries.
Ian Glick QC, for Walker Greenbank, told the court that WG acquired a private shelving company, Alkar, in January 1987, agreeing to pay its owners, Alan and William Carr, an initial amount of £2.2m in WG shares followed by a series of payments which would be linked to Alkar's profit performance.
At the time Alkar was audited by Grant Thornton, but Arthur Young, WG's auditor, took over Alkar's audit after the acquisition.
WG is alleging that Alan Carr, who remained as Alkar's chairman, overstated Alkar's profits by anticipating payments and inflating stock, causing WG to overpay him in subsequent acquisition instalments.
In February 1988, says WG, Mr Carr told WG's board that Alkar's sales for the year to January had been £10.4m with a profit of £2.7m.
In fact, says WG, sales had amounted to £8.5m and Alkar had made a loss.
WG also alleges that Mr Carr ‘perpetrated a massive if not very subtle fraud’ in December 1987 when AY conducted a stocktake at Alkar's warehouse.
On Mr Carr's instructions, his in-house accountant noted which stock lines AY was testing and altered the other lines of stock on a computer spread sheet.
The duplicate tickets were also altered and all the remaining tickets written over so it would be impossible to tell which had been changed.
The fraud and overstatements were discovered late in 1988 when WG's chairman, Sir Anthony Jolliffe, suggested that Mr Carr buy back Alkar in a management buyout.
AY, says WG, failed to detect the fraud and gave Alkar a clean bill of health in the accounts published in July 1988.
WG claims that it overpaid for Alkar by almost £2m, and that it subsequently poured £11.2m into the company in an attempt to rescue it.
The company is claiming damages against Mr Carr, and enough damages from AY to ‘put it in the same position it would have been in if AY had done the work it contracted to do competently’.
WG's estimates of the claim against AY range from £7.1m to over £11m.
AY has admitted negligence in relation to the stock over-statement, provided that WG can prove the fraud took place, but the firm is claiming that it only owed a duty of care to Alkar as its auditor, and not to Walker Greenbank, even though it audited the group accounts.
The case is not expected to finish before Christmas.
BLUE ARROW
More flack for former chief
Certified accountant Tony Berry, former chairman and chief executive of the Blue Arrow employment agency and one time darling of the City, faces action by the Department of Trade and Industry to disqualify him from acting as a company director, following publication of a highly critical DTI inspectors' report into Blue Arrow's management.
But the inspectors have exonerated three chartered accountants who worked for Blue Arrow, although some of their actions were also criticised.
Mr Berry built up Blue Arrow from the small staff recruitment and travel operation he acquired in June 1982 into the world's largest employment services group in September 1987 when it took over US company Manpower.
But growing concern with his management style and financial dealings led to his resignation in May 1989.
Eight days later the DTI investigation was announced.
The story the DTI report tells is of a highly successful small businessman who found himself out of his depth in the big league into which he was propelled by the Manpower acquisition.
‘The picture that has emerged is one of Mr Berry continuing to run Blue Arrow as he had always done despite its transformation to a very substantial international public company.
He failed to be sufficiently accountable to the board.
His attitude to the non-executive directors was ambivalent.
In reality the corporate environment that existed enabled Mr Berry, as both chairman and chief executive, to exercise too much power.’
Certain of his actions — including misleading the board over a transaction with Peter de Savary concerning a property development at Canvey and then concluding it without board approval — amounted to breaches of his fiduciary duty to Blue Arrow, the report says.
He also paid insufficient regard to the need for compliance with his  statutory obligations as a director and with regulatory matters concerning the company.
Although the increasing corporate and personal pressures on Mr Berry did to some extent explain his actions, the report says, they did not excuse them.
‘Such conduct was clearly not acceptable for someone in a position of authority in a public company.’
The report also criticises company secretary Bruce Gray, for preparing minutes of board meetings that did not take place without checking the fact of the meetings and the decisions reached.
‘Although we do not consider Mr Gray's conduct to have been either dishonest or intentionally misleading, nonetheless the discharge of his responsibilities as company secretary was, in these respects, most unsatisfactory.’
Deputy chairman David Atkins and finance director Nicholas Fazakerley were criticised over irregularities relating to directors' meetings, although, as the report stresses, their integrity was not in doubt.
City Sheriff.
One of the City of London's new Sheriffs, Coopers & Lybrand partner Roger Cork (pictured above left with fellow Sheriff Anthony Moss (right) and the present Lord Mayor Sir Brian Jenkins) is probably more familiar with City life than most: he is, of course, the son of former Sheriff and Lord Mayor Sir Kenneth Cork.
Now in one of the most prestigious and historic posts in the country, he includes looking after the Old Bailey among his new responsibilities.
‘We act like any other Sheriff, but for the Square Mile,’ he told ACCOUNTANCY .
‘We also support and stay with the Lord Mayor.’
Fellow Cooperite Sir Brian Jenkins stands down as Mayor on 12 November.
DRUG TRAFFICKING ACT
FCA accused of laundering
An Institute member has become the first chartered accountant to face trial on money laundering charges under the drug Trafficking Offence Act 1986.
Sole practitioner John Patrick O'Donnell was committed for trial to Southwark Crown Court at a hearing at Horseferry Magistrates Court last month.
He is pleading not guilty.
The case is the first to be brought by Scotland Yard's Regional Crime Squad under s 24 of the Act.
This creates an offence of assisting a drug trafficker to retain the benefits of his or her proceeds.
It is punishable by a maximum of 14 years' imprisonment or a fine or both.
It is a defence, however, if the defendant can satisfy the court that it was not known or suspected that drug trafficking was involved, or that he disclosed his knowledge or suspicion to the relevant authorities.
The Act provides protection from suits by clients or employers for breaches of confidentiality.
It also allows the police and Customs to permit accountants to go on acting for a client after they have disclosed suspicious activity to them.
The Institute is currently drafting guidance for auditors on money-laundering.
This will cover the recognition of suspicious transactions, including the use of dummy companies and offshore international activity.
The note is scheduled for publication in December.
BCCI
$8bn claim is ‘laughable’
The $8bn damages which Touche Ross, liquidators of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, are rumoured to be seeking from Ernst & Young and Price Waterhouse for their role as BCCI's former auditors, are causing a certain amount of grim humour at Becket House and Southwark Towers.
‘If it weren't for the fact that we have to spend time and pay lawyers to deal with it, we would find the whole thing laughable,’ E&Y's marketing partner David Wilson told ACCOUNTANCY .
‘But we've probably spent the best part of £1m on lawyers’ fees, let alone our own time.’
Sources inside Price Waterhouse describe the idea as a ‘bad joke’ and ‘too huge to even contemplate’.
The rumoured size of the claim is based on the estimated amount of the losses depositors incurred when the bank was closed last year.
In fact, the statement of claim, lodged in the High Court on 1 October, does not attempt to quantify the damages.
Instead, it lists a range of different losses which, the writs served on the two firms last March allege, should have been picked up during the course of the audits.
Both Price Waterhouse and Ernst & Young deny any negligence on their part and rule out any suggestion of an out-of-court settlement.
‘It's academic,’ Mr Wilson said, ‘first because the claim has no substance as far as we're concerned, and second, because even if it has, we haven't got $8bn.
Touche Ross are wasting their time and our money, and we regret that they've taken this action.’
There was rather less humour at Price Waterhouse earlier in October when a 786-page report by Senator John Kerry was published in Washington.
This accused PW of failing to protect BCCI's ‘innocent depositors and creditors from the consequences of poor practice at the bank of which the auditors were aware for years’.
It said that PW's independence was compromised by BCCI loans to partnerships in Panama and Barbados, and that from 1987 onwards the firm had ‘ample reason’ to believe that BCCI's accounts did not give a true and fair view of its financial situation.
The report deeply angered Price Waterhouse because it had not given evidence to Senator Kerry's subcommittee.
In November 1991, senior partner Ian Brindle wrote a letter to Senator Kerry offering to cooperate with the investigation and inviting him to London.
He did not receive a reply.
‘Under the circumstances,’ PW says, ‘without such essential evidence and insofar as it bears on the activities of Price Waterhouse UK in the matter, the findings of the Kerry report appear to be a hotch potch of hearsay, conjecture and unsubstantiated assertion.’
Ex-Coopers trainee jailed
Mark Braley, the former Coopers & Lybrand trainee who attempted to sell confidential BCCI documents while on secondment to the Serious Fraud Office, has been found guilty of conspiring to pervert the course of justice.
He was jailed for three years, as was his accomplice Bernard Lynch, a ‘freelance’ accountant from south London.
Both men were arrested last October (see ACCOUNTANCY , December 1991, p 10) after attempting to sell 70 pages of confidential information to Michael Barrett, a solicitor for BCCI official Syed Akbar.
Mr Barrett informed the police and tape-recorded subsequent meetings.
At the Old Bailey, Judge Rivlin QC told Mr Braley: ‘This was a quite extraordinary and very serious breach of trust.
I believe you also fully understood what was at stake.’
Although Mr Braley had been made aware of the need for absolute secrecy, he had put the SFO's investigation at risk.
Mr Lynch, who was described as the instigator of the deal, was told: ‘You knew full well what you were doing and you relished the consternation and damage being caused.’
Although only £1,000 was actually gained from the deal, they had seen the SFO investigation as ‘the beginnings of a very rich gold seam’ that they could tap, the judge said.
Both men were also sentenced to two years' imprisonment after admitting they had conspired to corruptly obtain a consideration from Mr Barrett.
Mr Braley was also given a two-year sentence for the theft of four bearer share certificates.
All sentences will run concurrently.
DIRECTORS' DIVIDENDS
Top accountants make over £1m
Two top accountant directors scooped over £1m in dividends during the year of their latest company accounts, according to a survey by Labour Research .
John Chedzoy FCA, of Brighton-based Palmer and Harvey (Holdings), earned £2.4m, while Rocco Forte FCA, who has replaced his father Lord Forte as chairman of the Forte hotel group, gained £1.43m.
Of the 60 directors who received over £500,000 in dividends, 28 gained up to £1m; 27 between £1m and £4m; and five over £4m.
Top of the list with £30.34m was David Sainsbury of supermarket giant J Sainsbury.
He was followed by Maurice Hatter of electronics company IMO Precision Controls with £14m.
Then came Michael Hunt of Nissan UK Holdings with £4.25m; Lord Sainsbury of Candover with £4.16m; and finally Robert Edmiston of property and car group Morgan Brown with £4.13m.
MAGNET
King wins dismissal case
Albert King, the former finance director of Yorkshire-based kitchen retailers Magnet Group, has won his three-year battle against wrongful dismissal.
Mr King, who was sacked from the group's board in November 1989 following a problematic £629m management buyout eight months earlier, was told by a High Court judge that he had carried out his duties correctly.
He consequently settled out of court for £850,000, including £375,000 in costs.
Speaking after the settlement, Mr King said: ‘I am delighted to be vindicated after this prolonged action.
I now look forward to resuming my career wholly without blame or blemish for any of the difficulties that arose at Magnet.’
FRAUD
Maxwell charge
Robert Maxwell's former private company finance director, Robert Bunn FCA, has been charged with conspiracy to defraud.
Mr Bunn allegedly conspired with others between 1 November 1990 and 31 December 1991 to defraud a syndicate of 35 banks led by Swiss Bank Corporation and Credit Lyonnais.
According to the Serious Fraud Office, he was knowingly and dishonestly party to the pledging of common stock in publishers Berlitz International Inc, as security for loans to third parties.
This breached the terms of a loan agreement between the syndicate and MCC.
Sushi and sagacity.
Cuddly Antipodean wit Clive James was guest speaker at a South Wales District Society dinner recently.
The dinner marked a Reporting Japan conference, which looked at the way western journalists report Japan.
Mr James is pictured with Paul Marshall, president of the South Wales District Society.
IRISH INSTITUTE
Dearing-style changes put in motion
The Irish Institute has taken bold steps to reduce the expectation gap, lobbying the government for changes in legislation that would allow implementation of several key recommendations put forward in the Ryan Report.
The Institute set up an independent Financial Reporting Commission last year, which was chaired by Dr Louden Ryan, former governor of the Bank of Ireland, in an attempt to address the expectations gap (see ACCOUNTANCY , June 1991, p 14).
The report recommended a number of wide-ranging changes to company reporting, many of which correspond closely with the recommendations put forward in the UK by Sir Ron Dearing.
The Institute indicated when it commissioned the report that it would make every effort to adopt its proposals wherever possible, and has already agreed on action in a number of areas.
It has, for instance, appointed a lay chairman to its disciplinary committee and ensured that 25% of its investigation and disciplinary committees are non-accountants.
As its next step, the Institute has submitted a paper to Desmond O'Malley, Irish Minister for Industry and Commerce, urging the government to make the necessary changes to company law that would allow more recommendations to be implemented.
The submission calls for changes that will require all companies to include a statement of directors' responsibilities in their annual reports.
An explicit statement saying that applicable standards have been adhered to, or the reasons for departures, must also be included.
The Institute also calls for legislative changes that would require companies to hold an agm within six months of the end of the accounting year (as opposed to nine months).
The Ryan Report also recommended that annual returns should be filed within 14 days of the agm, rather than the current 60 days.
The Institute felt, however, that 14 days was ‘excessively short’ and instead suggests a limit of 28 days.
Another of the Ryan recommendations was for a financial reporting review panel, similar to the panel operated by the Financial Reporting Council in the UK.
The Institute felt that such a panel would have to have legal powers to enforce standards if necessary, as the UK panel does, and has asked the government to take the appropriate steps.
To underline its commitment to the Ryan recommendations, the Institute simultaneously published two statements of best practice for companies reporting in the Republic and their auditors.
The statements suggest that annual reports of plcs and large private companies should include a statement about directors' responsibilities, acknowledging the role directors' play in the preparation of the financial statements, and their responsibilities for the decision on whether a going concern basis is appropriate, and for ensuring that adequate financial controls are in place.
The annual report should also give information on directors' remuneration and the cost of non-audit services provided by the auditor.
Companies' interim and preliminary statements should be reviewed and reported on by the auditor before publication.
LETTER FROM AMERICA
More than 2,000 delegates attended the 14th World Congress of Accountants held in Washington DC last month.
The British contingent was relatively small, and there was also some disappointment at the number of US participants.
Large groups of Japanese, Australian, Dutch and Swedish delegates, in particular, helped redress the balance.
Barbara Franklin, US Secretary of Commerce, launched the proceedings, followed by Pehr Gyllenhammar, executive chairman of Volvo, who spoke on the accountant's role in a global economy.
He analysed the causes of the world recession and urged the profession to re-emphasise its traditional qualities of high ethical standards and integrity.
The three following mornings took the form of plenary sessions with, on the Monday and Tuesday afternoons, a menu of concurrent special interest sessions from which participants could choose.
The first two mornings dealt largely with world and regional economic themes.
While these were of high quality and presented by a band of distinguished international speakers, some participants would have liked to take part in more of the 17 special interest sessions.
For those interested in the internationalisation of financial reporting and auditing, there was an encouraging note on the final morning when Paul Guy of IOSCO announced that endorsement of IAPC's auditing standards would be forthcoming later in the month (see ACCOUNTANCY , October, p 13).
Denny Beresford, chairman of FASB, added further support to the view that the US is more strongly involved than ever in international financial reporting issues, while Hugh Collum, finance director of SmithKline Beecham, emphasised industry's pressing need for effective harmonisation.
At the convention's closing ceremony, incoming IFAC chairman Peter Angars of Australia stressed the continuing message of the congress, that globalisation of services and of business would continue and that accountants must play their part.
AUSTRALIA
PW vows to fight Linter claim
Price Waterhouse's Australian arm has pledged to ‘vigorously defend’ what could amount to a multi-million dollar claim issued against it over the 1989 audit of failed textile company Linter Group Ltd.
Senior partner Bill Small said that PW rejected all claims against it ‘for any negligence or wrong-doing arising from the audit of Linter’.
The writ, which was issued in the Victoria Supreme Court by Linter's liquidator, KPMG Peat Marwick, names PW, two former Linter directors, Elders Finance and Investment Company and Elders Finance Group.
According to the statement of claim, the two former directors either committed misconduct or acted fraudulently in relation to two transactions — one in December 1988 for $100m and one in March 1989 for $220m.
This resulted in the accounts to 31 March 1989, which were given a clean audit report, being materially misleading.
Instead of showing the true cash-on-deposit figure of $863,000 it was shown at $220.863m.
Linter consequently traded insolvently, incurring massive losses, until its collapse in January 1990.
Mr Small, however, argued that it was ‘highly questionable whether the losses suffered by Linter on its failure were in fact attributable to the transactions which are the subject of the statement of claim.
PW rejects the suggestion that the auditors should be expected to under-write the company against any  
UK first.
Coopers & Lybrand's senior technical partner Matthew Patient has been appointed chairman of the International Auditing Practices Committee.
Mr Patient, who will take up his post in January, is the first UK representative on the IAPC to be appointed chairman.
ZEN FOR LIFE
Most accountants would be only too happy to go home and put their feet up after a long day at the office.
But for Neville Shulman of London-based Shulman & Partners, it must be an impossibility.
Apart from finding time to fulfil his role as British director of the International Theatre Institute (a UNESCO research and information organisation), write two novels and run the Land and City Families Trust, he is also vice-president of the National Children's Home and chairman of its George Thomas Society, which specialises in caring for abused children.
‘Every year I like to do some kind of challenge to raise money for charity and to inspire others to raise money as well,’ he told ACCOUNTANCY .
In 1990 this involved scaling Mont Blanc with no previous mountaineering experience.
‘I hadn't realised at the time how tough it was,’ he admits.
‘I went in a team of 12 and 11 of us got to the summit after an awful lot of tribulations, exploits, excitement and fierce problems.’
Apart from the physical difficulties, he also had to face up to the mental stress of completing the task.
This he achieved by using his knowledge of Zen, an ancient philosophy that he has studied ‘on and off’ for many years.
Although it is a difficult topic to explain, he defines it as ‘a willpower’.
‘Zen equals effort but somehow remains effortless,’ he says.
‘You try to achieve something and you never allow yourself to accept that failure will happen — yet if it does, that is totally acceptable.
All you can do in life is your best and expect to do your best and to try to go on achieving.
If you get thwarted or it doesn't work out,c'est la vie .’
Neville's determination paid off: he made it to the top, raising £55,000 on the way.
On his return, he found that people were curious about why he had opted for such a tough mountain.
‘I explained that if I didn't start on something really tough, I would never have had the willpower to finish it off,’ he says.
This led to his writing Zen and the Art of Climbing Mountains , about to be published by Element Books.
He writes not just about the climb itself, but also about the ‘mountains of life’ that people have to face every day.
All royalties will go to charity.
Neville also found a parallel between his journey and the challenges of handicapped NCH children.
‘It seemed symbolic for me to say to them you climb your mountain every day and I'm going to climb one that really I shouldn't, and probably wouldn't be able to.’
He hopes that the book, which includes a foreword by mountaineer Chris Bonington, will make people more aware of their own potential.
‘If I, as a non-mountaineer, climbed Mont Blanc, the highest mountain in Western Europe, I think others could do the same,’ he says.
Not content with Mont Blanc, last year found him searching for another challenge.
‘I was sitting there one day trying to think what was better than climbing a mountain — and suddenly it hit me…climbing two!’ he says.
So at the end of 1991, he went in a team of eight to climb Kilimanjaro and two peaks of Mount Kenya, raising more than £60,000.
He hasn't got much time left to come up with a challenge for 1992.
An offer to climb Mount Everest had to be passed up because of work commitments — the journey takes at least two months.
However, having travelled to the North Pole with artist Andy Goldsworthy in 1989, he does admit to a penchant for the South Pole.
‘It's much more difficult to get to because it's less accessible to the ordinary traveller,’ he says.
‘But I'm thinking about it.’
Neville Shulman: A penchant for the South Pole
Art of communication.
Ruth Eisenberg, the Institute's deputy director of practice regulation, has replaced June Ward as director of communications.
Ruth, who qualified with Deloittes in 1977 and also spent three years as a journalist with Accountants Weekly , has been with the Institute for over 10 years.
She has served as a student counsellor with the Education and Training Department and as deputy director of practice regulation she played a major role in setting up the new regulations for financial services business and audit.
Describing her previous role as ‘fascinating,’ she told ACCOUNTANCY : ‘I'm now looking forward to new challenges in the Communications Department.
There is so much happening at the Institute and in the profession at the moment that the task of ensuring that members, the public and decision-makers are aware of developments is an enormous challenge.’
IN-HOUSE CHAPLIN
Fears that the scarcity of chartered accountants in the Commons would prevent the Institute from finding a replacement for John Watts as its Parliamentary adviser have been quelled with the appointment of Judith Chaplin, MP for Newbury.
Although she is not qualified, Mrs Chaplin, who has a PhD in economics, spent five years as a trainee at a small firm of chartered accountants in Norwich and ran her own business.
Her studies were interrupted by the opportunity to go into local politics, from which she has never looked back.
After a three year stint at the Conservative Research Department, in 1986 she became head of the policy unit at the Institute of Directors.
More recently, she worked as special adviser to Chancellor of the Exchequer Nigel Lawson and his successor John Major, moving with Mr Major to Number 10 when he became prime minister.
She was elected to Parliament at the general election in April.
‘With her background, we felt that Mrs Chaplin had the potential to be extremely helpful in giving us advice on Parliamentary affairs,’ Institute secretary Andrew Colquhoun told ACCOUNTANCY .
‘Even as a new MP, she has got a much better grounding in the way that the Treasury and Number 10 work than most MPs who've been there a long time.’
Chaplin: Good grounding
IN BRIEF Man from the Pru
Michael Lawrence, the Prudential's group finance director, is to be the next chairman of the 100 Group, the influential forum for finance directors from the UK's top public and private companies.
He takes over this month from Hugh Collum, finance director of SmithKline Beecham, who has held the post for two years.
Mr Lawrence, who was a partner in Price Waterhouse before joining the Pru in 1987, says that he has a full agenda.
In addition to working closely with Government to ensure that fiscal and other financial policies do not create competition barriers for UK industry, he is making harmonisation of financial reporting a priority.
This, he says, is to ensure that ‘major companies are able to access international capital markets on equal terms’.
Travels off
The Institute's Accountancy Travel Club is being disbanded.
The agreement with Kenwood Travel, which gave discounts to Institute members on travel booked through the company, will expire this month by mutual consent.
Bookings made before the end of November, however, will still qualify for the appropriate discount.
For more information, ring Accountancy Business Group on .
The value in sharing
All public companies should report on their shareholder returns, according to Coopers & Lybrand.
Although that is what shareholders are most interested in, not a single UK company provides such information in their annual reports.
‘Any company which says its prime goal is to create shareholder value should report its performance in those terms,’ C&L's Richard Barfield told a recent conference on corporate governance.
He cited the example of Hanson and ICI.
Had ICI focused earlier on shareholder value creation, he said, it would not have allowed a value gap to develop and so become a target for Hanson's predatory schemes.
Mr Barfield also suggested that boardroom pay should be tied to shareholder value creation, which would focus management on developing value over the long term and act as ‘an antidote to short-termism’.
The Thames has seen its share of odd events over the years, but a Dragon Boat Race must rank alongside waterskiing commuters.
Among the World Corporate Games teams scything their way through the murky water in time to a sadistic drummer (by far the best job) were representatives from Touche Ross and Ernst & Young.
Both could have done with outboard motors, since neither managed it into the top eight.
A Touche Ross spokeswoman later confessed that, although some of the team had managed a practice run the week before, ‘when it came to the day, a lot of people on the boat had never rowed before’.
Enter the dragon.
More than 5,000 competitors from 405 organisations took part in the Games, which finished last month.
British Airways, fielding the most competitors, won the largest number of medals with 138, but E&Y won its division (according to team size) and Price Waterhouse came third in its division.
Out of the accountants, KPMG Peat Marwick gave the best performance with 27 medals, followed by E&Y with 19.
PW, TR and Arthur Andersen managed five each.
Value for money
If you want a good example of value for money, look no further than the National Audit Office.
In the 1991/92 financial year, the 900-strong watchdog saved the taxpayer some £200m, including a £30m a year reduction in the running costs of the Ministry of Defence's service quarters, £12m recovered by the Inland Revenue through revised procedures on small company tax relief, and a £1.7m recovery arising from the Property Services Agency's 1990/91 audit.
This means that, over the last three years, the NAO has saved a total of £0.5bn.
Best advice
Accountants have been given a vote of confidence as the most understanding and helpful advisers for British private companies, by the 1,000 owner-directors involved in a recent survey by The Director magazine and Pannell Kerr Forster.
While 44% of owner-directors described their bank managers as ‘distinctly unhelpful’ over the past 12 months, 42% said their accountant was best at understanding the business's needs and a third thought they were the most helpful source of advice.
However, 39% felt tax planning was the most useful area of advice, and only 27% cited business strategy.
Not surprisingly, 68% of owner-directors said that their financial or material rewards had not increased over the past 12 months; 65% now work over 50 hours a week, 38% have considered disposal over the past year, and over half have injected extra funds.
Despite this, 37% spent more on training and 51% increased their marketing expenditure.
Mole, aged 22¾
Love him or loathe him, Adrian Mole and his secret diary were as much a part of the 1980s as portable phones and rich estate agents.
No longer 13¾, Adrian, 22¾, has popped up again, this time as the PASS /Harrison Willis Trainee Accountant of the Year.
This Adrian Mole, however, does not have acne or a girl-friend called Pandora, but is just a poor PE2 student unfortunate enough to have the same name as Sue Townsend's fictional horror.
As consolation, he accepted a £1,000 cheque and the additional prize of being named the Institute's top trainee.
Monopoly commission
How would you like to buy Charing Cross from Coopers & Lybrand for £200?
The station will be up for grabs on 19 November when teams from C&L and other companies will be competing in the City Monopoly Challenge at the Honourable Artillery Company to raise money for Children With Leukaemia.
The cost of entering a team of two players is £500, and companies can enter as many as they like.
Each competitor will play as an individual but score as a team over two 45-minute games.
The winning team will receive the City Monopoly Trophy, while the five individual players with the highest scores will play in a Grand Final.
For more information, ring .
Fitter for the job
Female executives looking for salaries of around £35,000 are finding jobs twice as quickly as their male counterparts.
And, according to outplacement specialists InterExec, when men and women of the same age group are pitted against each other, women are still offered jobs 25% faster than men.
There are three reasons for this: first, women dress differently from ‘20 men all wearing pinstripe suits’, making them more memorable; second, they offload their emotions over redundancy much more quickly, making them better prepared to look for a new position; and third, because of the so-called ‘glass ceiling’, those women who do make it to the top are ‘slightly better’ than their male competitors.
UK business news
16 SEPTEMBER — 20 OCTOBER 1992
Recession.
In a single day, 29 September, the recession claimed over 4,500 jobs.
Unemployment rose by 32,300 in September; the overall rate stands at 10.1%.
In the third quarter of this year business failures rose by 53%, compared with the same period last year.
For the first nine months, the figure was 46,545, 39% higher than last year.
Publishing.
First half profit before tax rose by 20% to £46.5m at United Newspapers.
Paper.
First half profit before tax fell by 26% to £99.1m at Arjo Wiggins Appleton.
Computers.
Amstrad reported an unexpectedly large loss before tax of £70.9m (v £20.2m profit) for the year to 30 June; the figures were largely affected by the poor state of the PC market.
Chairman Alan Sugar is planning to take the company private again.
Airlines.
Davies and Newman Holdings and Richard Branson were in discussion over the possible rescue of Dan-Air by Virgin Atlantic.
Mr Branson pulled out after news that Dan-Air's financial situation could be a lot worse than expected.
British Airways is now in discussion with the airline's parent.
Aerospace.
British Aerospace announced 3,000 losses and the closure of its Hatfield plant.
The company made a first half loss before tax of £129m, compared with £86m profit a year earlier.
Leisure.
Brent Walker announced an interim loss before tax of £79.4m (v £133.5m).
For the year to 30 June, European Leisure reported a loss before tax of £45.6m (v £5.23m profit).
Forte.
Rocco Forte is to take over from his father as chairman of the hotel group.
Lord Forte will become president and remain on the group's board.
Conglomerates.
First half profit before tax rose by 28% to £60.6m at MB-Caradon.
Building societies.
First half profit before tax fell by 67% to £13.1m at Bristol & West; the fall was attributed to a rise in bad debt charges from £7.2m to £29.7m.
Financial services.
In the year to 30 June profit before tax rose by 7% to £71.2m at MAI.
Insurance.
Legal & General reported a half year profit before tax of £74m (v £56m).
Sun Alliance sold the majority of its 14.24% stake in Commercial Union for £280m and merged its Australian non-life operation with Royal Insurance's to form the fourth largest general insurer in Australia.
General Accident is to buy the Prudential Corporation's Canadian non-life insurance business for £74m.
Financially troubled Municipal Mutual Insurance is engaged in talks with Zurich Insurance ‘to provide ongoing commercial insurance cover for local authorities’.
Ice cream.
Clarke Foods, the UK's second largest ice cream maker, called in the receivers and nearly 50 potential buyers have already come forward.
British Coal.
The nationalised industry announced that it is to close 31 pits, which will result in 30,000 job losses.
In response to the news, Anglo United pulled out of the bidding for the company, explaining that the operation was now too small to be of any interest.
Engineering.
Lucas Industries announced that it will make at least 4,000 job cuts as part of a three-year restructuring programme.
Profit before tax fell by 72.8% to £22.5m in the year to 31 July; eps fell by 90.1% to 0.8p.
Defence.
Defence cuts and depressed civilian markets have led to a further 390 job losses at VSEL.
Chemicals.
First half profit before tax fell by 12% to £44.5m at Laporte; eps fell by 6% to 18.8p.
Building materials.
RMC reported a 11% fall in first half profit before tax to £62.1m.
Strong trading in overseas markets helped first half profit before tax rise by 12% to £88.5m at Redland.
Construction.
Barratt Developments announced a profit before tax of £11.3m in the year to 30 June, compared with a loss of £105.9m last year.
Eurotunnel.
Shares fell by 15% after Eurotunnel announced a further delay in the opening of the Channel tunnel; this is now scheduled for 15 December 1993.
Sir Alastair Morton, chief executive, also said that further funds will need to be found ‘from various sources including our shareholders in 1994 and 1995’.
Property.
Hongkong Land acquired a 14.9% stake in Trafalgar House and then attempted, but failed, to push its holding to 29.9%.
Cars.
Ford is to make 1,487 redundancies at its UK car assembly and engine plants.
Rolls-Royce Motor Cars is to cut 950 jobs at its plant in Crewe, Cheshire.
Baking.
Hanson launched a hostile £780m cash bid for Ranks Hovis McDougall.
RHM said that the offer ‘seriously undervalues’ the company and it is planning to split into three companies to fight the bid.
Waste.
First quarter profit before tax rose by 62% to £40.1m at Waste Management International.
Sporting goods.
Negotiations have broken down between Bernard Tapie Finance and Pentland over the purchase of Adidas.
Retail.
Sears is to dispose of its menswear division and, as part of its reorganisation of the British Shoe Corporation, the company is to close 350 shops and make 1,800 redundancies over the next three years.
The company reported a first half loss before tax of £8.8m (v £2.4m).
First half losses before tax increased from £17.7m to £30.6m at Ratners; Gerald Ratner received much criticism and there were calls for his resignation at the company's agm.
First half profit before tax rose by 10% to £251.8m at Tesco, and by 34% to £36.2m at Wm Morrison supermarkets.
analysis
ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
In pursuit of the unfudgeable
There has always been hostility in the UK to the cook-book approach to accounting standards.
People do not want standards that tie companies down comprehensively or that rule out the use of judgment.
They want directors to be free to choose the accounting policies that best suit the particular circumstances of their particular company in order to give a true and fair view.
Occasionally, these views find theoretical expression in a form that may seem to put the whole standard-setting enterprise in question.
In 1981, for example, Professor William Baxter, in Accounting Standards — Boon or Curse?(in Accounting and Business Research ), made it clear that he at least did not consider that uniform measurement rules were a boon.
More recently, David Tonkin and Bill Robertson have argued against standards that impose uniformity of measurement on companies, and in favour of‘strict recognition and disclosure requirements’ instead (see ACCOUNTANCY , March 1991, p 28).
Now, in two pamphlets issued in September, David Damant argues that in pursuing the principle of ‘unfudgeability’, the Accounting Standards Board is imperilling the true and fair view (Unfudgeability and Earnings , available from MAP Securities, 2–3 Philpot Lane, London EC3M 8AQ).
What ‘unfudgeability’ means is that accounting standards should be set in such a way that accounts cannot be fudged; Mr Damant claims that this is ‘a new accounting principle’.
As an example of unfudgeability in operation, Mr Damant cites the ASB's approach to extraordinary items.
Companies fudge their results by putting losses into extraordinary items, so the ASB stops the fudging by virtually abolishing the extraordinary item.
But the result, according to Mr Damant, is a less useful figure of profit.
There is, of course, nothing really new about the principle of unfudgeability.
Standard-setters have long realised that there is a trade-off between objectivity and relevance in accounting information, and on the face of it, unfudgeability is simply a pejorative term for objectivity.
In terms of the ASB's proposed statement of principles (see ACCOUNTANCY , September 1991, pp 99–103), fudgeable information lacks the primary characteristic of reliability, and the secondary characteristic of comparability.
Whether unfudgeability is a new principle is a relatively trivial point.
The important question is this: is the ASB putting too much stress on reliability and comparability at the expense of relevance?
Mr Damant argues that ‘to provide the users with what they need, it is important to reflect in the published accounts a true and fair view of the underlying realities.
In view of the complexity of those realities, the delineation of such figures will in many cases depend upon careful judgments which must be made and which must distinguish case from case.
But it is just this sort of judgment which those who argue for a unfudgeable standard do not wish to see exercised.
Thus, in many cases we cannot have both a true and fair view and an unfudgeable figure’.
As examples of topics on which unfudgeability will sometimes give the wrong answer, Mr Damant cites, in addition to extraordinary items, goodwill, securitisation and leasing.
The ASB has not yet pronounced on any of the last three issues (other than in a very preliminary way for securitisation), so the only real test so far is the treatment of extraordinary items, which we will take a look at.
The figure of profit Mr Damant regards as most useful is that of maintainable earnings.
This gives the best indication of future operating performance.
It should exclude ‘not only those items which have traditionally been called extraordinary, but also those called exceptional’.
It follows from this that Mr Damant's ideal earnings figure does not correspond to the currently available figures of earnings, since these include exceptional items; Mr Damant will have to separate these out.
Presumably, Mr Damant would also like to be able to separate out any element of earnings related to discontinued operations, since obviously such earnings cannot be maintained.
Unfortunately, unless they are exceptional or extraordinary, such figures are not currently disclosed.
The present situation, therefore, even though it allows some fudging of extraordinary items, must be far from perfect from Mr Damant's point of view.
Will he be any worse off once FRS 3 comes out?
As we go to press, FRS 3 has still not been issued, but we shall assume that it follows the lines of FRED 1.
Virtually all items previously classified as extraordinary will now be charged or credited in arriving at earnings, but they should also be reclassified as exceptional and should therefore continue to be disclosed.
Mr Damant should therefore have no greater difficulty than in the past in adjusting the earnings figure.
But the results of discontinued operations will be disclosed for the first time.
This will enable Mr Damant to calculate a better figure of maintainable earnings than has been possible in the past.
All in all, the ASB seems to have successfully combined the principle of unfudgeability with giving users more relevant information.
Although the specific example of extraordinary items and FRED 1 does not support Mr Damant's argument particularly well, it is easy to think of hypothetical examples that would.
Bad debts, provisions against slow moving stock and depreciation are all areas that require judgment and are therefore fudgeable.
If the ASB were to issue standards saying that all debts over three months old must be fully provided against, all stocks over six months old must be written down by 50%, and all fixed assets must be depreciated over five years, then things would have gone too far.
But there is no sign yet of such insanity from the ASB.
Most commentators,pace Mr Damant, are likely to think that there is a good deal too much fudging going on and that the ASB ought to be cracking down on it.
Institute president Ian Plaistowe, after reading a newspaper report of Mr Damant's views, wrote to the Financial Times saying that: ‘The reduction of differences in the accounting treatment of events and transactions arising in the same circumstances must surely remain as the standard-setters’ prime objective'.
Mr Damant predicts that in five years' time, if the ASB pursues unfudgeability rather than‘correct accounting principles’, it will be faced with dissatisfaction because accounts will not show a true and fair view.
It's a fairly safe bet that the ASB will be heavily criticised in five years' time in any case; that's just a fact of life that standard-setters in the UK have to accept.
But if they have produced nothing by then to diminish the present perception of the fudgeability of accounts, they are hardly likely to survive that long.
There is, of course, nothing really new about the principle of unfudgeability.
Standard-setters have long ago realised that there is a trade-off between objectivity and relevance in accounting information, and on the face of it, unfudgeability is simply a pejorative term for objectivity
Damant: True and fair view imperilled
brought to account
DAVID REED, BLUE ARROW DEFENDANT
The case they should never have tried The Blue Arrow trial, the second longest in English criminal history, has been widely condemned as a travesty.
Four months after he was cleared on appeal, David Reed tells Liz Fisher what it was like to be in the dock
It was dawn on 13 November 1989 when there was a loud knocking at David Reed's front door.
His wife got out of bed and answered the door, thinking it was the postman.
‘She came back and said that the people had arrived for my early morning meeting.
I didn't have a meeting.
When I went downstairs there were two policemen there.
They said ‘David Reed, we have a warrant for your arrest.’
I said: ‘Is it April Fool's Day?’‘
Almost three years later, Mr Reed, one of the four defendants found guilty in the Blue Arrow case only to have their convictions quashed later on appeal, feels his name is finally cleared, legally at least.
‘There is an element of notoriety,’ he says.
‘The damage is done the day you are arrested.’
His face has appeared regularly in newspapers since his arrest, once under a tabloid headline which screamed ‘Blue Arrow rogues guilty’.
Not exactly subtle, considering the case's complexity, but it is the verdict which no doubt still lingers in people's minds months after the convictions were quashed.
The trial judge himself admitted, before passing sentence, that ‘all involved in this case have been called upon to endure more than anyone should be required to cope with’.
The appeal court judges condemned the trial as ‘a costly disaster’, and the estimated £40m bill to the taxpayer has been widely denounced.
Almost universally, the opinion is that the trial should never have taken place, which is of little comfort to the defendants who, they say, have effectively lost two and a half years of their lives.
David Reed joined County NatWest in December 1973.
He qualified with Whinney Murray and spent two years with Peat Marwick in Sydney, where he developed a vague ambition to work with growing companies.
He never had a ‘burning ambition’ to be a merchant banker, he says, but was attracted to County on his return to England because it was a new venture that was attracting the smaller, rapidly expanding companies he was interested in.
Mr Reed rose quickly through the bank, becoming an assistant director in 1976 and a director in 1979, before being appointed head of the corporate finance department in 1984.
With hindsight, he says, he can see the deficiencies in County's and NatWest's structure that might have contributed to the Blue Arrow affair.
‘NatWest had been told that merchant banking was a good idea, but I don't think they thought much beyond that, with the result that we could plough our own furrow,’ he says.
Within the merchant banking community, he adds, clearing bank was a ‘pejorative term’, part of the social distinction that made County, a new boy on the merchant banking block, all the more determined to succeed.
County's big chance came with Big Bang in 1986.
UK deregulation meant that the smaller, traditional banks suddenly had to compete on a global scale, and very few had the financial power necessary.
The clearing banks were ideally placed.
County grew rapidly throughout the early 1980s.
‘In the space of two years, we moved from a domestic merchant bank with 500 people, all of whom knew each other very well, to an organisation with nearly 3,000 people spread all over the world,’ says Mr Reed.
‘It was not something I would have recommended my clients to do.’
Looking back, he says, County's rapid growth might not have caused problems had the company's management — and he does not absolve himself from blame — had more depth.
‘We were not experienced enough and we did not ask for, and were not given, enough help and guidance from NatWest.’
A strong selection of non-executive directors dedicated to County, he believes, could have helped it enormously.
‘The executive directors at NatWest were tremendously supportive but we didn't necessarily need support, we needed experienced guidance.
We were over-adventurous, we over-expanded and NatWest didn't see it.
They left things to us and we were rushing along on a supercharged train with no brakes.’
As a reflection of its rapid growth, County listed some of the fastest growing companies of the 1980s among its clients.
Blue Arrow plc, a UK employment agency which Mr Reed was responsible for bringing to the bank in 1985, was seen as a valuable addition.
‘Tony Berry [the company's chairman]was the star of The Stock Exchange and his company was very highly rated,’ says Mr Reed.
Mr Berry already had ambitions to expand Blue Arrow's personnel services on a global basis and in 1987 he discussed with County the possibility of his company's launching a takeover of Manpower, a US-listed agency.
In order to raise the $1.43bn (£837m) needed to finance the takeover, County organised the country's largest ever rights issue for Blue Arrow, which was launched in a revised form with Manpower's approval on 21 August 1987.
‘We had trouble underwriting the issue, due to a combination of events,’ says Mr Reed, ‘so we were left with part of it, which wasn't a particular problem for us.’
County was left with an underwriting commitment of just over £200m.
The issue closed at 3pm on 28 September 1987.
The events of the next 24 hours formed the basis of a Department of Trade and Industry investigation and the criminal trial that was to follow.
Few of the facts are disputed, while everything hangs on the intention behind the actions.
It quickly became apparent after the offer had closed that the take-up rate was just 38% —‘a lower level of acceptances than we had anticipated’ and enough for  newspapers to call the issue a flop.
What was certain was that an announcement of the take-up rate would cause Blue Arrow's share price to fall, and would probably damage County's reputation.
Blue Arrow's advisers gathered with most of the company's board later that evening at County's Drapers' Garden office to discuss the issue.
Among them were Mr Reed, Nicholas Wells, who had put the issue together at County, and Martin Gibbs, head of corporate finance at Phillips & Drew, County's stockbroker at the time, although he has since retired.
At the meeting, it was decided that County, the underwriters Dillon Read and Phillips & Drew would take some of the remaining shares and then sell them slowly over the next few weeks, a move which had been discussed with County's lawyers beforehand.
This decision — to take up the shares after the issue deadline had passed — became the key point the jury was asked to pass judgment on when charges relating to other aspects of the affair were dropped from the case by the judge in his summing up.
By the following day, County held over 13% of Blue Arrow shares, split into three tranches to avoid the Companies Act requirement that holdings of more than 5% (since changed to 3%) should be disclosed.
County at that time held 4.9%, County NatWest Securities, its market maker, held 4.43%.
The Union Bank of Switzerland, Phillips & Drew's parent company, held 3.99% subject to an indemnity that County would reimburse any losses (that indemnity was later cancelled).
County did not declare its interest since it technically did not own the Union Bank holding, and its market maker was exempt by law from disclosing holdings bought in the normal course of business.
The next day County issued a press release announcing that 48.9% of the shares had been taken up and the rest sold on the market.
The Blue Arrow prosecution was later to accuse the defendants of conspiring to rig the market — not alleging that the late take up was illegal, but that the purpose for which it was done was unlawful.
Mr Reed maintains that, even if such a late take-up did not happen often, ‘it was common currency among merchant bankers as something that could happen’.
He stresses that the decision was taken on the spur of the moment and that it seemed completely acceptable to everyone there at the time.
‘It wasn't a decision we agonised over, it was made on the hoof at about 10 o'clock at night.
For the moment of time I thought about it, I remember thinking: ‘Who is going to be hurt by this?’
I had acted out of good faith and in terms of what I thought were the best interests of my client.
There was no personal interest involved.
It never occurred to me that anyone might have thought they were prejudiced.’
He also points out that he told everyone who needed to know what had been decided.
‘We went through the late take-up exhaustively before we announced our holding in December 1987.
We had told NatWest and the Bank of England, anyone we thought we should have told, what we had done.
If you think you have done something wrong, you don't do that.
It was farcical to suggest that we were conspiring — if we were, I hope we would have done it more elegantly.’
Blue Arrow's share price plummeted after the stock market crash on 19 October, and any hopes of the shares held by County and the others being sold quietly were effectively scuppered.
In December, County announced its aggregated holding of just under 9.5%.
‘There was some press comment, but still none of us were remotely afraid that we had done anything wrong.’
The NatWest Group eventually announced a loss of £47m connected to Blue Arrow in 1987, and a further £17m in 1988.
The bank held an internal inquiry during the first few months of 1988, for which Mr Reed was questioned, but he was not shown the report, which detailed the late take-up of shares.
Copies were sent to the Bank of England and the DTI, but no comments were received from either.
In December 1988, the DTI announced an inquiry into the Blue Arrow affair.
‘The announcement was a complete surprise,’ says Mr Reed.
‘I was shocked in the sense that I knew what inspectors could do, but I wasn't worried because I thought they were just wasting their time.’
The report was published in July 1989 and proved devastating.
Mr Reed, along with Martin Gibbs and Christopher Stainforth, director of corporate finance at Phillips & Drew, were all condemned by the inspectors, and Mr Reed resigned from County as a result.
‘I'm sure the inspectors did the best job they could,’ says Mr Reed, choosing his words carefully, ‘but the whole process is very undesirable, very unsatisfactory.
I was asked to give a detailed case of events which at that time were 18 months old, with limited documentation.
‘The inspectors were under a lot of pressure to produce the report quickly.
They have ruined several people's careers and lives.
I'm not suggesting it was malicious; that was just the result.’
Mr Reed ‘picked up a bit of consulting work’ following his resignation and heard no more until his arrest five months later.
‘The night before we were arrested, I had been to dinner with Nick Wells, and I asked him if he had heard anything, and he said: ‘No, it's all water under the bridge, I suppose.’
The next time we saw each other was 7am the next morning at Bishopsgate police station.’
In all, 11 people were arrested that day.
All were taken to Bishopsgate in the full glare of the media —‘an amazing coincidence’.
They were held in police cells until bail was arranged.
‘That was an interesting experience.
I had to take off my belt, my tie and my shoelaces, had my photograph and my fingerprints taken.
Then they gave us a charge sheet — it was huge, something like 23 particulars, some of which I didn't even recognise.’
None of the defendants were questioned by the police before their arrest, or by the prosecution before the trial.
As Mr Reed says, the prosecution ‘simply took the DTI report as gospel, when it was flawed’.
‘I couldn't understand what it had to do with the law.
My actions may or may not have been right and, as I said in court, I wish with hindsight that I had thought more about the late take-up.
But I didn't see any criminality in it.
I felt I had been pretty severely punished by the DTI report — I had lost my job and been kicked out of an occupation which I thoroughly enjoyed.
I didn't agree with it, but if that was the result, that was the result.
It's a rough old world.
But to throw a fraud charge on top of that…
I just didn't understand it.
‘I couldn't take it seriously at first because it seemed so ridiculous, but then you look in the statute book and realise the maximum penalty for this is seven years.
I felt I was going to wake up one day and it would all be over.
But it isn't, you wake up and it's still there.’
Mr Reed had to wait almost a year before serious preparation for the trial began, and the trial proper did not get underway until 11 February 1991, by which time the judge had sat through four months of preparatory hearings.
At the trial, 10 individual defendants stood in the dock along with three corporate defendants — County NatWest, Phillips & Drew and the NatWest Investment Bank.
‘It was a relief to get the uncertainty out of the way,’ says Mr Reed, ‘but it was also pretty intimidating to have the full power of the law thrown at you.’
The prosecution's case lasted five months, after which the jury was sent away for 75 days, partly for a holiday and partly while the judge heard legal arguments.
There was another extended break of 51 days over Christmas.
The jury sat for 184 days in total, spread through a year and four days, the second longest criminal trial in English legal history.
‘My attendance record read over 90%,’ says Mr Reed.
‘Martin Gibbs went every day.
I found the pressure and tension of the courtroom very difficult to get out of my system.’
In total, the jury heard 94 prosecution witnesses and saw over 950 pages of exhibits.
Five individual defendants and the three corporate defendants were cleared on the judge's directions.
That left five defendants, all chartered accountants, David Reed, Nick Wells, Martin Gibbs, Jonathan Cohen, County's former chief executive, and Christopher Stainforth.
The jury retired on 11 February 1992 and took 16 hours to reach a verdict.
‘Your emotions go up and down but by the end of the trial our hopes were really up.
I didn't think I was going to be found guilty other than by accident.
But when they came back into court on 14 February it was obvious what they were going to say — I had watched these people for a year, I could read them.
I leaned over to Nick Wells and said: ‘I'm never going to vote for the death penalty.’
Everyone was staggered at the verdict, even the prosecution.’
The four defendants — Mr Stainforth was found not guilty — were released on bail over the weekend until sentencing on the Monday.
‘That was a tricky weekend; I left the house on Monday wondering whether I would be coming back.’
Mr Reed, Mr Cohen and Mr Wells were given 18-month suspended sentences.
Mr Gibbs was given a 12-month suspended sentence.
The prosecution asked for costs to be awarded against the defendants but the request was refused — NatWest has paid all its former employees' costs.
An appeal was lodged almost immediately since, in his summing up, the judge had drastically cut the charges, asking the jury to consider the evidence of just 23 of the 94 prosecution witnesses and less than 100 of the 950 pages of evidence.
‘I don't think it's fair to criticise the judge,’ says Mr Reed.
‘He was in a very difficult position, he had to rely on the prosecution to frame their charges properly.
He could have stopped the trial and we had discussed whether to apply for a stay of prosecution, but once I was in the fight I wanted to carry on, whatever the consequences.’
The appeal began on 28 July and was expected to last two weeks, but after three days the judges decided they had heard enough.
‘It was all so quick — the judges just said they did not want to hear any more arguments, convictions quashed and then got up and walked out!
Two and a half years washed away in 15 words.
I wasn't prepared for it.’
None of the defendants cleared on appeal have managed to find new jobs in the City, and Mr Reed, who at 45 should be at the height of his career, says he has not tried.
Most of his anger is still directed at the prosecution.
‘There was an atmosphere in 1989 that leant towards ‘getting people in the City’.
There were a lot of reputations at stake, particularly at the Serious Fraud Office and prosecution counsel, and they threw the entire book at us until something stuck.
Subconsciously, people saw this as the biggest crime since the Great Train Robbery.’
He feels very strongly that such a case should in future be dealt with by assessors in an open court.
‘If your conduct is considered by your peers to be unacceptable, you have to accept the consequences.’
He would also like to see plea bargaining introduced, although he says he would not have accepted a reduced criminal plea.
He has, he says, been ‘overwhelmed’ by the kindness and support he has received, and for the moment is relishing not working a 14-hour day and seeing more of his wife and four children.
‘I learnt a lot on the positive side about myself, even though that sounds trite,’ he says.
‘Somehow when the plumbing bursts, it doesn't seem to matter as much any more.
I'm far more phlegmatic and appreciate the value of people, but this has been a waste of a couple of years, prime working time, and I'd like those back.’
We told anyone we thought we should have told what we had done.
It was farcical to suggest that we were conspiring — if we were, I hope we would have done it more elegantly
I felt I had been pretty severely punished by the DTI report.
But to throw a fraud charge on top of that…
I just didn't understand it
David Reed: His face appeared frequently in newspapers after his arrest
the UK book business
LITERALLY BEHIND THE TIMES Books are still subject to resale price maintenance, sale or return is the norm, and only a third of all retailers have embraced electronic point of sale techniques.
Is that any way to run a business at the end of the 20th century?
Peter Carty
‘In a small farmhouse in Tuscany, a young mother dies a terrible death and her family is ripped apart.
Only by finding each other again can they hope to come to terms with their tragedy.
Suddenly you are transported to a world of shattering suspense and emotional power, the passionate world created by Hilary Norman.’
Viewers of day-time television on Channel 4 in the Thames region were pinned to the backs of their sofas this May by Hodder & Stoughton's new marketing ploy — a television advert using author Hilary Norman to promote her works and invite direct responses from viewers.
‘I have many more characters and stories I'd like to share with you,’ said Ms Norman at the end of the advert.
Watchers were then encouraged to get in touch with her via her publishers, after which they received a personalised mailshot.
Hodder & Stoughton's Robert Bacon, marketing manager for paperback fiction, says that the results of the Hilary Norman campaign have been hard to determine, but views the response in the shops as ‘reasonably encouraging’.
Ironically, on the ‘sell-in’ side — stimulating interest from the trade rather than the public — he has no doubts that the campaign was successful.
Cheap air time was the key to the decision to run both the Hilary Norman campaign and a more conventional one in June for the new Jeffrey Archer.
‘There are better deals to be had in a recession,’ says Mr Bacon.
Other publishers have been using unusual marketing tools this year.
In mid-October, 15,000 first-class passengers on InterCity Pullman trains were surprised to be offered a special edition of The Firm , John Grisham's tale of organised crime.
Mr Grisham's publishers, Random House, consider rail travellers a key market worth ‘persuading’ to buy books.
Another notable promotion, to the trade this time, involved Picador's sending pairs of pink knickers to booksellers all over the country — mostly men — to promote Tama Janowitz' new novel,The Male Cross-Dresser Support Group .
Are these and similar initiatives innovative marketing, or desperate measures in an industry smashed by recession?
‘The old adage is to promote harder during the difficult times,’ admits Mr Bacon.
But while publishers and booksellers eagerly regale journalists with recession horror stories, it is clear that the roots of the industry's problems go well beyond the crisis in the wider economy.
For an industry with a turnover of billions — £2.5bn in 1991 according to the Publishers Association — the UK book business may seem behind the times to an outsider.
Some industry chiefs are disarmingly frank about its shortcomings.
Richard Charkin is the chief executive of Reed Consumer Books and — particularly since he led Reed out of the Net Book Agreement (NBA) last year — a major force for change in the business.
‘It's unbelievably unprofitable!’ he cries.
Mr Charkin's research — difficult because of the very large number of publishers in the business, most unquoted — has shown him that average profits are usually less than 5% of turnover.
And that figure paints a misleadingly rosy picture.
As he points out: ‘There is a huge number that break even or do worse.’
He is in no doubt about the reasons: ‘Lack of marketing awareness, a lack of technological awareness, and a lack of financial control which would be second nature in most industries.’
A key issue for Mr Charkin is, of course, the long-running saga of the NBA.
Resale price maintenance now exists for only two commodities in the UK: over-the-counter medicines — and books.
The impetus behind the NBA was the problem in Victorian times of widespread and severe price cutting in the retail book trade, which was seen as a threat to the viability of booksellers and publishers.
A first attempt to introduce it in the 1850s failed.
Two trade bodies were set up to press for a system of price fixing: the Associated Booksellers of Great Britain and Ireland in 1895 and the Publishers Association in 1896.
They worked out the Net Book Agreement, which dates from 1901.
A similar system is in operation in many countries, with the key exception of the US, where book prices are much lower than in the UK.
In retrospect, Reed's exit from the NBA last year may be the beginning of the agreement's demise.
Richard Charkin is in no doubt that Reed has gained competitive advantage.
‘We wouldn't dream of going back,’ he asserts, revealing that he has seen ‘really substantial increases in sales’on books that have been denetted.
However, he stresses that denetting is simply a form of price promotion: ‘A price promotion selling more books is hardly surprising.’
And a publisher does not run any immediate commercial risk by denetting.
Prices to the retailer stay the same.
‘Any discounting is the business of the retailer,’ he emphasises.
Therefore any increase in volume guarantees increased profits for the publisher, at least in the short term.
On the retailing front, after his experiment in denetting a selection of Reed titles in his Dillons shops last autumn, Pentos chairman Terry Maher is in no doubt about the benefits.
‘Apart from selling many more Reed titles,’ he says, ‘the key fact to come out of it was that more than half the customers who came into our shops to buy a promoted Reed title at a lower price bought on average two-and-a-half books at full price, and so the venture, as far as we were concerned, was highly profitable.’
‘The key thing in book selling, even more so than other forms of retailing, is attracting people into the shop,’ continues Mr Maher.
‘Once we get people in a bookshop we can sell books to them, and most of them will buy more than one.’
Growing a market by discounting is fundamental to many consumer industries, but its effectiveness is hotly disputed in the book business.
Supporters of the NBA say that Dillons' experiment proves nothing, their key objection being that, since there was no corresponding monitoring of a similarly promoted sample of full price titles, the finding that discounting grows the market is dubious.
They also point to research by Waterstones this year which suggested that discounting is not the key marketing tool for books.
And they assert that discounting will only lead to lower profits all round, a reduction in the number of titles on offer and an increase in market share by the larger chains at the expense of small booksellers.
But some small booksellers are not worried about abolition of the NBA.
‘On the whole it wouldn't affect us too much,’ thinks John Murray-Browne, proprietor of the Angel Bookshop in Islington.
Like many small booksellers, he is not near any of the large chains' outlets.
He says his customers would go further afield only if discounting was ferocious, and in such an event believes that prices would soon start going back up as one or more of the big chains went out of business.
This year's blow to the NBA came in July: the EC Court of First Instance rejected the Publishers Association's appeal against the 1988 decision, which made the interstate application of the NBA illegal.
Opponents of the NBA say that with no interstate trading restrictions the agreement is now inoperable.
The Publishers Association does not see the damage as terminal, and is planning an amended agreement.
However, the amended agreement is not likely to appear for some time because, in September, the Publishers Association again appealed against the interstate decision.
Any amended agreement will also have to get past the Office of Fair Trading.
In the meantime it's business as usual.
The NBA is still operating without its interstate provisions, as a domestic agreement.
Other publishers do not think they must follow Reed's initiative to regain lost ground.
HarperCollins' chairman Eddie Bell, for example, does not see any evidence that his titles are losing ground to Reed's in the bookshops.
But Mr Bell will examine any amended NBA minutely before deciding whether to continue participating.
‘I'm not taking off the table the fact that we keep this constantly under review,’ he declares, ‘and when this redraft comes up then we're going to look at it very carefully.’
A related issue is that of the ‘firm-sale’ agreement.
Booksellers normally order books on a sale or return basis.
Large quantities end up going back to publishers.
The retailer is lumbered with hefty amounts of useless stock using up valuable square footage, while the publisher gets back merchandise that is well past its sell-by date.
‘It's expensive, it's time consuming and it's inefficient,’ says Richard Barker, operations director of Waterstones.
Why does the books business still have sale or return, a practice that would be anathema to other fast-moving consumer goods industries?
‘The difference between the book trade and other retail trades is that there are some half million new product lines each year,’ explains Mr Barker, ‘and many of those only have a shelf life of six months.
In an average-sized bookshop 30% of the product is changing each year.
It's not like baked beans, and so the sharing of risk on purchases is more sensible and realistic.’
‘Nevertheless,’ he continues, ‘we have decided to go for it.’
Under the firm-sale agreements Waterstones started making with publishers in April, it buys fixed quantities of books with no returns option.
So what's in it for Waterstones?
‘If we are taking responsibility for the stock and the write-off of obsolete and redundant stock, then the supplier is giving us improved discounts; that's essentially the deal,’ Mr Barker answers.
He revealed to ACCOUNTANCY that he is getting extra discounts of around 10% from the six major publishers that are now involved.
It's still early days for the initiative.
He won't know for sure whether it's a success until the time comes to deal with the excess stock.
‘The issue is, of course, when we come to sell off stock that we would otherwise have returned, what percentage of its normal retail price can we get?’
Richard Charkin is blunt about the difficulty Waterstones faces: ‘Under the rules of the NBA you can discount after a year, but a year's a hell of a long time to tie up dead stock.’
This spring saw another major initiative by British book publishers.
Secker & Warburg, Chatto & Windus and Hamish Hamilton started to publish books straight into paperback instead of producing first editions in hardback.
The initiative has been a success in terms of sales.
‘I'm very pleased with it,’ says Chatto's managing director Carmen Callil.
‘What we've found is that sales, at a minimum, are double.
The cover price is about £5 less, quite often we sell many, many more — but it's nothing for anybody to get too hysterical about,’ she adds.
A key problem is getting paperback originals reviewed in the quality press, the attention of which has traditionally been directed towards hardback first editions.
‘We're finding that they're getting reviewed, but quite a lot of papers are still bad about it,’ says Ms Callil.
‘A lot more depends on book reviewers.’
Ms Callil thinks it can be more profitable to go straight into paperback.
‘It depends on the run, but if the [author's]advance is right, yes — because you sell more.
Also, it's very good for your exports, because at the moment in Australia, say, they're buying no hardback books and they will order a couple of hundred paperbacks by an unknown author.’
However, Ms Callil says that overall it is not so much a question of bigger profits, as ‘less loss’.
She is not keen on hardbacks: ‘If it wasn't for the literary editors we wouldn't be publishing in hardback any more — some books we would, but not a lot.’
Eddie Bell has seen it all before.
‘I laugh at this straight into paperback initiative, it's been going on forever,’ he says.
‘I can remember it being done 15 years ago at Hodder & Stoughton.’
He has experimented successfully himself with low price hardbacks, but stresses that price cannot be looked at in isolation.
‘Price alone is not the issue,’ he says.
‘Dropping a book to £9.99 from £15 does not make the public run out and flood the bookstores; the book has got to have some other handle to it.’
Terry Maher is also unenthusiastic, but for other, perhaps predictable, reasons.
‘It's hardly an innovation.
It's a policy of despair in my view.
The despair is the fact that publishers feel they can no longer sell hardback fiction and biography, because of the very high price at which it's published.
And so we're back to the old problem.’
One problem in the business that does not relate to the NBA is technology.
‘The uptake in book retailing — this is in the UK — of electronic aids is very low, very low,’ mourns Richard Charkin.
In an industry in which stock is such a key issue, retailers' use of electronic point of sale techniques is limited.
A survey by The Booksellers Association last year showed a take-up of only 32% — a significant lag behind other industries — with 24% not using a computer at all.
‘It's astonishing,’ says Mr Charkin.
On the publishers' side, adoption of electronic data interchange is going slowly.
‘Our commitment to EDI will give us a strong competitive advantage,’ says Eddie Bell, ‘but we're not exactly overburdened by customers that we can deal with yet.’
Mr Bell is investing heavily in new technologies despite the industry's low margins.
‘I think that anybody who sits around and doesn't make the investment has got big problems coming in the future.
It ain't going to get much better for a while,’ he warns.
If the industry has been slow to embrace some commercial technological advances, there are publishers who see electronic publishing as the future.
At the moment books are available electronically in three formats: floppy disk, CD-Rom and now small — 8cm — CDs.
Books on floppy disk are being targeted at the business market, where there are multitudes of personal computers in use.
CD-Rom, on the other hand, lends itself to large general reference works such as encyclopaedias.
It is the key format for handling large volumes of information.
But the format that is creating a stir at present are the small CDs — the same size as CD audio singles — playable on the Sony Data Discman.
Launched this summer, the Discman displays data on a small screen.
Its selling point is portability: it will fit into the palm of a hand.
Paul Ayscough of Columbia Tristar Home Video (owned by Sony), which is marketing the Data Discman, says that sales are going well.
But he knows that new formats take a long time to catch on with the public: ‘We haven't got expectations of hundreds of thousands of units.
We're fairly happy with the hardware at the moment; we're not doing too badly.’
Sony is first into the UK market for the Discman hardware, but Panasonic is hot on its heels, and Mr Ayscough is aware of 12 other competitors.
Columbia Tristar's range of titles, however, will be compatible with all of the hardware.
The Data Discman costs around £350, with the titles retailing at £25 to £35.
Sony is already into its second version of the hardware.
Most significantly, the new version has sound, as well as extra facilities like a bookmark.
It is also slimmer, lighter and uses less power.
Mr Ayscough is bullish: ‘It makes a very strong proposition.
Whereas the first one was innovation, this one actually works very well and we're working on lots of interesting software for it.’
As we go to press 19 titles are on sale.
Columbia Tristar is working on 15 for release in January or February.
Titles include the Concise Oxford Dictionary, Oxford Thesaurus,Chambers' Science and Technology Library,the Michelin Main Cities Europe and the Time Out London Guide.
‘The first few hundred that sold were probably bought by what we call technophiles — people who are crazy to get new stuff — but since then it's moved out.’
Mr Ayscough regards business people as one of the safest major markets.
Time will tell whether there is widespread demand for the Discman and the other formats.
In some respects they are clearly superior to normal books, for example they have database cross-referencing facilities ordinary volumes lack.
But lovers of novels in everyday ink and print can take heart from the fact that electronic book publishing lends itself best to reference material.
Even electronic publishers can be sniffy about novels on disc.
‘I think there's a gimmick market,’ says one.
‘Most screens are still more difficult to use than most bits of paper.
It's not much fun, you're chained to the wall — it's like going back to a medieval library.
People like walking about with a novel.
I remain very sceptical about whether people will ever use electronic forms to read novels.
Battle for bookbuyers: Does innovation or desperation lie behind publishers’ marketing ploys?
The key thing in book selling, even more so than other forms of retailing, is attracting people into the shop
Jeffrey Archer: Taking advantage of television advertising
Terry Maher: No doubts about the benefits of denetting
This spring saw another major initiative by British book publishers.
Secker & Warburg, Chatto & Windus and Hamish Hamilton started to publish books straight into paperback
The bookstore: Most still operate on a sale or return basis
Hardbacks: Some sell well
Data Discman: Aimed at the business community and not just for technophiles
Lovers of novels in everyday ink and print can take heart from the fact that electronic book publishing lends itself best to reference material
Direct Line Insurance
WHAT MAKES THAT LITTLE RED TELEPHONE RING?
Well-known in a field — motor insurance — in which many if not most competitors are losing money, Direct Line Insurance has seen improved profits in each of the past four years.
Can it last?
Geoffrey Holmes and Alan Sugden
Universally recognised by its ‘little red telephone’, a device adopted in TV advertisements in 1990, Direct Line Insurance has certainly prospered.
From nothing in 1985 (start-up was on 2 April 1985), gross premium income was £124.4m by 1991 (47.9% up on 1990); and gross assets were £196.3m.
Best known for motor insurance, a field in which many — probably most — competitors are losing money, Direct Line has seen improved profits in each of the past four years.
Invited to Direct Line's impressive new headquarters in Croydon, Surrey to meet founder and chief executive Peter Wood, we asked the obvious question: can such spectacular expansion continue indefinitely?
This is important, first, to its parent, the Royal Bank of Scotland.
It saw a pre-tax return of £10.1m (more than one-sixth of its total profits in 1990/91) on a 31 December 1990 investment of £38m (increased by a further £24m in August last year) and now has a subsidiary worth perhaps six times its cost.
And it's important to Peter Wood personally.
Direct Line Insurance is not a listed company, but his 1991 total remuneration of £l.84m (up from £329,426 in 1990) makes him one of Britain's highest paid businesspeople.
‘You can't grow at 50% to 60% compound year-on-year [as they are doing],’ Mr Wood said.
‘Mathematically it's impossible.
So far as I can see, there are about 16m private motorists; 10m I would like to insure, and I think we might end up insuring 3m.’
That's about six times the present number.
But doesn't his bonus system (a profit share reported to be ‘1% of any increase above 12% in the capital value of Direct Line’) encourage him to take on business come what may?
‘The bonus system isn't purely on growth, it is on quality growth.
To calculate the net present value one takes into account claims frequency, average claim, growth of premiums and so on, so if I added business that generated far more claims, I could easily reduce the value of the company.’
In fact, not only is the business growing dramatically, but the claims frequency and expense ratio are both improving, and this year his bonus could well be double last year's.
Direct Line Insurance is Britain's largest direct insurer and had been running at 100,000 new policies or thereabouts for three years.
Last year, new business grew by 186,000.
Currently, it has about 550,000 motor policies in force; last year, in terms of written premiums, it wrote £84m, and this year it is looking at £150m-plus.
Expense ratio is around 16% against a market average of about 30% (but if it takes into account the cost of selling and servicing ‘add-on products’ such as legal expenses insurance and moves other costs into claims cost, as competitors do, it is down at about 13%).
Its mission — and it thinks that within two years it will achieve it — is 10%.
Last year it budgeted for 200,000 new motor policies in 1992.
‘In the first quarter, we upped that to 250,000.
We were soon running at 300,000.
If we carry on at that rate, and growth is actually accelerating, we will be the largest private motor insurer in two years.
This year we anticipate that our operating ratio [loss ratio plus expense ratio]will be the lowest in the market at about 88%.’
Peter Wood is a computer specialist by training; IBM and a number of British companies all figure in his background.
But it was working as a computer specialist in the insurance industry that gave him the necessary experience, most notably the motor insurance experience, he needed.
While he was working for insurance brokers Alexander Howden (running its 350-strong management services company, which is responsible for everything from staff canteen to computers and the chairman's Rolls-Royce) he decided he ‘wanted to run a company from A-Z.
Obviously with a computer background, I wanted to go into a business where you had large volumes.
I wanted a business where the competition wasn't very good.
It is better to go in when they are losing money than when they are making money; then one has more muscle’.
‘I studied the problem and came up with a blueprint.
We talked to lots of people before a friend at Royal Bank introduced me to Sid Proctor, then the bank's chief executive.
After many discussions, shaping and reshaping the deal, much to my surprise they said ‘yes’.’
Given Peter Wood's background, it is scarcely surprising that Direct Line's computer systems impress.
He determined the framework and the broad outline, brought 10 specialists with him and acquired a small bureau operation Howden did not want any more.
In seconds Peter Wood can key in, get the new business, and the renewals.
He can see exactly how business is coming in, look at the average premiums; how the underwriting stands; how claims are progressing; and at the renewal retention rate.
‘Within five minutes of arriving at the office I have enough information to discuss any changes needed.’
We watched the system in action.
All key figures were live — up to the instant the screen was called — and available in total and on an office by office basis.
The business depends on telephone contact, so its telephone systems are equally sophisticated — a display shows instant by instant how many calls have been handled and how many are waiting.
Direct Line prides itself on responding to 90% of enquiries within 10 seconds.
What then is the essential difference between direct and traditional insurance?
It is simply that with direct insurance customers come straight to the company to buy their insurance, usually by phone.‘
The first thing I brought was service.
Prior to us there was no 24 hour helpline.
You couldn't just pick up the phone at any time you liked.
We work hours to suit the public: 8am — 8pm, Monday to Friday, 9am — 2pm Saturday.
We have a 24-hour claims helpline; breakdown assistance — if you have an accident, a tow-truck to come and pick up the car; and much better documentation.’
The mission was simple: to be the lowest-cost producer with the best service.
‘We felt that by cutting out the broker to reduce the cost, building up a team of very friendly tele-sales and tele-service operators to talk to customers and explain and do all the form filling for them, they would eventually sign.
‘The fact that when you have a claim you can phone up and talk to us straight away, and we will give you advice on what to do, is important too.
‘What we term the Policy Confirmation Document is really the proposal.
We print it and ask you to check it and sign it.
It is the same with a claim.
Nobody likes filling in a form.
We don't like you filling in a form because we can't read your writing.’
How does he answer the man who says: ‘Don't go to the lowest quoting insurer because I remember Vehicle and General, and other insurers, favourites, in their day, of countless brokers, who were not there when policyholders needed them.
How do I know that in choosing Direct Line I won't get into the same trouble?’
‘On a cost basis we are approaching one third of the cost to the competition.
We are not in equities, we are not in property (our only property we use)— so we have no double risk.
Most insurance companies are in the risk of their prime business and they are in the risk of investment — which can go up and down dramatically as you well know.
‘We can justify our pricing.
We are selective.
We do not take youngsters or powerful cars.
We do not take certain inner City areas.
And because our operating ratio is so much lower, we can justify our premiums.’
Motorists seem particularly prone to change insurer.
‘Certainly, it surprises me: many people will change for £5.’
‘Renewal retention of the market is probably about 50% to 55%; so they are keeping a policyholder about two years.
We estimate that we will keep our policyholders, on average, for eight years.’
Why?
‘First, because other insurers have intermediaries who are forced by competition to look around for the best price.
Second, because policyholders have no identification with the insurance companies.’
Direct Line has regional offices in Glasgow and Manchester and is planning a fourth office in the Midlands.‘
People have said ‘Why didn't you stay in one place?’— and this would be more economic.’
But the company did not want to dominate employment in one area.
Distance of communication and marketing played a part.
‘We had good people in south London, but people don't necessarily like talking to the South East.
Scots prefer to talk to someone in Glasgow, Northerners to deal with Manchester.
We grew dramatically faster in those areas when we moved there.
The one area where we are not doing as much as we think we should is the Midlands; that is why we are opening there.’
Although best known for motor insurance, Direct Line writes two other classes of insurance: household and creditor.
Record levels of new business were written in 1991 on the household account.
As a result, the number of policies in force grew from 114,000 in 1990 to 166,000 in 1991.
But it has still to make an underwriting profit on this account.
‘The whole insurance industry is putting its household rates up tremendously because of subsidence.
They probably haven't got it right — their rates are all different — so we are holding back.
But we will add 75,000 new policies this year without trying.’
Creditor insurance is not currently one of the company's major functions — it is provided only for Royal Bank of Scotland customers (322,000 in 1991).
What is the business worth today?
How well has the Royal Bank of Scotland's investment performed?
‘When people bought an insurance company they tended to pay once times premiums, but with our operating ratio, you would pay at least twice.
That puts us at £400m [for an investment of £62m].
But we are not for sale.’
Direct Line never takes on a liability of more than a year.
That is one of the attractive things about the business: that there is no long tail.
An attractive and profitable investment?
Possibly, but will they ever go public?
‘There is no definite plan…if you were going to, you would want to go at the top, and we are still growing.’
Direct Line Insurance is not a listed company, but Peter Wood's 1991 total remuneration of £1.84m (up from £329,426 in 1990) makes him one of Britain's highest paid businessmen
Peter Wood: Chasing motorists
Direct Line never takes on a liability of more than a year.
That is one of the attractive things about the business: that there is no long tail Direct line headquarters: Our only property we use
golf
PLEASURE DOMES IN THE BUNKER Putting their money where the boom beckoned has turned out to be a major handicap for several super-golf-course developers
Nigel Cope
When Bruce Graham gets into work one of the first things he does is check his mail.
He is looking for letters from potential puchasers of Loch Lomond, the troubled up-market golf and country club development of which he was appointed administrator in November 1990.
After two years a buyer still cannot be found.
‘We remain optimistic,’ says Mr Graham, a partner with Cork Gully in Edinburgh.
Loch Lomond is a paradigm of golf's predicament.
Planned during the boom years of the late 1980s, it was to be the golf development par excellence.
The plan included two courses (one to be designed by former Open champion Tom Weiskopf), a 200 room hotel, 50 timeshare lodges, a marina, stables and a nature reserve.
Billed as a potential rival to Gleneagles, the development was to cost £60m in total.
It appeared to be a well-heeled golfer's dream.
The clubhouse would be Rossdhu House, the 200 year old former home of the Colquhoun family.
The courses would be championship standard.
The location by the loch was unrivalled.
All you needed to join was a hefty bank balance: corporate membership was £25,000.
But even before the recession hit, the project was in the rough.
Problems started when a developer for the hotel could not be found, and Mr Graham was called in at the behest of the main creditor, the Bank of Scotland.
And Loch Lomond is not alone.
There are at least half a dozen of these golfing meccas languishing in the hands of the receiver.
It all looked very different a few years ago.
The European team had won the Ryder Cup twice in succession.
British golfers such as Nick Faldo and Ian Woosnam were sweeping all before them and golf in Britain looked set to boom.
And boom it did.
According to a 1990 market study by market researchers Mintel, the UK market for golf goods increased from £153m in 1983 to £250m in 1990.
Two other factors helped swell the boom, both related to one key question: where were all these would-be golfers going to play?
In 1989 the Royal and Ancient Golf Club, the sport's governing body, issued a report concluding that by the year 2000 an extra 700 courses would be needed in England, Wales and Northern Ireland to meet demand.
The idea was to produce a more acceptable golf course-to-population ratio of one per 25,000.
Currently it's one per 30,000, whereas in Scotland (golf's home) the ratio is a healthy one per 12,000.
In addition, the Ministry of Agriculture and the European Commission warned that farmers must find other uses for their land.
According to Neil Hayward, golf development officer of the English Golf Union, the union received requests for advice on 2,000 planning applications between 1988 and 1992.
It is estimated that 1,000 courses were built in England in 1990 alone.
But building a golf course is expensive.
First there is the land; then possibly a top golf name's fee for designing the course; a decent clubhouse; maintenance.
The list goes on.
In the late 1980s developers knew that they would not make a decent return on their investment on a pay and play basis.
Cash flow would never had covered the interest charges on the debt.
Instead developers warmed to the idea of the luxury golf club.
Marketing their clubs as exclusive establishments with a championship-standard course and a five star hotel-standard clubhouse, the money men felt they could pitch their joining fee at £10,000 or £25,000 and even charge £1,000 annual dues on top.
It was great for cash flow because the developer got the money up front, wiping out the debts straight away .
Like Loch Lomond, Slaley Hall in Northumbria and Quietwaters in Essex tried to take the high-quality, high-price route to success.
Like Loch Lomond, they failed.
Slaley Hall, 25 miles west of Newcastle, had millions lavished on it.
The development, on 250 acres, was to include a championship-standard, 18 hole golf course (its construction was supervised by Peter Alliss); a 140 room hotel; a leisure complex featuring swimming pool, solarium and steam room; holiday villas; timeshare lodges; and small apartments.
It sounded great, but it never really happened.
The developers, headed by Seamus O'Carroll and John Rourke, ran out of funding, and in September last year Slaley Hall slid into receivership with debts of £27m.
Len Gatoff, a partner with Touche Ross in Newcastle, was appointed receiver.
He says Slaley Hall was scuppered by three main problems: ‘The funding was never properly in place.
The developers had hoped to sell timeshares and villas, but because of planning restrictions, fewer were sold than hoped, and then the economic climate changed.’
He also says that high prices and the Northern weather might have been a factor.
‘The course is in rural Northumberland where the weather is not at its best.
At the prices that were being charged would you go to Slaley Hall when you could go to Portugal?’
Though in receivership, the golf course is open and has held championships.
The hotel, which is three months away from being finished, is being maintained.
Mr Gatoff says he is looking for offers in the region of £15m.
‘People are nibbling,’ he says.
‘But we want to flush out a buyer in the next few months.’
Quietwaters, a £20m development near Maldon in Essex, is also awaiting a new owner.
Quietwaters is slightly different from the other developments: there was already a course and clubhouse in place, but the plan was to develop a second course as well as the seemingly obligatory hotel and leisure complex and timeshare units.
But, as at Loch Lomond, it was the hotel that was to prove the development's Achilles' heel.
De Vere Hotels pulled out of negotiations and the receivers — again Touche Ross — were called in during April this year.
Joint receivers Nick Lyle and David Morgan (both keen players with handicaps of 22 and 16 respectively) are talking with confidence.
‘On the assumption that good times will come again, people that buy these things now will make a lot of money.’
Touche Ross says that it has received more than 200 enquiries, including three ‘serious’ bids from the UK plus others from Japan, Hong Kong, Taiwan and the US.
But lavish developments can work, as The Wisley Club near Guildford in Surrey has proved.
Wisley, which opened in September last year, claims to be Britain's first syndicated golf club.
Members do not simply join it, they buy a stake in it.
The first tranche of shares in 1987 sold at £26,000, and the most recent at a thumping £41,000.
For that investment the member gets a stake in the club and in the freehold, and thereby has a say in how it is run.
There are 750 shares and so far 454 have been sold (including 170 in the past 12 months).
‘We're pretty happy with it,’ says marketing director Jonathan Dickens.
The developer, Marlin Estates, spent £19m on Wisley and decided to steer clear of ancillary activities and concentrate on golf.
There are 27 holes featuring multiple water hazards and a special ‘bent grass’ that has been imported for the putting surfaces.
A computerised irrigation system with 750 sprinkler heads keeps the course watered and more than £750,000 was spent on landscaping.
The clubhouse, built in the Lutyens style, includes two bars, a restaurant, and a club room with snooker table.
The changing rooms have saunas.
On top of the not inconsiderable investment of £41,000 for the privilege of joining the club, members have to stump up over £1,000 a year in dues.
How did Wisley succeed where Loch Lomond, Slaley Hall and Quietwaters failed?
One factor is its location, just 24 miles from central London close to the A3/M25 intersection in an area where demand is high and stockbroker-belt wallets are capacious.
The course was also marketed extensively overseas, with the result that of the current 454 members, 20% are resident abroad.
‘If you produce a good product, there's no problem,’ says Jonathan Dickens.
But Wisley may prove the exception.
Many think that it is the pay and play golfer who deserves more courses.
‘We reckon there are anything between 1m and 2m people who want to play golf but cannot get into a club,’ says Neil Hayward of the English Golf Union.
‘We strongly suggest that if you open a new course you want to get feet on greens quickly and that means building pay as you play courses.’
Some of the accountants who have found themselves running some of the ill-fated, high-profile developments agree.
Len Gatoff, Slaley Hall's receiver, says: ‘There is a huge market for pay and play.
And it is possible to build a club and run it profitably without building huge ancillary leisure developments.’
East Horton is one example.
The course, in Hampshire, was developed bytwo farmers, Edward and Richard Bastian, on part of their land.
Landscaping was kept to a minimum and construction took just five months.
The club opened in May and is already full with 575 members paying £50 to £500 a year for membership, plus green fees of £10 on weekdays and £12 at weekends.
It is not necessary, however, to be a member to use the course.
‘That's the key,’ says course designer Trevor Pearce.
‘We've been able to make it affordable.’
Loch Lomond's receiver, Bruce Graham, sees a pattern.
‘I believe there is a strong market for pay and play, but you have got to make sure your construction costs are kept down to make it pay.
I also think there is still a market at the top.
It is in the middle ground that I would question the viability.’
Another booming sector is the driving range.
There are now 322 in Britain, and Neil Hayward of the English Golf Union says the union has been  approached for advice an a further 124.
‘There is a great interest in driving ranges,’ he says.
‘They can be built on considerably less land than a golf course and the cost of construction and maintenance is reasonable.’
The success of modestly-priced courses such as East Horton and the increasing  popularity of driving ranges, where anyone can turn up with a three wood and a five iron and whack a basket of balls for just a few pounds, shows that golf can still thrive in the recession — if the price is right.
But lavish developments can work.
Wisley claims to be Britain's first syndicated golf club.
Members do not simply join it, they buy a stake in it
Accountancy TV
LOOK AND LEARN WITH ATV Accountancy TV has been formally launched and a phenomenal success is being predicted
Julia Irvine Abunch of accountants, of all ages and qualifications, smiling broadly in anticipation of an investment return beyond their wildest dreams?
Surely not; there's a recession on.
But that's exactly what was happening at the launch last month of Accountancy Television (ATV), a new service that will provide accountants with news, views and training once a week over the next year.
What was at best a speculative investment six months ago by five of the six major accountancy bodies, the BBC and accountancy trainers BPP, looks now as if it could turn into a roaring success.
By the time the service was launched, there had been more than 11,000 enquiries from potential subscribers, a level of interest that took the backers completely by surprise.
‘The investors did commission some initial market research before they invested their money,’ says former Institute president Mike Lickiss, who is currently ATV's independent chairman.
‘The results were optimistic, in fact so optimistic that people found it difficult to accept.
And so there was a second lot of market research commissioned from a different organisation, and they came up with an even better picture!
‘What is most interesting is that an analysis of the first 3,500 enquiries showed that 60% were from industrial and commercial companies.
I have always said that there are thousands of qualified accountants sitting out there in small companies where they are finance directors, credit controllers, company secretaries, advisers to the board, the people to whom the board looks for everything.
They never get a day off, nobody thinks of letting them go off on a training course, they never get the chance to keep up and yet they are expected to be the fount of all knowledge.
And these chaps are obviously saying ‘This is right up our street’.’
The advantage of the service, Mr Lickiss points out, is that the subscribers can choose when they want or have the time to study.
The programme,Business Account , which is aired in the early hours of the morning, is videoed through a BBC Selector decoder.
‘All you have to do is remember to put a videotape in.
The BBC switches it on for you by remote control smart card technology and training material is sent through the post.’
The programme, which is edited by Peter Williams, formerly editor of Accountancy Age , will provide a combination of up to date news, interviews, technical updates and training.
The first, shown at the beginning of October, included an interview with Corporate Affairs Minister Neil Hamilton, discussed the Institute of Taxation's fears about the ICAEW Tax Faculty's proposals to set its own examinations, and looked at three training issues: cashflow statements, the new Inland Revenue rules on company cars, and the Government proposals on compulsory competitive training.
‘There isn't going to be an enormous mix in every programme,’ Mr Lickiss explains.
‘We're breaking each into three distinctive parts: the first will be news which is relevant to the profession; the second is likely to be a head to head or an interview on a particular issue; but the bulk of it — 40 minutes — is going to be sheer training, probably in two lots of 20 minutes each.’
Getting the balance right will be a problem, he says, which is why the service is placing so much emphasis on what the subscriber wants.
Through the magazine and training packs that each subscriber receives, they will be asked their opinions on programme content, their likes, dislikes, and what they would like to see in the future.
Fees for the service range from £750 for a sole practitioner or for individual use, through to £4,000 for commercial organisations with up to 10,000 employees and practices with up to 10 partners.
Large organisations and firms will be able to negotiate their subscriptions (phone 0789 200222).
The first year's subscription includes one free BBC Selector and standard installation if you are one of the early subscribers.
Of course, as the investors are well aware, 11,000-plus enquiries does not mean that ATV is already a commercial success.
Those enquiries will have to be converted into contracts and hard cash, and much will depend on the quality of the output.
Not only will the service need to reach the highly professional standards achieved by British television, it will also have to be seen to be editorially independent.
Some Institute members have already raised questions about, for example, the lack of a Tax Faculty response to the Institute of Taxation's stance on the exam proposals in the first programme.
Mr Lickiss says that the programme does enjoy editorial freedom and that, should conflicts of interest arise, he will be called in to adjudicate as independent chairman of the board.
‘Peter Williams is a very experienced news editor and I think he has an uncanny awareness of what people find interesting.
Our chief executive, Petre Sefton, is not an accountant but she comes from a commercial organisation, so she is not fettered in any way by preconceived notions about the profession.
She is taking a totally objective marketing view and that's jolly good.’
He is bullish about ATV's future.
‘I think the question is what degree of success we can look forward to.
The more successful it is, the more we are going to be able to offer subscribers, and that in itself should make it even more successful.’
Mike Lickiss: Giving subscribers what they want
small business
RECRUITING IN A RECESSION Taking on new staff is rarely a company priority in a recession, but The Freshman Consultancy has established itself in the recruitment business in spite of the current climate
Hester Thomas
Timing is everything, or so they say.
In theory, Paul Chambers, the 32-year-old managing director of The Freshman Consultancy Ltd in London, got it completely wrong.
He opened his recruitment consultancy in January 1991, just as the recession was revealing the depths to which it could sink.
Most companies, including employment agencies, were thinking of laying off rather than taking on staff.
‘People said I was brave setting up a company at such a time,’ recalls Mr Chambers, adding ‘Brave’is a back-handed way of saying ‘You're mad’.’
Nevertheless, The Freshman Consultancy has done well, bucking the recession.
At the end of its first year's trading, turnover was around £250,000, and the second year is going even better; the company has achieved last year's total within six months.
After mulling over the idea for almost a year, Mr Chambers made the decision to leave Greenfield Human Resources — the agency he joined as a trainee in 1956 and left as a director — and set up on his own.
He felt he had gone as far as he could in the company and learned as much as he was likely to.
The Freshman Consultancy opened in January 1991 in offices near London's Euston station and has since moved to Chamber Street in E1 near Tower Hill.
It specialises in the area Mr Chambers worked in at Greenfield, recruiting for companies supplying information technology and software to international financial companies.
Mr Chambers bought an off-the-shelf company via his solicitors Gold, Mann and Co, opting for limited liability status because of the personal protection it gave him.
He uses serviced offices because of the flexibility they offer.
To keep initial setting-up costs to a minimum, all the office equipment — fax, personal computer and printer — is being purchased on three-year leases.
‘My major investment,’ says Mr Chambers, ‘was on stationery and presentation equipment, all of which the clients would see.’
Start-up costs came to around £10,000 — which came straight out of personal savings.
For the first four months he also funded his salary out of personal savings.
One of the things he had not envisaged was how long it would take before he could send out the first invoice.
‘Generally, everything happened about four to six weeks after I wanted it to.’
Having got the company going, he decided to look for an accountant.
Mr Chambers' solicitor advised him to try a medium-sized London firm.
‘I liked them.
They wanted to know about me and my business and how I thought they could help,’ he recalls.
Although the business was solvent, Mr Chambers wanted a fall-back measure in case his personal monies ran out.
He decided to ask his bank for a £5,000 overdraft facility.
It was a sobering experience.
With his accountant's help he eventually moved his accounts to the Midland, which gave him the overdraft on reasonable terms, but he is critical of the way banks look at small businesses, believing that many only look at the business sector rather than at the person running a particular business.
The banks have good reason to be wary of funding recruitment consultancies.
Figures from the MSL International consultancy, which tracks the number of executive jobs advertised in leading British journals, show that the computing profession has been one of the hardest hit.
Advertised jobs fell by 30% over the period August 1991/92 compared with August 1990/91.
He has now changed his accountant.
‘The problem is I'm a small company with an unsophisticated requirement from an accountant.
What I need is advice from time to time.
So I went with a much smaller firm.
I wanted to work with people who are running a small firm, people who are dealing with the same problems as me because they're running a small business.’
The new firm is Quest Duthoit, based in Worthing and with an office in Chelsea Harbour.
He moved to them early this year.
Nine months after start-up Mr Chambers took on another consultant.
He also has a full-time administrator and researcher who looks after the books, and a part-time secretary.
Now, with money in the bank, a small crew of employees and plenty of business, what does Mr Chambers put his relative success down to?
‘I've had six years experience in this market and have built up a high personal profile among clients,’ he explains.
‘I don't take a lot out of the company.
I've gone for quality service: if clients say jump, we jump.
And I've also gone for quality clients, companies I want to work for and who I know will pay on time.’
Mr Chambers' marketing efforts have been direct, including cold calling, but a large amount of his work now comes by referral.
He finds that job ads placed in prominent papers like the Financial Times serve him well.
He still thinks it was a good idea to open his business, despite the recession.
‘In terms of fun and enjoyment it's been the best move I've made.
This climate has made me conservative and changed my plans for growing the business.’
His previous employer went bust three months ago.
Paul Chambers: Good idea to open up despite recession
FRES/recruitment
OUT OF THE EXAM ROOM AND OUT OF WORK Hundreds of newly-qualified chartered accountants are also newly redundant, but few are very surprised
Flavia Hawksley
Three years ago, newly-qualified chartered accountants had it made.
Employers in all fields of endeavour were crying out for them, offering generous salaries along with an array of enticing perks.
No one would have believed then that, three years on, hundreds of newly-qualifieds would be redundant — and that perks would be cut, salaries frozen — and even harder to believe, that management and certified accountants could be sought in preference.
A year ago the recruitment agencies were optimistic that things would have improved by January.
Now they're saying things should have improved by this time next year.
In our last report on public practice six months ago, we saw salaries starting to decline and redundancies on the increase.
Overall, during this past year salaries have effectively declined by around 4.5%, according to recruitment consultants Challoner James.
With a fresh crop of newly-qualifieds hitting the market and no vacancies to fill, firms are making further redundancies, ceasing to renew training contracts — sometimes even terminating the contract early on the grounds that there is no work — and beginning to offer part-time employment as an alternative.
The only difference now is that people are not surprised and perhaps, therefore, better prepared for the shock.
Tanya Lake has just passed PE2, first time as with all her exams, but says it came as no surprise to her when her audit partner at Chantrey Vellacott told her that her contract would not be renewed.
‘The year above us didn't leave, so there are already plenty of qualified accountants.
We got squeezed out of the middle.’
Furthermore she doesn't seem to be the least bit worried.
‘I'm looking at it all very positively,’ she says, ‘because auditing isn't for me anyway — and the partners knew that, which is how they chose who to make redundant.
With the redundancy I have time to go and search properly for a job.’
With the help of outplacement consultants and Chartac (phone: 071–628 7060), which runs regular seminars and one to one discussions, Tanya is optimistic that she will find a job in a medium-sized company in commerce and industry, as number two or three to the financial director.
Although many of her friends have lost their jobs too, which, she says, means ‘there is no stigma to being made redundant’, they all seem to have been lucky.
Most found jobs within a few weeks and the longest any of them was unemployed was three months.
But according to the recruitment agencies that is not the norm.
‘The typical average time is three to six months,’ says Jenny Ogden of Harrison Willis.
Another newly-qualified (also with all first-time passes), who wishes to remain anonymous, can back that up.
He was made redundant from one of the Big Six at the end of 1991.
It took him 10 months to find a suitable job, although he was fortunate enough to be able to find temporary work in between.
This in turn made the looking harder, but eased the pressure to accept the first thing that came along.
Like Tanya, he has no bad feelings towards his employers and says his redundancy was handled well.
But he too wanted to move into industry and commerce.
For those who had set their heart on becoming partners in the firm it was much harder.
‘The only disappointment from my point of view was that the timetable for my leaving was chosen for me.
I'd have liked everything to happen at my pace,’ he says.
‘It also hits your self confidence a little bit until you realise it's just an equation of circumstances.’
With the steady influx of newly qualifieds every six months and the continuing decrease in demand, finding audit work in practice is extremely difficult.
There are opportunities to go overseas, but competition is tremendous, with five or six applicants for every job.
And because of the surfeit of accountants forced to look for work ‘outside’, employers are increasingly able to offer poorer terms.
Sometimes they even try to offer a position at a lower salary than advertised.
‘This practice of ‘gazundering’,’ says Martin Humberside of Challoner James, ‘is now commonplace.’
Naturally enough in a recession, insolvency and corporate recovery have boomed, though even that is slowing down now.
But there are pockets of vacancies in other specialist areas, notably in the financial services sector, corporate finance, taxation, training and forensic accounting.
The other main option is to move into commerce and industry.
There again specialisation helps.
‘We're finding that people who've specialised in a certain field such as financial services or entertainment are much more marketable than people who are more generalist in their work experience,’ says Ms Ogden.
Anyone with the additional skill of a second European language will find that the picture is far from bleak.
There will be an excellent chance not only of finding a good job but of receiving up to £4,000 above the regular salary.
As there is still a marked shortage of UK accountants with language abilities, it could be wise to take a crash course while searching for a new job.
Another newly-qualified with all first-time passes was made redundant from one of the Big Six at the end of 1991.
It took him 10 months to find a suitable job
strategy
INFORMATION: THE STRATEGIC ESSENTIAL Surveys suggest that the UK's senior executives don't get the information they need.
If companies are going to prosper when economic conditions improve, how should these information needs be satisfied?
Brian Taylor, Alistair Gray and Craig Graham
Companies have always needed to be fully aware of events in their marketplace, to recognise opportunities and to maintain the flexibility to take advantage of them.
In the middle of a recession this is even more acute.
Directors need to make swift, well-informed decisions to ensure that their companies are the first to react and are able to grow at their competitors' expense.
What must underpin these decisions?
The answer is fast, focused, relevant information; information that enables senior executives to formulate and review strategy as well as to monitor performance.
Usually finance departments are responsible for satisfying the most senior executives' information needs.
But are they providing information that will satisfy these needs and provide a foundation for successful strategies and meaningful performance measurement?
Quality of information
Evidence from several studies suggests that senior executives' information needs are not being met.
The KPMG survey of Information for Strategic Management (1990) shows that information provided to directors and senior executives of Times Top 1000 companies concentrates on financial indicators and only compares performance against internal self-determined indicators.
Competitive benchmarks for financial and non-financial indicators are not widely used.
Many respondents said that the information fails to highlight critical issues and a majority rated such information as only poor or average.
The survey also shows that because of insufficient information on non-financial and external factors, directors only have a narrow view of the business on which to base strategic planning and control.
The Business Intelligence survey of Directors' Information Needs (1990) highlights other areas of concern.
The traditional huge monthly information pack is particularly criticised.
More than a third of directors want more summarised information and want to see it in a more comprehensible, graphic form.
All but 9% list various improvements they want to see introduced.
The Business International survey of Chief Financial Officers (1991) shows that customer service is the most important business process, but its information and decision support was poor.
Again, insufficient external information was raised as a difficulty, especially among less profitable organisations.
So the evidence suggests that companies will not be able to take advantage of an improving economic environment unless better information is provided at senior executive and board level.
And unless the right information is obtained, and used, the decision process will be ill-informed and laborious, opportunities will be missed, and profits will be lower.
The role of senior executives
To meet senior executives' needs, the information must enable them to monitor and control the organisation's activities against its strategy and objectives, and contribute to an effective strategic decision-making process.
It is necessary to consider the role of the executive board and consider the types of decisions it actually makes.
Board decisions fall into three categories — strategic direction, managing change and operational management — and each category needs very different information.
Strategic direction and decision making are about choosing the right road, and they need a high degree of external information.
This information and its analysis will quickly eliminate unrealistic options and leave a limited number of alternatives.
Decision support techniques, such as sensitivity analysis, will improve the quality of the ultimate decision.
Once the road has been chosen, change management comes to mean knowing how to get off the existing road and onto the new one.
Here, different information and skills are needed.
Directors must know how the organisation is doing against its chosen strategy.
They should monitor its performance against specified objectives, with milestones along the way.
But these milestones cannot be purely financial — return on assets or earnings per share.
Change management is principally concerned with people — their attitudes and skill levels, and how to communicate with them and overcome their resistance.
So if the board is to ensure that it is project managing the change effectively, it must have non-financial internal information too.
And there's a need for external information: the board should know which of its competitors have embarked on similar strategies, and how they are progressing.
Operational management is about continuous improvement — how to get there quicker and safer.
The information here is necessarily internal and more exacting and precise.
But again, it should not be entirely financial.
The use of statistical process control by world class manufacturing companies shows how non-financial information can be used to improve performance.
Although executives' roles span all these categories, the evidence highlights the fact that companies too often concentrate on the internal, financially-based operational information to the detriment of strategic and change-management information.
As a result senior executives tend to concentrate on operations rather than on policy and direction.
Although boards need the correct information mix across the three categories of decision making, individual company cultures give greater or lesser emphasis to each category.
For example, it is in companies with a small number of core businesses, especially where there is a coordinated global strategy (eg BP and BOC), that the executive board is most heavily involved in operational decision making.
Conversely, the decisions taken by boards with a less participative style, such as Hanson and Tomkins, are primarily concerned with strategic decisions such as acquisition or disposal of businesses in the portfolio.
Determining information needs
How can you ensure the information given to senior executives is relevant to the types of business decision they make?
The information must be matched to the business's objectives and critical success factors.
Critical success factors are the limited number of areas in which results, if they are satisfactory, will ensure successful competitive performance.
Business International and KPMG surveyed 300 chief financial officers in the UK and Europe in 1990.
The report,Successful Financial Strategies for the New Europe,summarised the common factors crucial to business success:
product quality and innovation;
customer satisfaction and retention;
management development;
change management and flexibility;
cost structure.
Of these, only cost structure directly relates to financial control; the remaining factors cover non-financial and external issues.
Developing an information set from properly-defined critical success factors will ensure that it includes all the required key performance indicators and that they are supported by the full range of internal and external, financial and non-financial information that is necessary.
What types of information?
Although senior executives' specific information needs differ widely from company to company, the information required does fall into consistent categories (see diagram).
Traditional management information concentrates only on financial information, but information for strategic management should also include external information on, for example, the economy, products and competitors, and internal information on operations and human resources.
Remember that the relevant information set is always changing in line with business conditions.
In today's environment there are a number of information issues that will always arise when directors and senior executives are reviewing strategy and monitoring performance.
If your senior executives have the information to help them answer the following questions they will be well equipped to make the right decisions.
Where are the opportunities to invest?
Are we sufficiently innovative to sustain and grow our business?
Will we be a global player?
If so, how do we get there?
If not, how do we sustain competitive presence?
Are we at risk from acquisitive predators, and who are they?
What do our customers think of us, and what do we need to improve?
Who are our competitors, what are they doing and can we react quicker than they can?
Does the quality of our products meet current and future market needs?
Do we have the correct management skills?
And what skills should we be developing?
Is our cost level competitive?
What targets should we be setting for improvements?
If we have downsized to reduce our cost base, have we retained the potential to meet an upturn in demand?
Strategic direction:
Market issues:
Organisational issues:
Cost structure:
Reviewing the information that is needed can have substantial and far-reaching effects on how senior executives think about business performance and on the decisions that they make.
It made one manufacturing company re-order its priorities substantially.
Earnings per share was traditionally the prime and almost exclusive measure of performance.
In the revised priorities earnings per share dropped to last place.
It is now preceded by customer satisfaction, cash flow, manufacturing effectiveness and innovation.
These new measures are the ones that truly anticipated the success of this business.
Don't follow the crowd
The leading companies of the 1990s will be those that are quicker to respond and that innovate to retain competitive advantage.
The less successful companies will follow the crowd, soon underperform and, in due course, become the takeover targets of the more prosperous.
Where directors receive a range of internal and external information on which to determine strategy, and monitor performance against that strategy, their companies will be in the best position to lead and to win.
CASE STUDY: ICI
The executive board of ICI uses an information base which includes limited operational data and concentrates on strategic information.
This matches its role at the centre of the company.
A broad range of external information such as business, economic and competitor news, stock prices and currency movements is supported by financial and non-financial indicators for each division.
The competitor information includes, for example, trend analysis on the cost levels, profit and earnings per share of each perceived competitor.
ICI started a fundamental rationalisation programme in February 1990.
The implementation of the programme is currently being monitored through the information analysed at board level.
The programme's objectives include improving the divisions' financial accountability and increasing emphasis on shareholder wealth.
The information at the centre will permit the board to determine exactly how close it is to achieving these change management objectives.
CASE STUDY: NEW DIVISION
The division was formed two years ago from a number of subsidiaries.
On formation there was no consistent information set.
Its management decided to start from first principles by developing critical success factors.
These included, for example, management of working capital, product differentiation and cost management.
From this base, a set of performance indicators were generated as the top level of the information set.
This has helped it manage the recession more successfully than would otherwise have been possible.
Important indicators cover market share and the link to pricing and profitability.
As market size has reduced, the division has been closely monitoring the position and has been able to make swift, well-informed decisions on pricing strategy.
personal finance: currencies
OPPORTUNITY KNOCKS Movements in the foreign exchange markets can mean profits for investors with offshore currency funds.
They also provide tax planning opportunities
Robin Dunham
The turbulent foreign exchange markets and doubts about the future of the Exchange Rate Mechanism have created extra opportunities for individual investors in currency funds.
In particular, the weakness of the US dollar has made it look cheap on a comparison of purchasing power.
Union Bank of Switzerland expects the dollar to begin trading higher against the Deutschmark before the end of 1992.
Heightened tensions within the ERM have triggered devaluations of the lira, pound and peseta against the Deutschmark.
The Swiss franc is regarded as stronger.
Currency funds are based offshore, often in Jersey and Guernsey.
The money is invested in deposits with first class banks and the investor receives a wholesale rate of interest on the currency selected.
There are two types of fund: managed — where the investment manager selects the mix of currencies — and individual single currency funds.
In the case of the managed funds they will be denominated in a leading currency, for example US dollar, sterling, or Deutschmark, although the manager will be free to select the mixture of currencies that, at any time, appears to offer the best prospects.
The funds can either be roll-up, where all income is retained and reflected in the price of the fund, or distributor, where at least 85% of the income is paid out in dividends to the investors.
Usually, an initial charge is only payable on managed funds, but managers charge an annual management fee on both managed and individual classes.
Both categories provide some useful financial planning opportunities.
The distributor funds, which pay income gross, are suitable for UK investors such as non-working wives to cover their personal tax allowance (currently £3,445).
Any gain on the eventual sale of a distributor fund by someone liable to UK tax is assessable to CGT and indexation will apply.
However, in the case of roll-up funds any gain on realisation counts as income for a UK taxpayer.
Fidelity (0800 414161) has produced guides explaining the tax savings to be made by using a roll-up fund; the opportunities cover investing on behalf of a child, supplementing your income, retiring or working abroad, approaching retirement, investments made by a non-working spouse and investing on behalf of your company.
Rothschild Asset Management (0481 713713) has one of the widest choices of currency funds.
The roll-up fund, Old Court International Reserves Ltd, and the distributor fund, Old Court Currency Fund Ltd, each offer wholesale rates of interest in 18 individual classes of currency — Australian dollars, Belgian francs, Canadian dollars, Danish kroner, Deutschmarks, Dutch guilders, Ecus, French francs, Hong Kong dollars, Italian lire, Japanese yen, New Zealand dollars, Singapore dollars, Spanish pesetas, sterling, Swedish kronar, Swiss francs and US dollars.
Charges consist of a management fee of 0.75% a year.
There is no minimum investment.
Switching is possible between classes at no dealing cost.
In addition, Rothschilds has managed classes in the roll-up fund valued in sterling, US dollars and Deutschmarks.
It has recently created an international managed class of share designed for investors who require investments managed against the world's leading currencies.
It invests against a benchmark composed of one third US dollars, one third Deutschmarks and one third yen.
According to Rothschilds the introduction of non-certification has speeded up the redemption process by eliminating the need to return share certificates.
Lloyds International Money Market Fund (0481 724983) is a roll-up fund based in Guernsey.
It has 14 individual currency classes: Australian dollars, Canadian dollars, Deutschmarks, Dutch guilders, Ecus, French francs, Hong Kong dollars, Japanese yen, New Zealand dollars, Portuguese escudos, Spanish pesetas, sterling, Swiss francs and US dollars.
There are also two managed currency classes, one in sterling and one in US dollars.
Minimum investment is $10,000 or equivalent and $2,000 subsequently.
It may be spread between a number of different currency classes.
There are no initial or switching charges; the annual management fee is 0.75% for the individual currency classes and 1.5% for the managed currency classes.
The range of currencies in Fidelity Money Funds based in Bermuda includes Australian dollars, Austrian schillings, Canadian dollars, Deutschmarks, Dutch guilders, Ecus, French francs, Hong Kong dollars, Italian lire, Japanese yen, New Zealand dollars, Spanish pesetas, sterling, Swiss francs and US dollars.
There are no initial charges but an annual management fee of 1% is payable.
An investment of any size can be made in these funds which pay or accumulate the interest gross.
Guinness Flight (071–522 2109) pioneered the concept of managed currency funds in the early 1980s and offers both distributor and roll-up versions.
The current portfolio is weighted towards the US dollar, which it believes ‘is significantly under-valued against European currencies’.
Both funds have initial charges of 5% and annual management fees of 0.75%.
Other currency funds available include Hill Samuel International Currency Fund (0534 604604); managed classes in US dollars and sterling and individual classes in sterling, US dollars, Deutschmarks, Swiss francs, Japanese yen and Irish punts — all income accumulated; Prudential Money Funds (0800 244444), managed, sterling, US dollars, Japanese yen, Swiss francs and Deutschmarks — distributor status; Capital House International Growth Funds (0534 74689), sterling, US dollars, Japanese yen, Deutschmarks and Ecu — roll-up; Hambros Currency Fund (0481 715454), three managed funds plus sterling and US dollar — roll-up; Royal Bank of Canada (Channel Islands)(0481 723021), US dollar based managed plus classes in US dollars, Canadian dollars, sterling, Japanese yen, Swiss francs and Deutschmarks — roll-up.
According to Money Management , over five years the most successful managed currency funds in sterling terms with £1,000 invested are Hill Samuel US$ Managed Currency, £1,631; Hambros Currency Managed Sterling, £1,621; Mercury Money Market £ Managed, £1,588; Old Court International Reserves Sterling Managed, £1,555; and Old Court Currency Sterling Managed, £1,526.
Money Management contains full details of the performance of a wide range of managed and single currency funds.
Prices of the funds appear regularly in the Financial Times , etc.
Nest egg: Should it contain currency?
DEPOSITED ABROAD Choosing a suitable foreign currency bank account may mean shopping around, not necessarily for the highest interest rates but for the best service available
Flavia Hawksley
Choosing a bank account in a foreign currency need not be any more complicated than choosing a normal current account.
For both businesses and individuals with financial interests abroad, particularly where payments are constantly being made or received, a foreign currency account is essential.
One of the major concerns is to ensure security (as far as possible) and quality of service, rather than simply seek out the highest interest rate or the lowest charges on offer.
The range of services varies considerably, as do the types of account available.
With a choice of simple current/deposit account facilities, fixed deposit accounts, or managed currency funds and a highly personalised level of private banking, you may need to shop around for the most suitable.
Most of the major clearing banks offer private investors a wide range of foreign currency accounts, both in the UK and offshore.
Unless you are hoping to use your foreign currency account for future business or investment needs, or as a means of deferring tax payments — when a currency fund (see page 46) would probably be a better option — a currency account can save considerable time and money for people who have to make financial transactions abroad.
Currency accounts may also be useful for those who want to take advantage of foreign exchange movements, for example buying dollars well before visiting the US (if the dollar seems particularly cheap) and opening an account to gain interest.
To try to make money by switching currencies according to exchange rates is considered risky and not in general the purpose of these accounts.
In such instances a managed currency fund or an umbrella fund offering a choice of separate currencies would be more appropriate.
However, most banks will exchange currency at short notice.
Tyndall Bank (phone 0272 744720) offers a multicurrency deposit account for both private investors and businesses, enabling the investor to switch currencies without prior notice.
There are, at the moment, seven currencies available for accounts held in the UK — sterling, US dollar, Dmark, Ecu, French franc, Swiss franc and yen.
Offshore, the choice also includes Hong Kong, Australian and Canadian dollars (ring Tyndall's Isle of Man branch — 0624 629201).
‘Customers can exchange on the same day, free of charge,’ says chief dealer John Jackson.
But there is a commission payable on the exchange rate.
Charterhouse Bank (071–248 4000)(part of the Royal Bank of Scotland Group) has a world currency account offering a range of 24 currencies, with chequebook facilities, instant access and, it claims, highly competitive interest rates.
The minimum deposit needed to open an account is £2,500 or the equivalent, and if the balance drops below this, interest will not be paid.
Funds can be switched on the same day from one currency to another by use of a personal identification number (PIN), free of charge save for the foreign exchange commission of 0.1%, minimum £5, maximum £20.
If only a portion of the balance is to be switched into another currency, the service will take two working days, using the exchange rate quoted at the requested time of transfer.
Small charges are made on the various services offered, although up to 15 cheques can be used each quarter free of charge.
Any more may result in a £1 charge each.
Stopped and returned cheques cost £5 and £10 respectively.
Midland Bank (071–260 8000) offers four different types of foreign accounts available in most currencies.
There is a current account aimed at businesses with regular international transactions that offers normal current account facilities including overdrafts, regular statements and chequebooks.
The minimum balance is US$1,000 or the equivalent in the major currencies and US$3,000 otherwise.
For customers specifically wanting US dollars, it has a US Dollar Call Deposit Account, offering interest and immediate access to funds.
Midland's Seven Days' Notice Deposit Account offers a competitive rate of interest, regular statements and access to cleared funds, while the Fixed Term Deposit Account is aimed at customers requiring an investment for a specific period, with a higher and guaranteed fixed rate of interest over the stated term.
This can be for periods of one, two, three, six or 12 months or longer if required.
The minimum balance is the equivalent of US$10,000 in major currencies and US$15,000 otherwise.
There are charges on transactions, with a minimum of £30 for each six months, offset by a small allowance that varies with the seven days' notice currency deposit rate.
Cheques in major currencies cost £1.20 each and £12 in minor currencies.
There is a charge of 30p for automatic transfers and 45p for statements on credit accounts.
The Bank of Scotland (031–442 7777) offers three accounts with no minimum deposit: a current cheque book account with no interest, a current account with interest but no cheque book and an interest-paying deposit account.
If money is paid into the account in notes a charge of 1% (minimum £6) is made.
Two days' notice is generally required for withdrawals.
There are no extra charges over and above normal banking charges for maintaining a currency account.
National Westminster Bank (071–726 1000) has two options, called target accounts, available in most currencies.
One offers chequebook facilities but pays interest only on any excess over the minimum balance of £15,000 (or equivalent).
The other has no chequebook facilities, but provided the balance is not less than a minimum of £10,000, interest will be paid on the full amount.
Otherwise no interest is paid.
Charges are not usually incurred unless the account falls below the minimum.
Offshore, Barclays (0534 78511) offers three types of currency account including a non-interest bearing current account, with chequebook facilities for minimum balances of US$1,000.
Tom Foster, senior dealer for Barclays' international department, warns: ‘We do advise customers to take extreme care when using cheques, especially in the US.
Jersey cheques have been known to be sent to New Jersey for clearance!’
The US Dollar Call Account pays interest quarterly, on a minimum balance of US$2,000.
As with most ordinary deposit accounts, rates are subject to fluctuation without notice.
But for those who want a guaranteed fixed return, there is a fixed deposit account on a minimum balance of US$20,000, for an agreed period usually of between one and 12 months.
Interest rates are dependent on the agreed length of time as well as the size of the deposit.
There are no charges for maintaining any of these accounts, but charges will be made for any extra services offered, such as telegraphic transfers, drafts and money orders.
Finally, a word of warning.
Foreign currency deposits are not covered by the Deposit Protection Scheme under the Banking Act 1979, whereby in the event of failure the investor may claim up to 75% of his deposit up to a limit of £20,000.
HOLIDAY MONEY There are now so many ways holidaymakers can take money abroad that it's hard to decide which is best
Flavia Hawksley
As the plastic card industry expands worldwide, holiday money becomes even more of a dilemma for tourists.
While one country may be geared up for credit cards with hole-in-the wall machines everywhere you look, another may only accept local currency or travellers cheques.
So it is essential to check with your travel agent or bank on your destination's quirks and then think about other possible needs, as money may not be your only consideration.
Some forms of travellers cheque and credit card offer a host of additional services such as emergency legal and medical assistance and travel insurance (see ACCOUNTANCY , December 1991, p 100).
The choices for holiday money are fairly straightforward: cash; credit, debit or cash cards; travellers cheques in sterling or foreign currency; Eurocheques; and Girocheques.
While cash may seem the cheapest and simplest, particularly if you are travelling to an ‘out of the way place’, it is also very risky.
Each year millions of pounds are stolen from holidaymakers, and if cash is your mainstay a theft could prove disastrous.
And some countries — such as Greece, Malta and Egypt — have a very low limit on the amount allowed in and others — including the Eastern bloc countries, India, Morocco and Tunisia — do not allow any local currency in.
But, where possible, take some cash in a foreign currency.
The safest and most popular alternative (but not the cheapest) has traditionally been travellers cheques, which are, in general, universally accepted.
Each year UK tourists buy over £3.3bn worth.
Provided the serial numbers are kept separate, lost or stolen cheques can usually be replaced within a couple of days.
Both Thomas Cook and American Express aim to replace cheques within 24 hours, and Amex claims that most of its customers receive refunds within ‘just a few hours’.
But, like cash, travellers cheques must be organised and paid for before you go, and there are commission charges of, usually, 1% for sterling and 2% for foreign currency.
So you may only want to buy what you think you're likely to need.
And that may in the end prove inadequate for any unforeseeable expenses.
Moreover, on top of the purchase commission there is usually a charge when cashing the cheque, although both Amex and Thomas Cook have offices around the world where their cheques can be cashed free of charge.
Elsewhere, costs vary considerably from bank to bureau de change, and hotel to back street restaurant, so it is worth shopping around.
There is usually no charge for cashing travellers cheques in the local currency, and in the US, dollar travellers cheques can be used as currency in most shops, hotels and restaurants.
While several building societies, including Nationwide Anglia, Bradford & Bingley and Cheltenham & Gloucester, have stopped issuing travellers cheques, and others such as Leeds Permanent have switched to a mail order service, most banks and many building societies do keep travellers cheques on site, though many will want a couple of days notice.
Costs do vary though, with some societies charging non-customers as much as double.
Minimum rates also vary, so if you are buying only a small amount it may be worth shopping around.
According to Which?
, June 1992, several building societies including Britannia, Halifax, Portman and Yorkshire charge 1% with no minimum, as does Northern Bank for sterling, French franc, US and Canadian dollar travellers cheques.
Costs of purchasing foreign currency also vary considerably.
Some banks, such as National Westminster, charge a one-off rate of £3.50 per transaction regardless of the amount or number of different currencies required.
Others, such as Lloyds, charge a percentage — 2% for each currency (minimum £3, maximum £35 for customers; minimum £5 for non-customers).
An increasingly popular alternative for visitors to continental Europe are Eurocheques and Eurocards, but they can be expensive, with typical charges around £8 a year for the card and around £2 for each cheque cashed.
There are around 35,000 Eurocard cash machines in Europe; Eurocheques can be cashed at more than 215,000 banks and are accepted by more than 5m retailers, restaurants and hotels in 40 countries.
A cheaper alternative for Girobank members is Girocheques and cards, which can be used to withdraw money on the PLUS network, at more than 90,000 post offices, free of charge, in most parts of America, Hong Kong, Singapore, Australia and Japan.
A book of 10 postcheques costs £6 with a 1% commission on encashment.
Even with a collection of travellers cheques, Eurocheques and cash, one of the best ways to settle bills when abroad is with a debit or credit card, with a distinct advantage if you use the credit card: up to 56 days free credit if you time your purchases efficiently.
Moreover, for purchases and bills in general, cards tend to work out cheaper than the cash alternative, as the card issuers tot up all the day's transactions and exchange the total at a favourable exchange rate, usually around 2% to 3% better than the one available to the public.
Mastercard has, however, recently introduced a surcharge (to bring its charges in line with Visa which already included a surcharge, it says), sometimes of up to 2.75%.
This means that although credit cards are probably still the cheapest way to pay bills abroad, they may not be quite such good value as they used to be.
And since many credit card issuers have introduced an annual charge of around £8 to £12, it may not be worth getting a credit card just to take on holiday, although there are additional benefits such as travel insurance if you use the card to buy your ticket.
Obtaining cash by credit card incurs a commission whether it's across the counter or at an ATM — a hole-in-the-wall cash dispenser.
This is usually about 1.5%, and interest is charged from the day of the withdrawal.
Amex charges 2%.
Many credit cards can now be used to draw cash from ATMs around the world.
For example, the Chelsea Card from Chelsea Building Society can be used to draw £200 daily in local currency from more than 4,000 machines in Europe and more than 50,000 in America, Canada, Australia and Japan.
If you are intending to use your card regularly to obtain cash, it could therefore be advisable to put your account well into the black before going away, in order to avoid the high interest charges.
While Visa debit cards have been accepted internationally for some time, the Mastercard equivalent, Switch, is still waiting to be linked up to the Mastercard/Eurocard payment system.
This should happen early in 1993.
As with credit cards there is usually a 1.5% fee for obtaining cash, but no fee is added for purchases.
Some cash cards have special links with international networks and make no charge for obtaining cash.
For instance, holders of the Royal Bank of Scotland's cashline card can obtain pesetas from the Spanish Banco Santander, free of charge.
So check whether your cards have any special links.
A group of banks and building societies — AIB, Girobank, Royal Bank of Scotland and the Britannia, Chelsea, Derbyshire, Dunfermline, Northern Rock and Yorkshire societies — has linked up through Nexus Payments Systems.
Their cardholders can use ATMs of Telebanco in Spain, Multibanco in Portugal, Bancomat in Italy and Bancontact/Mister Cash in Belgium.
Apart from non-cosmopolitan countries, Greece and, more surprisingly, Germany, which do not readily accept cards for cash or payment, cards are undoubtedly a useful addition to travellers cheques.
But, if in doubt it is probably still wise to take travellers cheques or Eurocheques (for Europe only), a little currency, and a handful of cards as a back up.
commercial property
TOO MUCH SUPPLY, TOO LITTLE DEMAND It will take more than an upturn to cheer the developers up — there will be little for them to do until tenants move into the large areas of commercial space that have yet to be let
Jack Ozanne
Britain joined the Exchange Rate Mechanism of the European Monetary System just over two years ago.
At the time, the property industry was concerned that high interest rates had persisted for too long — all of 12 months, in fact.
It was hoped, however, that the worst would be over once conflict in the Gulf had been resolved; normal trading, people assumed, would be resumed in the summer of 1991.
This expectation was only partly fulfilled, even though UK rates fell to 10%.
Despite the Conservatives' election victory and the easing of rates since their high point in August 1990, recovery seemed a long way off even before the events of Black Wednesday.
As far back as December 1989, James Tuckey, managing director of giant landlord/developer MEPC, said: ‘Occupiers, not owners, are in the ascendant.’
In other words, the tenant had the upper hand.
When he uttered those words, a lot of development was still taking place in Britain; in fact it was only this summer that it ended, leaving commercial centres throughout the land replete with unlet space in shopping complexes, offices, business parks and industrial estates.
Construction and property companies will therefore be the last to benefit when economic conditions eventually improve.
Developers face a bleak Christmas.
In the past, they had a handsome lifestyle, but few of them have new projects to pursue; all they can do is sit on their hands, rueing the day they paid so much for the land they were keen to build on.
Recession in 1981 came about because of Britain's poor manufacturing and general economic performance; today's widespread receiverships are the result of over-inflated land values and a worldwide slowdown.
High-cost oversupply has been compounded by extremely low demand.
Although landlords are prepared to squeeze margins by offering a variety of incentives — rent reductions, rent-free periods and payment of fitting-out costs — demand refuses to pick up because many tenants are lumbered with expensive leases they cannot assign.
Ironically, a sizeable proportion of tenants would like to move, now that their offices need sophisticated computers that old buildings can scarcely accommodate.
Many of them resent this country's system of the 25 year lease, and would favour a more flexible approach — such as the break options that are widely available in the US and France but less common here.
Any change would, however, be resisted by heavyweight landlords, whose valuations are enhanced by overseas investors' predilection for a secure purchase.
Indeed, chartered surveyors in London have been encouraged — but ultimately, frustrated — by the volume of enquiries they have had from investors interested in picking-up commercial property at favourable prices.
‘There are plenty of buyers in the market, particularly for all sizes of shops and retail warehouses,’ said Mark Teale, an associate of Hillier Parker.
‘The trouble is, there's a shortage of product.
Owners are sitting tight and gritting their teeth, hoping to see out the recession.’
Some surveyors have advertised; for instance, Ramagge Allen Partnership announced that it was seeking a 5,000 to 15,000 sq ft retail or warehouse unit in the fringe part of any M25 town.
Just as in the residential market, buying and selling will increase in volume only when players feel confident that prices are realistic, and when the UK's unemployment statistics improve.
Certainly, the recession is worst in south east England.
In August 1992, the financial services industry recorded a decline for the first time.
With some prescience, property advisers Edward Erdman produced a report called London's Space Odyssey to 2001 , high-lighting job prospects and office vacancy rates.
‘The outlook for employment is bleak,’ the firm said.
‘We predict it will not be before 2000 that the capital will see the same number of jobs as in 1989.’
The report calculates that there are 978,000 people currently working in central London, where total office stock is 170m sq ft.
Vacant stock is put at 31m sq ft, forcing prime rents down.
It is estimated that they have fallen from a peak of £62 a square foot to £38.
‘The current central London labour force needs to expand by at least 15% for the capital's vacancy rates to be manageable,’ says Mr Erdman.
The report concludes that London is likely to experience a longer hangover from the late 1980s boom than the rest of the country; economists' forecasts that new jobs in the capital during the 1990s will only grow by 48,000 (4.9%) means that there will still be a lot of space available, and office tenants should be the beneficiaries.
Instead of rent amounting to an annual 15% of operating costs, it could decline to 13% or 14%.
Landlords will need to be imaginative.
There is even a school of thought that says some 1960s office blocks outside prime areas should be refurbished as residential accommodation.
In broad terms, London's office tenants are well placed; M25 towns are also, in general, over-supplied.
Occupiers in Birmingham, however, may find there is pressure on rents once recovery starts, since there is relatively little supply in the pipeline and the city, thanks to its council, is enjoying a renaissance.
The same applies to Manchester; though again there is no reason to believe recovery is imminent: fringe areas there are suffering.
In Nottingham, tenants' outlook is good; only the very best new space costs as much as £11 a sq ft.
In Glasgow this might rise to £20, but there are plenty of incentives.
As for other sectors, retailers can expect attractive deals from landlords throughout the country; exactly the same goes for industrialists leasing premises either on the less prestigious business parks or run-of-the-mill estates.
Extra space: But it's going to be a bleak Christmas for developers
WAYS TO REDUCE YOUR RATES What you can do if you think your business rates are too high
Martin Steiner
Commercial property in England, Wales and Scotland was revalued for rating in April 1990.
Following revaluation, a six month window was allowed for lodging appeals against the new figures; but there are still ways the ratepayer can minimise payments.
Annual rate bills are calculated by reference to rateable values and the rate multiplier.
Rate bills are the occupier's responsibility, or, in the case of vacant property, the person entitled to occupation.
A rateable value is intended to represent a rent from year to year at a specific date on terms laid down by regulations.
For this current rating list, that date is 1 April 1988.
Rateable values are the District Valuer's responsibility (Assessor in Scotland), the country being divided into approximately 150 valuation areas or regions.
The rate multiplier is set each year in England and Wales by central government and cannot rise by more than the annual rate of inflation.
In Scotland, a different system working towards a national multiplier is still in force.
To keep rate bills to a minimum, action needs to be taken.
First, ensure that the charging authority correctly applies any exemptions or reliefs to which the property or ratepayer is entitled.
Second, ensure that the District Valuer correctly identifies the premises occupied and the rateable value is as low as possible.
Exemptions and reliefs
Certain property is exempt from rating, principally agricultural property.
In recent years, property within enterprise zones has also enjoyed relief.
Empty property will attract empty rate relief as long as certain rules and conditions are followed.
The property has to be separately assessed and it has to be completely empty.
Bear in mind that storage of furniture or goods for possible later use or for disposal will endanger the relief; however, process plant left in premises generally will not.
Empty rate is levied at 50% of occupied rate after the property is void for three months.
There are certain exceptions, for example on industrial property where no empty rate is payable at all.
Recent cases have explored the extension of industrial building relief to some categories of buildings that have never been occupied but which were clearly capable of industrial use.
No empty rate is payable on a vacant building listed as being of special architectural or historic interest.
Registered charities enjoy relief from full rates, paying only 20% of the charge.
This relief is mandatory, and charging authorities have the discretion to increase this relief.
There are certain other reliefs, for example where the owner is prevented by law from occupying, but these are the main ones to bear in mind.
Is the District Valuer correct?
Rateable values are capable of appeal.
Following revaluation in 1990, over 600,000 appeals were submitted in England and Wales by ratepayers and their advisers.
These appeals are now being discussed.
The majority will be settled by agreement, but an appeal process, first to Valuation Tribunals through the Lands Tribunal, and thence to the Court of Appeal and the House of Lords on matters of law, is available.
A general appeal against a rateable value resulting in a reduction of assessment will normally reduce annual liability, although this depends on the effect of transitional relief.
Transitional relief — a system for phasing large increases or reductions — is outside the scope of this article, but may have affected liability since revaluation.
Any amounts overpaid will be refunded, normally with interest.
It is too late now to submit a general appeal, but there are still circumstances when the regulations will permit a valid appeal.
When part of the premises is vacated, and is capable of forming a separate occupation, it is essential to submit an appeal seeking a separate assessment on the vacant part.
Empty rate relief will not be available unless this is done.
Similarly, when subletting, if the sublet part is not to remain empty for any time, a separate assessment is still prudent.
The law allows an appeal to be submitted at any time to achieve this.
A divided assessment may have the added advantage of allowing the valuer to claim that certain areas have now become common to two occupations and should be omitted from the valuation.
Appeals to merge two or more assessments can be submitted at any time.
This may allow a lower overall value to be negotiated in an area where a premium has been applied to smaller occupations.
This may appear to conflict with the above paragraph, but either point can be valid depending on the location and the circumstances.
Where the physical circumstances affecting a property change, the law allows the ratepayer six months for the submission of an appeal to amend the rateable value.
This is probably the most common reason for submitting new appeals.
Where, for example, part of a property has been demolished, appeal.
Where adjacent building works affect an occupation, appeal.
Where new road patterns or a new shopping centre affect trade, appeal.
The reason for the appeal has to be physical, or physically manifest, and the experienced rating surveyor will advise whether circumstances warrant it.
Any new ratepayer has six months to appeal from the date he or she became responsible for rates.
This also applies to owners taking over responsibility from defaulting tenants, and finance houses taking back property from mortgagors.
Any property owner in this position should take immediate advice as action may be necessary both to ensure that the rateable value is as low as possible, and that maximum advantage is taken of the empty rate provisions.
There are other reasons for submitting appeals.
If the valuation officer himself makes an alteration for whatever reason, for example, a renewed right exists.
Rate liability requires managing.
An ability to identify the opportunities for saving is essential, coupled with a basic understanding of the regulations governing the appeal process.
It is worth pointing out that rateable values can go up or down following an appeal, and care should be taken before acting.
Legislation
Current rating legislation is contained in three Acts of Parliament (the Local Government Finance Act 1988, the Local Government and Housing Act 1989 and the Non-domestic Rating Act 1992) and about 100 items of associated secondary regulations that lay down the processes and procedures governing the system.
The rating surveyor has a specialist knowledge in this area, and will always be pleased to advise.
Rateable values can go up after an appeal
SHIPSHAPE IN DOCKLANDS?
Despite the obvious setbacks, not all is doom and gloom in London's Docklands
Jack Ozanne
What do Bob Geldof, the Lord Chancellor's Department and the Western International University of the USA (WIU) all have in common?
The answer is that all three have decided to move to London's Docklands.
Law courts are expected to be established on sites owned by the London Dockland Development Corporation (LDDC) at East India Dock, E14, and at Connaught Station, Royal Albert Dock, E16.
‘Sir’ Bob is rocking on to Thames Quay on the Isle of Dogs, where he is establishing Planet 24, a production company putting out The Big Breakfast Show for Channel 4.
He has signed 11,000 sq ft in Norex Court, owned by Laser 1989 Enterprise Zone Trust.
At Glengall Bridge — four minutes' walk south of Thames Quay — WIU has leased four floors in Bellerive House, part of a 170,000 sq ft development by BICC and London & Edinburgh Trust, for its business courses.
The development, with its brick-built courtyard design, is already home to language school ELS.
Nearby, West End restaurant Manzi has its second outlet.
WIU will pay about £10 per sq ft, with a two-year rent free period and several break options in its 25 year lease.
Long derided as the product of a fevered brain, Docklands has made progress this year, despite backlash from Olympia & York's £5.8bn worldwide debts.
The troubles experienced by contractors and developers have led to a new realism; this improved view now has the benefit of a TV and newspaper marketing programme.
It is easy to criticise Docklands.
The Government, keen to ameliorate dock dereliction, initiated a planning free-for-all.
This helped developers by relieving them of the expensive negotiations they usually have to undertake.
The results, though, are generally unimpressive, mainly because — as on the Isle of Dogs, for example— lack of an overall masterplan has meant there is little cohesiveness.
Transport links were badly thought out and remain a problem.
The LDDC has taken control of the Docklands Light Railway from London Underground and has made some progress.
The line out of Bank doubles in length next year on its way to the Royal Docks and Beckton.
At the end of last year there was good news for drivers from the Ilford/Romford area when the new Lea River flyover on the north eastern fringe of the Isle of Dogs opened.
And City staff needing a quick flight to Zurich, Stockholm, Brussels or Paris were pleased that jets were finally granted permission to land at Silvertown's airport last September.
Detractors of what has been achieved so far in Docklands, 10 years after the LDDC's inception, fail to remember that there is one other artery into the area that will have a positive effect on commercial property: the underground road tunnel known as the Limehouse Link, which is expected to open in about eight months' time, eliminating tedious congestion at Tower Bridge and Wapping.
The link is the final section of what is, effectively, a dual carriageway from the Houses of Parliament via Canary Wharf to the A13 at Canning Town.
That leaves the vexed question of the Jubilee line extension to Stratford via Canary Wharf, and Surrey Docks, Bermondsey and Rotherhithe.
In July a series of yellow signs appeared in central London, warning that potentially disruptive pre-construction work would shortly begin.
However, with money — as much as £400m — unforthcoming from Olympia & York, the Government has stalled the much-needed project.
The only bright spot that LDDC has to look forward to — following a downturn in its profits this year — is the hope that the Department of the Environment will leave Westminster's Marsham Street for Docklands in the near future.
If the Jubilee extension is not built, the DoE, like one of O&Y's Canary Wharf tenants, will probably have to bus its staff in and out of the area.
Those in search of positive news this summer were cheered when a Danish pension fund paid £20m to receivers Ernst & Young for the Butlers Wharf Building, part of Sir Terence Conran's scheme at the southern end of Tower Bridge.
Regeneration here has been impressive; indeed, Sir Terence expects to build here again.
This locality, which falls within the LDDC area, like Skanska's large (and 90% unlet) Thomas More Square office project on the opposite side of the river, has benefited from development.
So far, the LDDC has overseen more than 13m sq ft of Docklands' office completions; about 38% are still vacant.
Texaco is to move its UK headquarters to Canary Wharf early next year, and Tower Hamlets council hopes to move 1,000 staff into Canada Tower.
There are excellent bargains to be had.
Forecast for landlords: patchy.
For tenants: very bright.
A Government decision to move the DoE to Thomas More Square, Canary Wharf, Harbour Exchange or East India Dock would keep Docklands alive and kicking.
Docklands: Fair weather for tenants?
health
BOOZE AND THE BALANCE SHEET Excessive drinking costs companies dear, and many have realised that it's time to do something about it
Dr Trisha Greenhalgh
Have you ever thought it strange that the curse of the working classes is none other than that beloved boardroom nectar that evaporates executive stress and wins over the most capricious of clients?
It is a truth universally acknowledged that if you are trying to clinch a tricky deal, alcohol will lubricate the wheels of diplomacy, quell tempers and deflect dissent.
Will it hell!
I have yet to see one jot of hard evidence that getting a client drunk increases the likelihood of a successful negotiation.
However, if the managing director is regularly hitting the bottle, the company's standing on the FT indices is doomed to suffer.
Each year in the UK, 14m working days are lost from documented alcohol-related illness, at an estimated cost of £800m.
That excludes the hidden cost of unofficial late starts and days lost through ‘flu’ or ‘food poisoning’after a heavy bevvy the night before.
The secretary's typing errors after a birthday tipple are a trivial expense; the fog that enshrouds the boss's managerial decisions after his daily liquid lunch might well be costing the company millions.
Heavy drinkers are found in the most unlikely occupations.
A few years ago, I heard of a consultant surgeon who had been drinking on duty for 20 years.
A whole infrastructure had grown up to support his ‘weakness’.
There was a large armchair in sister's office where he could be dumped if he collapsed during ward rounds.
His senior registrar did all his operating.
He would occasionally slide a lecherous hand inside his female registrar's white coat saying: ‘Tell me, my dear, where have they hidden my car keys this time?’
In Britain 1.5m people are drinking at levels that are definitely harmful (50 plus units a week for men, 36 for women), and another 7m exceed the recommended limits of 21 units a week for men, 14 for women.
One unit (8 grams of pure alcohol) translates to one pub measure of spirits, half a pint of regular strength beer or lager, or an average sized glass of wine (one sixth of a bottle).
You accountancy people are good at sums, so you will immediately recognise that if your own ‘glass’ contains a quadruple measure, you are having not one drink but four.
Being over-generous when pouring one's own is a well documented cause of excessive intake.
And if your hand slips that often, you should consider the possibility that you have already developed an alcoholic tremor.
Use a measure.
Better still, find another way to unwind.
Making love, walking the dog or knocking a squash ball about will do the job as effectively as a stiff drink, and they are less likely to hasten your demise.
Remember that accountants and business executives have two and a half times the average death rate from alcohol-related diseases (doctors, incidentally, have three times the rate).
Behaviour patterns such as early morning drinking, gulping down drinks, hiding alcohol, and compulsively seeking alcohol are strong pointers to the alcohol dependence syndrome.
Repeated unsuccessful attempts to cut down, and not feeling drunk even after a large quantity of alcohol, are other warning signs.
All these things can be successfully concealed.
Alcohol misuse is more likely to come to light via marital disputes, repeated driving offences, accidents, absenteeism and progressive inability to cope at work.
If you recognise these problems as your own, my advice is see your doctor, contact a self-help group, or confide in a friend.
If the description fits someone else in the office, take action.
These days, enlightened employers are supposed to see alcoholism as an illness, not a vice.
There should be a company protocol for dealing with suspected alcohol and drug misuse, including a named senior executive (or even a company doctor) with whom you may raise your suspicions in confidence.
You are not helping anyone if you pretend you haven't noticed.
The most widely quoted medical ‘fact’ I hear at parties is that a moderate alcohol intake is good for you.
There is certainly some evidence that people who drink one or two units a day are less likely to die of heart disease than people who drink no alcohol at all.
Above the minimum level, the risk increases with intake.
But teetotallers include people who are too ill to fancy a drink, and a smattering of ex-alcoholics who have been warned that their next drink may be their last.
Many doctors (myself included) accept the association between moderate alcohol intake and reduced risk of heart disease, but question whether this association is actually causal.
In any case — and this is probably the least-quoted medical fact at parties — the lowest risk of heart disease occurs at about a glass of wine a day, so the average social drinker is well past any ‘protective’ effect of alcohol.
Times change.
In the health-conscious nineties, companies such as ICI, Shell, National Westminster Bank and Gestetner are closing down their in-house bars and applying a no-alcohol policy across the board, apparently with little resistance from staff.
Low-alcohol wines, beers and lagers have some way to go before they are considered chic, but many an exclusive restaurant can now produce a mineral water list on cue.
Mark my words, the day is fast approaching when the phrase ‘lubricating the client’ will be consigned to the same vernacular scrap-heap as ‘one for the road’.
Alcoholics Anonymous, PO Box 1, Stonebow House, Stonebow, York Y01 2NJ (0904 644026).
For alcoholics and ex-alcoholics.
AI-anon, 61 Great Dover St, London SE1 4YF (071–403 0888).
A support group for the families and friends of problem drinkers.
Turning Point, 101 Back Church Lane, London E1 1LU (071–702 2300).
The largest national charity helping people with drink, drug and mental health problems.
There should be a company protocol for dealing with suspected alcohol and drug misuse, including a named senior executive with whom you may raise your suspicions in confidence
SELF-HELP GROUPS
computer crime
FOILING THE FRAUDSTERS Don't be an ostrich when it comes to computer system security.
You could be the next victim
Lesley Meall
Crime is one of the fastest-growing and one of the few recession-proof industries.
In such  beleaguered times all sorts of crimes are on the increase, including arson and shop-lifting, and it is undoubtedly a boom time for fraud.
Last year UK customs officers pursued 59 major VAT fraud cases with a value of around £19m.
Plastic card fraud is estimated to have cost £165.6m (see ACCOUNTANCY , June, p 100) according to the Association for Payment Clearing Services, and in the UK alone the cost of common agricultural policy frauds runs into hundreds of millions.
But these figures look insignificant when compared to the cost of computer security breaches.
Accurate estimates of the overall costs of computer misuse in the UK are hard to come by, but various recent figures put the annual cost at somewhere between £400m and £2bn.
The Audit Commission's triennial surveys of computer fraud and abuse suggest an upward trend in the level of misuse during the nineties.
One of the hidden costs of information technology is security.
Users and manufacturers have expended a lot of time and effort trying to find ways to improve computer security.
As the Department of Trade and Industry's report Dealing with Computer Misuse points out, there are two ways of doing this.
First, by protecting systems against security breaches, and second by deterring ‘miscreants’.
Computer misuse or security breaches can take many forms, but these all fall into two broad categories: physical and logical.
Physical security breaches cover occurrences such as theft of equipment, and a number of what might be called ‘acts of God’— lightning, flood or fire for instance.
In the days when most computer systems demanded their own room, ‘casual’ theft wasn't a problem, but the incredible shrinking PC has increased the likelihood of equipment going missing.
Improved building security and physical access controls offer some protection against theft.
However, there is only so much you can do to protect yourself against the whims of the Almighty.
Being adequately prepared with contingency plans for such an eventuality is about the most you can do.
Comprehensive, tried and tested disaster recovery procedures can make the difference between getting vital computer systems up and running again within hours or days, and going out of business.
However, many companies find the cost of planning and implementation prohibitive.
Simple procedures such as backing up data on a regular basis, getting a fire safe, or storing master disks off-site offer a relatively high degree of protection.
Hardware can usually be replaced, but it may be impossible to reproduce the information stored on it.
Every computer user should seriously consider protecting their system with an uninterrupted power supply.
In a recent National Computing Centre survey, 41% of respondents said they had suffered from physical security breaches, the most common cause being power failure.
Dealing with the threat of logical security breaches poses much more of a problem because it demands a thorough understanding of the computer systems and the workings of the business they support.
Although we are all aware of relatively simple security measures such as password controls, doing a thorough job requires experience and expertise.
There is no shortage of individuals and organisations willing to supply the necessary advice, yet the DTI survey found that ‘demand for such services was weak, particularly for the private sector.
This was explained by lack of awareness or understanding of the problems of computer misuse on the part of potential victims.
As a result firms did not appreciate the benefit that (external) technical experts might offer’.
Unfortunately, the ostrich approach is most inappropriate when it comes to systems security.
A third of the NCC survey respondents admitted having suffered from ‘logical’ security breaches.
But unfortunately companies seem to prefer to believe that ‘it will never happen to them’; until it does.
Demand for advice is strongest amongst actual victims of computer misuse, where it is effectively little more than a damage limitation exercise.
Technical publications on computer abuse, security and auditing tend to focus on input, output, access, software and processing controls, while the media is all too often preoccupied with the potential threat posed by viruses and hackers (see ACCOUNTANCY , April, p 102, 103).
These are important areas, but the writers usually concentrate on the technical and physical aspects of securing computer systems against external threats while neglecting the most common source of risk: from companies' own employees.
The NCC survey found that external hacking posed much less of a threat to systems than malicious acts by staff or ex-staff, who were  responsible for almost a third of all logical security failures and breaches.
In contrast, another survey found that as many as 75% of security breaches are perpetrated by insiders.
Both figures are too high to ignore and prove, if nothing else, that the greatest threat to computer security comes from within.
It is especially easy for employees to breach a security system.
Although many such breaches are in fact inadvertent, rather than deliberate, those that are deliberate pose a growing threat.
Increasingly, experts are seeing computer crime as a people rather than a technical problem.
Researchers at the Woolwich Centre for Computer Crime Research believe that improved personnel procedures have a key role to play in improving internal controls.
They recommend a strong, constructive personnel policy, including a structured management philosophy covering rules of conduct relating to the employment life cycle from recruitment, through continued education, performance evaluation, promotion, mandatory annual vacation, and employment termination, covering all employees from data entry operators to management information systems directors.
Typical fraudsters are likely to be long-term employees in a position of trust: they work hard, put in long hours, and seldom take holidays — often presenting the perfect employee profile.
Victims' concern over damage to their image results in many cases of computer fraud going unreported.
In the recent NCC survey of computer security breaches in the UK, only 7% of the respondents had a policy of reporting all incidents of deliberate misuse to the police.
Not that there's always a lot of help on offer even when an organisation does decide to call in the police.
The Metropolitan Police's Computer Crime Unit in SO6 (company fraud) is the only UK unit dedicated to computer crime.
Despite the high profile Serious Fraud Office, police resources are limited and already overburdened.
Earlier this year the SFO was forced to increase the value of frauds qualifying for its attention from £2m to £5m.
This places a greater burden on local fraud squads attached to individual police forces.
Despite their responsibility for investigating lesser frauds, computer expertise is thin on the ground.
These resource problems, coupled with the widespread fear of corporate embarrassment, have virtually removed the traditional threat of discovery, prosecution and possible imprisonment as a deterrent to aspiring fraudsters.
The DTI survey found a reluctance to use available laws, such as the Computer Misuse Act, to pursue computer criminals.
As companies that do fall victim to computer crime prefer to deal with the problem internally, personnel security may well turn out to be the most vital component in a firm's defences.
External hacking poses much less of a threat than malicious acts by staff or ex-staff.
The greatest threat to computer security comes from within
System security: neglect is money down the drain
spreadsheets
INTO A NEW DIMENSION For anyone feeling insecure about a five-year-old, two-dimensional, DOS-based spreadsheet, there are many new temptations
Alison Classe
It would be exaggerating to say that the basic capabilities of the electronic spreadsheet have reached the point where they can't be improved on.
Each new product release adds graph types and new functions for finance, stats, science and so on.
Microsoft's Excel, for instance, now has over 400 pages' worth of functions listed in its reference guide.
Spreadsheets are also borrowing features from other categories of package, such as Excel's multi-language spellchecker and thesaurus, which you might expect in a word processor but will be pleasantly surprised to find in a spreadsheet.
However, some of the improvements to functionality are of marginal importance to the average financial user.
The competition in the conventional spreadsheet arena is, therefore, shifting to areas such as cross-platform and cross-product integration, ease of use, and information sharing.
On the other hand, new products are also emerging that extend the scope of the spreadsheet beyond its traditional applications and into the world of multi-dimensional modelling.
In terms of cross-platform integration, Lotus in particular has aimed to meet the need for spreadsheet implementations on a range of hardware platforms, while others, such as Microsoft, have focused on the PC world.
The Lotus 1-2-3 range has been expanded in the past 12 months to include Windows, the Apple Mac, and a variety of Unix implementations.
‘You can get 1-2-3 on every conceivable type of computer,’ says Rob Ingram, technical sales manager at Lotus.
Mr Ingram points out that organisations with Unix and Mac users, as well as PC users, can share information between all of them provided everyone uses 1-2-3.
Spreadsheet applications, including macros, can be migrated from one platform to the other with relative ease.
‘This is significant in an accounting environment, where professionals may want to exchange information with clients running a different system,’ says Mr Ingram.
‘The client might, for example, have a Unix-based accounting system, with 1-2-3 on Unix, and the accounting practice might have PCs, but they can still share files.’
Another important type of integration is the ability of spreadsheet users to access data from the outside world.
Borland's Quattro Pro users, for example, have access to a variety of PC databases of the xBASE type, such as dBase or Borland's own Paradox.
Frances Reay, spreadsheet product manager at Borland, claims: ‘Quattro Pro lets you access database information from within a spreadsheet.
This lets you get at the information without having to understand anything about databases and without having to wade through reams of data.
The database can be anywhere on the same PC or on a network.’
Ease of use is another area where noticeable advances are being made.
The advent of Windows spreadsheets such as Excel, did, for many people, result in a much friendlier tool, and other leading spreadsheet vendors have added Windows products to their range.
Once you are accustomed to one Windows package, say a word processor, users say it's plain sailing to learn another, such as a spreadsheet, because the conventions of look-and-feel tend to be very similar, though not necessarily identical.
Software suppliers are going to some lengths to make their Windows product sets work in a uniform way, with the same icons, toolbars and so forth.
(There are also pricing incentives to encourage you to buy all your software from one vendor: from Lotus, for example, you can buy not only spreadsheets but also word processing, electronic mail and graphics, in fact what Mr Ingram calls a complete office system.)
Windows makes it much easier to exchange information between different packages; there are various mechanisms, one of which allows you to use the mouse to highlight a chunk of information in a spreadsheet, say, to be cut-and-pasted to a Windows word processor via an intermediate storage area called a clip-board.
3D is another area where spreadsheets are getting more usable.
A three-dimensional spreadsheet lets you keep several conventional work-sheets together in one file.
For example, you could have the year's budgets as 12 sheets identically laid out and stored together.
Updates can be applied to individual sheets or, in the case of something like a heading change, to all of them simultaneously.
Consolidation is also easier.
3D spreadsheets have been around for a while, but have tended to be rather cumbersome to use.
In Quattro Pro for Windows, Borland has alleviated the problem with its ‘notebook spreadsheet’ concept.
The spreadsheet looks like a notebook on the screen, and each two-dimensional page has a ‘thumb tab’ at the bottom which can be labelled with an appropriate name, such as a month or sales region.
Another easy-to-use idea from Borland is the ‘object inspector’.
‘You can point at any object on the screen, click on it and do everything you could possibly do to that object without having to remember any instructions,’ says Ms Reay.
‘Let's say you want to change the appearance of a range of cells.
You just point to them and click the right mouse button.
You get an object inspector (or dialogue box) on the screen giving you options to change everything that you could possibly change for those cells.
Font, colour, size and so on.
You can get it right in one operation without having to go through any menus.’
Progress is also being made in sharing spreadsheets between multiple users.
Mail-enabled spreadsheets allow you to send your work to a colleague over a network.
‘Using our e-mail product, cc:mail, we've built mail-enabling into several of our other products,’ says Rob Ingram.
‘Rather than just having e-mail messages, people often want to send files around, spreadsheet files for instance.
Instead of leaving the spreadsheet package and typing a memo, they can go into a menu option in the spreadsheet to bring up a dialogue box for e-mail.
They say who they want to send it to, add a few notes, send it off and are dropped straight back into the spreadsheet.’
Lotus views this as the first step in providing intergroup capabilities for applications like spreadsheets.
In the corporate environment, it's easy for worksheet files to proliferate rapidly.
By the time there are 95 different budget projections on disk for the same period it may be difficult to remember who contributed what.
‘We're developing a spreadsheet product that will allow a group of people to interact on the same spreadsheet, so people can contribute different ideas, assumptions and scenarios to a common spreadsheet.
In a budgeting process, rather than creating BUDGET 1, BUDGET 2 and BUDGET 3 for the different assumptions, different users could have access to the same file and contribute and see each others’ ideas.’
This facility is coming early next year, in the next release of 1-2-3 for Windows.
Thereafter Lotus's groupware product Notes will be harnessed to allow the spreadsheet sharing to take place even across a wide area network spanning several continents.
The integration between 1-2-3 and Notes is known as the Chronicle project.
‘We're moving away from the concept of a spreadsheet being something an individual uses, in keeping with our philosophy of making people work together, rather than in isolation,’ says Mr Ingram.
Another factor causing untoward proliferation of spreadsheet files is the need to analyse the same information in different ways.
You have your analysis of sales by product for the month, but what happens if you want to break it down by salesman, region and so on?
This problem is tackled by executive information system products containing multidimensional databases, such as Information Resources' Express.
It has also led to the emergence of a handful of multi-dimensional spreadsheet products, which can typically hold data in up to 12 dimensions instead of the usual two or three, and let you ‘slice and dice’ the view of the information along these different dimensions.
Computer Associates' CA-Compete and Lotus's Improv for the NeXT computer are examples of the genre.
Improv is likely to be migrated to the Windows PC environment shortly, says Mr Ingram.
‘Improv is what we call the first dynamic spreadsheet for Windows.
All spreadsheets are currently static, in the sense that if you've got a set of rows and columns and you want to look at the information in a different way, you have to move rows and columns of data around, change formulas — in fact rebuild the entire structure of the model.
If you then want to look at it in yet another way you've got to do it all over again.
Improv is based on a multi-dimensional model.
You can just click with the mouse to view the model a different way.’
Lotus sees Improv coexisting with 1-2-3 but serving the needs of users who are in the no-man's land between spreadsheets and financial modelling.
‘Financial modelling packages tend to be expensive and hard to use’, says Mr Ingram.
‘We think that's where we've cracked it.
We're marketing this very much as a spreadsheet, because it won't be difficult to use.
It will probably be priced not a mile above 1-2-3, but it will do things that couldn't be attempted with a traditional spreadsheet.’
Other products combine spreadsheet features with more complex underlying functionality.
An unusual one is Ambit Research's ARK, a modelling package with a spreadsheet-like user interface, but a very different internal structure, as Bill Cawley, technical director of Ambit and inventor of ARK explains.
‘For management data it's no good having a five, six or even a 20 dimensional database,’ he says, ‘because that's not the way data works.
What we have is a database with a much freer format underneath and a spreadsheet on top.
If we want sales to be six-dimensional, instead of making up a six-dimensional cube we attach six different labels to each item and store it in the database once.
We then present that to the user through a two or three dimensional spreadsheet.’
Mr Cawley claims that this approach greatly reduces the amount of data stored.
The product also enables you to trace the origin of any piece of data.
‘Let's say you enter a piece of data through a worksheet.
As you do that it records the name of the worksheet, the user, the date and time.
Anyone viewing that figure can put the cursor on that item, press a key and be taken directly back to where the data was entered.
That means every figure is justified.’
Back in the world of conventional spreadsheets, the fact that many organisations are in a state of flux between the DOS operating system and Windows is posing a marketing problem for software vendors.
The danger is that prospective purchasers will postpone spending money until they have finished upgrading to Windows.
To counteract this problem, vendors are doing their best to smooth the upgrade paths between DOS and Windows versions.
Lotus, for instance, has been enhancing its DOS 1-2-3 products with features borrowed from the Windows world.
‘The world has become very graphical,’ says Mr Ingram. ‘1-2-3 has had graphical capabilities for a couple of years with the WYSIWYG capabilities.
The Windows product extends that, with enhancements like the icon-driven interface.
You can have one-click shortcuts to do things like opening a file, instead of the usual menu route.
‘By doing this, we're simplifying the process of using a spreadsheet, and doing it in a consistent way.
If you're a DOS user, you learn the technique on DOS, and then if you move to Windows at some point the icons are the same.’
Borland is attacking the same problem with its WINDOS concept, under which the Windows and DOS versions of Quattro Pro are sold together in one box.
‘Users can buy WINDOS now, use the DOS spreadsheet, and know that they've got the Windows spreadsheet ready to go as and when they're ready,’ says Ms Reay.
When the time comes, no spreadsheets conversion is necessary.
The purchaser gets a licence to use either or both products, provided that both are not used simultaneously.
‘So, for instance, you may install Windows in the office, and if you want a compatible spreadsheet to use at home, you can install the DOS version there, provided that only one is used at a time.’
For anyone feeling insecure about a five-year-old, two-dimensional, DOS-based spreadsheet, there are many new temptations.
In case of any lingering doubts, there are usually upgrade paths enabling you to transfer your spreadsheets files from the old product to the new.
And the designers have built in reassuring similarities to the products you know and love, such as the ‘Lotus Classic’ menu option in Lotus for Windows, which lets you go on using the familiar ‘/’method to bring up menus, until you get used to the state-of-the-art stuff.
Progress is being made in areas such as cross-platform and cross-product integration, ease of use, and information sharing, and products are emerging that extend the scope of the spreadsheet into the world of multi-dimensional modelling
software and systems
INFORMATION, AND QUICK ABOUT IT Acronyms and abbreviations abound in the world of information technology.
But just when you think you know what they mean, they stop meaning anything at all— workflow systems and groupware have arrived
Lesley Meall
Today, information technology's most significant role is as a communicator.
Networks are merely an enabling technology, and the applications that run on them little more than means to an end: information.
And the various forms of workflow management systems and groupware products now emerging, in response to the demand for ever-increasing ease of access to that information, look likely to make the terms MIS and EIS redundant, and the LAN and WAN irrelevent.
The local area network (LAN) arrived in the early 80s as a means of sharing expensive equipment.
But over the last decade the cost of hardware has dropped, the perceived value of information has risen, and the LAN has become most significant for its information-sharing capabilities.
Following closely on the heels of the micro-mainframe link, the LAN gave many organisations their first management information system (MIS).
Then, coupled with the telecommunications advances that popularised wide area networks (WANs) by easing access to remote information sources (such as private and public databases), the LAN helped provide the infrastructure necessary for the MIS to be developed into the executive information system (EIS).
Since then, the line separating MIS and EIS has become increasingly blurred.
Likewise the concepts of local and wide area networks.
Recent economic pressures have forced an increasing number of organisations to reassess the way they work, simplifying complex business processes to reduce costs and improve efficiency and quality.
It's an area in which IT can play a leading role, and has rekindled interest in workflow and other document management systems.
So far, the computer has proved very efficient at storing, manipulating and processing information.
But, with the exception of image processing systems (see p 62), computers and the documents they generate have only added to the printed matter which covers most desks: even today 95% of business information is paper-based, and every year millions of working hours are wasted just searching for information.
Touch-of-a-button access to all the required information would be the greatest boost to efficiency since computers were invented.
Within clearly defined boundaries, this is the aim of workflow systems.
This technology, which concentrates on the task to be done, rather than on the shape of the organisation doing it, can revolutionise organisations' approach to everything they do.
Work methods based on departmental functions such as accounts or sales, and which result in responsibility for jobs being passed between staff and departments, can be totally redefined.
For example, customer enquiries and correspondence can be scanned into the computer system on receipt, or entered by the telephone operator.
Alternatively, information can be faxed directly into a system.
All the relevant documents will then be appended to the same computer file, so that whenever a customer rings or when a job is actioned, all pertinent information is immediately to hand — for whoever needs it.
Using workflow, one hardware manufacturer managed to cut the time taken to process an invoice from six weeks to three days.
Severn Trent provides water and sewerage services to 8m customers, covering 8,337 square miles.
The customer accounting department receives 2.25m customer contacts a year, which are handled on a workflow system provided by IBM.
The FileNet workflow system (supplied by Olivetti) has been in use for some time within the customer services department of the BT mobile division.
Both organisations have experienced not only huge cost savings, but other benefits such as improved response to customers, as a result of simplifying the work flow by removing unnecessary work.
But the high cost of workflow systems limits their appeal to the larger organisation.
Groupware type products like Lotus Notes and Microsoft Windows for Workgroups (WFWG) also appeal to the large user.
However, their low cost (Notes retails at around £400, WFWG at £149) and ease of implementation make them a viable proposition for the small company, and will probably result in their becoming much more influential in the long term.
The term groupware refers to products designed to provide teams of (what may be widely dispersed) PC users, termed workgroups, with an easy-to-use interactive way of communicating and sharing information.
Users won't associate the workgroup with networking.
The workgroup could be located in the same office, or split among a number of offices located around the world.
This makes the concepts of LANs and WANs ‘fuzzy’, and turns networking into workgroup computing.
Investment management company Ivory and Sime plans to use Notes to help its analysts monitor and choose equities from a potential total of 1,500 stocks.
It will integrate electronic data sources such as Reuters', Selectfeed, Topic and Lotus One Source into a single information system.
Analysts will then be able to access this from desktop workstations in London, Edinburgh and Hong Kong.
Windows for Workgroups supersedes Windows 3.1, and will provide information sharing, communication and workgroup application capabilities to Windows users.
With a vast established user base, and low upgrade costs for existing Windows users, it will probably prove extremely popular.
Lotus Notes has been on the market for some time, and is already being used by many of the world's largest companies.
Arthur Andersen is downsizing, and over the next two years will be replacing its Wang Minicomputers with a PC-based system running Notes.
Andersen Consulting and Arthur Andersen recently bought 20,000 copies of the product, with an option to buy 40,000 more.
The company describes its use of Lotus Notes as ‘a knowledge exchange system’.
This will capture information from around the world, store it in meaningful applications, and make it available to users who need it.
Andersen has also become a Notes reseller, so it can supply the product as part of its own services.
At the moment, automated workflow is used in less than a quarter of all electronic document management systems; by 1995 it is projected to have jumped to over three quarters.
By 1993 the international consultancy Ovum expects all suppliers of office products to have added a workflow capability to their software, and predicts that there will be almost 600,000 workflow users by 1997, compared with 23,000 in 1991.
On the groupware side there are standards issues to be resolved — as with any new technology.
Microsoft Windows for Workgroups vs Lotus Notes looks set to be a long running battle.
But the Lotus Notes product does have wireless communications in its favour (see ACCOUNTANCY , September, pp 46–48).
Before the end of next year it will be possible, with the aid of a pager, to use Notes to achieve two-way wireless transmission of text.
Nobody has yet decided what abbreviation or acronym we will use to describe these operations.
95% of business information is paper-based, and every year millions of working hours are wasted just searching through it
The members of workgroups may be close together or widely dispersed
THE COMPUTER NIGHTMARE COMPETITION
ACCOUNTANCY is offering you a chance to win the latest product from software giant Microsoft.
Windows for Workgroups 3.1 is designed to improve productivity and communication among groups of users.
Based on the popular Windows 3.1 operating environment, Windows for Workgroups adds electronic mail and group scheduling facilities so that users can write, edit, send and receive messages and documents at the click of a button.
It also allows you to electronically access a group diary, showing when colleagues are free so that you can block out meetings and add notes detailing their purpose.
It's easy to install and monitor, and provides simple networking facilities without the expense incurred in implementing a full-scale network.
This should be of benefit to small businesses, since it is a cheap way of connecting single PCs and sharing expensive resources such as printers and fax modems.
The Prize
Microsoft will install Windows for Workgroups 3.1 on up to 10 of your PCs.
The winner will also get 10 copies of Microsoft Office, plus a bundle of Microsoft's most popular applications.
These are the word processing package Word for Windows 2.0; the spreadsheet Excel 4.0; the e-mail package Microsoft Mail; and the business presentation package Power Point 3.0.
The total value of this prize is in the region of £10,000.
How to enter
All you have to do is tell us about the worst computer nightmare you've ever had.
This should be a true story, no longer than 250 words in length.
It could be the day you deleted the thesis you'd been writing for the last year, or the time the system crashed while you were giving a presentation in front of a thousand people.
Whatever it is, we want to hear about it.
Entries will be judged purely on their entertainment value, so you don't have to be a literary genius or the proud possessor of a computer science degree to enter.
Send your story and the fully completed coupon (below) to the following address:.
Entries should be received not later than 30 November 1992.
1.
The competition is open to all readers of ACCOUNTANCY normally resident in the UK except for employees (and their families) of Accountancy Business Group and Microsoft.
2.
Stories (no longer than 250 words) and completed entry forms should be posted to the above address, to arrive not later than 30 November.
Entries should be marked ACC in the top left hand corner of the envelope.
3.
No correspondence about the results can be entered into, and that the judges' decision is final is a condition of entry.
4.
The prizes are the products described on this page; no cash substitute will be offered.
The prizes will be awarded to the individual or company named on the winning entry form.
Rules
NEW WAYS TO DIP INTO INFORMATION Document image processing can only fulfil vendors' claims if the right analysis and preparation are carried out before a decision to buy is made
Piers Cooper
Emerging technologies such as document image processing (DIP) are surrounded by a mystique which makes them sound attractive to potential customers, who are nevertheless unsure about how they will actually help their business.
So how do we remove the mystery from a potentially highly beneficial technology?
The ideas behind DIP are relatively simple.
It allows the physical pieces of paper passed around an office to be replaced by electronic images — you can think of them as electronic photographs of the paper pages.
These images can be stored in computer files and viewed on the screen of any personal computer connected to the system.
The advantages of a DIP system are that images — unlike paper documents — do not have to be physically moved around the office, they occupy much less storage space, and they cannot be lost, misfiled or damaged in the way that paper can.
The equipment consists of a number of machines linked together in a network.
A scanner, with similar components to those in a fax machine, is used to scan a document and create an electronic image of it.
The scanner is linked to a PC, which is used to display, manipulate, and work on the electronic image.
The images are stored on a more powerful computer, called an image server, which not only handles the overall management of the system, but also controls the sending of images to users' PCs when they need to view them.
The image server may be equipped with optical disks — a high capacity but relatively low cost storage medium which is written to and read by a laser disk drive unit.
When it is necessary to print a copy of a document, this is done using a standard laser printer of the type already found in many offices.
The history of DIP
DIP first began as a concept around 1980, but at that time the components were prohibitively expensive and the software needed to drive them was very rudimentary.
In this first phase of DIP development vendors offered solutions that merely handled the archival and retrieval of images.
These systems worked well but were very difficult to justify because of the high cost of the equipment and low value of the savings (being mostly space savings from removing filing cabinets).
Five years ago DIP entered its second phase, thanks to the development of software that not only handled image storage and retrieval but actively managed the routing and movement of images around an organisation.
This new ‘workflow’ software opened up vast new possibilities for DIP solutions that could be justified on time savings and service improvements as well as space savings.
We are now in DIP's third phase of evolution where we can expect vendors to supply comprehensive workflow software, providing intelligent automation of office tasks and complete integration with other computer systems in the business, as well as the automatic routing of document images to those who need to work with them.
What do these new facilities mean to the businesses that use them?
Workflow software is able to recognise when a particular action has been carried out on a document and can then carry out other actions (which were previously done manually) by itself.
The software then automatically routes the document to the next person in the process.
This is best illustrated by an example.
A letter arrives and is scanned into the system.
The workflow software routes the letter's image to clerk A, who keys in the sender's name and a description of the subject matter, say a query on a statement.
This keyed data acts as additional indexing information describing the image.
The workflow software recognises the type of query from the keyed data, gives the document a priority code, and automatically checks with the accounts computer to verify the sender's details.
It can then extract details of the statement being queried, and route both the letter and the statement information to clerk B who will deal with the query.
Business issues
The power and flexibility of these new systems means that some previously manual clerical tasks can now be fully automated.
As a result, DIP systems, when combined with workflow software, are seen as a technology which will allow office processes to be simplified and automated — or ‘re-engineered’.
There are three strategic business objectives encouraging senior management to look closely at DIP: profitability; customer service; and quality management.
How do you tell if you have an application that would benefit from this technology?
The basic characteristics of a suitable application might include:
a high volume of documents being handled;
frequent demand for the retrieval of documents from filing;
documents which are critical to the business process;
documents which go through several stages in their processing or which need to be handled by several people;
operations which need several documents from different sources to be brought together.
Not all of these characteristics need to be present for a successful implementation of DIP, but, if they are, it is almost certain that DIP would provide benefits.
Benefits
Cost-justification of DIP systems is now easier than ever, with component prices falling fast and large cost savings being achieved through improved productivity and reduced staff numbers.
This now means a typical return on investment in under two years, some within one year, through a combination of both hard and soft cost savings.
The major hard cost saving comes from reduced labour costs through increased productivity.
Other hard savings come from reduced operating costs.
A common example is a dramatic reduction in telephone bills through the reduced need to return calls in answer to a query.
Space savings can also provide hard cost savings, although this, of course, depends on commercial property rental values.
Soft cost savings are typically in the areas of enhanced customer service, better document discipline, control of the work process and competitive edge.
For example, having all customer information readily available, simultaneous access to separate files, and fast turnaround and control of work in progress, enhances customer service.
Health warning
This all sounds highly desirable and there are without doubt major savings to be made, but as with all investments in information technology a cautious approach is recommended.
Once you understand the basics of what the technology can provide you need to carefully consider your own situation and ask yourself the following questions:
Does the application you have identified have the right characteristics to be a successful DIP system?
How will a DIP system fit into your corporate information systems strategy?
Do you have the necessary resources to carry out the workflow analysis and business process re-engineering?
Finally, DIP should not be considered as a stand-alone technology.
It must be thought of as just one of the tools available to business today for managing the ever increasing volumes of information.
As such, DIP should, in future, be included to a greater or lesser extent in all organisations' information systems strategies.
Callhaven plc supplies two imaging systems: The Multi-user Archival and Retrieval System (MARS) is the only market offering providing compatibility with both the Apple Macintosh and IBM PCs.
A Windows version is available.
BIS Strategic Decisions (see Information and Advice) recently selected MARS as the best-performing, most reliable and easy-to-use imaging system available.
Image Gen is the world's biggest selling Unix-based imaging system.
For further details phone .
Canon's Canofile 250 is the market leader among the smaller systems.
The system is currently available only for AT compatibles running DOS, but a Windows version will be available in the near future.
For further details phone 0293 561180.
FileNet is the leading mid-range system.
It is available in the UK from both FileNet and Olivetti.
For further details phone FileNet on  or Olivetti on .
IBM dominates the mainframe sector of the market, with large installations including Norwich Union and Severn Trent Water (see p 60).
For further details phone IBM on .
Other suppliers include the following:
Bell and Howell .
Digital Equipment Company .
ICL (UK) Ltd .
Kodak Ltd .
EDS-Scicon .
Siemens Nixdorf .
BIS Strategic Decisions BIS provides a document and image management information service.
Phone Luton .
Cimtech Ltd Cimtech advises on all aspects of traditional and electronic document management systems.
Phone .
UKAIIM The Association for Information and Image Management organises regular seminars and courses promoting the use and understanding of document imaging systems.
Phone Hatfield .
A jukebox can store many disks
SUPPLIERS
INFORMATION AND ADVICE
WHAT'S NEW IN ACCOUNTING SYSTEMS
One-stop audits
Marshall Beaven, a Dorset firm of registered auditors, has developed its own audit and accounts production program, MAAP, to run with the accounts production package SSAP II.
Written with small firms in mind, MAAP will produce audit planning and control documentation to satisfy the audit regulations, as well as generating high quality financial statements, all from one source of data.
One of Marshall Beaven's clients has already had successful JMU visits while using the system.
MAAP is continuously being developed and any legislative changes can be dealt with quickly.
Operating on either DOS or Unix-based computers, the system costs £495.
Contact Ralph Elliott-King on  for further details.
Sterling stuff from Sage
Businesses with up to 20 employees and a turnover of less than £1m will be the main beneficiaries of a new generation of easy to use accounting systems from Sage.
Sterling+2 is supplied with DOS and Windows versions in one box, enabling users to switch at any time, free of charge, from one operating system to the other.
The two versions use the same screen formats and keystroke commands, and access the same data files so that changing from the DOS to the Windows version requires no file conversion and no operator retraining.
The range includes: Bookkeeper (£149), Accountant (£349), Accountant Plus (£499) and Financial Controller (£649).
For further details phone Sage on .
DIP on show
The Image Processing ‘92 exhibition will take place at Hall 7, NEC, Birmingham from 10–12 November.
There will be a general introduction to image processing technology every morning, and visitors can receive up to £50 worth (15 minutes) of independent advice on the supply and feasibility of document image processing systems.
A conference (11/12) will aim to equip both existing and potential DIP users with practical advice on selection, implementation and integration of DIP systems.
It will look at the current status of DIP, and outline the pros and cons of implementing systems in areas like insurance, law, local government and credit cards.
Speakers will include Royal Insurance, Royal Bank of Scotland, United Carriers, Amerada Hess and Severn Trent Water.
Further details are available from the organisers on .
Budget buy
The father of modern accounting, Fra Luca Pacioli now has an accounts package named after him.
Pacioli 2000, which has received good reviews in the computer press, is a fully integrated accounts package suitable for small businesses.
The package is easy to use — it comes on a single disk and self-installs in a couple of minutes.
There are eight accounting modules: nominal ledger; invoicing; stock control; budgeting; sales ledger; purchase ledger; purchasing; and auditing.
Pacioli 2000 costs £69.99 and runs on IBM or IBM compatible PCs.
Phone suppliers Standard Forms on  for more details.
women in accountancy
PRUE STOPFORD AND SHELLEY SAXON
Lunching out on success
Prue Stopford was fed up.
Every lunchtime she watched her three male partners in Exeter-based accountancy firm Honey Perriam disappear out of the door and up the road to the local snooker club, while she sat at her desk, nibbling her sandwich.
It wasn't that she felt left out —‘in fairness, they had said to me that I could go out with them anytime, but it's a really grotty place, and I also didn't want them to feel I was a hanger-on’— it was just that she had nowhere else to go.
‘Women find it very difficult to break into traditionally male preserves, to walk into pubs or even some restaurants on their own.
As a result it is difficult for them to make business contacts.
So I was put in a total quandary when my partners asked me to go out and do just that,’ she says.
‘It's much easier for men because they have their clubs and their networks to rely on.
My partners are all masons, which brings them immediate contacts.
Also, men are much more attuned to talking business with each other, something which women are not encouraged to do.’
Determined not to let herself be beaten by such obstacles, Prue came up with the idea of a luncheon club for professional women in the Exeter area.
In this, she was encouraged by Shelley Saxon, a former manager with Honey Perriam, who had set up a consultancy practice and worked from an office in the same building.
‘I wanted a legitimate way to increase my profile,’ Shelley says, ‘but I don't like doing things just for my own benefit, so I was very comfortable with this idea because it was intended to benefit all its members.’
And so, in lunch breaks over Prue's desk, the Boadicea Club was born.
The aim was to provide a facility for professional women to meet on a regular basis, exchange ideas and experiences and discuss topics of mutual interest.
At the time, neither Prue nor Shelley had any idea what sort of reaction they would get.
They did not think they were alone in feeling isolated in the business world, but when they sent out invitations to the inaugural meeting on 14 July, with an explanation of what they were trying to achieve, they were staggered by the response.
‘We were initially going to hold the meeting in the boardroom here,’ Prue says, ‘but when the numbers got up to 40, we thought ‘help’.
We decided to move the chairs out to make more room, but the acceptances kept coming in so we thought we'd open the French windows and pray for a sunny day.’
‘Prue was out of the office on the Friday and the numbers kept creeping up,’ Shelley adds.
‘So I had to spend the whole morning trying to organise another venue.
By Monday morning when she got back, the numbers were up to 75 and on the day we had 80 people.’
Four months on, both are still amazed by the Club's success.
155 professional women have expressed interest in joining, membership has passed the break-even point and Prue and Shelley, now joint presidents, are about to hand over the administration to an established committee.
What is more, membership is drawn from across the range of professions, from town planners to tax practitioners, and is not just Exeter-based.
‘It's gone right round the whole of Devon, Somerset and Cornwall.
We've even got someone from Bristol,’ adds Prue.
‘It's been incredible.’
The pair have become local media stars as well, with interviews in the local press and on Radio Devon.
That, says Prue, helped convince her partners she was doing the right thing.
They had reacted badly to the amount of time she was forced to spend on organising the first meeting.
‘It was disruptive,’ she admits, ‘because we kept having so many phone calls which meant that the staff got involved, together with the photocopying and sending out documents.
‘I got round them by selling to them the fact that I was doing what they wanted me to do which was to get out into the business world and make contacts.
It just happened that I was doing it in a unique way through the business world of women.
‘I said that this was not Shelley and I ganging up in competition against them: it was just two businesswomen trying to make more business.
They relaxed then.’
Another problem was what to call the Club.
It was Shelley who came up with the aggressive sounding Boadicea.
Was that a grimace on Prue's face?
Shelley grins.
‘What I like about Boadicea,’ she says, ‘is that she wasn't in conflict with men; she was fighting for her people, men and women, against an outside aggressor.
I wanted to pick someone who saw herself as part of the community and yet stood up for her rights.
Okay, so she lost but that's not important.
It's what her name stands for.
And it's a name that gets remembered and looks good in print.’
The Club meets once a month, usually at lunchtime when only women are allowed.
Either a speaker is invited or a topic is chosen for discussion in groups.
Themes range from the serious to the lighthearted: October's meeting, for example, focused on ambition, while November's will look at magic.
‘People don't always want to be serious at lunchtime.
They want to go along and relax and a lot of women have said that they can relax much more easily in their own, rather than in mixed, company,’ Prue explains.
‘What we are trying to do is provide women with the sort of club environment that men are used to and they are not, so that they can relax and talk about business.
That will help them cope better in mixed business situations.
For instance, women find it very intimidating when they have to attend large business functions, which are still dominated by men.’
The Boadicea Club provides an opportunity for the tables to be turned.
Every third month, it holds an evening event where members can bring male guests.
The first one, Prue laughs, was terribly funny.
‘You know all those male dos where the occasional woman creeps in looking very apprehensive?
Well, the boot was on the other foot.
The men were sidling in, wondering what the hell was going to happen.
By the end, of course, they were thoroughly enjoying themselves because they'd had a bit to drink and it was a jolly convivial evening.’
‘In fact,’ says Shelley wickedly, ‘we're holding a cocktail party in December and we're thinking of inviting Prue's partners.
Now that will be interesting!’
Turning the tables: Shelley Saxon (left) and Prue Stopford
finance & investment
OFFSHORE INVESTMENTS
The price of Bahamian residency
Investors prepared to put a minimum of $250,000 into the 9% preference shares of Sandyport Marina Beach Club and Resort can obtain permanent residency in the Bahamas under category II.
They will have to reside there for a minimum of one month a year, but this may be waived for up to five years by an annual payment of $5,000 to the Bahamian government.
The government has approved the offer, and there is no requirement to buy a house.
Normally, to become a permanent resident in the Bahamas under category I, an individual needs to invest a minimum of $500,000 and keep it there for 10 years; this compares with the five years for an investor in Sandyport Marina.
The shares carry the right to five weeks a year of free accommodation at the resort, which is being developed as a time share enterprise.
Sandyport chairman Hugh Buckner believes that the offer will appeal to people who wish to realise capital gains from a business or trust; those with business activities in more than two countries; sports stars, promoters and entertainers with large incomes; and those who legitimately wish to minimise the tax burden.
The attractions of the Bahamas include the absence of taxes on income, gifts, valued added, capital gains, wealth, inheritance and corporate profits, as well as the excellent climate.
The Sandyport project is situated on New Providence, not far from Nassau and only 10 minutes' drive from the international airport.
The preference shares will receive a 9% non-cumulative dividend and the prospectus indicates a return to investors (including the profit share) of between 12.65% and 19%, with a repayment of the original investment at the end of five years.
The resort is part of a major development of Sandyport by the Sandyport Development Co Ltd, which will own the ordinary shares in the resort company and which is 67.4% beneficially owned by Mr Buckner and his wife.
The two other directors of the resort company are Raymond Horrey, founder of Rayford Supreme Electrical Group in the UK, and John Duckworth, a time share expert in the Bahamas.
A copy of the prospectus and further details are available from .
EMERGING MARKETS
Templeton's bargain hunters
The prime attraction of investing in the world's emerging stock markets is their much faster growth rates than those of developed countries.
Templeton Investment Management undertakes painstaking research involving extensive on-the-spot analysis with much travelling by its emerging markets team to find the best bargains.
According to Templeton's Mark Mobius, his team will only put those shares on the buy lists which it judges to be bargains; if it discovers no bargains in a particular country then no shares from that country will appear in the portfolio.
Investors keen on emerging markets have a choice of vehicles from Templeton.
In the UK, Templeton Emerging Markets Investment Trust is a closed end fund whose shares are listed on the London Stock Exchange; in the US, Templeton Emerging Markets Fund, also a closed end fund, has its shares listed on the New York stock exchange.
For those who prefer an open ended fund, Templeton Emerging Markets Fund is available within the Luxembourg-based umbrella fund, Templeton Global Strategy SICAV, which is a UCITs and so can be sold in any EC country.
The initial charges on the umbrella fund are 5.75% for equity funds and an annual 1.75% for the Templeton Emerging Markets Fund.
The minimum investment is $5,000 or the currency equivalent.
This fund is currently invested in Portugal, Malaysia, Philippines, Hong Kong, Singapore, Turkey, Thailand, Greece, Indonesia, Venezuela, South Korea and Hungary.
At the end of August, Templeton Emerging Markets Investment Trust had its portfolios invested as follows: 0.9% Mexico, 2.6% Chile, 14.2% Brazil, 11.6% Hong Kong, 3% Indonesia, 9.6% Philippines, 8% Singapore, 8.1% Thailand, 7.6% Malaysia, 1.8% South Korea, 0.2% Hungary, 9.3% Turkey, 5.8% Greece, 5.7% Portugal and 11.6% liquid investments and cash.
Statistics from the Association of Investment Trust Companies show that this trust has produced the highest total return over the last year out of five emerging markets trusts.
Why should emerging markets be particularly attractive?
According to Dr Mobius, over 75% of the world's population lives in such countries, which currently account for only 11% of the world's GNP and less than 5% of the capitalisation of the world equity markets.
Because people are now living longer in developing countries — from 23 to 41 for average age expectancy since 1850 in India, and from 32 to 43 in Sri Lanka — it is more worthwhile for them to gain greater skills.
This is combined with an enormous rise in education standards — less than 10% of the population of Indonesia could read in 1930, and by 1980 this had risen to 60%.
Over the last seven years to the end of 1991, some of the emerging markets have realised quite startling returns: Turkey 3,124% in dollar terms, Chile 2,831% and Mexico 1,978%.
Over the same period the London equity market only rose by 341%.
As a result of the large number of markets to select from, Templeton finds risk can be reduced by diversification and at any time some markets offer value.
Touching on some individual countries, Dr Mobius commented: Argentina — good last year but Templeton now completely out; Hong Kong — benefiting from growth in China, lots of bargains; Indonesia — down from peak and very interesting; Turkey — growing awakening of the need for fairness in the market; Poland — will become big; South Africa — too high but big potential from black consumers.
For further details, call .
INVESTMENT TRUSTS
F&C caters for PEP investors
London Stock Exchange dealings in Foreign & Colonial PEP Investment Trust should have begun by the time this issue reaches readers.
It is a new investment trust designed for investors who want to invest a full £6,000 in a PEP.
Because Foreign & Colonial Investment, the group's highly successful large £1.1bn trust, only qualifies for PEP investments of up to £1,500, F&C has created PEPIT, which will seek long-term growth of capital and income.
It will have broadly the same management team as the existing trust.
About 75% of the new trust's portfolio will be invested in FT-SE 100 stocks, 15% in other UK shares and 10% in Europe.
PEPIT will follow F&C's investment philosophy: intelligent use of gearing and cautious but steady buying into quality during turbulent or depressed and gloomy markets.
The capital structure is simple, with only ordinary shares in issue.
Estimated gross yield at 100p is 4.5% a year.
The costs will be kept low — less than 2.5% of initial expenses and 0.4% annual management charge.
For investors who choose to put the shares in the new trust into the F&C Personal Equity Plan, there is a flat fee of £60 a year — this charge does not rise with the value of the PEP.
The minimum PEP investment is £2,000 lump or monthly minimum £100, maximum £500.
For more information contact Foreign & Colonial Management on .
BUILDING SOCIETIES
Watch your returns
Rates of interest offered to investors by building societies are coming down and in some cases are now below what can be obtained elsewhere.
Alliance & Leicester's Instant Access Account has a gross CAR of 7.2%, Bristol & West Select (balance £2,000-£9,999) 7.8%, Halifax Premier Xtra (minimum balance £10,000) 8.8% and National & Provincial Option (minimum balance £5,000) 7.85%.
In contrast, Fidelity Easy Access Cash Account provides a 9.3% return.
For further information call 0800 414191.
Falling interest rates make it even more important for investors to check that they are getting a reasonable return from their funds.
As the Investors Chronicle of 18 September pointed out, most building societies do not tell their savers when one of their accounts ceases to be marketed to new investors, even if the existing investor could obtain a much better rate of interest by switching to another account with the same society.
Some of the closed building society accounts pay very low rates of interest; among examples that the Investors Chronicle included in its survey were Halifax Subscription Share 3.15%, Nationwide Share Account 1.5%, Alliance & Leicester Money/Builder Plus 3.35%, Cheltenham & Gloucester Investment Share 2.2%, National & Provincial Saver Shares 3.95%, Britannia Ordinary 2. %, Bristol & West Shares 1.5%.
Norwich & Peterborough has actively informed its savers in closed accounts of the better rates available in other, newer accounts and three other societies — Nationwide (0800 400417), National & Provincial (0800 446600) and Bradford & Bingley (0274 561545)— have actually established interest rate helplines.
All building society investors and financial advisers are strongly urged to check that they are getting the best rates available.
STOCKBROKING
Dealing only, no advice
Fidelity Brokerage has expanded its stockbroking facilities in the UK for investors who make their own decisions and do not want advice.
The Fidelity Stockbroking Service is open from 8am to 6pm on weekdays and 9am to 9pm on Saturday and Sunday.
It covers trading in all listed and unlisted securities, gilts, and other fixed interest securities on the London Stock Exchange.
Over £40,000, all deals are charged at the rate of 0.25%; maximum commission is £250.
Clients also receive a regular newsletter and benefit from a securities management service.
At no extra charge, Fidelity offers a Stockbroking Plus option which provides frequent dealing credits when you exceed a minimum commission of £250 a month, dealing in US and European Stocks, a high interest multicurrency instant access money market account and, for an extra fee of £50 a year, a full client reporting pack.
Fidelity is planning further services for financial advisers.
Call Fidelity on  for more details.
Unit trust.
By using computer technology, James Capel's FT-SE 100 Index Fund aims to match the performance of the index of the UK's top 100 companies as closely as possible.
Minimum investment is £1,000 or £40 a month.
Charges are 4% initial and 1% annual.
There is a 1% discount on investments made before 31 December 1992.
A Footsie PEP is also available.
For further details, call 0800 289505.
High interest account.
Cater Allen's High Interest Cheque Account, which currently pays a gross CAR of 7.76%, requires a minimum investment of £1,000 but pays interest down to £500.
There are no charges on operating the account and no limits for normal credits or withdrawals.
A Visa Trustcard with automatic monthly settlement can be linked to the account.
For further information telephone 071–623 2070.
Savings scheme.
Kleinwort Benson has introduced a savings scheme for its investment trust, Kleinwort Endowment Policy Trust, which invests in second-hand with-profit endowment policies.
Minimum investment is £25 a month or £250 lump sum.
Ring 071–956 5808 for full details.
Pensions offer.
For those completing a personal pension plan, group personal pension plan or freestanding AVC plan with Friends Provident  before 31 December 1992, there will be an additional allocation of 5%.
Platinum coins.
Gold investments can supply Australian Koala platinum bullion coins containing two ounces, 10 ounces and one kilogram of platinum.
The coins are legal tender but are traded for the value of the precious metal they contain, rather than their nominal face values.
For further details phone .
Insurance service.
National Westminster Bank has launched a commercial insurance service for small businesses which includes a customer claims charter and a no claims discount.
A help desk provides immediate quotations and on the spot cover if required.
Ring  for full details.
Assurance bond.
The SHEP Bond, designed by Resource Partnership with the Isle of Man Assurance, invests in second-hand with-profit endowment policies issued by leading life assurance companies.
The minimum investment is £2,500 and then £100 a month or £500 lump.
The price of the units is quoted in the Financial Times .
The bond is being recommended as the means to provide funds for a variety of personal needs; these include retirement provision, school fees, and repayment of debt or mortgages.
Call  for full details.
WHAT'S AROUND
INSURANCE
Income protection
Standard Life is to launch a new income protection plan later this month.
The administration of the product and the handling of claims will be done by UNUM, which has extensive experience in this area both in the UK and the US.
According to Standard Life's marketing manager Bruce Wallace, less than 18% of the UK's working population has arranged any form of income protection, although one in five people are likely to be off work for more than three months during their working life.
The new plan is aimed at employed persons not covered by company schemes, and the self-employed.
Standard Life has also decided to improve its range of protection products, including the introduction of non-smoker rates on level term assurance, mortgage protection and family income bond.
For further information contact Standard Life on .
economic trends
ERM — the great escape or a cold new world?
Sterling's forced departure from the ERM has created a vacuum in the Government's economic policy, leaving the entire business world anxious and confused
Since sterling entered the ERM in October 1990, UK monetary policy has been wholly subordinated to maintaining the currency within its permitted fluctuation band (6% either side of a central rate of DM2.95 to the pound).
This economic lodestar was set to achieve for the UK a reduction in interest rates, a break in the long-ingrained inflationary tendencies that have afflicted the UK economy since the war, and to increase the momentum of developing trade links between the UK and the EC.
Since these objectives have yet to be achieved, there is time to ask if they can be approached via an alternative route.
The choice facing the Government is whether to take a risk with inflation by reducing interest rates in order to get the economy out of recession, or to take no risk with inflation, await a recovery in the domestic economy (now more likely because of a lower pound and lower interest rates), and a decline in German interest rates, before rejoining the ERM.
Those who advocate an expansionist policy believe that a 6% base rate is the minimum necessary to get the economy out of the recession, even if it involves a further decline in sterling.
The expansionists acknowledge that the great worry about devaluation is that it will be inflationary and could at best be self-defeating or, at worst, bring in higher interest rates and slower growth.
They concede that while the fall in the pound will push up inflation, the critical point is by how much.
They believe that the Treasury-held view that a 12% devaluation will translate into 4% extra inflation over two years and 12% extra inflation (the full impact of the trade-weighted devaluation to date) over four years is, given the present economic background, highly exaggerated.
In the present economic conditions, inflation is likely to be suppressed because the majority of businesses are operating at well below capacity.
It follows that both domestic producers and importers will be prepared to take a reduction in their profit margins in order to retain their market share.
Furthermore, with unemployment rising to above 3m, workers are likely to break with tradition and accept lower wages rather than demand compensation for higher prices.
Indeed, if monetary relaxation succeeds in stabilising output, it should unlock sharp productivity gains which could finance higher import costs.
Moreover, the reduction in interest rates will have a positive effect on the RPI through lower mortgage interest rates.
Hence the optimists believe that it is difficult to visualise circumstances better suited to a successful devaluation than the ones currently offered.
Those who advocate caution in allowing a rapid decline in interest rates, and in consequence a further devaluation of the pound, can point to the period of sterling's membership of the ERM as the most effective discipline the UK has experienced — an incentive to force down both inflation and interest rates.
Furthermore, ERM membership has effectively disciplined many EC governments unable to cure inflation for themselves; this has been a major factor in the creation of prosperity in Western Europe.
It is not by accident that the countries within the ERM — viz Spain and Ireland — and countries shadowing the system — such as Sweden and Norway — believe that the price of higher than warranted interest rates, from their domestic point of view, is nevertheless worth paying, in return for the longer-term stability that the ERM will provide.
By contrast, the UK's record of continuous devaluation and inflation has been dismal (see graph below).
In 1960 one pound bought DM11.70.
Since then the exchange value of the currency has fallen by 78%, but any advantages for exports have been eroded by rising domestic prices.
Throughout the post-war period, the policy has been to allow the exchange rate to adjust to costs rather than the other way round.
Indeed, if devaluation was an easy recipe for success, the UK's economic performance would be miraculous!
A number of factors in the optimistic case on inflation are questionable.
First, if the economy in general and industry in particular are operating substantially below capacity, how can the existence of a current account deficit of approximately 2% of GDP be explained?
Could it be that the UK products are either deficient in non-price factors or alternatively too expensive relative to goods being produced elsewhere?
It is possible that if the existence of spare capacity is more statistical than real, a central prop to the inflation optimists' case will have gone.
Since the balance of payments has become a structural problem because of the prolonged period of under-investment, imports have grown as a share of UK domestic spending, making the growth of inflation resulting from devaluation more rapid.
The second factor that argues against the theory that only a low increase in inflation will result from devaluation is the attitude of the workforce, where wages account for 60% of unit costs.
Historical evidence suggests that it is not the absolute level of unemployment which restrains wage claims but its rate of change.
If the rise in unemployment has mercifully decreased, the pressure on wage restraints will have lessened.
It is worth noting that in the period of sterling's membership of the ERM the cumulative decrease in GDP has been approximately 4%, while UK wages have increased by 6%, a gap not substantially reduced by productivity growth.
Leaving the ERM is going to involve the loss of international comparisons with related worker groups in Europe, but any benefits that may have been retained through an attitudinal change in the labour market will not become clear until they are tested in the course of an economic upturn.
The third factor which argues against a low rate of inflation coming through is the extent of the devaluation that has taken place so far.
From the pre-crisis level of DM2.83 = £1 and US$2 = £1, the pound has at the date of writing declined by some 14% against the DM (or 17.5% below its central rate of 2.95), a similar amount against the US$, and 12% against its trade-weighted index.
In 1981, sterling declined by approximately 11% over a period of nine months, thus enabling inflationary pressure to be effectively contained by releasing it slowly.
The dramatic events of Black Wednesday leave little chance of avoiding a quick revival of inflationary pressure.
When sterling left the European snake in 1972, inflation rising above 20% came two years later.
The financial markets' measure of inflationary pressure is reflected by the yield on high-coupon, long-dated gilts less the yield on equivalent index linked gilts, which currently indicates that the anticipated long-run core inflation has risen from a rate of 4.43% to 5.56% a year over the life of the 20-year bond.
A reduction of only one percentage point in base rates to 8% between now and the end of the year would not please advocates of economic expansion.
Given the Treasury's computation that every 4% of devaluation is equivalent to 1% reduction in interest rates, it follows that monetary relaxation from Black Wednesday to date is already in excess of 4%.
What is often overlooked is that the presence of high real interest rates, by attracting higher savings, reduces spending and hence curtails imports.
Greater buoyancy in overseas markets helps to shift UK output towards exports.
Hence high UK real interest rates (actually the lowest in the EC) are not a curse but vitally necessary.
In my view, the time has come to leave behind us the national humiliation and recriminations that have resulted from sterling's suspension from the ERM.
The Government was actually correct to follow a course of defeating inflation from which rebuilding a new economic base of excellence could begin.
Completing this task outside the ERM will be more difficult, but it would be a betrayal of those who have sacrificed so much if the task were to be abandoned.
Achieving low inflation outside a monetary bloc can be achieved.
In the meantime, the Government should adopt a far more dynamic approach to fiscal policy.
This might include: a freeze in public sector pay with the released resources used on infrastructure; a phasing-out of mortgage relief, with concessions limited to houses purchased in the next 12 months; introduction of a Swedish-style programme linking training with unemployment; and changes to CGT in order to increase investment, the foundation for long term non-inflationary growth.
The UK should aim to rejoin the ERM in the course of the next 18 months when the strength of sterling should reflect the underlying strength of the economy and not be solely the product of high interest rates.
It is often the case that the highest ambitions can be born in the darkest days of defeat.
The time has come to leave behind the national humiliation and recriminations that have resulted from sterling's suspension from the ERM
commentary
It isn't fair, and it ought to go The legislation governing taxation of capital gains is full of anomalies and should be repealed
Bruce Sutherland Bruce Sutherland & Co
The recent Institute of Economic Affairs publication,A Discredited Tax — the Capital Gain Tax Problem and its Solution , examines the present UK taxation of capital gains (TCG) and concludes that it should be repealed or at least levied at greatly reduced rates.
As one of the authors of that publication, I am offering a brief summary of it here.
The present tax was introduced in 1965 in the first Budget of the Labour government elected in 1964.
It was based on the Memorandum of Dissent of the minority, the late Professor (subsequently Lord) Kaldor and the two trades union representatives, on the Royal Commission on the Taxation of Profits and Income which published its Final Report in 1955.
Their justification for TCG was that there is no fundamental difference between capital gains and income, since they both represent ‘accretion of economic power’ and should both, therefore, be taxed.
However, Kaldor recognised that there is, in fact, a difference between capital gains, which tend to be unique or non-recurrent items, and income, which is recurrent.
For this reason, he recommended that gains should be charged to income tax but not to surtax.
The FA 1965 went further and fixed the rate of tax at 30% when the standard (now basic) rate of income tax was 41.25%.
The 30% rate stayed the same until 1987 for companies and until 1988 for individuals and trustees although, in the meantime, the basic rate of income tax had fallen to 25%.
From 1987, companies' gains were charged to corporation tax as if they were additional income of an accounting period.
Since 1988, individuals' gains in excess of an annual exemption (currently £5,800) have been taxed as if they were additional income.
Most of the tax on individuals' gains is now charged at 40%.
Chancellor Nigel Lawson justified this on the grounds of the alleged identical nature of gains and income and the advantage of removing the incentive to avoidance by eliminating the boundary between them.
It should be, however, noted that none of the complex anti-avoidance provisions that protect that boundary have been repealed: others have, in fact, been added since 1988.
Under the 1965 provisions, death was an occasion of charge.
This was repealed in 1971 and chargeable assets in a deceased's estate pass to the heirs at probate value.
Hold-over relief for gains on gifts of business assets was introduced in 1978.
This was extended in 1980, 1981 and 1982 to all gifts and to distributions out of settlements.
In 1989, however, the 1980, 1981 and 1982 extensions were repealed so that the relief now only applies to business assets.
This was justified on the grounds that, since lifetime gifts were exempt from inheritance tax, there was no longer double capital taxation.
The effects of inflation, which had ‘taken off’ in the early 1970s, were finally recognised by an indexation allowance for inflation after 31 March 1982.
In 1988 the tax was rebased to 1982, but at the cost of gains being charged thereafter as if they were marginal income.
So what is wrong with TCG?
Whatever some fiscal economists may say, capital gains are not the same as income.
Many other distinguished fiscal economists recognise this.
Most other countries recognise it.
Kaldor, himself, recognised it (see above).
Above all, taxpayers generally recognise it.
As Adam Smith observed, it is important that any tax is perceived by the taxpayers to be fair.
They perceive that gains involve risking capital in the acquisition of chargeable assets and that the incidence of their realisation is usually irregular, particularly in the case of businesses and land.
TCG is a clog on markets.
It has contributed to the decline in direct portfolio investment as opposed to indirect investment through tax exempt institutions.
Many individuals are locked into portfolio investments they would like to, and should, change, but cannot because of the tax on realisation.
When, typically, TCG takes more than 20% of the proceeds of realisation, the investor would have to make a real gain of more than 25% on his new investment just to recoup the tax.
An individual who bought the FT All Share Index at 31 March 1982 and sold it on 31 August 1989 would have suffered tax (at 40% and ignoring the annual exemption) of 24.2% of the proceeds.
Even in the present depressed state of the economy and of the stock market, sale at 30 September 1992 would have incurred tax of 21% of the proceeds.
It is significant that, in 1969, gains on Government stocks were exempted from TCG if held for over a year because the government's managers of the market in those stocks found the tax to be an unacceptable clog on that market.
The clog on the market in equities must be infinitely greater.
TCG inhibits venture capital and other investment in unquoted companies.
The exemption under BES recognised this fact.
However, that exemption was not extended to entrepreneurs themselves, just to their backers.
Comparisons with other OECD countries show wide variations in their TCG regimes.
Some do not tax gains at all.
The majority tax gains, certainly long-term gains, at lower rates than income.
In the US, gains are taxed as if they were income.
The highest marginal rate of tax has fluctuated since 1969 between 34.13% and 20%.
Empirical studies have demonstrated that the lower the top rate of tax, the greater the yield.
Moreover, the proportion of the tax paid by the richest tax-payers is greatest when the top rate is lowest.
Professor Lawrence Lindsey's studies (National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No 2215, 1987) led him to conclude that the optimum revenue-raising rate is somewhere between 9% and 21%.
TCG is biased against the taxpayer and in favour of the Revenue, because losses cannot be carried back and there is no provision for carrying forward unused annual exemptions nor for top-slicing (spreading the gains over the years during which they have occurred).
The legislation embodies numerous illogicalities and anomalies, including the double capital tax charge on gifts made within seven years before death, the taxation of some settlements as if no interest in possession exist when, in fact, they do, and the effect of the ‘pooling’ rules for shares etc, which can result in a chargeable gain which greatly exceeds the actual gain on a disposal of a recently acquired holding, eg on a rights issue.
It penalises the realisation of losses later than gains; donors of gifts who die within seven years; owners of non-fungible (lumpy) assets who cannot ‘bed and breakfast’ to use up annual exemptions; as well as direct as compared with indirect investors through tax-exempt institutions.
Ideally, TCG should be repealed.
The yield of the tax on individuals and trustees is less than that of one half of 1p on the basic rate of income tax.
If this is not accepted, the rate should be reduced to, perhaps, 15%.
Not only would this make TCG more acceptable to taxpayers but, in addition, the US experience suggests that the yield to the Revenue would rise substantially.
In addition to that, the anomalies, which have been repeatedly pointed out to the Revenue for many years, should be corrected.
Ideally, TCG should be repealed.
The yield of the tax on individuals and trustees is less than that of one half of 1p on the basic rate of income tax.
If this is not accepted, the rate should be reduced to, perhaps, 15%
A manifest interest in the membership Can the Institute really maintain an appropriate balance between the public interest and its members' interests?
Martin Cook Judkins
According to the consultative paper Manifesto to Members issued in March of this year, ‘the Institute's mission is to promote, in the public interest, high standards of objectivity, integrity and technical competence, thereby enhancing the value of the qualification chartered accountant.’
This mission statement is based on the notion that there will be a strong convergence between the public interest and members' interests over the longer term, but is this necessarily so?
It is surely a question of maintaining an appropriate balance, and is not something that can be taken for granted.
The current preoccupation with the public interest at the expense of members' interests has undoubtedly created a deep-seated unease among practising members.
However, over the longer term, it may also have precisely the opposite effect to that which was intended.
Unless the balance is redressed, there will be little incentive for members to remain in practice and still less for students to consider a career in the profession.
Needless to say, it will tend to be the highest calibre individuals who choose another career.
While most practising firms are having no difficulty in retaining and recruiting staff in the midst of a recession, the situation was, of course, very different only a year or two ago and will probably change again just as rapidly.
There is little disagreement with the view that the principal public interest issue at the present time is the quality of audit-ing.
Audit regulation, changes to the disciplinary arrangements and the continuing development of accounting and auditing standards may go some way to increasing public confidence in the profession; and various other proposed regulations and changes to the law, such as preventing directors of public companies from exercising any influence over the appointment and removal of auditors, might have more effect than any of the steps which have been taken so far.
However, even if we are extremely successful in improving the quality of auditing, it may have little effect on the public's perception of the profession.
No amount of regulation or changes to the law will prevent the type of corporate failures which the public, however illogically, assume to be conclusive evidence of audit failures, and judging by the Government's reluctance to relax the statutory audit requirement for small companies, there may, in any case, be less dissatisfaction with the quality of auditing than we are sometimes led to believe.
It is difficult to avoid the impression that we, as a profession, and the Institute in particular, have so far been too willing to accept unwarranted criticism in the past and that we must respond far more effectively in future if we are to limit the damage caused by corporate failures.
Equally unavoidable is the conviction that it is not in the public interest for any profession to become the subject of so much unwarranted regulation and criticism (not to mention claims) that it is unable to retain or recruit individuals of the required calibre.
Although one need look no further than the Institute's mission statement to appreciate that it sees members' interests as very much secondary to the public interest, it might be reassuring for practising members to know that the Institute, nevertheless, recognises their concerns and has taken proper account of them in determining its long-term objectives.
Notwithstanding the fact that, according to the document,The Future Value of our Qualification , issued at the same time as the Manifesto , the Institute believes that chartered accountants want it to ‘safeguard the reputation of the profession and to enhance the value of their qualification’ and ‘to concentrate on helping them succeed professionally’, at the present time practising members are concerned primarily with their practices' cash flow and profitability, and the threat of litigation.
Scepticism
The section of the Manifesto entitled The Institute and Professional Success does list a number of detailed objectives that might be expected to help firms increase their profitability, the most important of which is that ‘unless required by public interest, the Institute should not seek to impose regulations which have the effect of restricting the freedom of members to succeed professionally and commercially’.
One assumes from this that there should be no repeat of the Investment Business Regulations debacle but, until such time as the Institute has had an opportunity to demonstrate that it can resist the temptation to create any further unnecessary bureaucracy, members are likely to be justifiably sceptical.
To ‘work to ensure a system of legal liability for members which provides a reasonable balance between the interests of auditors, preparers and users of accounts’ is ranked 14th in a list of 15 detailed objectives, which does not encourage one to believe that it is being given a proper priority.
The illustrative programme of additional expenditure from January 1993, set out in Appendix 1 of The Future of Our Qualification , does include programmes ‘to enhance firms' profitability’ and ‘to help firms translate audit regulation into a profitable opportunity’, but these activities account for only £210,000 of the total additional expenditure of almost £2m.
There is no reference to any additional expenditure on working to ensure a fairer system of legal liability.
Significantly, neither the summary of Existing Benefits for Members in Practice, set out in Appendix 3, nor the summary of Recent Achievements, set out in Appendix 5, make any reference to practice profitability or the legal liability problem.
There is, of course, always hope.
The revised Investment Business Regulations may reduce the unnecessary administrative burden created by the original regulations, and relaxing the statutory audit requirement for small companies may provide firms with an opportunity to provide their clients with more valuable services, while at the same time reducing their professional risk.
Perhaps the Institute can, indeed, maintain an appropriate balance between the public interest and members' interests over the longer term, but on the evidence currently available, it should come as no surprise that members are unwilling to accept too much on trust.
Examining the examination system Candidates sitting the Institute's exams need more than an ability to memorise the syllabus
Martin Bousfield Examination Committee
The Institute's professional examinations tend to receive regular but fleeting publicity, usually when results are published.
If pass rates are low, there are knee-jerk allegations of a quota; if the number passing in a time of recession is large, people get worried about the effects on the job market.
The fact is that the Institute's Examination Committee, which determines the results, does not see manpower planning as part of its remit.
That is the employing organisations' responsibility.
The role of the examinations is to determine which of the candidates have reached a set standard.
In 1993 the current PE1 will be replaced by a new Intermediate Examination, and in the following year PE2 will be succeeded by the Final Examination.
With new exams approaching, it is timely to take a longer view of what the pass standard entails and of how students might be helped to attain it.
Overall success rates are very good.
Of those who enter PE1, over 80% eventually pass it, while over 90% of those who enter PE2 will eventually qualify.
But these overall success rates are much higher than the pass rates at individual examination sessions, because many candidates' progress through the examinations is impeded because they have to resit.
This is so even though results determination is weighted in the deserving candidate's favour: extra marks are automatically allocated to those with a good aggregate score who are just below the pass mark in one or two papers.
A reduction in the number of those resitting would be in the interests of both employers and students.
How can this be achieved?
Recruitment, timing, preparation and motivation are all critical.
With every set of results, the Institute publishes analyses of the educational backgrounds of first time candidates.
From these it is possible to glean strong indications of the kinds of educational records that will predispose candidates to perform well.
Some firms conduct more sophisticated research.
This is less practicable for the smaller firm, but all firms should incorporate in their selection procedures a judgment on whether an applicant's educational background appears to fit him or her as a candidate for the examinations.
Once a candidate is recruited, decisions about when he or she is entered for an examination should be taken very carefully and should draw on advice from tutors.
The high pass rates achieved by those taking PE1 early, after full-time courses, are not an argument for early entry in all cases, since such candidates are not a representative sample.
Then the candidate's workload must be prudently controlled.
It is a false economy to overload a student in the run-up to an examination if the upshot is a fail result.
Besides creating the conditions for success as the examination approaches, the employer should also have been involved in the candidate's preparation from the start of the training contract.
There may be a temptation to view examination preparation as something circumscribed and mechanical.
This is evidenced by the fact that most candidates seem well drilled to answer objective-test (multiple-choice) questions, but are weaker in the written test.
The new Final Examination will include a four-hour, interdisciplinary case study requiring candidates to identify key issues, evaluate the relevance of the data provided, undertake financial analysis, use their professional judgment in making decisions, and communicate logically and clearly in writing.
In other words, this will be a test of abilities for which chartered accountants are paid their fees and salaries.
A warning should be sounded that a candidate whose work experience has not equipped him or her to handle the case study paper is unlikely to pass it on the strength of a little practice and revision course.
An article in the April issue of ACCOUNTANCY (see p 98), which discussed the role of private tutors, said that ‘Students do not attend private institutions…to get a well-rounded education at a leisurely pace in an intellectually stimulating environment; they go…to pass professional exams’.
The business-like approach is right, but there is something disturbing in the implication that intellectual stimulation and education, in its wider sense, have little to do with passing the exams.
Examiners, when they identify reasons for failure, refer repeatedly to lack of skill and aptitude in problem solving, judgment, and communication.
These are not ivory-tower matters.
Preparation of candidates for the exams should deploy and extend the intellectual abilities that caused them to be recruited.
Memorising set pathways through the syllabuses is not enough.
In the exams, as in professional life, students must demonstrate that they have versatile, enquiring, and analytical minds, and these are qualities that both training offices and tutors must foster.
Long-term review
Common sense suggests that there should be as much integration as possible of the practical training, classroom-based education, and formal assessment that leads to a professional qualification.
Undoubtedly we have further to go in this, and the Institute is engaged in longer-term research into competence-based assessment.
More immediately, the case study will represent considerable progress.
Already, though, the examiners are looking not only for knowledge of syllabus content but also for those intellectual qualities that make a successful chartered accountant.
This emphasis has been signalled by the introduction of open-book papers, in which candidates are allowed to use reference texts in the examination hall.
There is no denying the breadth of the syllabuses.
Indeed, the Education & Training Directorate believes that the time has come to review the continuation of the policy of requiring all candidates to take papers in the same subjects.
In the meantime, the Examination Committee has been investing a good deal of effort in communicating with tutors, students, and training organisations about what is being tested in the examinations, by, for example, issuing definitions and illustrations of the skills assessed.
However robust its procedures and however effective the communications about its aims, the dependability of an examining system finally rests on the quality of those who set, moderate and mark the papers.
In this important respect, the Institute's exams are in a stronger position than ever before, following the agreement of the firms with the largest numbers of students to provide nominees to examining positions on a planned basis; and smaller firms have expressed support as well.
The good standing of the exams, and thus — in the long run — of the profession itself, depends heavily on individuals' willingness to put something back into the qualification from which they have benefited, and on the support that they receive in this endeavour from their employing organisations.
The high cost of structured CPE: myth and reality CPE doesn't have to be as expensive as many firms would have you believe
Steve Pipe Stephens & Co
The recent Institute statement of intent on continuing professional education has breathed new life into the debate over the cost of structured CPE, and it is not difficult to see why.
Busy accountants would obviously like to save the 100 or so hours of training time that structured CPE can save them (through the difference between obtaining the recommended target of 150 CPE points from 50 structured hours or 150 unstructured hours).
However, for many of them the £1,500-£2,000 cost per head of attending courses can no longer be recovered by using the hours saved to boost fees.
The seemingly high cost of courses, measured in terms of money, time and disruption, had led many practices to abandon the idea of structured CPE altogether.
Unfortunately this is very much a case of throwing the baby out with the bath water.
In fact there are a number of ways of obtaining structured CPE at only a fraction of the cost associated with courses, and with very much less disruption to the professional's work-load.
Prime among these is ‘do it yourself’ CPE, which has been quietly recognised by the Institute for some time.
The current guidelines, for example, accept that in-house seminars and technical committee meetings can qualify as ‘structured’.
It seems likely that the new CPE guidelines to be published later this year will further publicise and extend the acceptability of DIY-structured CPE.
The problem with the DIY approach in the past, both for the Institute in publicising it and for the accountant in implementing it, has always been the difficulty of ensuring that its content is, in fact, adequately structured.
This had led to the widespread belief that DIY CPE involves setting up expensive in-house training facilities with dedicated staff.
The challenge now facing cost-conscious practices would seem to be how to structure their own in-house training at minimum cost and disruption, but without sacrificing quality.
The basic principle underlying the DIY approach is that ‘the whole is greater than the sum of the parts’.
Even for practices which don't have recognised experts on a particular issue, the pooling of in-house ideas, experience, knowledge and opinions will greatly enhance every participant's skills and competencies.
The key to reaping these benefits is clearly good organisation and ensuring that the in-house forum doesn't all too easily degenerate into office politics, tittle-tattle and administration.
A disciplined meeting structure must be established.
This structure is likely to include the advance co-ordination of diaries to ensure that all those who should attend can, a visible commitment from partners that the meetings are to be given high priority, the circulation of concise pre-reading in good time, and adherence to a formal agenda.
The meetings themselves should include an introduction to the topic under discussion and a summary of the main points.
They should then move on to inviting questions from the group to clarify understanding, posing questions to test that understanding, drawing implications for the practice and its clients, and developing an action plan to enhance client service in respect of those implications.
Cost fears
At this point, some readers may be raising their hands in horror at the imagined cost and effort of all of this!
There are two ways of responding to that horror.
First, maintaining professional standards has arguably never been more important.
Second, the actual cost, both in time and money, can be very much less than might at first be anticipated.
As with any form of technical updating or training, the time spent participating is, in one sense, costly.
However, that cost is not unique to DIY training, and in fact once the lower travelling and disruption time is taken into account, DIY may actually be cheaper than the alternatives.
Where DIY can be expensive is in the preparation of the meetings' technical content.
All too often professional pride or point-scoring results in the production of highly polished papers and presentations, often costing hundreds of pounds of lost chargeable-time, when a simpler approach would have been more than adequate.
With a little thought and imagination, it is possible to assemble a wealth of off-the-shelf sources of technical material on which DIY CPE meetings could be based with little or no effort.
These sources include articles and official statements published in ACCOUNTANCY , course and conference notes from the few delegates that still attend external training, and letters and reports already produced within the firm as part of normal client service work.
In addition, Accountancy Television's Business Account offers a weekly one-hour video service through BBC Select, while the Television Education Network produces a monthly video-based service called the Accountants' Education Channel.
Both are aimed directly at facilitating low-cost structured CPE by providing ready to use, visually stimulating video material, photocopyable background notes and guidance on how to structure your own CPE.
Even the smallest of sole practitioners can benefit from DIY CPE by combining with other professionals, perhaps via the discussion groups organised by many district societies.
In the past, CPE might just as easily have stood for ‘Continue Paying Eternally’.
For a long time there has been a choice, but very few seem to have realised it.
The interesting question is how many of us will now exercise that choice, redefining CPE by opting for ‘Cheaper Professional Education’?
books
AUDITING
The Coopers & Lybrand Manual of Auditing (Fifth Edition) Gee, South Quay Plaza, 183 Marsh Wall, London E14 1079pp £65
This is not a book for auditors with weak wrists.
Its formidable bulk means that you are unlikely to want to carry it about with you if you can avoid it, but that has probably been true of most audit manuals for some time now.
In the preface, Coopers note that this edition ‘has been completely rewritten and has a different structure and style’.
In one respect the change seems to me to have been for the worse.
Earlier editions quoted extensively from case law on auditors' duties.
Much of the case law was old, and perhaps Coopers feel that modern courts would disregard it.
But the decisions made fascinating reading and would presumably still be dragged into any legal proceedings today, even if they were not regarded as binding.
For this reason, the fourth edition of Coopers' manual will continue to be of some value.
Signs of the times include sections on ‘Adding value to the audit’, ‘Audit regulation’ and ‘Controlling audit costs’.
Smaller firms may not feel that some of the guidance is particularly relevant to them, eg: ‘it is desirable that a second partner is appointed for each client’.
This new edition is, of course, an authoritative work and should prove invaluable to auditors.
CARTOONS
Build a Better Life by Stealing Office Supplies, illustrated by Scott Adams, is an amusing and accurate guide to office life.
The book's hero, Dogbert, claims that ‘To research this book I spent nearly two weeks at a large American company.
This was long enough to become an expert by American standards, but not so long the life force would be sucked out of me.’
Available from Nicholas Brealey Publishing Ltd, 156 Cloudesley Road, London N1 0EA, price £4.99.
ENVIRONMENTAL ACCOUNTING
Business, Accountancy and the Environment: A Policy and Research Agenda Environment Research Group, ICAEW 129pp £20 p/b + £1 p&p (available from the Technical Department, ICAEW)
The environment is proving to be a recession-proof issue for UK business managers.
Many thought that greenery would go away when times got tough but they are being proved wrong.
No one could ignore the Rio Summit even if much of what came out of it did not have an immediate effect on business.
There is every sign that industry's effect on the natural world will remain near the top of the business agenda.
This is why publication of the Institute's Environment Research Group's report Business, Accountancy and the Enviroment: A Policy and Research Agenda is such a welcome event, even if it is as much as two years too late.
The ACCA published Rob Gray's booklet The Greening of Accountancy: The Profession After Pearce in 1990.
A lot has happened since then and this is the Institute's first significant contribution to the debate.
This is a pity, given its leading role in the profession.
The research group's paper provides an excellent review of environmental accounting, reporting and auditing and reiterates the important role accountants should be playing.
It raises many practical issues, in particular the problems of dealing with voluntary disclosures on environmental performance in a reliable and consistent way.
There is a role for the professional accountant here: dealing with complex data — some scientific and some financial — in a fair manner drawing on the sort of guidance that, in time, could be provided by the ASB and the APB.
If the profession does not take up the challenge others will, and an opportunity will have been missed.
There is also a growing need to measure what many think is immeasurable — our consumption of natural resources — and to help evaluate the extent to which business activities are truly sustainable.
This is a key area where professional accountants have already begun to experiment — the 1991 environmental accounts of the Dutch company BSO/Origin, for instance, are reproduced and show what can be done with a bit of imagination and lateral thinking.
BSO/Origin's accounts also highlight the many uncertainties involved and the assumptions that have to be made.
The Institute should be sponsoring its own research in this area and encouraging UK companies to try it for themselves.
Accountants also have an important role to play in ensuring that green taxes — such as the much-discussed carbon tax — are designed and administered efficiently.
Policy is for politicians, but if a tax proposal is administratively unworkable, then we should let them know sooner rather than later.
The research paper recommends certain reporting actions by UK companies — such as publishing environmental policies and naming an environmental director — as well as setting out an eight page research agenda for academics, the ASB and APB.
It also proposes an environment charter setting out the Institute's environment strategy and even suggests establishing an Environment Faculty in the longer term.
I believe the issues are important enough to warrant setting up such a faculty now.
Its first job should be to draw up the Institute's environment charter.
readers ask
Agricultural tenancy
Articles in the press have commented on the value the Inland Revenue places on a non-assignable agricultural tenancy at the point of inheritance.
In the current case,J Hedley Walton deceased v Inland Revenue , a challenge is being mounted to the value put on such a tenancy.
Apparently, on Mr Walton's death in 1984, the Capital Taxes Office valued his share of the tenancy for IHT purposes.
It claimed the tenancy was worth half the difference in value between the tenanted land and equivalent vacant possession land, and taxed half this amount.
In cases where the rent paid is low, do you consider it advisable to continue or dissolve the tenancy?
The short answer to the question is: continue the tenancy.
The whole situation regarding the over-valuation of estates consisting of freehold and agricultural property by district valuers has now been highlighted, not only by the case of J Hedley Walton deceased v CIR , but also by the decisions of the Lands Tribunal in Exors of Lady Fox deceased v CIR .
In the Fox case, although there was an initial hearing before the Special Commissioner, it was decided that the case should be heard before the Lands Tribunal as the matter involved the valuation of land.
This duly happened, and in the judgment published in November 1991, it was held that the valuation of the estates should take into account the agricultural tenancies granted by the late Lady Fox to herself and her farming partners.
The consequence of this was that the district valuer's valuation of the estate — on the basis of an open market vacant possession value less a very small discount — was overturned, and the Lands Tribunal accepted the executors' valuation of the estate as an ‘investment’ property.
The final result was a decrease in valuation of about £1.5m and probable CTT saving of £1m.
The difficulty with all this is cost as, despite the Lands Tribunal decision, there is nothing to prevent the Capital Taxes Office from raising a new demand based on fresh grounds, as it has done many times during the past 11 years.
Nevertheless, a blow has been struck for the land-owning taxpayer, particularly those less well-off individuals who have not been able to defend themselves against the local district valuer's increasingly aggressive commercial techniques.
Hopefully, the Fox and Hedley Walton cases will encourage the executors of land-owning taxpayers to fight over-valuation, which has often assumed the status of a national scandal.
Keep the tenancy, and fight to have it valued as an investment property when the time comes.
Outstanding creditors
My company has a large number of creditors in its balance sheet that have been outstanding for between two and four years.
Payment has never been demanded and it is possible that the provisions are not necessary because the liabilities they cover did not exist in the first place.
However, we are understandably reluctant to raise this with the creditor organisations.
I have been told that in these circumstances it is permissible from an audit point of view to write back debts that are over two years old, notwithstanding the provisions of the Statute of Limitations, giving the creditor the right to demand payment for up to six years.
Can you confirm that this is so and whether the accounts would then have to carry some sort of explanatory note to this effect?
The questioner does not indicate the nature of the creditors in question, only that there are a ‘large number’ of them.
Nor is it known how such circumstances arose or whether the balances are individually or cumulatively material in relation to the company's accounts.
This information would be needed to provide a comprehensive response.
It is the auditor's responsibility to form an opinion on the truth and fairness of the accounts.
If, over the years, the balance of probabilities has shifted so that balances previously included as creditors now seem unlikely ever to be paid, it would be appropriate for the balances in question to be removed from creditors, with the corresponding credit in either profit and loss account or, if the sums are material and the adjustment arises from a fundamental error, the profit and loss reserves in the balance sheet.
A notional liability continues to exist, however, and it would therefore be necessary, bearing in mind SSAP 18,Accounting for Post Balance Sheet Events , to disclose the contingency by way of note to the accounts.
A suitable form of wording could be devised to avoid the risk of inviting a flood of claims, spurious or genuine.
An important additional factor, of course, is whether the items in question originally attracted tax relief.
If so, the current tax charge should reflect the writeback of costs.
The transfer of sums out of the creditors' total in the balance sheet does not, of itself, imply dishonesty and would not be an offence under the Theft Act 1968, since any creditor able to prove the sum owing within the six year limitation period would be paid, regardless of the accounting treatment adopted.
Registration of trade mark
One of my clients registered at Companies House a company under the name Larry Small Pizza Parlour Limited.
Companies House raised no objections; the first two words were his own name and the other two words of the title described his business.
After trading for some months, he has been approached by a company which says it owns the rights to the trade name Pizza Parlour and that he must desist from using it.
Can you please advise what steps should be taken when registering a company name to ensure that subsequently there is no embarrassment over the use of someone else's trade mark?
A company's name must not include a trade mark unless its owner's consent is obtained.
That consent is clearly not forthcoming here.
The Registrar of Companies does not consult the Trade Marks Index when considering applications for a proposed new company name, and the acceptance of a particular name is not an indication that no trade marks right exists in it.
Applicants for registration of a company or a change of name are therefore advised, in their own interest — to avoid possible expense and inconvenience — to investigate the possibility that others may have trade marks rights in a name, or part of a name, they require before applying to the Registrar of Companies for its registration.
Searches may be made at the Trade Marks Registry, Patent Office, Cardiff Road, Newport, Gwent NP9 1RH (phone ).
If the mark is unregistered it may still be protected by common law, and its owner could take steps to prevent its use by asking the court for an injunction under the tort of passing off.
Allotment of share capital
A private limited company has the following clause in its Articles of Association concerning the issue of share capital: ‘The shares shall be under the control of the directors, who may allot and dispose of or grant options over the same to such persons on such terms, and in such a manner as they think fit.’
The Articles were registered in 1953 under the CA 1948, and except for a few standard exclusions, largely adopt Table A, in force at that time.
Given the progression of the companies legislation since that Act, does the foregoing clause comply with the requirement of s 80 of the CA 1985 concerning directors' authority to issue share capital, and of s 91 concerning the disapplication of the pre-emption provisions of s 89?
The Memorandum and Articles in question have never been altered from those that were first registered, save for an amendment increasing the company's authorised share capital.
It should also be borne in mind that the directors control 56% of the company, with the balance held by shareholders not involved with the daily running of the business.
On the assumption that the relevant legislation is not satisfied, what course of action can a minority shareholder who is not a director (owning say 20% of the share capital) take to redress the situation when new shares have been systematically issued to existing directors without first being offered on a pro rata basis to all members?
Table A to the CA 1948 applies to the company concerned.
However, the article relating to allotment of shares is a special one which does not appear in Table A but nevertheless applies to this particular company.
Ss 80 and 89, CA1985 overrule the special article.
S 80 in effect requires members' approval by ordinary resolution before the directors' power to allot the company's shares can be exercised, though the resolution may give approval for up to five years.
The CA 1985 should be referred to for the detail.
The directors of this company have therefore ignored the legal requirements now attaching to the allotment of shares and are liable to a default fine for each infringement (see Sch 24, CA1985).
Nevertheless, the allotment is good and cannot be set aside under the above provisions.
S 80 (10) states: ‘Nothing in this section affects the validity of any allotment.’
Private companies can now get rid of the requirement for member involvement, but only by an elective resolution under s 379A.
All the voting members must approve of such a resolution.
Presumably that does not apply here.
S 89 includes provisions under which directors who have the members' authority under s 80 to allot are nevertheless required to allot the shares on a pre-emptive basis to existing shareholders pro rata to their holdings, unless the members have disapplied their pre-emptive rights under the Act.
Disapplication requires a special resolution, ie a 75% majority, which the minority shareholder referred to could not block.
Private companies can get rid of the pre-emptive rights — by altering their articles, again by special resolution — unless and until the articles are altered by deleting the relevant clause.
The reader indicates that this has not been done.
The elective resolution procedure does not apply to the pre-emptive rights since a special resolution procedure is available to change the articles.
Reference should be made to ss 89–96, CA1985 for the full details.
Again, contravention of the pre-emption provisions does not affect the allotment, and the recipients of the shares are entitled to them in law.
S 92 deals with the consequences of contravening the pre-emption rights the Act confers.
It makes provision for monetary compensation to be paid to any person to whom an offer should have been made but was not, and who has suffered loss.
The compensation is payable by the company, and every officer of it.
Legal proceedings can be taken under the section, but there is a two year limit on such a claim.
This starts to run from the date of delivery of the relevant return of allotments to the Registrar, which must be within one month of each allotment.
Other than the s 92 remedy, it may be possible for the minority shareholder to petition the court under s 459, CA1985 alleging ‘unfair prejudice’.
The court can make a variety of orders — set out in s 461 of the Act — to which reference should be made.
They include the purchase of the minority shares by the other members or the company if the minority shareholder feels he or she would be better off out of it.
Finally there is case law.
Directors are required to exercise their powers for the proper purpose, ie for the benefit of the company, and it has been held that the power of allotment is given to the directors to get capital for the company.
If there are other motives, the court may regard the allotment as void unless ratified by an ordinary resolution of the members (see Hogg v Cramphorn [1966]3 All ER 420).
The possibility of the directors' using their votes to ratify the allotments would require more detail, and legal advice should be sought here.
There is also a somewhat vague principle in the common law which requires the majority to act fairly towards the minority (see Clemens v Clemens Bros [1976]2 All ER 268, in which the facts were not unlike those outlined: the court set aside allotments of shares by the directors).
It looks therefore as if the court's intervention will be required here unless s 92 compensation is given voluntarily.
Director's golf club subscription
A company pays a director's golf club subscription.
In the tax computation this amount is added back as a disallowed expense and hence the company obtains no tax relief.
As a result no entry is made on the P11D for the director and no income tax is therefore assessed on him.
Is this situation permitted and if so at what stage, if any, does employer's NIC get assessed?
A clear distinction should be made between a self-employed businessman trading either as a sole trader or in partnership, and the director of a limited company, whether that company be a public limited company, close investment holding company or another kind.
A self-employed trader can add back a non-allowable expense in his Sch D tax computation and that is the end of the matter.
Not so a director, who is a separate legal entity from the company, even if it is 100% owned by him.
The golf club subscription is a benefit the director receives from the company, even though the company gained no tax relief for the payment of the subscription.
The amount of the subscription is therefore subject to income tax as a benefit under s 154, ICTA 1988 and national insurance contributions under Contributions Regulations, Reg 19(1) (d).
The income tax treatment is borne out by the decision in Brown v Bullock , 40 TC 1, concerning a bank's subscription to a London club on behalf of its West End manager.
Training expenses
We are currently in communication with the Inland Revenue regarding the deductibility of training expenses for a sole trader.
The client concerned undertook training with the British School of Motoring at a cost of £1,000 to qualify as an approved driving instructor immediately prior to commencing to trade as such.
The accounts submitted to the Revenue included these costs as a deduction and our computations claimed them as a legitimate expense.
The Revenue has subsequently responded that these costs did not fulfil the requirements of s 84(1) of ICTA 1988, arguing that these fees were not an expense of the trade but ones which put the client in a position to carry out his trade, being akin in their opinion to home to business mileage.
Would you agree, given the circumstances, with the Revenue's argument?
If you do, would not the same argument be applied to a host of other examples of training expenditure; for example, costs related to acquisition of BS 5750 (a cost which is not directly a cost of trading but merely a requirement to put companies in a position to carry on their trade, ie where customers seek BS 5750 approval)?
The Revenue's reference to s 84(1), ICTA 1988 appears to be entirely irrelevant, as this section refers to ‘gifts to educational establishments’.
The law is quite clear on a deduction for employees' training costs, which are allowable as a business deduction under ss 588 and 589, ICTA 1988.
In addition, allowances for Enterprise Agency contributions are given specifically under s 79, ICTA 1988, and ss 32 and 33, Finance Act 1991 give additional relief, for expenditure incurred after 5 April 1992, for amounts spent on ‘a qualifying course of vocational training’.
The latter relief applies to National Vocational Qualifications approved by the National Council of Vocational Qualifications, but presumably does not extend to the training of driving instructors by the British School of Motoring.
On this assumption, all is not lost, as the expenses of a training course undertaken by a self-employed person are allowed as a business deduction under general principles when the training is undertaken for the purposes of the trade.
This approach is in accordance with s 74(a), ICTA 1988, being expenditure ‘wholly and exclusively laid out or expended for the purposes of the trade, profession or vocation’.
There can be no duality of purpose or personal benefit in connection with the BSM training course expense.
Only an eccentric would consider spending £1,000 on such a course for fun, and the company would probably refuse to accept such a trainee.
It is therefore recommended that the inspector of taxes is fought very hard on this issue.
If he persists on the line of pre-trading expenditure, then the provisions of s 401, ICTA 1988 should be pointed out to him, as this section headed ‘relief for pre-trading expenditure’ gives, effectively, the same end result as a deduction under normal Sch D principles.
As regards BS 5750, s 401 gives a similar relief for companies' pre-trading expenditure incurred (as for the sole traders and partnerships) within five years of commencement, and this section ought to validate such expenditure for tax purposes.
Partially-exempt businesses
Businesses with small taxable and large exempt turnovers, ie dentists, insurance brokers etc, would appear to have much to gain by registering for VAT under the new exemption rules if the input tax does not exceed £7,200 a year.
We should be grateful for your advice on whether this is a loophole which is likely to be quickly closed or whether it is intended that this type of business should benefit in this way.
The current partial exemption rules are in the VAT (General) Regulations 1985, Regs 29 to 37.
The standard method attributes to taxable (both zero and positive-rated) or exempt supplies, that input tax on goods and services which is used or is to be used exclusively in making such supplies (Reg 30).
The outputs ratio is the standard method of apportioning the ‘residue’ of input tax (for example, that on overheads) which is reclaimable along with that directly attributed to taxable supplies: residue of input tax times the value of taxable supplies divided by the value of all supplies gives the residue of input tax.
The ratio is then rounded up to the next whole number (Reg 30(4)).
However, the ratio excludes certain supplies: these include, for example, those whose size distorts the ratio and are ‘incidental’ to the business, such as the sale of a zero-rated dwelling (Reg 30 (3)).
Any method other than the standard method requires Customs' advance written approval.
A person is not partially exempt if his or her ‘exempt input tax’(the sum of the residue apportioned and that directly attributed to exempt supplies) is no more than the de minimis limit of £600 a month on average (Reg 33A (1)), ie £7,200 a year.
Thus a person who carries on a VAT exempt business (such as a bookmaker, dentist, doctor, funeral director or registered nursing home) might deliberately start a small-scale taxable business and hope to take advantage of the rules.
If he carries on a taxable business, he can register voluntarily (Merseyside Cablevision Ltd (1987) 3 BVC 596) and reclaim all input tax if the exempt input tax is no more than £7,200 a year.
A disadvantage is the cost of complying with the VAT rules.
Customs must know of this planning point.
They may argue as a point of fact that, to carry on a taxable ‘business’(or ‘economic activity’— the terminology in the EC's Sixth Directive, Art 4(1) and (2)) and so use the partial exemption rules, the person must do more than just sell a mere, say, £5 worth of food, drink, tobacco, matches, magazines, books, postcards, camera films, audio or video tapes, cassettes, compact discs, records, sunglasses or combs each year.
For example, in GB Turnbull Ltd (1985) 2 BVC 205, 152 Customs argued that a person's horse breeding, training, racing and dealing were a mere hobby rather than a ‘business’.
Similarly, they argued that a person's motor racing was a hobby in Atlas Marketing (1985) 2 BVC 205, 298.
In C & E Commrs v Lord Fisher (1981) 1 BVC 392 Gibson J named certain tests that had to be applied in deciding if an activity is a business, including the following:
1.
the activity must be a ‘serious undertaking earnestly pursued’;
2.
it must be actively pursued with recognisable continuity;
3.
it should have a measure of substance; and
4.
it must be conducted in a regular manner.
Some people are already and perhaps unknowingly able to use the rules, such as those who run a taxable business and already have exempt rental income.
taxation
EMBRACING PAY AND FILE Pay and file, the new system under which companies will pay their corporation tax and file their returns and accounts, is less than 12 months away.
How will the changes affect the profession?
Mike Jones
Most of the deadlines that must be met for the new pay and file tax system are at least nine months on from 1 October 1993, but one is already less than a year away.
If this has escaped your notice then read on!
We took a first look at the pay and file provisions with the non-tax specialist in mind (see ACCOUNTANCY , April, p 80).
Although the ‘appointed day’, on which the legislative machinery will spring into life, has twice been delayed, the Inland Revenue has confirmed that it will now definitely be 30 September 1993.
Many companies whose latest accounting period started on 1 November will therefore be affected as this period will end after the appointed day.
Corporation tax return (CT 200)
At the time of writing there has been little feedback from the trial period earlier this year during which forms CT 200 were completed and submitted alongside the usual accounts and computations.
The experience has, however, shown that the format in which the tax computation is prepared is the key to successful and speedy CT 200 completion.
If a lot of juggling and rearrangement of figures is necessary to transfer the information to the forms then it is worth considering adopting a new procedure for preparing the tax computation.
Otherwise there is a danger of losing or miscasting figures during the conversion process.
Any resultant interest and penalty charges will have to be explained to dissatisfied clients.
At first sight, the most time-consuming area seems to be directors' remuneration details.
Unless the year ends coincide, or the information is readily available from other sources, the time needed to calculate the returnable amounts may be prohibitive.
Experience is likely to show that this optional page is rarely completed because the extra costs have to be passed on to clients.
Estimated returns
What if, despite our best efforts, a full and complete return simply cannot be submitted by the due date?
Recent guidance, issued by the Institute's Tax Faculty, offers some comfort (see Tax 12/92).
This indicates that the Revenue will be prepared to accept returns containing estimated figures provided they are identified, drawn to the inspector's attention and made to the best of the company's (adviser's?) ability.
Provided these requirements are complied with, no late filing penalty will be sought under s 94, Taxes Management Act 1970.
However, if later events indicate that the estimated figure has changed, or the final figure becomes known, then the new amount should be notified without delay in accordance with s 97, TMA 1970.
This should ensure that no incorrect return penalty would be incurred under s 96 of that Act.
Where it is shown that an estimate was unreasonable and not made to the company's best ability, a penalty may arise.
But it will not be under s 11, TMA 1970 for failure to make a return, but under s 96 for submission of an incorrect return.
The penalty under the latter section may of course be up to 100% of the undeclared tax as opposed to the pay and file penalties of £100, £200 plus 10% or 20% of underpaid tax.
The time limit for submitting the return may be extended by the inspector if it can be shown, to his satisfaction, that there is a reasonable excuse for the inability to submit by the prescribed deadline.
The omission must, however, be rectified as soon as the excuse has ended.
It will therefore be possible to provide late or estimated figures in a number of cases.
The submission of an incomplete return with some information missing will surely therefore amount to carelessness, if not outright neglect, on the part of any professional adviser.
Transitional problems
Many companies, with the support of their advisers, will already be well on the way to being able to comply with all pay and file's demands.
Others may not be in such a happy position.
Those already behind in the preparation and submission of accounts will have great difficulty during the transition period.
Take Emily Ltd as an example.
It is July 1994 and the company has taken a relaxed attitude to preparation of its accounts since it was set up in 1991.
Those for the year to 31 December 1991 (due to the inspector of taxes by 31 December 1992) were not prepared until January 1994.
(The Companies House penalties were regarded as a minor inconvenience by the directors.)
The accounts were submitted to the Revenue in March 1994 and late submission penalties incurred.
The 1992 accounts (due 31 December 1993) are almost complete but another six to eight weeks' work is needed before the audit can be signed off.
Another penalty is therefore likely for that year.
The accountant now becomes aware that the 1993 accounts will be subject to the pay and file provisions and the first tax payment is due on 1 October — just nine weeks away.
He realises too late that not only can he not meet that deadline but he will not be able to finish those accounts before 31 December 1994.
They will therefore incur a late filing penalty as well as interest on the unpaid tax.
Clearly some forward planning in 1992 would have given him the opportunity to organise his affairs and avoid many of his problems.
As another example, take the case of Benjamin Ltd.
Again it is July 1994 and the company is under investigation by the local inspector of taxes.
Certain items in the accounts to 31 December 1992 have been successfully challenged and earlier years are now being looked at.
As is often the case in such circumstances, the accountant has delayed submission of later accounts pending settlement of the enquiries and establishment of the true liability.
If she delays beyond 31 December 1994 then the 31 December 1993 accounts will incur a late filing penalty in addition to interest arising on any underpaid tax at 1 October 1994.
She must therefore establish with the client whether those later accounts contain similar items to those challenged for previous years.
If they do, then she must establish by 1 October the likely correct tax liability and make the payment due on that date.
Unless she does so there will be further interest arising on those unpaid amounts in addition to the interest arising on the investigation years.
In future, those advisers or companies involved in investigation cases will have to be aware of this situation.
In many cases accounts are held back until completion of an investigation but the position will recur year after year and would have to be constantly reviewed in the light of the current stage of the investigation.
Interest
Under measures introduced by pay and file there will be a differentiation between interest paid on overpaid tax and interest payable in respect of late or underpaid tax.
At the moment, an overpayment of tax, once it attracts repayment supplement, produces a quite reasonable tax free ‘investment’ return.
Present rates are running at 9.25% — equivalent to 12.33% gross for a company paying the small companies tax rate.
The incentive to reclaim the overpayment is lessened if a company is lucky enough not to need the cash immediately.
Under the new regime, however, two rates will apply.
1.
For late or underpaid tax the rate will be 2.5% over bank base rate less tax relief at the small companies rate of corporation tax (currently 25%).
Assume the current base rate is 10%.
The charge will therefore be:(10 + 2.5) less 25% = 9.375%.
2.
For overpayments the rate will be the bank deposit rate (base rate minus 1%) less tax relief at the full rate of corporation tax (currently 33%).
Assume the current base rate is 10%.
The repayment supplement will therefore be:(10 — 1) less 33% = 6.03%.
Although not taxable, the supplement is significantly less than that currently payable.
It is in fact much closer to the rate paid on tax deposit certificates which currently offer 7% gross 5.25% net.
Overpaying tax on an estimated computation therefore seems preferable to purchasing a certificate.
However, it is yet another decision that will need to be discussed with clients.
The incentive for making as accurate a calculation as possible of the likely final liability is therefore clear.
An error, intentional or otherwise, in the amount paid on the due date (nine months after the end of the accounting period) will result in a 3.35% difference in the interest paid or charged.
Group relief
As a consequence of the House of Lords' decision in Gallic Leasing v Coburn (STC 1991 699) the Revenue has now exercised its power of determination under s 42(5), TMA 1970.
From 1 September 1992 group relief claims must contain specific items of information about the claiming and surrendering companies.
In fact this simply anticipates the advent of pay and file because such requirements have lain dormant in the legislation since the Finance Act 1990 (Sch 15).
There is therefore a ‘trial period’ as far as this aspect of the new corporation tax return is concerned.
What will change on 1 October 1993, however, is the method by which a claim may be varied.
At present, if an indeterminate amount of group relief has been claimed (under the approved formula method) then a later amendment can be made when the true figure is known by advising the district concerned — usually by simply notifying the inspector in writing.
Under the pay and file regime, however, an amended (or finalised claim) will only be acceptable on a corporation tax return (form CT 200).
Thus a complete form will have to be prepared and, more importantly, signed by the company secretary, each time a claim is varied.
The administrative time and cost involved in such an exercise will surely lead to a substantial increase in the numbers of practitioners using computerised versions of the return form.
Loans to participators
Loans to participators in close companies are one aspect of corporate tax liability that will assume particular importance under the new regime.
An obligation to notify chargeability within 12 months of the end of the accounting period in which the loan arises will remain.
However, a new, earlier and potentially far more troublesome deadline will arise.
Under pay and file any tax payable under s 419 Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988 on such a loan is due to the collector 14 days after the end of the accounting period in which the liability arises.
Sarah Ltd, for example, advances a loan of £60,000 to a director, Thomas, in the accounting period ended 31 December 1994.
The company's corporation tax liability is due on 1 October 1995 and its returns and accounts by 31 December 1995.
But under s 419 tax of £20,000 is payable by 14 January 1995 (25/75 advance corporation tax rate assumed).
At that stage most advisers won't even have thought about visiting their clients' premises to discuss the audit programme for the year.
It would therefore be very easy for the deadline to pass without the tax payment being made and an interest charge would therefore start to accumulate.
Advisers will therefore have to make clients aware of this new requirement.
They should discuss the best way of monitoring loan arrangements within the company so as to put in place a control system to avoid these problems.
As with the rest of the pay and file regulations, interest charges will run on unpaid s 419 tax from the day after the payment is due until the date of payment.
A company whose accounting period began on 1 November 1992 will therefore have to pay any s 419 tax due on loans made in the current account period on 14 November 1993.
That is now just 12 months away.
Reorganise and move forward
There is no doubt that the introduction of pay and file will add to the administrative burden of clients and advisers alike.
Poor internal procedures mean that accountants will struggle to complete audits and computations in time to meet the deadlines.
Poor liaison with clients means that decisions about elements of the tax computation will be made without the client being advised.
In both cases, interest and penalties may be incurred.
Clients will resist carrying these costs if the fault lies with the accountant.
On the other hand, practices whose procedures are well organised and geared up to meet the new deadline will surely benefit from the new regime.
Clients will receive completed accounts, returns and computations at roughly the same time each year so embarrassing delays will not arise.
Tax sensitive decisions will have been explained thus improving client liaison.
With reliable automatic control systems in place to produce everything required for pay and file, there will be more time to address the client's other needs.
A better overall service should be offered with, hopefully, an accompanying increase in fee income.
The choice is clear.
Reorganise and move towards pay and file with confidence or let things be and risk losing clients.
It is time to make a decision.
1.
The appointed day for the commencement of the pay and file regime is 30 September 1993.
2.
For many companies the first pay and file deadline is now less than 12 months away.
3.
Companies behind with their accounts and returns submissions will have to catch up in the next 12 months.
4.
Interest rates will discriminate between overpaid and underpaid tax — by more than 3%.
5.
Amended claims to group relief and capital allowances will only be valid if made on a further corporation tax return (CT 200).
6.
Procedures for preparation of tax computations will have to be reviewed to ensure easy transfer of figures on to the new returns.
7.
Clients will have to be made more aware of what information is needed and why certain tax computations decisions have been taken.
8.
Auditors and tax specialists will have to liaise more closely to ensure that internal procedures allow deadlines to be met.
PAY AND FILE POINTERS
PAY AND FILE
Roadshow rolls on
Accountancy Courses and Conferences is holding a series of half day Pay and File Roadshows around the country during the autumn and spring.
Each autumn presentation costs £40 plus £7 VAT and gives you 10 CPE points.
The first Roadshow, held in October, attracted more than 400 delegates.
For further details and bookings, contact Jonathan Hooton on .
students
THE COST OF MAKING DECISIONS Examination questions that feature relevant costing are often answered poorly — but they don't have to be
Katherine Holdsworth
Managers constantly have to make financial decisions.
What price should we tender for a contract?
Should a division be shut down?
Is a project worth undertaking?
There may be many factors to take into account, but usually the overriding consideration is monetary.
The fundamental technique used to analyse the monetary aspect of these decisions is called relevant costing .
Relevant costing features in many of the questions set in the Financial Decisions paper at Conversion Course, and it is often these questions that receive the poorest answers.
I shall offer here a methodical approach to answering such questions.
First we need to look closely at the nature of decisions.
A decision is a choice between alternative courses of action (one of which could be to do nothing).
To analyse decisions we compare revenues and costs between the courses of action (see panel).
The extra revenue, extra cost, lost revenue and saved cost are relevant to the decision to be made; they are known as relevant costs.
Relevant costs and revenues are defined as future cash flows that will be changed by the decision under review.
Costs and revenues that have occurred in the past cannot be changed.
Non-cash flow costs and revenues such as depreciation are subjective.
For these reasons such costs and revenues are not taken into account in decision making.
It is important when answering questions on relevant costing to identify all future cash flows affected by a particular decision.
To answer a relevant costing question we must do two things:
list the relevant cash flows;
explain the reasoning and assumptions behind them.
The explanation is every bit as important as the numbers!
The approach is to consider each figure in the question and decide whether it falls into one of the four categories — extra revenue, extra cost, lost revenue or saved cost — if the decision is acted on.
Look at Heisenberg, which is part of a real exam question set in June 1992.
Your answer in an exam should be similar to the solution given here.
Each number on the cost statement is referenced to a note.
The note sets out how the figure has been arrived at and stresses any assumptions that are being made.
Your answer need not be quite as full as the explanations given here.
Notice that we have considered every figure given in the question and decided whether it is relevant or not and which category it falls into.
Some of the numbers, for example lost contribution, need further analysis before they can be used, but the principle is the same.
By adopting this methodical approach you should avoid the pitfalls and successfully answer any questions set on this subject.
Heisenberg — Question
Mr Schrodinger, the production manager of Heisenberg Ltd, wants some costing advice on a one-off overseas order that he wishes to tender for.
He has given you a cost breakdown as follows:
You have also ascertained that:
1.
Material A is in stock and the £8,000 represents cost.
There is no use for the material other than the project.
It would cost £4,000 to dispose of the material.
The replacement cost of the material is £2.5/kg.
2.
There is 2,000kg of material B in stock, which cost £3/kg.
The current replacement cost is £5/kg.
The material is in continuous use in the business.
3.
A normal working week is 40 hours.
Employees are paid at normal rates for the first 40 hours and are guaranteed a minimum of 35 hours.
4.
The wage rate in dept X is £2/hr.
The department is slack at present with its five-strong workforce only working at 50% capacity.
5.
The wage rate in dept Z is £4/hr.
The department is extremely busy and all existing machine and labour capacity is fully occupied.
To process the order, the company would have to take labour off current projects that have been costed to yield a contribution of £5/hr.
6.
Supervision costs have been charged to the project on the basis of 100% of normal labour costs.
The supervision will be carried out by existing staff within their normal duties.
Mr Schrodinger informs you that the customer is prepared to pay up to a maximum of £20,000 for the order.
He knows of at least one competitor who is prepared to accept this price.
However, he does not feel that he can tender below the £21,960 cost, because the order would make a loss for the company.
Requirement:Set up a cost statement to show the minimum tender price.
Explain clearly how you reach your cost figure; in particular, state any assumptions that you make and explain why any figures have been included or excluded.
(10 marks)
Heisenberg — Solution
Therefore £13,520 is the minimum tender price.
This price would cover costs, but not make any profit.
If the company wishes to make a profit the tender price should be higher than this.
Note 1
If the order goes ahead we take material A out of stock and since we have no other use for it we will not replace it — no cash flow.
If the order doesn't go ahead we assume that we will dispose of the stock.
By accepting the order we therefore have a saved cost of £4,000.
The £8,000 is a past cost and so is not relevant to the decision.
Note 2
If the order goes ahead we take the 2,000kg of B from stock; there is no cash flow, the £3/kg being a sunk cost.
We order a further 1,000kg at £5/kg to make up the 3,000kg.
However, we assume that since B is in continuous use in the business we wish to maintain our stock levels at 2,000kg, so we also replace the 2,000kg at £5/kg.
So in total we have an extra cost of 3,000kg * £5/kg = £15,000.
Again, the historic cost of £3/kg is past and so is irrelevant.
Note 3
Department X is working at 50% capacity but the staff are guaranteed payment for a 35 hour week.
It is therefore reasonable to assume that they could undertake the order without incurring any further wage costs, so the relevant cost is nil.
Note 4
: Labour and machines are both at full capacity in department Z. This situation needs to be looked at very carefully.
Whatever decision is reached the overall wages cost in department Z will not increase.
If the order is not taken on, one employee will still be paid for five weeks to undertake other work.
What is important is that ‘other products’ can't be made in the hours used for the order.
These products yield contribution of £5/hr; suppose this is made up as follows:
For each hour we use on the project we could say we lose £5 contribution.
Is this strictly true?
Let's break it down.
Another way of writing this, which ties in with the information given, is:
The hours used on the project are 5 weeks at 40 hours a week, ie 200 hours, therefore the overall lost revenue and saved costs for department Z are 200 hours * £11/hr = £2,200.
Note 5
: We are told that if the order is undertaken, supervision will be carried out by existing staff within their normal duties.
We will not be paying them any more, so there is no extra cost.
Note 6
: We concluded in Note 4 that department Z will not incur further variable overhead costs.
In department X the company would not have to pay for more labour hours but more will be worked (instead of being idle).
It is reasonable to assume that variable overheads will only accrue if hours are worked rather than idle.
The extra hours in department X are 40 hours * 4 weeks = 160 hours.
The additional variable overhead cost is 160 hours * £2/hr = £320.
COURSES AND CONFERENCES
International tax conference
Accountancy Courses and Conferences is running a two-day international tax conference on practical personal and corporate tax planning on 16 and 17 November.
The conference is a joint presentation by the Institute and the Scottish Institute.
It has been designed to be different from the usual run of the mill international tax conference.
It will not be a review of well-known general principles.
The emphasis will be on real situations, real problems and real solutions.
With the European Community continuing to have a major impact on the key corporate tax planning issues associated with operations in mainland Europe, and with the wide divergence of personal tax practices and rules globally, keeping abreast of developments is essential for all practitioners.
The team of expert speakers will use their own experiences and expertise to illustrate the problems, opportunities and solutions facing the international tax professional.
Attending the conference will enable you to make the most effective tax decisions for your company and clients, optimising their international tax position and competitive advantage.
The first day of the conference is to be devoted to corporate tax issues affecting national and multinational corporations.
The second day will concentrate on personal international tax planning.
You can attend on either day.
Attendance on both days entitles you to a discount of over £50.
The conference is to be held at the Forum Hotel, London SW7.
The cost is £275 plus VAT for each day, or £499 plus VAT for both days.
Each day's attendance gives you 19 CPE points.
For further information and bookings, please contact .
accounting issues
The APB and going concern — the way ahead Concerns raised by commentators on the APB's proposed auditing standard repay close examination
The exposure period for public comment on the Auditing Practices Board's proposed Statement of Auditing Standards (SAS) dealing with the subject of going concern, ended on 31 August, and the views expressed vary considerably.
The proposed SAS introduces some significant changes to the extant Auditing Guideline,The Auditor's Considerations in Respect of Going Concern .
The most significant are that the proposed SAS requires auditors to be active, rather than passive, and to perform procedures specifically designed to identify circumstances which might call into question the appropriateness of the going concern basis; that the future period which should be considered by both the directors and auditors in assessing the validity of the going concern basis should be extended to one year from the date the accounts are approved by the directors; and that emphasis is now placed on the need for adequate disclosures in accounts of matters giving rise to inherent uncertainties that affect a company's ability to continue as a going concern.
Although most of those who commented on the proposed SAS support the need for a new Standard, there are two particular aspects that concern many commentators.
The first is that it is considered to be premature to introduce a SAS dealing with going concern before parallel guidance has been developed on what constitutes adequate disclosure on inherent uncertainties in respect of going concern.
The second is that the proposals are considered to be impracticable for most small companies and their auditors.
The preface to the exposure draft states clearly that the provisions of the proposed SAS aim to encourage fuller disclosures than have emerged under current practice.
However, there is nothing in it to suggest what these fuller disclosures might be.
Yet, under the proposals, auditors are required to consider whether the disclosures of matter giving rise to a going concern uncertainty are adequate for the accounts to give a true and fair view.
Not unreasonably, some commentators insist that guidance be provided on what constitutes adequate disclosure before the SAS becomes effective.
This gives the APB a problem.
The natural body to develop guidance on disclosures is the Accounting Standards Board.
However, it is known that the subject of disclosures of uncertainties is not on the ASB's agenda and that, in any event, the ASB has other priorities.
Thus the question arises whether the APB should now wait until the ASB addresses the subject, or should it develop the guidance alone, or with other interested parties?
It is probably fair to say that the subject is too urgent to be left until the ASB can find time.
It therefore comes down to who should develop the guidance.
Going concern was one of the areas the Cadbury Committee considered, and it recommended that the accountancy profession, together with representatives of preparers of accounts, should develop guidance on the subject for both companies and auditors.
As a consequence, the English and Scottish Institutes and the 100 Group have established a working party to consider and make recommendations with regard to various aspects of going concern.
Given the establishment of this joint working party, it would appear both reasonable and sensible for the APB's Going Concern Task Force to work with it to establish the necessary guidance on what disclosures should be made, and then to incorporate it.
How might the proposed SAS affect small companies and their auditors?
As part of requiring the auditors to take a more active approach, the proposed procedures include the requirement that auditors obtain a statement from the directors confirming their considered view that the company is a going concern, as well as evidence to support that view.
The proposed SAS suggests that such supporting evidence will normally include forecasts and budgets, as well as statements of borrowing facilities, covering a period of at least one year from the date the directors approve the accounts.
This ‘normal’ requirement is seen by many commentators as being totally impracticable for most small companies, and fairly difficult even for some large companies, particularly given the extended period which now needs to be considered.
Commentators make the point that most small companies would find it either impossible or relatively costly to provide their auditors with evidence that is sufficiently robust to support their view that the company is a going concern.
There is a general questioning of whether the proposed approach is appropriate to small companies, particularly when considered from a cost/benefit perspective.
It is pointed out that in many instances much of the needed supporting evidence will have to be produced by the auditors themselves, which in turn will give rise to independence issues.
Some commentators also note that many directors of small companies might well refuse to provide their auditors with the proposed statement and the supporting evidence; if this proves to be correct, it will result in a significant increase in the number of limitation of scope qualifications.
One further major issue is the question of whether the SAS will narrow the expectation gap.
It is important for the profession that it does.
It is therefore also important that the final SAS makes clear the degree of assurance that a clean auditors' report will be expected to provide, with regard to a company's ability to continue as a going concern.
Some commentators have drawn an analogy between the SAS's requirements and an adequacy of working capital statement, required in certain Stock Exchange documents.
Such statements are only made after a considerable expenditure of time and effort by both the company and its auditors.
As a consequence, the level of reliability of the directors' statement and the degree of assurance from the auditors is high.
Is such a level of reliability and degree of assurance now going to be expected in the preparation and audit of annual accounts?
If so, will companies be willing to bear the additional costs involved?
If not, the final SAS will need to make that abundantly clear.
These are just some of the key issues the APB must address.
Although a revised standard on going concern is needed, it is important that this SAS, which is seen by many as a critical element in reducing the expectation gap, is not rushed and that due consideration is given to all the issues the commentators have raised.
It will be better for the APB to issue a delayed but duly considered SAS, rather than one that meets an early deadline but does not adequately address all the issues involved.
There is a general questioning of whether the proposed approach is appropriate to small companies, particularly from a cost/benefit perspective
The expanded auditors' report: could do better The APB's exposure draft needs some attention if it is to help to reduce the expectations gap
Auditors' Reports on Financial Statements — the exposure draft the Auditing Practices Board issued in May (see ACCOUNTANCY , June, p 9)— will, if approved, replace the existing Auditing Standard,The Audit Report .
The main objective in changing the standard is to increase the effectiveness of audit reporting, which is one of the ways of closing the expectations gap between the auditors and users of financial statements.
The proposed changes will have a fundamental impact on the form and content of auditors' reports.
The overriding aim is to increase the value of the reports by providing more information, but this should not be at the expense of clarity.
The major points of difference between the proposed Statement of Auditing Standards and the existing standard are that: auditors' reports would contain brief descriptions of the respective responsibilities of directors and auditors, and would indicate the basis of the opinion expressed and include a description of the key features of the audit process; auditors would no longer issue qualified reports solely as a result of uncertainties which cannot be resolved at the date the financial statements are approved (‘inherent uncertainties’).
They would express an unqualified opinion in these circumstances, taking into account the treatment of any matters affected by uncertainty; auditors would draw attention to the way in which inherent uncertainties had been treated; and their reports would state the date on which the audit was completed and on which their opinion is expressed.
The proposed expansion of auditors' reports should help close the expectations gap by explaining to users what the auditors' responsibilities are and how they are carried out.
However, further changes to the proposed SAS are necessary before it can help significantly in narrowing the gap.
The example auditors' reports given in the exposure draft are unlikely to help narrow the expectations gap because they do not include references to the inherent limitations of financial reporting and, in particular, to the need to recognise that the balance sheet is not intended to be a statement of a company's net worth and that there cannot be a guarantee that the company will survive as a going concern.
There also needs to be much clearer reference to the limitations in the audit process and, in particular, in relation to collusive or immaterial fraud and sudden changes in companies' financial positions, as these are also fundamental to the expectations gap.
An alternative specimen auditors' report is given in the panel.
The wording of the report assumes that Financial Reporting Standard 3,Reporting Financial Performance , has been put into effect.
The stated intention of the proposed SAS is to establish reporting practice which is both clear and informative.
However, some clarity of reporting has been lost in the process of giving the additional information the SAS requires.
To improve the effectiveness of the auditors' report, the following changes are needed.
First, the report should carry a suitable title, so that its form is readily ascertainable; for instance, ‘Independent auditors’ report to the members of XYZ plc — unqualified opinion', or ‘Independent auditors’report to the members of XYZ plc — total disclaimer of opinion'.
Second, the example auditors' reports given in the proposed SAS place the opinion paragraph at the end of the reports.
In our alternative report, this paragraph and any explanatory paragraphs for a qualified opinion have been moved to the top.
Users may not read the qualification otherwise because they stop reading the report in the middle.
Third, an option should be created whereby, if the directors themselves set out a full enough statement of their responsibilities, it would obviate entirely the requirement to describe directors' responsibilities in the auditors' report.
This would result in a shorter report and give useful encouragement to companies that develop innovative forms of reporting.
Several of the key issues relating to the form of auditors' reports on financial statements not only have implications for the APB but should also have major implications for the Accounting Standards Board's work programme.
However, at present these issues are not included in that programme.
In particular, there is a need for clear guidance on the reporting by companies themselves on inherent uncertainties and statements of directors' responsibilities.
This appears to be a demonstration of the clear need to bring the APB and ASB under the auspices of the Financial Reporting Council, which could then coordinate both committees' work programmes.
The exposure draft appropriately seeks to abolish the ‘subject to’ opinion in circumstances in which the financial statements show all available and relevant information concerning an inherent uncertainty and there is no disagreement about its treatment in the financial statements.
However, the proposals for added emphasis paragraphs in respect of disclosures about inherent uncertainties have a number of drawbacks.
The proposals would undermine the principal effect of removing the ‘subject to’ opinion, which is to encourage better reporting of uncertainties in the financial statements themselves.
Companies should not continue to be penalised by a reference to an inherent uncertainty in the auditors' report when the directors have given it prominent and full disclosure.
The inclusion of added emphasis paragraphs would also undermine the clarity of audit reporting.
Users of financial statements would wrongly assume that such paragraphs are a form of qualification.
There is also a danger that, particularly in relation to inherent uncertainties arising from going concern considerations, added emphasis paragraphs would be used to such an extent that they become a standard paragraph.
Furthermore, added emphasis paragraphs would not discriminate between companies with a real going concern crisis and those in which the uncertainty arises from lenders' reluctance to give firm undertakings about facilities.
Finally, the proposals would create legal problems, despite statements that the APB makes to the contrary: the courts may interpret any references to uncertainties in an audit report as a form of qualification which requires a statement by an auditor, under s 271(4) of the Companies Act 1985, about whether the matter is material to assessing the legality of the dividend.
Given the above drawbacks, the APB should reconsider the use of added emphasis paragraphs.
AN ALTERNATIVE SPECIMEN AUDITORS' REPORT Independent auditors' report to the members of XYZ plc — unqualified opinion
Our opinion
We have audited the financial statements on pages…to…in accordance with auditing standards issued by the Auditing Practices Board.
In our opinion the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the company's affairs at 31 December 19.. and of its profit (loss), total recognised gains (losses) and cash flows for the year then ended, and have been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 1985.
Nothing has come to our attention to indicate that the following statements made in the directors' report are unreasonable in all the circumstances:
the company is in compliance with the Code of Best Practice of the Committee on the Financial Aspects of Corporate Governance;
the company is a going concern;
the company has an effective system of internal financial control.
Bases of the matters reported on
The ultimate responsibility for all financial aspects of the corporate governance of XYZ plc rests with its directors.
They are also responsible for preparing financial statements which give a true and fair view and are properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act, maintaining proper accounting records and having an effective system of internal financial control.
It should be recognised however that:
the balance sheet is not intended to be a statement of the company's net worth;
any system of internal financial control can give only reasonable and not absolute assurance;
while the directors have given careful consideration to whether the company will continue to be a going concern, the directors' statements cannot be a guarantee that that will happen.
Bases of our opinion
Our audit has been performed so as to provide reasonable assurance that the financial statements are free from material error.
[It includes procedures to assess whether the company will continue as a going concern and whether material error has arisen from fraud or illegal acts]2, but it is not a guarantee against collusive or immaterial fraud or against sudden changes in the company's financial position.
Unless there is a statement to the contrary in our opinion, it can be assumed that we have formed the opinion that:
the company has maintained proper accounting records;
proper returns adequate for our audit have been received from all branches we did not visit;
the financial statements are in agreement with the accounting records;
the financial statements comply with Sch 6 of the Companies Act 1985 in respect of directors' emoluments and other transactions involving directors;
the directors' report is not inconsistent with the financial statements;
we have obtained all the information and explanations which to the best of our knowledge and belief are necessary for the purpose of our audit.
en
Our audit opinion is expressed at the date below.
Auditors of investment business: help at hand The Auditing Practices Board's first practice note makes essential reading
In June 1992 the Auditing Practices Board issued its first practice note on the subject of investment businesses (see ACCOUNTANCY , August, p 84).
The purpose of this and future practice notes is to provide auditors with guidance on new or changing issues, with explanatory and other material to help them interpret and apply auditing standards.
Practice Note 1 is directed at auditors of businesses regulated under the Financial Services Act 1986, and provides guidance on certain aspects of the conduct of those audit engagements.
The guidance is persuasive rather than prescriptive and has a lower level of authority than statements of auditing standards.
The practice note, however, is indicative of good practice and auditors should be prepared to explain departures.
The practice note consists of four principal sections.
Section 1 gives guidance on the form and content of auditors' annual reports and comments on the principal matters to be taken into account in framing those reports.
Sections 2 and 3 reproduce guidance relating to the audit of investment businesses issued by the Board's predecessor, the Auditing Practices Committee.
This consists of the Auditing Guideline,Communications between Auditors and Regulators under Sections 109 and 180(1) (q) of the Financial Services Act 1986 , which was issued in July 1990; and Practice Note 3,Client Assets — Guidance to Auditors of Investment Businesses , issued in December 1990 and which has been amended to reflect recent changes in the rules relating to client money following the issue of The Financial Services (Client Money) Regulations 1991 .
These documents are included with the new guidance in sections 1 and 4, and have the same status.
Section 4 considers the auditor's role in relation to an investment business's compliance with the rules governing its conduct.
The practice note's contents have been developed in consultation with the Securities and Investments Board and the self-regulating organisations.
The practice note has not been developed to cover recognised professional bodies specifically, although much will be applicable to an audit of one of their members which conducts investment business.
The first of the new areas covered by the practice note, the auditors' report to regulators, seeks to provide a common approach to reporting by auditors and establish clear unequivocal wording of auditors' reports, so that whenever possible auditors may use a standard layout and form of wording when reporting to all regulators.
The intended benefit is that a standard form of report enables auditors to understand more clearly, and report on, the regulators' generic and specific requirements.
It also removes any ambiguity about the assurance the auditors are providing.
The practice note sets out the auditors' reporting responsibilities and the contents of the auditors' report in some detail, and provides some guidance on qualified reports.
It also presents standard formats of unqualified reports for each regulator, which have been agreed with the regulator in question.
The second of the new areas covered provides guidance on the extent of auditors' responsibilities in relation to an investment business's compliance with those rules and regulations, for the conduct of investment business, which are not the subject of specific regular reporting by auditors.
It recognises that the prime responsibility for ensuring compliance with and for reporting breaches of the conduct of business rules lies with management of the investment business, and that regulators carry out their own inspection visits.
Nevertheless, the breaches of these rules may have implications for the financial statements or other aspects of the auditor's regular reporting responsibilities, and therefore some enquiry in these areas is needed as part of the audit.
The note gives guidance on the enquiries that should be made about the investment business control environment, including the business's higher level procedures for complying with the conduct of business rules.
It also provides some examples of breaches and discusses the possible manners in which such breaches should be addressed and in some cases reported.
The note is indicative of good practice and auditors should be prepared to explain departures
accounting solutions
Small groups and FRS 1
A UK parent company with wholly-owned subsidiaries is itself a wholly-owned subsidiary of a US parent company whose securities are registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
The UK group is expected to meet the small group criteria for its current financial year ending 31 December 1992 having met the relevant criteria in its previous financial year.
The UK parent wishes to take advantage of the exemption in s 248 of the Companies Act 1985 from the requirement to prepare group accounts.
Can the parent company also claim exemption from preparing a cash flow statement in accordance with FRS 1?
What would be the position if the parent company did not take the exemption afforded by s 248?
Two important issues must be considered.
First, whether the UK parent and its subsidiaries qualify as small companies in their own right under ss 246 and 247, CA 1985.
Second, whether the UK parent can claim the exemption from preparing group accounts under s 248.
A company qualifies as a small company for the purposes of filing abbreviated accounts if,(a) following s 246(4) neither the company, nor any company in the group of which it is a member , is: a public company or a body corporate (not being a company) that has power under its constitution to offer its shares or debentures to the public and may lawfully exercise that power; a bank; an insurance company; or an authorised person under the Financial Services Act 1986.
And,(b) following s 247(3), the company satisfies two or more of the following criteria: turnover not more than £2m; balance sheet total not more than £975,000; and average number of employees not more than 50.
Although the UK parent and its subsidiaries meet the criteria in (b) above, they do not meet the criteria in (a) because the ultimate parent company is a SEC registrant.
Although the US parent company is not a public company as defined in s 1(3), CA 1985, it is a body corporate whose shares are offered to the public.
A body corporate is defined in s 740, CA 1985 to include a company incorporated elsewhere than in Great Britain.
So neither the UK parent nor any of its wholly-owned subsidiaries qualify as small companies in their own right as they are members of an ineligible group.
Therefore, it would appear that none of the UK companies can claim exemption from preparing a cash flow statement under para 8(a) of FRS 1.
However, under para 8(c) of FRS 1, the UK subsidiaries may claim exemption from FRS 1 if they are wholly owned and the UK parent publishes consolidated financial statements and those consolidated financial statements include a consolidated cash flow statement dealing with the group's cash flows.
Can the UK parent claim the s 248 exemption from preparing consolidated accounts?
It can claim the exemption if the group headed by the UK parent qualifies as a small group and is not an ineligible group.
It is assumed that the UK group satisfies the small group criteria in s 249 and since it is not an ineligible group for the purposes of s 248, it need not prepare group accounts.
If it elects not to prepare group accounts, the exemption under para 8(c) would seem not to apply and as each UK company is not entitled to the small company exemption in its own right, neither can they claim the exemption under para 8(a).
The exemption under para 8(a) does not automatically extend to ‘small groups’.
So, in this situation, it appears that all the UK companies will have to prepare cash flow statements.
However, if the parent company elects to prepare consolidated accounts and those accounts include a consolidated cash flow statement, then all the wholly-owned subsidiaries are entitled to claim the exemption under para 8(c).
Associated company
A parent company has a 30% interest in an associated company.
During the current financial year, the associated company issued shares to a third party for cash as a result of which the parent company's stake has been diluted to 15%.
How should the associated company be treated in the parent's consolidated financial statements?
In the parent company's own balance sheet, the investment in the associated company should be shown at cost.
In the consolidated p&l account, the group's 30% share of the associated company's profits should be included on an equity basis up to the date on which associated status is lost.
In the consolidated balance sheet, the investment should be stated at the carrying amount under the equity method at that date, ie 30% of net assets.
The carrying value should be adjusted if dividends are subsequently paid out of profits earned prior to the change of status.
Provision should be made against the investment if there is any impairment in value.
This is the treatment required by SSAP 1 whenever an investment ceases to be an associate.
However, we believe that the carrying value should be further adjusted by the gain or loss arising on the deemed disposal for the group by comparing the net assets attributable to the 30% interest with the net assets attributable to the 15% interest.
The gain or loss should be recognised in the consolidated financial statements.
FRS 2 discusses such ‘deemed’ disposals in the context of subsidiaries (para 47) and requires the gain or loss to be calculated in a like manner.
Although neither SSAP 1 nor FRS 2 deals with this issue in the context of associates, we believe that the principles outlined in FRS 2 would apply equally to associates.
Details of the circumstances should be explained in the notes.
Minority interests
A parent undertaking owns 100% of the ordinary shares in a loss-making subsidiary with negative net assets.
The subsidiary has non-cumulative preference shares in issue, all held by minorities.
Should the parent undertaking's consolidated balance sheet show a minority interest in respect of the preference shares?
Non-cumulative preference shares, by their nature, give their shareholders a preferential interest in the company's profits for the year, and on liquidation of the company, after settlement of all creditors, entitle the holder to repayment of the nominal value of the shares before the ordinary shareholders are repaid.
But as the subsidiary has negative net assets, there would be no funds available on liquidation to pay the preference shareholders anything.
So there is no requirement to recognise a minority interest in respect of the preference shares.
If the parent company has provided the preference shareholders with a guarantee, it may be possible to recognise a minority interest.
However, there is a strong view that the guarantee should be recognised as a liability both in the parent's individual accounts and the consolidated accounts, and, therefore, no amount would be attributed to the minority interest.
reports & accounts
GUINNESS
Interim review now included by auditors
Guinness, the international drinks business, has included an audit review from Price Waterhouse in its interim results statement for the six months to 30 June 1992.
Insurance group Guardian Royal Exchange broke new ground by publishing a review by its auditors, also Price Waterhouse, of the interim results for the first half of 1992 (see ACCOUNTANCY , October, p 17).
The wording of the PW report to the Guinness directors is, as might be expected, almost identical with the one presented to the GRE directors.
The Guinness interim report, which covers 12 pages, includes group p&l account, group balance sheet and group cash flow statement.
In addition, five and a half pages of notes to the accounts give valuable extra information.
Cadbury Schweppes' interim report for the 24 weeks ended 13 June 1992 also contains group p&l, balance sheet and cash flow statement on separate pages, each with its own notes at the bottom but no audit review.
This confirms the trend towards much more detailed interim reports following publication of the Cadbury Committee recommendations.
Sir Adrian Cadbury was formerly chairman of Cadbury Schweppes.
Transworld Communications (operator of independent radio stations) devotes a page to an unaudited half year summary in its interim report for the first half of 1992.
This covers first half 1990, second half 1990, first half 1991, second half 1991 and first half 1992, and analyses the main p&l account items over these periods.
This is a helpful addition.
The company also provides a group balance sheet and group cash flow statement.
Laporte (speciality chemicals) has incorporated a restated group p&l account plus notes in its interim report for the six months ended 3 July 1992, on the basis that the Interox restructuring had been completed on 1 January 1992.
It has been produced in order to illustrate the base from which Laporte now operates.
The restructuring of Interox, a major transaction for the group, was actually completed on 21 May 1992.
Other features of the Laporte interim statement are details of the organisation and management corporate structure, and brief details of the directors, members of the executive committee and divisional managers.
MTM
Half year figures audited
MTM (speciality chemicals) has had its half year statement to 30 June 1992 audited by Price Waterhouse.
The group made changes in accounting policies and bases adopted in preparing the 1991 statutory accounts following the sudden departure of the executive chairman.
This resulted in substantial adjustments to the year end position (see also ACCOUNTANCY , August, p 83).
The new chairman, Dr David Swallow, says that it has not been possible to ascertain the impact of these adjustments on the interim results for the six months ended 30 June 1991, and the directors consider it would not be practical to restate those results.
They believe the reported profits for the first half of 1991 may have been materially overstated, and that further publication of these results as a basis of comparison may be misleading.
The interim p&l account, balance sheet and cash flow statement therefore do not include comparative figures for the first half of 1991; the full year 1991 figures are shown, however.
Price Waterhouse, which took over from BDO Binder Hamlyn after the 1991 annual audit, points out in a ‘subject to’ report that the accounts are on a going concern basis and that the group is dependent on the continuing availability of adequate banking facilities.
In a research note on MTM, brokers Kleinwort Benson comment that ‘the short term future of the company is dependent on support from its bankers, which partly explains why the first half figures have been audited.’
AIRLINES
Accounting policies differ widely
The world's airlines use a variety of methods to account for their fleets, depreciate aircraft and account for foreign exchange gains and losses, and differ widely on their levels of disclosure in income statements for depreciation and finance costs.
This is revealed by a survey,Accounting Policies, Disclosure and Financial Trends in the International Airline Industry,conducted by KPMG in association with the International Air Transport Association.
Participating airlines include three from Asia, three Australasia, 11 Europe, three North America and five others.
Shares of 14 of the airlines are traded on stock exchanges, but 12 of the participants are 50% or more owned by government.
The survey found that ‘the level of disclosure in airline published financial statements in relation to depreciation is usually somewhat vague.
This is an area which needs not only more consistency in the estimates underlying depreciation calculations but more meaningful disclosure, particularly where the estimates used by an airline vary considerably from industry averages’.
The survey also found that 17 out of the 23 airlines capitalise interest on advance payments for aircraft being acquired.
A majority of airlines (18 out of 23) stated that they had not changed their accounting policies within the last three years, although one executive suggested they were not adequately disclosing such changes in their financial statements.
The world's major airlines have agreed to set up a task force to develop international accounting guidelines; it will liaise with the IASC.
TITAGHUR
System changes ensure clean audit report
Titaghur plc (manufacturer of jute products in India) has received a clean auditor's report on its accounts for the year ended 31 March 1992 after changing its system of accounting and reporting.
As chairman Reg Brealey explains in his statement, changes have been made to provide depreciation on buildings and equipment, to accrue retirement gratuity payments, to write off to p&l account the exchange adjustment on foreign currency loans and to provide for interest payable —‘all to help in the cause of a clean auditor's report’.
This makes a change from the 1989/90 accounts which contained a full page of audit qualifications.
The changes made by prior year adjustments result in the p&l balance brought forward of £47.425m being reduced by provision for retirement gratuity liabilities £3.13m, interest on bank overdrafts and other loans £814,219, exchange adjustments on foreign currency loans £791,499 and operating expenses £1.236m.
In 1991/2 Titaghur also wrote off old debtors and wrote back old credit balances.
The audit by Partha Mitra, registered auditor of Lovelock & Lewes, chartered accountants of Calcutta, has attracted remuneration of £5,366 — modest by UK standards, since Titaghur has a turnover of £20.634m.
BUSINESS EXPANSION SCHEME
Property valuation causes problems
Assured tenancy companies that have raised money under the BES to invest in properties for letting are having trouble valuing their properties.
The Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors Statements of Asset Valuation Practice require BES assured tenancy companies to provide a valuation of the properties based on non-vacant possession, with tenants occupying under an assured tenancy.
Banner Residential Properties draws shareholders' attention to the RICS requirement in the notes to its accounts for the year ended 31 March 1992.
The directors consider that ‘the value of the properties on this basis could be a minimum of between 60% and 80% of the open market value based on vacant possession’.
They think it unlikely that the company would sell the properties without vacant possession.
The net book value of Banner's leasehold properties comes to £1.82m; the historical cost is £2.054m.
According to the note to the accounts, the directors believe that the value of the leasehold properties at 31 March 1992, based on open market value and assuming vacant possession, is equivalent to their cost less any permanent diminution in value.
In previous years, Banner treated these properties as investment properties in accordance with SSAP 19.
It now classes them as fixed assets at cost, less any permanent diminution in value.
The change in accounting policy is reflected as a prior year adjustment.
When Banner treated its properties as investment properties in its 1990/91 accounts, auditors Stoy Hayward added to their report: ‘Without qualifying our opinion above, we draw attention to note 8 which refers to the valuation of investment properties having been conducted by the directors at open market value assuming vacant possession’(see ACCOUNTANCY , September 1991, p 33).
The 1991/92 accounts receive a clean audit report from Stoy Hayward without any additional comment.
Richard Werth, Banner Residential's finance director, explained to ACCOUNTANCY that by treating the properties as a fixed asset, the company avoided the necessity for a valuation under the RICS rules; a temporary diminution in value could be ignored.
The accounting policy favoured by Kerrington Developments, another BES assured tenancy company, is to value completed investment properties at the end of each year on an open market basis assuming vacant possession, and transferring the group's share of any resulting surplus or deficit to the revaluation reserve.
The note adds: ‘The directors consider that this accounting policy results in the financial statements showing a true and fair view.
Depreciation and amortisation is only one of many factors reflected in the annual valuation, and the amount which might otherwise have been charged cannot be separately identified or quantified.’
At 31 March 1992, Kerrington's directors revalued the investment properties at £12.964m, and the deficit on revaluation of £1.056m was transferred to revaluation reserve.
Auditors Casson Beckman give Kerrington a clean report.
Retirement Assured, which lets sheltered apartments to the elderly on assured tenancies, takes account of tenants when valuing its properties.
The note to the accounts on investment properties says the properties have been valued at 31 August 1991 at the directors' estimate of their current market value (£3.901m), taking existing use into account.
Where properties are untenanted, Retirement Assured has valued them at open market value with vacant possession.
Where they are tenanted, they have been discounted by 30% (1990 — 35%) from open market value — the estimate of the likely discount effect if the properties were sold tenanted, taking into account the terms of the assured tenancy leases that the company granted to tenants.
The deficit on valuation of the properties of £226,764 (v £817,700) is charged to p&l account; Retirement Assured does not have a revaluation reserve account.
In his chairman's statement, David Morris reveals that ‘at the year end the directors considered the market value of the portfolio with vacant possession and in our opinion this has increased by £7,832’.
KPMG Peat Marwick gave the company a clean audit report.
Richard Wollenberg, chairman of Cardiff Properties, informed ACCOUNTANCY that the assured tenancy companies at present run by Cardiff Properties adopt what the directors believe to be the correct policy — to value the properties on a current open market basis with vacant possession.
Paul Ginman of Casson Beckman, auditors to some 100 BES assured tenancy companies, said the problem was the logic of applying SSAP 19 and the RICS rules.
BES companies lasted for a minimum of five years, and shareholders were interested in what would happen at the end of this period.
Traditionally, BES assured tenancies had used the vacant possession method for valuing properties until the RICS issued the new rules, said Mr Ginman.
A factor to be considered was that the leases were short term and therefore often did not have long to run by the year end; this reduced the difference between a valuation with vacant possession and one with a tenant in occupation.
According to Mr Ginman, his firm pointed out the rules to the directors of those BES companies which it audited, and the directors then reached their own conclusions.
If there were any conflict, as auditors, Casson Beckman would, of course, take it into account.
As the aim of many of the BES assured tenancy companies is eventually to obtain value by selling or redeveloping the properties when they are vacant, it would be useful for shareholders to know what the market value is with vacant possession, even if the present value with tenants in possession is also shown as a note.
Legal & General.
In its interim report for the first half of 1992, the insurance group has changed its accounting policy to reflect the total investment return — including realised and unrealised gains arising on its shareholder and general insurance funds — in its consolidated p&l account.
This change follows the EC's adoption in December 1991 of the Insurance Accounting Directive, which allows the inclusion of both realised and unrealised investment gains in the p&l account.
Previously, Legal & General had only taken realised investment appreciation to p&l account as investment return.
In the first six months of 1992 the group's investment return totalled £31.1m (v £46.8m), made up of investment income £25.2m (v £21.3m), interest expense £0.6m (v £0.6m), realised investment gains £13.8m (v £11.7m), and unrealised investment losses £7.3m (v gains £14.4m).
Glaxo.
In the notes to the accounts for the year ended 30 June 1992, the pharmaceuticals group has analysed directors' remuneration under fees, performance-related payments, other emoluments, pension scheme contributions, payment to former director and pension to former director.
The note adds that directors participate in a long-term, performance related incentive plan based on growth in earnings per share above a minimum level over a four-year period.
Marling Industries.
Without qualifying their opinion, auditors Hacker Young draw attention in their report to the basis on which the industrial textiles group's accounts have been prepared; they have been drawn up on a going concern basis.
In its accounts for 1991/92, Marling says that the going concern basis is dependent on the successful conclusion to a fully underwritten rights issue announced on 26 June to raise about £18m net of expenses.
RECENT RESULTS
professional briefing
INSTITUTE
Small company records Institute guide
The Institute has published a booklet explaining the practical implications of those 1985 Companies Act provisions that require companies to keep accounting records.
Accounting Records and the Smaller Company , by Professor Harold Edey of the Institute's Company Law Sub-committee, is available, price £2, from Angela Jones in the Institute's Technical Department.
STANDARDS
Valuing investments in US accounts
An exposure draft from the US Financial Accounting Standards Board defines when investments in debt and equity securities should be reported at fair value.
Accounting for Certain Investments in Debt and Equity Securities classifies investments in three separate categories.
Investments in debt securities, which the company intends and has the ability to keep to maturity, would be reported at amortised cost.
Those debt and equity securities that are held for current resale would be classified as trading securities and included in the financial statements at fair value with unrealised gains and losses included in earnings.
When debt and equity securities fall into neither of the previous two categories, they would be classified as securities available for sale and reported at fair value, but any unrealised gains and losses would be excluded from earnings and reported as a separate component of shareholders' equity.
If adopted, the standard would apply to financial years beginning on or after 16 December 1993.
The proposed statement would supersede FASB Statement No 12,Accounting for Certain Marketable Securities , and related interpretations, and amend FASB Statement No 65,Accounting for Certain Mortgage Banking Activities , to eliminate mortgage-backed securities from its scope.
The exposure draft does not examine accounting for liabilities and it requires the transfer of a security between categories to be at its fair value.
Copies are available from the FASB Order Department, 401 Merritt 7, PO Box 5116, Norwalk, CT 06856–5116, US.
The deadline for comments, which should be sent to the same address, is 8 December.
Accounting for bank advances
The British Bankers' Association, in conjunction with the Irish Bankers' Federation, has published a Statement of Recommended Accounting Practice on accounting for advances, after considering comments on the exposure draft issued in April 1991.
This is the third in a series of SORPs which are intended to reduce accounting differences between banks.
The SORP requires that advances should be written off to the extent that it appears there is no realistic prospect of recovery.
Unless there is significant doubt as to whether it can be collected, interest from advances should be brought into the p&l account as it accrues.
A clear statement should be made of the accounting policies adopted for advances covering specific provisions, general provisions, write-offs, interest recognition and treatment of fees and expenses.
The SORP, whose publication has been approved by the Accounting Standards Board, applies to financial years beginning on or after 23 December 1992.
Copies of the SORP are available free (send sae) from the British Bankers' Association, 10 Lombard Street, London EC3V 9EL.
More environmental information needed
Companies should be encouraged to provide more environmental information in their annual reports, according to a new report from the Institute's Environment Research Group.
Business, Accountancy and the Environment: A Policy and Research Agenda (see p 78 for review) says that it will be those companies responding fully and promptly to environmental issues which will be in the strongest competitive position in the future.
During the 1980s, interest in corporate reporting on environmental issues was muted, but there is evidence that more UK companies are beginning to provide such information in their annual reports.
In the US there have been extensive experiments with new forms of reporting and in Europe, Germany stands out as the leader in environmental reporting.
Among the subjects the report would like to see companies publish in their annual reports are details on environmental policy; environmental objectives; information on action taken and the costs of passing environmental objectives; compliance with regulations; significant environmental risks not disclosed as contingent liabilities; and key features of external audit reports on the enterprise's environmental activities.
The research publication calls on a number of representative bodies, including the London Stock Exchange, the Financial Reporting Council, the ASB, the Urgent Issues Task Force and the Auditing Practices Board, to consider how they should respond to environmental issues.
Copies of the report, price £20, are available from Peter Mayatt at the Institute's Technical Department.
CITY REGULATIONS
Appointments and changes at Lloyd's
Peter Middleton, former group chief executive of travel group Thomas Cook, has been chief executive of Lloyd's since 14 September this year.
He will be the first chief executive of the new Lloyd's Market Board, which will be responsible for the growth of the worldwide business.
On 1 January 1993 Brian Garroway FCA, will become the first chairman of the new Lloyd's Regulatory Board.
Mr Garroway retired as deputy chairman of BAT Industries on 31 October.
These appointments implement the recommendations of a report by Jeremy Morse, which advocates separation of business development and regulation.
Among other changes that have recently been announced by Lloyd's are: a new arbitration scheme to deal with disputes between members and their underwriting agents, starting next year; a new scheme placing a ceiling on future losses sustained by underwriting members, to commence from 1 January 1993; and the establishment of a support fund, financed by contributions from Lloyd's brokers and underwriting agents, to help members suffering from underwriting losses and changes in the guidelines, and members willing to meet their underwriting losses but unable to do so immediately.
Lloyd's has also agreed to pass Syndicate Premium Income (Amendment No 4) Bye-law (No 11 of 1992), which allows premiums paid by syndicates for quota share re-insurances with insurance companies to be deductible when calculating a syndicate's premium income.
The Lloyd's Deposit Trust Deed, which will permit the holding of certain US government securities and US company stocks in funds at Lloyd's, has also been amended.
Forming the Personal Investment Authority
The Securities and Investments Board has welcomed the Formation Committee's proposals, in a discussion paper, for the establishment of the Personal Investment Authority (PIA).
In the SIB's view, creating the new self-regulatory organisation will bring substantial advantages in terms of increased investor protection and cost effectiveness of regulations.
The PIA will regulate the marketing of retail packaged investments, including life insurance and pensions.
It will replace Fimbra and Lautro and absorb Imro's retail operations.
It is hoped that firm proposals will be issued early next year and that the PIA will be launched in July 1993.
However, the reluctance of the financial services divisions of banks and building societies to join the new body is causing concern.
Changes to rules for share incentives
The National Association of Pension Funds would prefer to see executive share options exercisable only if the share price has out-performed a suitable benchmark, such as the FTA All Share Index.
It is concerned that tying schemes to growth in earnings per share is less appropriate, as this number can be influenced by the precise accounting treatment of certain items.
In a paper,Share Schemes — A Consultative Approach , NAPF indicates that companies making use of share schemes should delegate authority for monitoring and operating the scheme to a committee the majority of whose membership are independent non-executive directors.
In general, NAPF will support schemes which result in a maximum of 10% of the ordinary share capital being made available over a 10-year period.
The annual report and accounts should contain details of share schemes.
Copies of the document are available from the National Association of Pension Funds' Investment Committee, 12–18 Grosvenor Gardens, London SW1W 0DH.
Comments should be sent to the same address by 31 December 1992.
Insurance ombudsman reappointed
Julian Farrand, the insurance ombudsman, has been reappointed for a further two-year term from 1 January 1993.
He heads up the Insurance Ombudsman Bureau (phone 071–928 4488), which was set up in 1981 and which provides an independent service for the resolution of disputes between personal insurance policyholders and holders of unit trusts, and companies that belong to the scheme.
WESTMINSTER UPDATE
Discrimination against the disabled to be outlawed
Baroness Lockwood has introduced a Private Member's Bill,The Civil Rights (Disabled Persons) Bill 1992 , to the House of Lords.
It has all party support and has reached Report Stage.
The Bill would outlaw discrimination in employment, housing, education, leisure facilities, transport and public services in a more effective way than the existing legislation.
This was enacted in 1944 and uses criminal prosecution as a sanction for an employer who fails to meet the disabled quota.
Charities Act booklet
The provisions of the Charities Act 1992 probably affect the activities of most charities in the UK.
Chartered accountants Cohen Arnold & Co have prepared a booklet,Charities Act 1992 , covering the most important aspects, particularly the new regime for accounting for charities.
Copies are available, price £3, from Cohen Arnold & Co, 13–17 New Burlington Place, Regent Street, London W1X 2JP.
DTI acts on computer misuse report
The Department of Trade and Industry is to consult business about the implications of computer misuse — estimated to cost over £1bn a year — through a series of seminars to be held in London, Manchester, Birmingham and Bristol.
This follows the publication of a DTI report, prepared by Coopers & Lybrand, which cites lack of awareness of the Computer Misuse Act and difficulty in identifying reliable expert advice as the main barrier to companies bringing cases forward.
The report, which examined whether industry, commerce and the police had sufficient specialist advice to assist in the detection and investigation of offences, recommends that business and the Government highlight the cost of computer misuse as part of an overall promotion of computer security awareness; conduct regular surveys of the incidence of computer misuse; and encourage the development of a directory of suppliers of expert advice.
Further details and the dates of the seminars are available from Mark Ambler at Coopers & Lybrand, Plumtree Court, London EC4A 4HT.
Copies of the report,Dealing with Computer Misuse,are available free from DTI Information and Manufacturing Technologies Division, 151 Buckingham Palace Road, London SW1E 9SS.
Pension law review consultation document
The Pension Law Review Committee has published a consultation document,The Law and Regulation of Occupational Pensions , to help encourage the widest possible debate.
The document contains a broad outline of the existing legal and regulatory framework for pension schemes, and a more detailed look at the issues on which the Committee is seeking views.
These include the individual's pension rights; the powers and responsibilities of scheme members, trustees, employers and advisers; and how to manage conflict of interest.
Comments are requested by 15 December and should be sent to Pension Law Review Committee Secretariat, Vincent House, Vincent Square, London SW1P 2LS.
Copies of the consultative document are available free from the same address.
Tougher insider dealing law proposed
The Government plans to introduce tougher curbs on insider dealing in its Criminal Justice Bill.
However, after strong protests from fund managers, brokers, market makers and other City interests, some of the original proposals have been revised.
According to Economic Secretary to the Treasury Stephen Dorrell, inside information would be widely defined to include anything which affects a company's share price, even if the information did not specifically relate to that company.
The City is concerned that the original proposals would have hindered the dissemination of information from companies to investors.
Confidential information and Chinese walls
The Institute has written to the Law Commission urging a change in the Financial Services Act rules relating to confidential information and Chinese walls.
In reply to the Commission's consultation paper on the relationship between fiduciary duties and regulatory rules, the Institute points out that while the Securities and Investments Board's rules recognise Chinese walls, the exemption does not apply to firms authorised by a recognised professional body.
Under partnership law, information known to one partner is imputed to all the partners, laying firms open to charges of making misleading statements when a Chinese wall impeded information.
Copies of FRAG 31/92 are available free (send sae) from the Publications Department at the Institute.
Ownership of shares s 212 model form
The Department of Trade and Industry's Companies Division has come up with a new model form, which it believes will help companies investigate their shares under s 212 of the 1985 Companies Act.
S 212 gives a public company the power to investigate the ownership of its shares by sending a written notice to any person or company which it believes has had an interest in its share capital over the previous three years.
In response, recipients of the notice have to inform the company whether they have had such an interest and, if so, the nature of that interest.
They are also required to inform the company of anyone else whom they know to have had an interest in the relevant shares.
The section gives some indication of the questions the company may ask, but it does not specify a format.
As a result, a number of companies have failed to obtain useful responses because of poorly drafted notices.
The new model notice, which is not a statutory form and can be adapted to fit the company's purposes, is intended to help solve the problem.
Copies are available free from .
Foreign companies legislation too complex
Implementation of the Eleventh Company Law Directive will add further complexities to the law relating to disclosure of information by foreign companies setting up a place of business in the UK, according to the Institute's Company Law Sub-committee.
This is because it will introduce a disclosure regime which will have to run in parallel to the existing regime under the Companies Act 1985.
UK company law requires companies incorporated overseas which establish a place of business in Great Britain to file details of their officers and constitutions and to nominate someone to accept service of documents on their behalf.
They are also required to file accounts at Companies House.
The Eleventh Directive and the corresponding Directive relating to bank branches, however, require similar disclosure when the overseas company sets up a branch.
Although the Eleventh Directive does not define ‘branch’, it is assumed that a European Court would interpret a branch according to the definition in the Bank Branches Directive, which is much narrower than ‘a place of business’.
The Institute had hoped that the Department of Trade and Industry would replace the existing Companies Act legislation with new provisions based on the Directives, but this route has apparently been dismissed by the DTI in its consultative document on implementation, because it would require primary legislation.
As a result, there will be one regime for overseas companies' places of business and one for their branches, and the potential for abuse.
In the consultative document, the DTI proposes two courses of action: monitoring registration of branches at Companies House to ensure that the law is not abused by companies being incorporated in a lax jurisdiction to take over a British business; or requiring branch accounts from overseas companies which conduct all or a substantial part of their business in Great Britain.
The Institute says that it would prefer the former.
‘We have strong reservations,’ it says in its response to the document, ‘about the usefulness of information contained in accounts which only relate to the activity of a branch in an economic entity.
It seems to us that research may be needed to identify those non-EC countries compliance with whose laws would result in accounts in minimal form, in conjunction with any monitoring operation.’
It also urges the Department to keep the possibility of moving to a single regime under review.
Copies of the memorandum, FRAG 29/92, are available free (send sae) from the Publications Department at the Institute.
Summary financial statements to be more widely available
Public companies will be able to offer debenture and stockholders the option to receive summary financial statements, if draft regulations, contained in a recently published Department of Trade and Industry consultative document, get the go-ahead.
At present, only shareholders may be offered the choice.
Companies will also be able to ascertain from purchasers of shares before they become members (such as purchasers of shares by instalments in a privatisation issue) whether or not they will want to receive summary financial statements.
The draft regulations also provide details of the proposed minimum content of summary financial statements for banks.
This follows implementation of the EC Bank Accounts Directive in The Companies Act 1985 (Bank Accounts) Regulations 1991, SI 1991/2705 .
Copies of the consultative document are available from .
The deadline for comments on the document, which should be sent to the same address, is 6 November.
LAW Edited by Denis Keenan
Statutory Instruments
Building Societies
— SI 1992/1611 (£1.05).
The authorisation of building societies by the Building Societies Commission so that they can raise money and accept deposits depends in part on a society's having directors, a chief executive and a secretary who are willing and able to direct the society's affairs in accordance with the criteria of ‘prudent management’ which are set out in s 45(3) of the Building Societies Act 1986.
The first of these is the maintenance of adequate reserves and other designated capital resources.
This Order,which is now in force , specifies that various building society resources which appear in annual accounts or accounting records are to be treated as capital resources to be aggregated with reserves for the purpose of the first criterion of prudent management.
The resources designated are verified interim profit, internally audited interim profit, revaluation reserves and general provisions for bad debt.
— SI 1992/1612 (£1.05).
This Order,which is now in force , amends the provisions of The Building Societies (Supplementary Capital) Order 1988 in terms of the specification of supplementary capital as a capital resource which building societies may aggregate with the reserves to assess the adequacy of their reserves and other designated capital resources under s 45(3) of the 1986 Act.
The overall limit on the extent to which supplementary capital may be aggregated with reserves is also varied.
Charities
— SI 1992/1901 (65p).
Under s 4 of the Charities Act 1992, the Charity Commissioners have powers which are similar to those of the Registrar of Companies to require that a charity's name be changed.
The Commissioners' powers, unlike the Registrar of Companies', come into being only after registration.
These Regulations,which are now in force , are made under s 4(2) (c) of the 1992 Act and set out names which are likely to mislead the public in terms of the status of the charity.
They are similar to those appearing in statutory instruments made under the Companies Act 1985 which relate to businesses, and include words such as bank, Great Britain, Queen, United Kingdom and Windsor.
Consumer protection — Timeshare
— SI 1992/1942 (£2.30) and SI 1992/1943 —(£1.05).
The Timeshare Act 1992 was brought into force by SI 1992/1941 on 12 October 1992 (see ACCOUNTANCY , October, p 99).
Under the Act those offering timeshare facilities must supply to the other party a notice of their right to cancel the agreement within 14 days after the agreement is made.
If credit, such as a loan, has been given to the offeree, then following cancellation the question of the recovery of that loan arises.
It is an essential part of that recovery that a request in writing for recovery shall be served on the offeree.
The above Orders,which are now in force , specify cancellation notices for use under the 1992 Act (1942) and forms of request for repayment of credit (1943).
County Court
— SI 1992/1966 (65p).
Under s 11 of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990, the Lord Chancellor may provide by Order that there shall be no restriction on the people who may exercise rights of audience or rights to conduct litigation in relation to proceedings in the County Court.
This Order,which is now in force , allows lay people to represent litigants on a fee paid basis at County Court actions automatically referred to arbitration (claims not exceeding £1,000).
It will be open to the arbitrator to order the person losing the case to pay the winner the fee charged by the lay representative.
This provides an exception to the no-costs rule in arbitration cases.
LAW CASE REVIEW Edited by Denis Keenan
Payments to accountants not a preference
Earlier this year, Mr Justice Morrit decided that certain payments to a bankrupt's accountants were not a preference under s 340 of the Insolvency Act 1986.
The section deals with transactions prior to an individual bankruptcy that were conducted at an undervalue or constituted a preference.
In the case of a preference, it makes payments made within the six months preceding the bankruptcy recoverable if they were made by the debtor under the influence of a desire to better the creditor (see Re Ledingham-Smith [1992]Vol 5 Insolvency Intelligence 65 ).
It appears that in 1988 Mr and Mrs Ledingham-Smith were partners in a business which hired out photocopiers.
Their accountants' fees, including bookkeeping services, were £1,000 a month, payable by banker's order.
By September 1989, the Ledingham-Smiths owed their accountants £7,968.
The management accounts to 31 October 1989 revealed a net deficiency of £166,000, the annual turnover being some £1.7m.
Their accountants advised them to put further capital into the business or sell it.
They decided to sell and started negotiations in December 1989.
The accountants produced figures and were involved in meetings with a number of possible purchasers: as a result, by the end of December 1989, the Ledingham-Smiths owed them £24,196.
In January 1990 the accountants wrote to the Ledingham-Smiths and said that they wished to continue to act, especially with the negotiations for the sale of the business.
However, they could not do so unless their account was settled in full.
This was made plain at a meeting with the Ledingham-Smiths.
On 25 January 1990, the two parties reached an agreement under which the accountants would raise invoices each week for work done during that week and the Ledingham-Smiths would pay them £5,000 each Friday.
This would be used in the first place to pay that week's invoice and the balance, if any, would reduce the outstanding invoice of £24,196.
In consideration of this agreement, the accountants would continue to act in the sale of the business and meet creditors when required.
There was no dispute about the fact that on 25 January 1990, when the agreement was made, the Ledingham-Smiths could not pay their debts as they fell due, but they thought that if the business could be sold with an adequate payment for goodwill, all creditors would be paid in full.
The accountants carried on until 21 February 1990.
The Ledingham-Smiths did not pay the £5,000 a week as required, but did continue the banker's order for £1,000 a month.
They did pay £4,000 on 30 January and again on 5 February and finally on 12 February.
The invoices the accountants rendered for work done under the agreement amounted to £11,690 and the payments by the Ledingham-Smiths totalled £14,000 — the three payments of £4,000 plus two payments of £1,000 under the banker's order.
On 21 February 1990 the Ledingham-Smiths consulted an insolvency practitioner and the accountants ceased to act for them.
The business was sold on 7 March 1990, but there was not enough money raised to pay all the creditors and bankruptcy followed on 12 April 1990.
In July 1991 the Ledingham-Smiths' Trustee in Bankruptcy sought repayment of £16,000, made up of four monthly payments of £1,000 within the relevant period of six months and the three payments of £4,000.
Mr Justice Morrit held that the first payment of £4,000 on 30 January together with the monthly sum of £1,000 by banker's order was not enough to discharge in full the invoice for January's work by the accountants, which was £5,307.25.
However, the two payments on 5 and 12 February, plus the sum of £1,000 by banker's order, did produce a surplus of £2,310 in the accountants' favour, which was available to discharge their fees earned in 1989.
Should this be recovered by the Trustee in Bankruptcy?
Mr Justice Morrit did not think so.
It was necessary to show that the payments were made to benefit the accountants.
This was by no means certain at the time the payments were made.
When the last payment was made on 12 February 1990, it could not be said that the accountants would necessarily be benefited by a surplus of £2,310 to set against fees for work done earlier but unpaid.
The negotiations were continuing, and fees for services the accountants were rendering were still being incurred.
The last payment could not be said to have been more than required to pay for such services rendered then or in the future.
It would depend on how much more work the accountants would do.
Mr Justice Morrit therefore concluded that there was no preference in fact in relation to any part of the payments made.
Comment.
As the judge said, no doubt the Ledingham-Smiths were influenced by a desire to retain the accountants' services, but this did not make the payments a preference in the absence of evidence that they would, not may, benefit the creditor.
The Trustee's claim was rejected in full.
Unauthorised access to a computer
The Court of Appeal recently decided that an offence can be committed under the Computer Misuse Act 1990 by the unauthorised use of one computer (see Attorney-General's Reference (No 1 of 1991 )[1992]3 WLR 432).
The respondent had been employed by a wholesale locksmith between October 1989 and August 1990 as a warehouseman and sales assistant in the key department.
He was experienced in operating the computer assistants used when making sales to customers.
In September 1990 the respondent appeared with his new employer at the wholesale locksmith's, and during the sales assistant's brief absence the respondent helped himself to a key-cutting machine from stock.
The assistant returned to see the respondent carrying the goods towards the main exit and loading them into a van.
When the respondent returned he was challenged but insisted that he was going to pay for the goods.
Part-way through entering the sale on a computer, the sales assistant had to go into the store room to check the identifying number of the machine selected.
The respondent took this opportunity to add an entry on the computer which gave a 70% discount on the sale.
The resulting invoice was printed out accordingly.
The respondent was tried for an offence contrary to s 2(1) of the Computer Misuse Act 1990, having secured unauthorised access to a computer in contravention of s 1(1) of the 1990 Act with intent to commit a further offence of false accounting.
S 1(1) provides that ‘a person is guilty of an offence if —(a) he causes a computer to perform any function to secure access to any program or data held in any computer;(b) the access he intends to secure is unauthorised; and (c) he knows at the time when he causes the computer to perform the function that that is the case’.
It was submitted at the trial that the respondent had no case to answer.
The trial judge upheld that submission on the ground that, on a true construction of s 1(1) (a), a second computer had to be involved, so that s 2(1) was inapplicable to the facts.
The Court of Appeal held that the ordinary rules of construction require the court to look at the section's words and to give them their plain and natural meaning.
The relevant words are ‘he causes a computer to perform any function with intent to secure access to any program or data held in any computer’.
To read these words as ‘held in any other computer’, as the trial judge had done, would be to give them a meaning quite different from their plain and natural meaning.
In interpreting statutes, additional words should not be implied or introduced when the plain and natural meaning is clear.
Therefore s 1(1) was contravened when, as happened in the present case, a person caused a computer to perform a function with intent to secure unauthorised access to any program or data held in the same computer.
Comment.
This is an interesting modern example of statutory interpretation, which gives effect to Parliament's intention.
If the courts were to limit the offences to circumstances in which another computer was also involved, there would be nothing in the Computer Misuse Act 1990 to cover industrial espionage or obtaining other confidential security information stored in a company's computer.
In none of these cases could it be said that if a person entered the premises and caused a computer to exercise a function so as to reveal information, there had been access via one computer to another.
Withholding money was not unfair
Soundcraft Electronics Ltd (Electronics) owned 75% of the share capital of Soundcraft Magnetics Ltd (Magnetics) and the remaining 25% of Magnetics was owned by Alexander Nicholas and Timothy Eustace equally.
Being the parent company, Electronics exercised strong control over Magnetics' finances and was able to decide which of its creditors should be paid.
In 1984 and 1985 Electronics got into severe financial difficulties, and as a result there were delays in paying Magnetics substantial amounts of money due to it.
S 459 of the Companies Act 1985 provides that if a company's affairs are being or have been conducted in a manner which is unfairly prejudicial to the company's interests, then the members may obtain relief through the courts.
Mr Nicholas tried to obtain an order from the court for the purchase of his shares in Magnetics or that the company be wound up.
He claimed that Electronics' actions in withholding money due to Magnetics were prejudicial to the minority shareholders.
In the company court, the judge held that withholding the sums due caused Magnetics serious damage, but that Mr Nicholas was not entitled to any relief under s 459 because Electronics had not been conducting Magnetics' affairs within the meaning of the section.
Mr Nicholas appealed to the Court of Appeal (see In Re Soundcraft Magnetics Ltd Ex parte Nicholas, The Times , 10 July 1992).
There, Lord Justice Fox said that when Electronics withheld payments from Magnetics, it was doing so as part of the general control of Magnetics' financial affairs.
However, the question was whether it did so in a way that was unfairly prejudicial to Mr Nicholas.
The problem derived from Electronics' financial situation in 1984 and 1985.
There was not enough money to go round.
If Electronics had not held off its creditors, it would have collapsed, bringing Magnetics down with it.
It was therefore in Magnetics' interest that Electronics should not go into liquidation.
It was using what assets it had to keep the group afloat.
The Court of Appeal said that the attempt to keep the group afloat by recourse to both companies' assets was a reasonable commercial judgment in the circumstances and was not unfairly prejudicial.
Mr Nicholas lost his appeal.
EMPLOYMENT
Maternity — the right to return
In a recent decision the Employment Appeal Tribunal has confirmed that a woman who is entitled to return to work but is made redundant while still on maternity leave, is to be regarded as automatically unfairly dismissed if the employer does not offer a suitable alternative vacancy or prove that no such vacancy exists (see John Menzies GB Ltd v Porter [1992]457 Industrial Relations Legal Information Bulletin 13 ).
Ms Porter was employed as a department manager by John Menzies at their store in Argyle Street, Glasgow.
After becoming pregnant, she made arrangements to take maternity leave from November 1990 to February 1991.
The baby was born in November 1990.
She confirmed in writing to the company that she intended to return to work on 11 February 1991.
However, there had been a fall in profits necessitating a cost-cutting exercise.
The manager of the store decided that Ms Porter should be made redundant.
He wrote to her to fix a meeting which took place on 7 February 1991.
At the meeting, she was told that the store had coped without her during her maternity leave and to cut costs she was now being made redundant.
She appealed to the area manager and to a director, but to no avail.
She then made a claim of unfair dismissal.
Her complaint was that she had the right to return to the job she had left: if this was not possible because of redundancy, she had a right under s 45(3) of the Employment Protection (Consolidation) Act 1978 to be offered alternative employment if there was a suitable available vacancy.
Sch 2, para 2(2) of the EP(C)A provides that if no such offer is made the employee is to be regarded as automatically unfairly dismissed.
There were also procedural shortcomings in that the company had not applied a length of service test, ie, ‘last in, first out’, or given consideration to downgrading Ms Porter.
Furthermore, they had not consulted with her.
The company's argument was that under s 45(3) an employer need only offer alternative employment ‘where there is a suitably available vacancy’.
Since the industrial tribunal had not found that such a vacancy existed, it was wrong to conclude that her dismissal was automatically unfair.
The Employment Appeal Tribunal did not accept that argument.
The industrial tribunal had not identified a suitable alternative vacancy.
However, it was clear from the whole tenor of the case that the tribunal had not been satisfied that there was no such vacancy for Ms Porter.
The company had not made a proper effort to place her in a comparable position in another store.
Such efforts as they had made had been ‘half-hearted and not coordinated’.
tax briefing
TAX Compiled by Chris Greene and Christina Maddalena of Clark Whitehill
Ex gratia payments on termination of employment
The Inland Revenue has commented further on the tax treatment of ex gratia payments made on the termination of an office or employment, as set out in Statement of Practice SP 13/91.
In response to a letter from the Law Society, the Revenue states that it is not possible to set hard and fast rules to determine whether a payment made to an employee who intends to seek further employment will be treated as made in connection with retirement.
Intention is just one of the factors that will be considered, as would the age of the individual concerned.
For example, an ex gratia payment made to a man moving to further full-time employment in his middle years will obviously not be made ‘on or in anticipation of retirement’.
However, an ex gratia payment to an older man who has no full-time employment in prospect could fall on the other side of the line.
Where the employee leaves his employment in circumstances which amount to unfair dismissal — whether because the employee is sacked or forced to resign — this will not constitute ‘retirement’ for the purposes of SP 13/91.
Such payments would come within para 10 of the Statement as compensation for loss of office rather than in anticipation of retirement.
Thus, provided as a question of fact the payment is made for unfair dismissal and not in circumstances where unfair dismissal is contrived, the Revenue confirms that the ‘golden hand-shake’ provisions will apply (see the Law Society Gazette , 36, p 42).
Married couple's allowance — allocation to wife
Married couples may now apply to have either the whole or half of their 1993/94 married couple's allowance allocated to the wife.
The married couple's allowance, which is currently £1,720, was introduced in 1990/91 with the advent of independent taxation and is given to married men living with their wives.
At present the allowance is automatically allocated to the husband.
He may transfer only that part of the allowance which is unused by his own income.
For 1993/94, couples wishing to transfer the whole of their allowance to the wife, and wives who wish to claim half of the allowance (as is their right), should notify their tax office.
They will then be asked to fill in ‘form 18’ which should be completed and returned before 6 April 1993.
No action need be taken where the allowance is to remain with the husband and whatever arrangement is chosen will apply for future tax years until the allocation is changed.
Although, at current rates, the married couple's allowance increases to £2,465 where either partner is aged 65 or over, or to £2,505 where either partner is aged 75 or over, it should be noted that only the basic £1,720 is transferable.
Rollover relief — groups
Rollover relief may be obtained by one trading company in a group, even when the replacement asset is acquired by another trading member of the same group.
This Inland Revenue practice has recently been affirmed by Financial Secretary to the Treasury Stephen Dorrell, following the High Court judgment in Campbell Connelly & Co Ltd v Barnett (see ACCOUNTANCY , June, p 53).
In his judgment, Mr Justice Knox suggested that the practice was based on an incorrect interpretation of the law, and that the company disposing of the old asset also had to acquire the new asset.
However, the Revenue will continue to apply its existing practice until the case is finally decided in the higher courts.
Discounts on training fees for NVQs and SVQs
Discounts are now available on training fees towards national vocational qualifications (NVQs) and Scottish vocational qualifications (SVQs) up to and including level 4.
The scheme has been in place since April: however, to coincide with the start of the new academic year, the Inland Revenue has issued a reminder that UK resident trainees may deduct basic rate tax of 25% from fees paid for study, examination, or assessment excluding the cost of books and equipment.
The training organisation will then be able to recover the tax from the Revenue.
Non-taxpayers are also eligible for this discount, while higher rate taxpayers can obtain higher rate relief by adjustment to their PAYE code, or by repayment at the end of the tax year.
The discount is not available, however, to those receiving or eligible for assistance under government schemes like employment training or student grants.
An explanatory leaflet, IR 119,Tax Relief for Vocational Training , is available from tax offices.
Pension business tax repayments
Regulations effecting provisional repayments of tax to insurance companies have recently been laid before the House of Commons.
Sch 19AB, TA 1988, inserted by s 49 of the 1991 Finance Act, allows insurance companies to provisionally reclaim income tax and tax credits deducted from pension business income, in recognition of the fact that an insurance company will not know precisely its level of pension business until after its accounting period has ended.
These claims, for accounting periods beginning on or after 2 October 1992, may be made on a quarterly basis similar to that currently used in accounting for franked payments/ — investment income and interest paid/received under deduction of income tax.
The new Regulations define a transitional period of 2 October 1992 to 31 December 1998 (coinciding with the introduction of corporation tax Pay and File due in 1993), during which provisional repayments in respect of accounting periods ending before 1 January 1999 are to be reduced by a prescribed percentage.
This will be 7.5% for accounting periods ending before 1 January 1994, and may subsequently be varied.
Inter alia, the Regulations also specify the information which is to be included in a claim, and they allow for interest to be charged when a provisional repayment proves to be excessive.
Public revenue dividends late payment of tax
From 14 November, anyone liable to basic rate income tax on paying public revenue dividends, foreign dividends, or proceeds of coupons, will be subject to interest charges if the tax is paid late.
The tax falls due 14 days after the end of the month in which the transaction is effected (as provided by para 6A, Sch 3, TA 1988), and interest will accrue from that date until payment is made.
The interest rate, which is provided by s 178, FA 1989, will be the same as that applicable to other charges for late payment of tax, for example, charges under ss 86 and 88, TMA 1970.
The changes are included in the following Regulations:The Finance Act 1989, Section 178(1) (Appointed Day) Order 1992 SI 1992/2073 (65p) and The Taxes (Interest Rate)(Amendment No 3) Regulations 1992,(SI 1992/2075)(65p).
Inland Revenue publications
A new leaflet aimed at young people starting work for the first time has been produced by the Inland Revenue.
Leaflet IR 33,Income Tax and School Leavers , contains a brief description of the tax system and those features most likely to be encountered by young people.
These include PAYE, forms P 45 and P 46, and personal allowances.
The leaflet, available from tax offices, forms part of the Revenue's implementation of the Citizen's Charter, and explains procedures for making complaints and suggesting improvements.
Three new leaflets on stamp duty have also been published in response to taxpayer needs: S 05 —Common Stamp Duty Forms and How to Complete Them ; S 05 (Scotland)Common Scottish Stamp Duty Forms and How to Complete Them ; and S0 7 —Stamp Duty on Buying a Leasehold Domestic Property .
These leaflets are available from local stamp offices.
The Rent a Room scheme of tax relief is also explained in a new leaflet to be inserted in the existing guidance notes IR 87 —Rooms to Let .
Copies of the leaflet are available from tax offices or tax enquiry centres.
What the taxpayer thinks
As part of its drive to improve the standard of service to taxpayers under the Citizen's Charter, the Inland Revenue commissioned a survey in June to find out what taxpayers thought of the existing service and what they would like to see by way of improvement.
That survey, which was carried out by Research International and is the largest and most detailed survey ever commissioned by the Revenue, is now complete.
In all, 1,678 people were interviewed from a cross-section of the taxpaying population including both the self-employed and employees.
Of these, 65% were satisfied with the overall service they receive from the Revenue, around 20% had no strong feeling either way and one in 10 were dissatisfied with the service they received.
Most felt that their tax was worked out correctly and that their affairs were kept confidential.
The most overwhelming support came for the Revenue's work in deterring and seeking out tax dodgers.
The greatest areas of concern for tax-payers were about the Revenue's staff's apparent lack of authority to deal with certain problems, difficulty in getting through to the right person on the telephone, and about the time it took to resolve problems and answer queries.
Those questioned were also concerned that they were not given information on exactly how their tax liability was worked out.
Taxpayers' priorities were for the Revenue to get things right first time, and for problems, where they arise, to be resolved quickly.
Many were also keen for more general and personal information about tax.
As a result of the survey, the Revenue will concentrate on improving the telephone service and the clarity of its forms and leaflets.
It is also considering what it can do to meet the demand for more information by such measures as explanatory videos, evening classes or workplace clinics.
The Revenue has already introduced new target turnaround times for replying to all letters — the aim is now to reply to all letters sent to tax and collection offices within 28 days.
Double taxation agreements — representations sought
Negotiations for comprehensive double taxation agreements with Colombia, Kazakhstan, Namibia, Russia, Ukraine, and Vietnam are on the Inland Revenue agenda for the six-month period to 31 March 1993.
Exploratory talks in advance of similar negotiations will take place in respect of Lesotho and Saudi Arabia.
Representations should be sent as soon as possible to International Division, Room 95 West Wing, Somerset House, London WC2R 1LB.
Inland Revenue pay — new system introduced
Inland Revenue staff pay is now linked more directly to individual performance under a new performance management system introduced on 1 October.
Responsibility for pay has now been delegated to Inland Revenue management, leaving Treasury ministers to concentrate on establishing the required standards of service.
By 1 April 1993, automatic pay increments based on length of service will be abolished, and future pay levels will be determined by performance in relation to individual performance agreements entered into by employees.
The changes are intended to reflect the Citizen's Charter approach that Government is responsible for defining those standards which the public expects, with managers responsible for delivering them.
Personal equity plans record year
More personal equity plans were taken out in the 12 months to April 1992 than in any other year since the PEP scheme was set up in 1987.
According to Financial Secretary to the Treasury Stephen Dorrell, 640,000 new general plans were taken out and £2.26bn invested in them, compared with 500,000 plans and £1.6bn investment in 1990/91.
This brings the total number of plans taken out since 1987 to 2.11m and total investment to £6.14bn.
The single company PEP, which was introduced on 1 January this year, has also been a success.
In the three months to 5 April, 110,000 people opened a single company PEP, with total subscriptions of £270m.
FUEL CARDS AND NIC
Fleet management specialists PHH AllStar Ltd are advising people who used an All Star Fuel Card to purchase private fuel during the 1989/90 tax year not to pay National Insurance contributions on it until a test case which PHH is currently bringing against the Department of Social Security is decided.
According to PHH, neither the DSS's Employer's Manual (the Green Book), published in April 1989, nor the October 1989 supplement, expressly states that agency cards issued for private use attract NICs.
‘We have been advised that the Contributions Agency of the DSS is not entitled to collect NICs for fuel provided to an employee for private use and paid for with an All Star Fuel Card in the tax year 1989/90.
Nevertheless, the Agency has attempted to collect NICs in such instances from a number of our clients.’
The Secretary of State has been asked to determine the test case, which has been brought against the Agency, under s 17(1), Social Security Administration Act 1992.
If he rules in favour of the Agency, it stands to collect from employers additional NICs estimated at nearly £50m.
TAX CASE REVIEW Compiled by Chris Greene and Christina Maddalena of Clark Whitehill
Unlimited recovery of overdue tax
The Inner House of the Scottish Court of Sessions has held that the Prescription and Limitations (Scotland) Act 1973 (the Act) did not exclude the Crown's claim to interest on overdue tax that related to a period more than five years before the Crown had acted to recover the tax and interest thereon (see Lord Advocate v Butt and others [1992]STI 169).
In the lower court, the Lord Ordinary had found that s 6 of the Act did not prevent the Crown from seeking a decree de plana for recovery, in October 1989, of the tax outstanding for the years 1979/80 to 1981/82.
However, the limitation on recovery did apply to interest which accrued before October 1984, but not to that accruing after that date.
On appeal by the Crown, it was found that the Lord Ordinary had failed to give proper weight to Taxes Management Act 1970, in particular that interest on overdue tax was to be treated as if it were tax charged and due and payable under the assessment to which it related.
In addition, interest on overdue tax accrued indefinitely and not on a day-to-day basis even if it was so calculated.
Hence it was outside the scope of s 6 of the Act, which applied only where interest was due in respect of a particular period.
VAT Compiled by John Brown and Suzanne Chadwick of Ernst & Young
New Customs warehouse facility
HM Customs & Excise have announced the introduction of a new warehouse facility from 1 January 1993.
From that date, warehousing will be available for imports of non-Community goods which are liable only to import VAT.
This facility has been sought by UK businesses and should help traders to be more competitive with their counterparts in other member states, some of which already operate such a scheme.
At present, only goods imported from outside the Community that are liable to Customs duties may be stored in Customs warehouses without immediate payment of those duties and the related import VAT.
The change will allow the warehousing of goods liable solely to import VAT in order to suspend payment of that VAT.
Supplies of non-Community goods in a UK Customs warehouse will be free of VAT until the goods are released for use in the UK.
At that point import VAT will become payable.
This change was recommended in a recent Customs Foreign Business Review on future developments for international trade in the UK.
EC single market — secondary legislation
The Finance (No 2) Act 1992 included substantial changes to the VAT Act 1983 and the Finance Act 1985 in order to implement the single market VAT regime from 1 January 1993.
Changes to the secondary VAT legislation are now necessary to bring the new regime into effect.
The draft secondary legislation, with a commentary and accompanying explanatory notes, has now been issued as part of a consultation exercise to various trade representative bodies.
Copies have also been sent to anyone who requested a copy of the draft primary legislation.
Repayment supplement rules amended
Following a recent court decision, businesses may be eligible to claim repayment supplements to which they were previously considered not to be entitled.
A business is entitled to a repayment supplement where a repayment claimed on a VAT return is not made within 30 days of that return being received by Customs.
However, payment of a supplement will not be made if any delay is caused by Customs making ‘reasonable enquiries’ of the return in question.
In the case of L Rowland and Co (Retail) Ltd , the High Court found that the period of time for which the clock stops during an enquiry by Customs can only reasonably be limited to the period from when the local office initiates the enquiry with the trader to the day when a satisfactory answer is given by the trader.
Customs have previously included within that period any time taken for communications between the VAT Central Unit at Southend and the trader's local VAT office.
Amendment has now been made to the legislation to ensure that the time for raising and answering enquiries is calculated correctly.
However, as the amending legislation does not have retrospective effect, traders who, under the High Court interpretation, would have been eligible for a repayment supplement are invited to apply for that supplement.
Default surcharge to be reviewed
Customs have announced a review of the default surcharge regime, following the recent review of and changes to the Serious Misdeclaration Penalty.
Trade and professional bodies have been invited to comment on a consultation paper.
A previous review of the default surcharge, conducted in 1989, concluded that no substantive changes were necessary and, at this stage, no details have been given about any changes Customs are now proposing.
VAT publications
Customs have issued the following revised publications: Notice 179 —VAT Refunds for ‘Do-It-Yourself’ Builders , dated 1 July 1992; and Leaflet 700/13A/92 —VAT Publications , dated 1 July 1992.
They are both available free from local VAT offices.
Taxpayer's Charter documents published
Customs have published two new Charter Standard Documents that clarify the principles set out in the Taxpayer's Charter issued jointly last year by Customs and the Inland Revenue.
The first, which deals with VAT traders, explains traders' rights and Customs' responsibilities; the quality of service that traders can expect; what happens during visits; what to do if a trader disagrees with or complains about the way they have been treated; and how Customs will publish results.
The second document, which covers Excise and Inland Customs, details improvements in Customs' provision of information; lays down specific standards on replying to enquiries; provides clear advice on how to complain; sets standards on how Customs will deal with complaints; and clarifies the policy of reducing business' burdens by simplifying and standardising regimes.
Copies of the VAT Charter Standard will be sent to all registered traders by the end of the year, and are also available from local VAT offices.
Copies of Excise and Inland Customs Charter Standard Document will be sent to all regular traders and are also available from local advice centres.
Institute
Report of the Professional Conduct Committees
Disciplinary Committee 6 August 1992
1.
(FCA ) of , having been found to be in breach of Bye-law 76(a) in force at the material time and liable to disciplinary action under Bye-law 76(a) (ii) in that he in Southport between 1 January 1982 and 24 May 1990 failed to deal properly and promptly with the affairs of a former client and in that he in Southport between 25 May 1990 and 15 August 1990 failed to deal properly and promptly with professional enquiries from registered accountants in respect of a former client and having been found to be in breach of Bye-law 76(d) in force at the material time and liable to disciplinary action under Bye-law 76(a) (iii) in that he in Southport between 6 November 1991 and 29 June 1992 failed to satisfy a judgement of the County Court in the sum of £539.40 was ordered to have his Practising Certificate withdrawn with effect from 31 October 1992 and to pay £100 by way of costs.
(ceased to be a member of the Institute on 3 September 1992 for failing to pay the Disciplinary Committee costs under the terms of Bye-law 41.)
2.
(FCA ) of  having been found liable to disciplinary action under Bye-law 76(a) (i) in that he in the Crown Court on 30 April 1992 was indicted and on his plea of guilty convicted on one count of conspiracy to defraud a limited company was excluded from membership of the Institute and ordered to pay £250 by way of costs.
3.
A member of the Institute having been found to have been in breach of Bye-law 76(c) in force at the material time and liable to disciplinary action under Bye-law 76(a) (iv) in that he between 1 January 1985 and 30 March 1992 engaged in public practice contrary to Bye-law 59 when he did not hold a current practising certificate was reprimanded, fined £500 and ordered to pay £500 by way of costs.
The Committee directed that the name of the member should not be disclosed.
(He ceased to be a member of the Institute on 3 September 1992 for failing to pay the Disciplinary Committee fine and costs under the terms of Bye-law 41.)
4.
FCA of  having been found to be in breach of Bye-law 76(b) in force at the material time and liable to disciplinary action under Bye-law 76(a) (ii) in that he at Chertsey between 25 March 1991 and 3 September 1991 failed to deal properly and promptly with the affairs of a limited company and a former client and in that he at Chertsey between 3 September 1991 and 3 March 1992 failed to deal properly and promptly with professional enquiries from chartered accountants in respect of a limited company and having been in breach of Bye-law 76(c) in force at the material time and liable to disciplinary action under Bye-law 76(a) (iv) in that he between 13 January 1992 and 14 February 1992 failed to provide information required of him by the Investigation Committee on 13 January 1992 in exercise of its powers under Bye-law 80(a) concerning the affairs of a limited company was reprimanded, fined £l, 500 and ordered to pay £l, 000 by way of costs.
5.
ACA ACA and  FCA all of  who were found to be in breach of Bye-law 76(a) (i) in that they at Stockport between 1 February 1991 and 31 October 1991 passed clients' monies through their firm's office account were each reprimanded and jointly and severally ordered to pay £250 by way of costs.
6.
ACA ,FCA ACA and  FCA all of  all of Bridge House, Heap Bridge, Bury, Lancs who were found to be in breach of Bye-law 76(a) (i) in that they at Bury between 7 August 1991 and 8 September 1991 passed clients' monies through their firm's office account were each reprimanded and jointly and severally ordered to pay £250 by way of costs.
7.
FCA of  who had been found to be in breach of Investment Business Regulation 1.32 in that in Camberley between 6 October 1989 and 22 August 1991 the firm failed to carry out a review of its compliance procedures in accordance with the terms of the Regulation and having been in breach of Investment Business Regulation 2.09 in that in Camberley between 6 October 1989 and 22 August 1991 the firm failed to warn clients of the extent to which they may be exposed to risk in accordance with the terms of the Regulation and having been in breach of Investment Business Regulation 2.32 in that in Camberley between 6 October 1989 and 22 August 1991, when the firm gave advice to clients such that, if acted upon, it would result in commission being received, it failed to inform those clients of that position in writing in accordance with the terms of the Regulation and having been in breach of Investment Business Regulation 2.47 in that in Camberley between 6 October 1989 and 22 August 1991 the firm failed to issue engagement letters in accordance with the terms of the Regulation and having been in breach of Investment Business Regulation 2.60 in that in Camberley between 6 October 1989 and 22 August 1991 the firm failed to ensure that it had adequate records in accordance with the terms of the Regulation was reprimanded, fined £500 and ordered to pay £250 by way of costs.
8.
FCA and  FCA all of  who were found to be in breach of Bye-law 76(a) (i) in that they at Hoylake on or about 17 September 1990 passed client's money through their firm's office account were each reprimanded and jointly and severally ordered to pay £250 by way of costs.
9.
of  having been found to be in breach of Investment Business Regulations 1.16(a) and 1.17 in that in Grimsby between 30 September 1990 and 1 October 1991 the firm handled Investment Business Clients' monies when not authorised to do so was reprimanded and ordered to pay £250 by way of costs.
10.
of  having been found to be in breach of Investment Business Regulation 2.09 in that in Windsor between 13 October 1989 and 3 June 1992, before recommending or effecting for clients transactions relating to investment, the firm failed to give adequate risk warnings to those clients in accordance with the terms of the Regulation and having been in breach of Investment Business Regulation 2.47 in that in Windsor between 13 October 1989 and 3 June 1991 the firm failed to send engagement letters and agree them with clients in accordance with the terms of the Regulation and having been in breach of Investment Business Regulation 2.60 in that in Windsor between 13 October 1989 and 3 June 1991 the firm failed to keep proper client records in accordance with the terms of the Regulation was reprimanded, fined £500 and ordered to pay £250 by way of costs.
11.
FCA of  who had been found to be in breach of Bye-law 76(a) (ii), in that
A
he in Bromborough between 30 April 1986 and 30 September 1991 whilst his firm were the auditors of a limited company issued an audit report on that company's accounts for the year ended 30 April 1986 in which the profit and loss account and balance sheet did not follow the format set out in schedule 4 part 1 of the Companies Act 1985 and
B
he in Bromborough between 28 February 1989 and 1 April 1989 whilst his firm were the auditors of a limited company issued an audit report on that company's accounts for the year ended 30 April 1987 in which the profit and loss account and balance sheet did not follow the format set out in schedule 4 part 1 of the Companies Act 1985 and
C
he in Bromborough between 30 April 1990 and 1 June 1990 whilst his firm were the auditors of a limited company issued an audit report on that company's accounts for the year ended 30 April 1988 in which the profit and loss account and balance sheet did not follow the format set out in schedule 4 part 1 of the Companies Act 1985 and 
D
he in Bromborough between 30 April 1988 and 8 February 1991 whilst his firm were the auditors of a limited company issued an audit report on that company's accounts for the year ended 30 April 1989 in which the profit and loss account and balance sheet did not follow the format set out in schedule 4 part 1 of the Companies Act 1985
E
he in Bromborough between 30 April 1986 and 30 September 1991 whilst his firm were the auditors of a limited company issued an audit report on that company's accounts for the year ended 30 April 1986 which accounts did not refer to the information required in schedule 4 part 3 of the Companies Act 1985 and
F
he in Bromborough between 28 February 1989 and 1 April 1989 whilst his firm were the auditors of a limited company issued an audit report on that company's accounts for the year ended 30 April 1987 which accounts did not refer to the information required in schedule 4 part 3 of the Companies Act 1985 and
G
he in Bromborough between 30 April 1990 and 1 June 1990 whilst his firm were the auditors of a limited company issued an audit report on that company's accounts for the year ended 30 April 1988 which accounts did not refer to the information required in schedule 4 part 3 of the Companies Act 1985 and
H
he in Bromborough between 30 April 1988 and 8 February 1991 whilst his firm were the auditors of a limited company issued an audit report on that company's accounts for the year ended 30 April 1989 which accounts did not refer to the information required in schedule 4 part 3 of the Companies Act 1985
I
he in Bromborough between 30 April 1986 and 30 September 1991 whilst his firm were the auditors of a limited company issued an audit report on that company's accounts for the year ended 30 April 1986 in which the accounts did not contain a statement of accounting policies in accordance with Statement of Standard Acounting Practice (SSAP) 2 and a statement of source and application of funds as required by SSAP 10 and
J
he in Bromborough between 28 February 1989 and 1 April 1989 whilst his firm were the auditors of a limited company issued an audit report on that company's accounts for the year ended 30 April 1987 in which the accounts did not contain a statement of accounting policies in accordance with SSAP 2 and a statement of source and application of funds as required by SSAP 10 and
K
he in Bromborough between 30 April 1990 and 1 June 1990 whilst his firm were the auditors of a limited company issued an audit report on that company's accounts for the year ended 30 April 1988 in which the accounts did not contain a statement of accounting policies in accordance with SSAP 2 and a statement of source and application of funds as required by SSAP 10 and
L
he in Bromborough between 30 April 1988 and 8 February 1991 whilst his firm were the auditors of a limited company issued an audit report on that company's accounts for the year ended 30 April 1989 in which the accounts did not contain a statement of accounting policies in accordance with SSAP 2 and a statement of source and application of funds as required by SSAP 10 and in that
M
he in Bromborough between 30 April 1990 and 1 June 1990 whilst his firm were the auditors of a limited company issued an audit report on that company's accounts for the year ended 30 April 1988 which report did not comply with the revised version of the auditing standard ‘The Audit Report’ was reprimanded, fined £l, 000 and ordered to pay £500 by way of costs.
Regulatory Proceedings
Lewin Atkins & Co practising at AMP House, 2 Cyprus Road, Regents Parks Road, London had its registration as a company 
Investigation Committee Consent Orders 4 August 1992
ACCOUNTING AND BUSINESS RESEARCH
Accounting and Business Research — Autumn 1992 issue
The latest issue of the Institute's quarterly Accounting and Business Research is now available.
Accounting and Business Research is edited by Bob Parker, Professor of Accountancy at the University of Exeter and Chris Nobes, Coopers & Lybrand Professor of Accounting at the University of Reading.
The objective of Accounting and Business Research is the publication of substantial and original contributions to knowledge in the areas of accounting and finance, broadly defined.
The autumn issue (Volume 22, No 88) includes articles on:
The use and abuse of graphs in annual reports: theoretical framework and empirical study — Vivien Beattie and Michael John Jones.
A classification system for economic consequences issues in accounting regulation — John Blake.
Financial ratio covenants in UK bank loan contracts and accounting policy choice — David B Citron.
The audit report under going concern uncertainties: an empirical analysis — David B Citron and Richard J Taffler.
Incentive effects of assigned goals and compensation schemes on budgetary performance — Victor A Fatseas and Mark K Hirst.
Perceptions and attitudes of different user-groups to the role of the budget, budget pressure and budget participation — Stephen R Lyne.
Gains from disaggregation and the definition of a segment: a note on SSAP 25 — S Hussain and LCL Skerratt.
A note on the information content of relocating corporate domicile: a trading volume approach — Yan-Leung Cheung and Yu-Hon Lui.
The existence and significance of cycles: a reply — Christopher Nobes.
Subscriptions can be arranged by the Subscriptions Manager,Accounting and Business Research , 40 Bernard Street, London WC1N 1LD, at the following rates:
All subscriptions may be paid in US dollars at current exchange rates.
Bound volumes, with index, of Volume 8 (1977/78) onwards are also available from the same address.
solicitors' accounts
WHAT THE RULES SAY NOW Controlled trust accounts are now within the reporting accountant's scope, and one of the rules relating to interest on clients' money has changed too
Gervase MacGregor
Recent changes to the Solicitors' Accounts Rules (1991)(SAR) and the Accountants' Report Rules 1991 (ARR) will affect the way reporting accountants carry out their duties.
The amendments, which were first noted in the Law Society Gazette of 6 May 1992, came into force with effect from 1 June 1992, that is at the same time the changes occasioned by the SAR and the ARR were effective (Law Society bulletin No 7 provides full details).
The major changes affecting reporting accountants are the introduction of rules bringing controlled trust accounts within the scope of the accountant's report, and changes to one of the rules that relate to interest on client money.
The other changes are relatively minor, but the reporting accountant needs to be aware of them.
Controlled trusts are those where the solicitor is the sole trustee or where all of the co-trustees are partners or solicitors within the same firm.
The ARR did not require the reporting accountant to report on controlled trust accounts, although Part II of the SAR contained rules determining how a solicitor should deal with the movement of controlled trust money, ie the circumstances in which money could be paid in or withdrawn from a controlled trust account, and the records that had to be kept.
The Accountant's Report (Controlled Trust Accounts) Amendment Rules 1992 give details of checks that the reporting accountant must now make.
They also modify the accountant's certificate to refer to controlled trust money.
The accountant is required to do the following work relating to controlled trust accounts:
ascertain details of the record-keeping system;
make test checks on posting to the accounts from records of receipts and payments;
check the casts of the accounts and records;
test documents with the object of confirming financial transactions evidenced by the documents and the entries in the accounting records;
enquire into and test check the system of recording costs and making transfers in respect of costs;
compare, on the last day of the accounting period, the balance on each controlled trust account with the amounts confirmed by banks and building societies.
Law Society guidance to these amendment rules emphasises that the new requirements are not intended materially to increase the reporting accountant's workload.
First of all the guidance states that the accountant's test checks should be on a limited number of accounts and files relating to controlled trusts.
The guidance goes on to say that there is no obligation to check every controlled trust account, and that choosing which and how many is left to the accountant's discretion.
The guidance recognises that if an accountant (not necessarily the reporting accountant) is already involved in the management of a trust, and if trust accounts are prepared annually, then that may influence whether or not a test is done on that trust.
The guidance advises the accountant that test checks on a suitable number of controlled trust accounts may make possible a corresponding decrease in the number of checks in respect of other accounts.
For example, where the accountant currently test checks 20 client files, he might now include a couple of controlled trusts.
The guidance also states that, in many cases, the information a solicitor must retain may be satisfied by bank statements and pass books if these are sufficient to explain movements on the accounts.
However, in complex or protracted cases a formal set of books for the trust should be kept.
Finally, the guidance stresses that the test checks are similar to those in other parts of the SAR and would not lead the accountant to check, for example, the appropriateness of investments made in respect of the trust.
The amendments also contain changes to the de minimis interest to be paid on clients' money.
The SAR table for determining when interest should be paid has been changed (see panel).
Further, the minimum amount on which interest must be paid when held for any period of less than a week, if it is fair and reasonable to do so, has been increased from £10,000 to £20,000.
At the same time the Solicitors' Practice Rules 1990 on commissions have been amended; the minimum amount of solicitor's commission that must be accounted for to a client has been doubled to £20.
The third amendment concerns the receipt of legal aid payments in respect of unpaid professional disbursements.
It is a variation of the rule requiring client money to be paid into the client account without delay.
The receipt of bulk payments from the legal aid board may include amounts in respect of unpaid professional disbursements (which under the SAR are deemed to be client money), which it may be impracticable to split into office and client accounts immediately.
The amendments allow the whole sum to be kept in the office account for up to 14 days, by which time the unpaid professional disbursements must have been paid or an amount transferred to the client account.
The final change also concerns unpaid professional disbursements.
Where a solicitor receives an amount in respect of a bill of costs that includes unpaid professional disbursements, an amount equivalent to the unpaid professional disbursements should be treated as client money and must be paid into the client account.
There is now an option not to pay the office money element directly into the office account if the bill includes unpaid professional disbursements.
A solicitor can now pay the whole of a receipt in respect of a bill of costs into the client account to avoid splitting receipts into office and client account.
The Law Society has recognised that this splitting may be difficult to operate in practice.
If the solicitor takes advantage of the option then the office monies must be transferred to the office account within seven days.
The amount left in the client account in respect of the bill of costs after seven days should only be, therefore, unpaid professional disbursements that from the date of receipt earn deposit interest subject to the de minimis rules.
It should also be noted that professional disbursements are now considered to include interpreters' and translators' fees as well as those of counsel, agents and experts.
accountants' third-party liabilities
DUTY AND DEFINITION Debates about the accountant's duty of care go back a century.
Caparo, the most recent ruling on the subject, reversed the trend of preceding cases
Chris Swinson
Sometimes it seems that the world scarcely changes.
In May 1898, Lawrence Dicksee, then one of the more authoritative commentators on auditing, opened a lecture by referring to the ‘grave and increasing responsibilities which are being cast upon auditors’.
Such an opening to a lecture would not seem out of place now.
The years since 1898 have seen many changes tending to increase the circle of people to whom the accountant owes a duty of care and can therefore be held liable.
At the beginning of the century, it was generally held that, in the absence of any contractual or fiduciary relationship, there was no liability for a negligent misrepresentation made by one person to another who had incurred loss by acting on it.
The first judicial indication that this view was to change can be found in Lord Denning's judgment in Candler v Crane Christmas & Co (1951) 1 All ER 426.
In that case, the plaintiff had invested money in a company after relying on accounts that had been prepared negligently by the defendant accountants who had known that the accounts were wanted for the purpose of inducing the plaintiff to invest money in the company.
Subsequently, the company went into liquidation and the plaintiff investor lost his money.
The Court of Appeal upheld the judgment that the accountants owed no duty of care to the plaintiff, but Lord Denning dissented from this decision and in doing so, discussed at some length the types of statement in respect of which accountants owe a general duty of care and the people to whom that duty extends.
He suggested that accountants were not liable for casual remarks in the course of conversation, statements made by accountants outside their work or for statements not made in their capacity as accountants.
However, accountants were ‘in proper cases’ under a duty, quite apart from any contractual obligation, to use reasonable care in the preparation of accounts and the making of reports.
He also suggested that quite apart from the accountant's employer or client, he owed a duty to any third person to whom he shows the accounts or to whom he knows the employer will show the accounts with a view to persuading that person to invest or take some other action.
Lord Denning suggested that the accountant's responsibility should not be extended further to include strangers of whom he had no knowledge.
The test suggested by Lord Denning was ‘…
Did the accountants know that the accounts were required for submission to the plaintiff and use by him?’.
He also suggested that this duty of care would be confined to transactions for which the accountants knew their accounts were required.
This point was next considered in the case of Hedley Byrne & Co Ltd v Heller & Partners Ltd (1963) 2 All ER 575.
In this case, Hedley Byrne was a firm of advertising agents and Heller & Partners were merchant bankers.
Hedley Byrne was considering a substantial advertising programme for a customer which previously had only been involved in limited programmes.
As it was doubtful of its customer's financial position, Hedley Byrne asked its bankers to obtain a report on the customer's affairs.
Heller & Partners provided such a report to Hedley Byrne's bankers, who passed it on to their customer.
Subsequently, Hedley Byrne asked several more times for further reports and these were provided.
Relying on these reports, Hedley Byrne incurred expenditure and lost money when its customer went into liquidation.
It sued to recover its loss.
Although this case obviously did not concern accountants directly, it proved crucial to subsequent claims against them.
The House of Lords found that there were circumstances in which liability could be incurred for negligent misrepresentation by one person to another in the absence of any contractual or fiduciary relationship between them.
In particular, it was held that the law will imply a duty of care when a party seeking information from a party possessed of a special skill trusts that party to exercise due care, and that party knew or ought to have known that reliance was being placed on their skill and judgment.
In spite of this, Hedley Byrne did not recover its loss since the reports submitted by Heller & Partners had expressly disclaimed responsibility.
The significance of this case is not only that the House of Lords effectively over-ruled the majority decision in Candler but also that in doing this the judgment went beyond Lord Denning's minority judgment.
His view that the accountants in the earlier case owed a duty of care was based on the fact that they had actual knowledge of the plaintiff's intended and actual reliance on the accounts that they were to prepare.
In Hedley Byrne , however, the House of Lords considered that, for a duty of care to exist, it was sufficient to establish that the professional ought to have known that the third party would rely on his statement, Lord Reid put it this way: ‘I say ‘ought to have known’ because in questions of negligence we now apply the objective standard of what the reasonable man would have done.’
Accountants inevitably greeted the court's finding with some disquiet.
The Institute published guidance (no longer extant) on the need to state clearly the addressees of reports, the purposes for which they had been prepared and to exclude purposes for which reports were not intended.
The implication that reasonable foresight was the appropriate test for determining the existence of a duty of care by a company's auditors was considered by the courts several times following Hedley Byrne .
This, for example, was the issue in JEB Fasteners Ltd v Marks Bloom & Co (1981) 3 All ER 289.
JEB Fasteners had purchased all the shares in a private company having relied on its accounts for a period of about a year since incorporation.
Accountants Marks Bloom had audited the accounts and had issued an unqualified opinion on them.
Unfortunately, the accounts contained many errors and, in particular, the stock was overstated.
These accounts were made available to JEB Fasteners which, as the auditors had been aware, was considering an acquisition of the company concerned.
Subsequently, the company failed, the investor lost its money and claimed against the auditors.
In the event there was no recovery, but only because the judge found that the auditors' negligence had not caused the plaintiff's loss.
He did find that the auditors owed a duty of care to the plaintiff.
All these cases, and similar cases heard in other jurisdictions, were reviewed in the landmark case Caparo Industries plc v Dickman (1990) 2 AC 605 HL which has caused so much controversy.
The claim arose out of the takeover in 1984 of Fidelity plc by Caparo Industries plc which were both listed companies.
It was brought against two of Fidelity's directors and the auditors of its accounts for the year ended 31 March 1984.
A press release had been issued by Fidelity early in March 1984 forecasting a significant profits shortfall.
During that month, Fidelity's share price fell sharply.
In May 1984, the auditors reported on the accounts, signing an unqualified report.
On the following day, Fidelity's directors announced that the company's profits were lower than had earlier been predicted.
On 8 June, Caparo began to acquire Fidelity's shares.
Four days later, on 12 June, the accounts were sent to shareholders.
However, Caparo was not at this stage registered as a shareholder of Fidelity.
Indeed, Caparo was not represented at Fidelity's agm on 4 July, at which the auditors' report was read and the accounts received.
By 6 July, Caparo had acquired 29.9% of Fidelity's issued shares.
In September 1984, Caparo made a bid for the remaining shares and subsequently acquired them.
Caparo alleged that Fidelity's accounts were inaccurate and misleading.
It was suggested, for example, that stock was over-valued and that credit notes due to customers had been understated with the effect that whereas the accounts as published had reported profits of £1.3m, they should have reported a loss of approximately £400,000.
Caparo alleged that its share purchases made after Fidelity had sent its accounts to shareholders were based on those accounts.
It further suggested that if Fidelity's true position had been known, then those shares would not have been purchased nor would the eventual bid have been made at the price paid or at all.
It contended that in carrying out their functions in April and May 1984, the auditors owed a duty of care to investors in the form of the existing shareholders and to potential investors including Caparo.
In particular, Caparo suggested that the auditors were or should have been aware of the fall in Fidelity's share price during March and of its need for financial assistance.
In these circumstances, it was suggested that the auditors should have been aware that Fidelity was vulnerable to a takeover bid and that any possible bidder such as Caparo would be likely to rely on the accounts when deciding whether a bid should be made and that loss would be suffered by such a bidder if the accounts were inaccurate.
In the event, the question of the existence of a duty of care was considered as a preliminary issue.
The judge of first instance held that the auditors owed no duty of care to Caparo either as an existing shareholder or as a potential investor.
On appeal, the Court of Appeal was unanimously of the view that there was no duty of care between an auditor and potential investors in a company, but held that an auditor did owe such a duty to Fidelity's existing shareholders.
Thus, if an individual shareholder sustained loss while relying on negligently prepared accounts, whether by selling or retaining shares or by purchasing additional shares, he or she was entitled to recover his or her loss.
Inevitably, an appeal was lodged.
The House of Lords found that there was no duty of care either to existing shareholders or to potential investors.
The essence of this judgment is that if the courts are considering whether a duty of care exists in a particular situation, they will apply three criteria: fore-seeability of damage, proximity of relationship, and reasonableness.
Lord Oliver described proximity as ‘no more than a label which embraces not a definable concept but merely a description of circumstances from which, pragmatically, the courts conclude that a duty of care exists’.
In evaluating proximity three factors are critical: purpose, knowledge and reliance, ie the purpose for which the statement was made and communicated, the knowledge of the maker of the statement, and reliance by its recipient.
In Caparo the House of Lords reviewed the statutory provisions relating to the position of auditors and concluded that although they undoubtedly created a relationship between auditors and shareholders, that relationship did not extend to the protection of all the shareholders' possible interests.
Lord Oliver described the relationship in the following way: ‘…the purpose for which the auditors’ certificate is made and published is that of providing those entitled to receive the report with information to enable them to exercise in conjunction [with others]those powers which their respective proprietary interests confer on them and not for the purposes of individual speculation with a view to profit.’
The effect of this decision is to reverse the trend that was evident from the preceding cases in which there had been a gradual tendency to expand the range of third parties to whom accountants might be held to be liable as a result of errors in financial statements.
Judgments in those earlier cases must now be reassessed.
While Caparo concerned a claim by an equity investor, the underlying thinking will also apply to other third party claimants such as banks, trade creditors and guarantors.
Indeed, the House of Lords expressly approved the earlier judgment in Al Saudi Banque and Others v Clark Pixley (1989) 3 All ER 361 in which it was held that auditors did not owe a duty of care to a number of banks because it could not be established that the auditors knew either that the company's accounts were to be shown to the banks or that the banks would rely on them in reaching decisions as lenders.
Here, for the moment, the law stands.
Accountants will be held liable to third parties with whom they have no contractual or fiduciary relationship.
But for this conclusion to be reached, it must be established that the accountant ought to have known that the third party would rely on the accountant's work in the way and for the purpose alleged.
Further, the duty must be reasonable in all the circumstances.
Although the decision has caused controversy, it is not so much because of the principles underlying the determination of a duty of care but mostly because of the House of Lords' interpretation of the Companies Act responsibilities of auditors.
This will be the subject of a further article.
Candler v Crane Christmas & Co
Hedley Byrne & Co Ltd v Heller & Partners Ltd
JEB Fasteners Ltd v Marks Bloom & Co
Caparo Industries plc v Dickman
Al Saudi Banque and Others v Clark Pixley
DUTY OF CARE: KEY CASES
Chris Swinson is an independent consultant specialising in third-party liability
INSTITUTE
Are you an ‘unknown’?
Did you know that the Institute's questionnaire database contains 19,892 ‘unknown’ members?
The database can divide members into ‘partners in practice’, ‘employed in practice’, ‘in business’ and ‘retired’.
This information is of obvious value to the Institute in considering policies and services for members, but the value of the information would be all the greater if it could be updated correctly from the ‘unknown’ category.
Please complete the questionnaire and the address and job title details form that is sent to you with the annual subscription and fees notice, 1993, by the members' registrar.
It will only take a moment of your time and will help the Institute to serve the entire membership better.
auditing
LIABILITY: CASE LAW ACCUMULATES Proving that loss was directly caused by a breach of auditing duty is likely to be difficult
Christine Pearse
A landmark decision for the audit-ing profession?
The Caparo case [1990]1 All ER 568 was certainly that.
But it was confined to the specific issue of whether a duty of care existed — to establish liability, a plaintiff must also prove breach of duty, and loss caused by that breach.
Auditors and users of financial statements should therefore be able to learn some practical lessons from Berg Sons & Co Ltd and Others v Mervyn Hampton Adams and Others,FT 10 July 1992, in which the High Court considered whether an audit had caused loss.
Berg traded in commodities and provided finance for other commodity traders.
The last audited accounts, for the year to March 1983, were heavily qualified by the auditors in November 1984.
In mid-1985 Berg went into liquidation with a deficit of some £15m.
The plaintiffs were the liquidator and Union Discount.
They argued that the auditors should have qualified their 1982 audit report and that, had they done so, Berg would not have been able to continue to trade.
The liquidator therefore claimed for recovery of the deficit on liquidation.
Union Discount claimed to have relied on the 1982 accounts in deciding in late 1983 and early 1984 to discount four bills of exchange, totalling £550,000, drawn by Berg.
Berg's financial statements for the year ended 31 March 1982 showed turnover of more than £23m, profit before tax of £54,224, net assets of £243,980, and contingent liabilities in respect of bills discounted of more than £6m; bills receivable amounted to some £4.8m.
I shall focus here on just two aspects of the case: the treatment of one debtor balance of some £2.4m, and the useful life of a set of financial statements.
The useful life of financial statements
Recently, the Auditing Practices Board (APB) suggested in the preface to its Exposure Draft,Going Concern,that ‘…one year is normally the period during which it is expected that the financial statements can reasonably be relied upon’.
The APB went on to observe that ‘…the degree of reliance that can reasonably be placed on financial statements will decrease as the length of time that has elapsed since their approval by the directors increases’.
In the Berg judgment, Mr Justice Hobhouse considered the timing of Union Discount's alleged reliance on the 1982 accounts: ‘Furthermore, there would only be a limited period of time within which it would be reasonably foreseeable that a bank or discount house would rely upon a given set of audited accounts.
By the time of the completion of the audit, over six months had already elapsed since the end of the year covered by these accounts.
It would not be reasonably foreseen that these accounts would still be relied upon by any banker acting in the ordinary course of business as a basis for assessing the then creditworthiness of Berg after the passage of more than about 15 months from the end of the period covered by the accounts.
By that time the information contained in the audited accounts would be so out of date that it would not reasonably be foreseen as the basis for a business judgment concerning the extension of credit to Berg or the discounting of bills.
‘Audited accounts are in any event only one of the sources of information which a prudent banker takes into account.
Within a reasonable period after the end of the year covered by the accounts, those accounts may have a dominant role.
With the passage of time thereafter, the role of the audited accounts becomes progressively less important and other more up to date information, including up to date references and up to date experience of transactions and accounts, of whatever kind, covering later periods, become progressively more important.’
This gives judicial support to the view that financial statements have a limited useful life (of less than 15 months) and depreciate in usefulness over a period of time.
Debtor recoverability
One debtor, Gimco, owed some £2.4m at 31 March 1982.
Naturally, this material balance attracted the auditors' attention.
Mr Justice Hobhouse noted that the engagement partner ‘did correctly identify the need to take a view about these bills and approached the matter conscientiously’.
Evidence of the existence of the debt was documented and confirmed; as regards recoverability, the auditors had assurances from Gimco and Berg that the bills would be honoured but no information about the ownership, financial position or resources of Gimco.
Mr Justice Hobhouse said: ‘The essence of the position was that [the engagement partner]was relying on the unsupported representations of [Berg].
Even though they had been confirmed…in writing they remained without support or corroboration and should not have been accepted…as sufficient for the purposes of an unqualified certificate.’
Thus the Berg judgment supports para 3 of the Auditing Guideline,Representations by Management,which states that having obtained written representations, the auditors must still decide whether they have sufficient evidence to support an unqualified opinion.
Unsupported representations, whether oral or written, do not of themselves constitute sufficient audit evidence.
Auditors not liable
Ultimately, the plaintiffs failed to prove their case because the losses they had suffered were, as a matter of fact, unrelated to the auditors' report on the 1982 accounts.
Union Discount was found not to have relied on the 1982 accounts and the deficit on liquidation arose largely because of unsuccessful commodity trading in 1984 and the failure of an £8m debtor, Esal.
In English and Welsh courts the position remains that defendants are only liable for losses that they have caused and, as Mr Justice Hobhouse put it, the plaintiffs had ‘failed altogether to prove their case on causation’.
Financial statements have a limited useful life.
Unsupported representations, whether oral or written, are insufficient audit evidence.
In English and Welsh courts defendants are only liable for losses they have caused.
LESSONS FROM BERG
expert witnesses
BIRTH OF AN EXPERT WITNESS Being cross-examined is a daunting experience, but there are courses to teach you how to cope with it
Brian Singleton-Green
One of the best shows in London isn't on in the West End.
In fact, it isn't in a theatre at all— it's put on at irregular intervals by a group of lawyers in the sedate and sheltered surroundings of the Temple, and it's called Seminars for the Expert Witness .
But the comments from those who have been to it would rapidly be displayed outside any West End theatre: ‘It was splendid.
I was very impressed’; ‘I thoroughly enjoyed it.
It was a very good day’; ‘Excellent.
Parts of it were extremely humorous’; ‘I enjoyed it immensely’.
The all-day seminars are put on by lawyers from the chambers of John Spokes QC of Three Pump Court in the Temple.
On the day I went the team comprised two practising barristers, a QC who is a Recorder of the Crown Court and a Circuit judge.
Those attending the seminar were overwhelmingly from accountancy firms — excluding myself, 23 of the 26 participants.
This reflects the growth of expert witness work (or ‘litigation support’ or ‘forensic accounting’) in the accountancy profession in recent years.
Whatever may be happening to the rest of the economy, litigation is booming and so, apparently, is fraud.
This creates opportunities for accountants to act as experts, preparing a report on the subject of the suit or prosecution and possibly giving evidence in court as an expert witness.
The format of the day was:morning session — a lecture on the forensic accountant as an expert witness in civil litigation, focusing on the preparation of the expert's report and its aims and objectives, followed by a mock trial of a civil case;afternoon session — a lecture on the role of the forensic accountant in criminal proceedings, focusing on the importance of the accountant in the investigative stage of the proceedings and the preparation of the expert's report, followed by a mock trial of a criminal case.
There was plenty of time for questions.
Participants I spoke to afterwards found the lectures useful and interesting, but it was the mock trials that made the day.
These were arranged so that eight of those attending the seminar gave evidence as expert witnesses.
In the morning, for example, one person gave evidence for the plaintiff, and a second was cross-examined on that evidence.
A third person gave evidence for the defendant, and a fourth person was cross-examined on that evidence.
The same happened with the criminal case in the afternoon.
Everybody attending the seminar was sent papers a few days in advance; these were principally copies of actual experts' reports (with the names changed) which would form the subject matter of the two mock trials.
Those giving evidence obviously read the papers more conscientiously than the rest of us, and had short briefing sessions beforehand with the counsel on their side, but did not know what questions they would be asked.
Simon Carne, head of Putnam, Hays & Bartlett's litigation consulting and expert evidence practice, gave evidence in the afternoon session.
Although he has given evidence before in a real life case, he still found the experience very worthwhile.
The situation was an artificial one, but ‘one was concerned not to make a complete fool of oneself in front of one's peer group’, so the pressure was real.
Sarah Evans, a manager in Price Waterhouse's litigation and special services department, was cross-examined on the same evidence.
She admitted that, ‘even though you knew that what you said didn't matter’, it was a daunting experience; in fact ‘afterwards, counsel apologised for giving me such a hard time’.
Those not giving evidence that I spoke to found watching the trials a useful experience and felt that they had either learned something from the process or at least, if they were already experienced in giving evidence, received helpful confirmation on points of technique.
Pump Court Chambers started putting on the seminars only last year and they now hold them every three or four months.
This show should run and run.
1.
Speak up, speak slowly (it adds weight to your words and gives the judge a chance to take notes) and try to speak in articulate sentences.
2.
Keep it simple, avoid jargon and if you have to give a long explanation, try to break it up.
3.
Don't move about; it gives a shifty impression.
4.
Answer the question that you've actually been asked.
5.
If you need to pause to think before answering, do so, and if you stumble over an answer, start again if that will help.
6.
If you need to put in caveats, do so, and if you need time to look at a document, say so.
7.
If you disagree with, say, one point out of ten in your own side's case (but preferably not the main point), it adds to your credibility as a witness.
8.
If you have to give an answer that is unhelpful to the client, explain why you support the client's case in spite of it.
9.
Don't argue with counsel.
10.
Look towards the jury when you give evidence.
11.
Try to build up a rapport with the judge.
12.
Try not to irritate the judge.
HINTS ON GIVING EVIDENCE
training
NEW APPROACH TO WORK EXPERIENCE The Institute's new work experience guidelines reconcile the irreconcilable and add more flexibility to its training arrangements
Michael Entract
For a long time, work experience has been an important — and separate — element of training for membership.
In 1984 the Institute published its first work experience guidelines for the training of students.
These were followed a little later by separate guidelines covering post-qualification work experience.
The Institute's district training boards relied on both sets of guidelines in the continual process of authorising — and reauthorising — some 2,000 training offices and post-qualification training offices.
In 1990, it became clear that the 1984 guidelines needed revision.
This need was accentuated by the extension of the Institute's training scheme to non-practising organisations and into the European Community.
There was also the prospect of extending the scheme worldwide and the Institute was about to take on statutory responsibilities under the Companies Act 1989.
An Institute working party was charged with updating the guidelines.
The fruits of 18 months' debate and consultation are the Work Experience and Training Guidelines that were published in September.
The guidelines took effect on 1 August, but there will be a transitional period for the sake of students and members who began their pre- or post-qualification training before that date.
The working party's remit was sufficiently wide-ranging to permit examining almost anything that had a bearing on chartered accountants' training.
In 1991 it was therefore able to produce a far more comprehensive interim report for consultation purposes than would otherwise have been possible.
At this point I must express thanks for the valuable contributions from training organisations, district societies, district training boards, the National Student Liaison Committee and various Institute committees (including the Competence-led Assessment Steering Group).
The working party was very conscious of the dilemma facing the Institute in its capacity as a self-regulating organisation, namely that of balancing the need for a clear indication of expectation against over-prescription.
This surfaced prominently in considering members' views about the core work experience requirements for membership.
For example, it is clear that there is a wide range of strongly-held views about the importance of ‘pure’ accounting.
At one extreme was the suggestion that at least 40 weeks of the training period should be spent acquiring the necessary accounting skills; at the other, that there should be no requirement to record accounting separately on the grounds that it was adequately covered within the auditing function.
There were also differing opinions about the degree of permissible ‘specialisation’ at the pre-qualification stage.
We decided to ‘reconcile the irreconcilable’ by identifying three separate routes to qualification.
Each embodies a core of 20 weeks' accounting, linked with auditing if necessary, and a degree of flexibility to accommodate work experience programmes in taxation, financial management, insolvency and information technology — the last two having been hitherto restricted to the post-qualification stage.
The rationale behind this was our conviction that, first, it would be consistent with the public and professional interest to extend the membership criteria to allow specialist work and, second, that it would be unrealistic, not to say unhelpful, to restrict the training of chartered accountants rigidly to a single route.
The logic of linking auditing and accounting had already been accepted by the Secretary of State as a feature of the experience needed to qualify as an auditor under the Companies Act 1989.
The associated requirement, to complete a mandatory period of auditing during the five or so years' training that spans admission to membership of the Institute, led to two more changes.
The first is the ‘integration’ of the pre- and post-qualification stages (approved training and approved practical experience) by extending the new guidelines to cover both stages — thereby doing away with the confusion of having separate guidelines — and by similarly extending the training record system.
As a precaution against undue fragmentation, it is also now a requirement to complete the post-qualification stage within four years.
The second change is the introduction, as guidance only, of various quanta of work experience in the six technical categories previously mentioned (within an overall mandatory quantum for each stage).
We recognise that a time record is a poor indicator of quality but, in combination with the necessary confirmatory certificates and the detailed examination of standards that is built into the training office appraisal process, the Institute has a monitoring system of which — given that it depends almost entirely on voluntary effort — it can be justifiably proud.
The last, and possibly the most beneficial, development is the introduction of what is now called ‘centralised’ training.
This is the latest step in the sequence of changes that followed the phasing out of authorised principals and the introduction of the training office system in 1983.
The 1983 changes came from the recognition that it was the facilities available in offices as well as supervision by members that determined effective training.
By the same token, the business arrangements in many organisations are now regionally orientated, and it seems only logical to allow groups of offices that can collectively meet the Institute's requirements to provide pre- and post-qualification training as single entities — or training office groups.
The facility, which will be available early in 1993, has a number of distinct advantages.
Not least of these is the greater freedom to deploy students to different locations.
That said, the new guidelines continue to promote the Institute's well-established requirements for supervision, monitoring and counselling throughout the integrated training period.
Those then are the main changes introduced with the new guide-lines.
The publication as a whole has been designed with ease of reference in mind and its advice should be of great value and interest to anyone involved in professional training.
However, that process is continually evolving and we are always looking for suggestions to aid its development.
If you have any, please send them to the Institute's director of Education and Training, Phil Armitage — the debate must continue!
corporate treasury
LIQUIDITY AND HOW TO MANAGE IT Tips for the treasurer charged with managing the group's short-term cleared cash balance
Stuart Leadill
A company can borrow from its clearing bank via an overdraft facility attached to its current account.
Large corporate customers pay interest on overdrafts at the bank's base rate plus 1%.
Smaller companies will pay a higher margin.
But companies can also borrow from banks using a wholesale money market, in which the banks also borrow from and lend to each other.
There is a difference, commonly 1/8 %, between the rate at which a bank will bid for deposits from other banks, ‘Libid’(London Interbank Bid Rate) and the rate at which a bank can borrow from other banks, ‘Libor’(London Interbank Offered Rate).
There is a Libor rate for any period, eg one week, three months, six months, etc.
Banks will lend to all but their smaller customers in this wholesale market adding an additional margin over Libor, which of course represents the bulk of their marginal funding cost.
In the long run the average three-month Libor rate is very close to the average bank base rate, though the two may differ significantly on any given day.
So, in the long run, if a company borrows in the wholesale money market and leaves as little as possible on overdraft, then it can save up to 1% depending on the margin over Libor.
Borrowing instruments
Money market advances.
These are sometimes known as ‘clean money’, and are the simplest form of money market borrowing.
The interest rate quoted is applied to the principal for the number of days of the advance divided by 365 if this is a domestic UK sterling deal (360 days for Eurosterling and most currencies), and the interest is repaid together with the principal at the maturity date.
Bankers' acceptances.
Bankers' acceptances are one of the main ways by which the Bank of England manages the money supply, buying them from the banking system, via the discount houses, in order to inject cash into the banking system, and selling them when it wants to take cash out of the banking system.
A banker's acceptance starts off as a bill of exchange, which is itself a form of IOU.
To count as a banker's acceptance a bank must add its own credit to that of the drawer by adding its name to the bill or ‘endorsing’ it.
To be eligible to be purchased by the Bank of England the bills must have an underlying short-term trade finance role, as evidenced by a clause on the face of the bill, and must have been accepted by an ‘eligible’ bank.
Most, though not all, of the major banks that operate in the City of London are on the list of eligible banks maintained by the Bank of England.
When comparing quotes from banks it is important to note that the interest (known as ‘discount’) on bankers' acceptances is paid upfront, by being deducted from the amount paid to the borrower.
To compensate the borrower for parting with the interest at the beginning of a loan the nominal interest rate on bankers' acceptances is commonly lower than that for cash advances of the same maturity.
In the absence of any other factors, if this timing difference is taken into account the effective interest rate would be the same.
However, the fact that the Bank of England will rediscount bankers' acceptances means that they are more liquid, ie there is more potential demand for them.
If there is more demand for a commodity, its price rises.
If the price of a money market instrument rises then the yield falls, and this is indeed the case with bankers' acceptances, which are normally cheaper than straight cash advances, even allowing for the fact that interest is paid upfront.
A set of discount to yield tables helps the job of comparing the relative attractions of money market advances and bankers' acceptances.
Sterling Commercial Paper.
SCP is similar to bankers' acceptances in that it is evidenced by a formal document and issued at a discount which is paid upfront.
Confusingly, the interest rate quoted when referring to SCP is the effective yield and not the straight discount percentage, which makes the calculations less straightforward.
SCP is not eligible for rediscount with the Bank of England but it is attractive to a much wider range of investors than bankers' acceptances, and it is widely held outside the banking sector by institutional investors such as insurance companies and pension funds.
In practice the effective interest rate on bankers' acceptances and SCP is similar, though not the same, and the interest differential differs between maturities.
The Bank of England places restrictions as to size, etc, on SCP issuers, but any company listed on the International Stock Exchange or USM that has net assets of over £25m can in principle issue SCP.
However, in the current economic climate it is only major corporates that will find demand for their SCP, and only then if it is rated by at least one of the rating agencies such as Moody's or Standard and Poors.
The rating process can tie up a considerable amount of management time, and the company, of course, pays a fee to the rating agency.
SCP is normally sold via a dealer group of two or more banks.
Net cash position
Practically everything that I have said about borrowing is applicable to cash, in reverse.
But there is one — crucial — difference.
If you borrow money from a bank and it becomes insolvent you do not have a problem.
But if you lend money to a bank and it becomes insolvent you do.
You therefore have to address the question of ‘credit risk’.
It is vital that you set limits for the amount of money that you will deposit with each bank.
There are two ways of doing this.
The first is to make use of the rating services and have a rule that, say, you will only deposit money with a triple A bank, ie a bank with a credit rating of AAA.
This would restrict you to rather few banks these days.
But you could say AA or better.
Another method is to ask your house merchant bank to suggest limits, no doubt adding a ‘no responsibility’ disclaimer.
The instruments used
Money market deposits.
The obverse of money market advances is money market deposits, and these work in the same way.
You deposit a principal amount with a bank (or large building society) and at the end of the maturity period you are repaid the principal, with interest.
On large deposits you can expect to get Libid.
Bank certificates of deposit.
Corporate customers can buy bankers' acceptances, but it is more usual to buy bank certificates of deposit (CDs).
These are effectively IOUs certifying that there is a sum of money on deposit for a stated period and at the end of the period the holder of the CD will have title to the principal and interest.
Bank CDs are negotiable pieces of paper; you do not have to hold them to maturity; you can sell them instead.
Hence they are more liquid than money market deposits and so carry a lower interest rate.
If cash flows are expected to be predictable then there will be no special virtue in liquidity and you would earn a higher rate of interest from a straightforward money market deposit.
Sterling commercial paper.
Corporates can of course purchase the SCP of other corporates.
Given third world debt problems and so on, many corporates are stronger credits than many banks.
Consequently SCP is attractive to some corporate depositors since it commonly carries an interest rate of Libid or better and diversifies the risk away from the banking sector.
Do remember though that while it is unusual if not unknown for governments to allow major banks to fail, it is not unusual for corporates to fail.
Some treasurers find ratings a help, though they are no guarantee.
Treasury bills.
These are three or six-month bills issued on a discount basis by the UK Government.
The yield is lower than on money market instruments; they are safer.
Gilts.
These are long-term bonds issued by the UK Government, and so a safe investment.
If they are near to maturity then the yield will reflect short-term interest rates, though again the gross yield will be lower than on money market instruments.
There is no CGT on the difference between the purchase and sale/redemption price (provided that they are held as investments and not on trading account), and this can enhance the after-tax yield of low coupon gilts near to maturity if they are trading at below par.
The yield on gilts that are some years from maturity will reflect long-term interest rates.
Other bonds.
Sterling bonds are also issued by foreign governments or ‘sovereigns’, foreign quasi-governmental agencies such as SEK, the Swedish export agency, and corporate borrowers, either UK or foreign.
Many sterling bonds traded in London are ‘qualifying corporate bonds’ for tax purposes.
The main exceptions are bonds with non-sterling conversion rights and bonds with an equity component, such as convertibles, though this list is not exhaustive.
There is again no CGT on the difference between the purchase and sale/redemption price of qualifying corporate bonds.
Everything I have said about gilts applies to qualifying corporate bonds, except that they are not backed by the UK Government and so there is a greater risk that the bond will not be repaid.
You may think that this risk is remote for major sovereign borrowers, but it has happened in the past.
It is certainly a possibility for many foreign quasi-governmental agencies, and it is an even stronger possibility for corporates.
It does not take the actual bankruptcy of a corporate which has issued a bond to adversely affect the bond's value — a leveraged takeover bid, or the threat of one (euphemistically known as ‘event risk’) will do almost as well.
Remember that if you sell one of these instruments before maturity, then changes in interest rates will almost certainly mean that its capital value has altered and you will get a gain or loss, which could be substantial and exceed the interest earned.
Floating rate notes.
An instrument which mitigates this problem of interest rate risk is the FRN.
This is a bond, often issued by banks and building societies, whose interest rate is periodically reset to a market interest rate.
At an interest reset date the bonds trade at around par, assuming the issuer's credit quality has not deteriorated.
As a final point, remember that markets in many gilts and other bonds are illiquid; so it can be very difficult to find a buyer.
Dealing
For many people there is an aura of mystery about dealing on the money markets but it just involves picking up a telephone, ringing two or three numbers, asking the price of something (the interest or discount rate), and buying from the cheapest source.
I am an advocate of concentrating money market business rather than spreading it among a large number of banks; so long as banks know that they are in competition it does not matter if they are competing with two or three others, or 50: if they do not offer the best rate they will not get the business.
There is nothing to stop you doing most of your business with your main clearing bank if the rates are competitive.
For smaller and medium-sized corporates this is a good idea, since it means that the bank does not lose most of your lending business.
Your clearing bank will also be able to transfer cash directly to and from your current account, saving you telegraphic transfer charges, and simplifying arguments about who bears the interest lost if payments go missing in the banking system.
It is a good internal control if the dealer is not allowed to make cash transfers and if bank confirmations are matched to internal dealing records by someone other than the dealer.
But there can be practical difficulties in implementing this, particularly in small and medium-sized companies where the number of treasury transactions does not warrant employing several staff.
Forecasting
The cleared bank balance for the close of business on the current day can be forecast with some precision, because most of the events which influence it are known today.
However, the treasurer needs to know how much he will be borrowing not just today but for the rest of this week, the rest of this month and the rest of this year.
There are two ways to forecast cash flows:
The accounting-based approach involves forecasting the entire balance sheet.
Fixed assets plus net current assets less long-term sources of funding, less shareholders' equity equals the short-term funding required.
Taking the current level of borrowings and forecasting future receipts of cash in and payments of cash out by salaries, bought ledger payments, tax payments and so on.
In principle this does not need to be done by an accountant.
Remember that it is the cleared bank balance on which interest is payable and not the cash book balance.
The receipts and payments method is commonly employed for shorter time periods, say up to one month.
Hindsight is a great teacher and it can be very useful to plot successive forecasts against the actual outturn; there is often a stable underlying pattern.
A picture is worth a thousand words and a single graph can often lead to a rule of thumb.
General points
Resist the temptation to deposit money in currencies with a high interest rate, or borrow in currencies with a low interest rate, if there is no matching underlying cash flow in that currency.
Movements in foreign exchange rates will affect the sterling value of the principal deposited or borrowed and your finance director will not thank you for saving £50,000 by earning interest at 1 1/2 % above UK rates if you lose £1m when the foreign currency is reconverted to sterling.
Can the sterling value be fixed by means of a forward foreign exchange contract?
Alas, no: because the forward foreign exchange rate will vary from the current ‘spot’ price by an amount which reflects the interest rate differential.
You can protect yourself against future rises in interest rates by means of a hedging instrument known as a forward rate agreement, or FRA.
Effectively, you agree with a bank that on, say, 1 January you will pay the bank interest on a notional principal calculated using a fixed interest rate reflecting the current yield curve; the bank will pay you interest on the same notional principal at whatever interest rate pertains on 1 January.
In practice the two payments are netted off.
You are locked into the current interest rate, for better or worse.
There are other interest hedging products, such as interest rate options, which allow you, at a price, to benefit from favourable movements in interest rates without locking yourself into future rates should these prove unfavourable.
But bear in mind that interest rate hedging should not be undertaken lightly by the inexperienced, and then only to hedge an underlying cash position and not for speculation
Tax is a minefield for the unwary.
The problems multiply for the newer financial and hedging instruments, many of which do not easily fit into existing statute and case law.
There are a number of complex proprietary schemes to reduce borrowing costs or enhance income; most are tax driven.
Be very careful.
You must take legal and tax advice on the legality of the scheme and the enforceability of any provisions designed to mitigate credit risk.
Many schemes have an overseas aspect, which means another legal and tax jurisdiction.
Be even more careful when investing cash overseas.
To avoid simultaneous borrowing and depositing you should monitor how accurate your forecasting is, without turning this into an art form.
When your forecasts are significantly wrong, find out why.
To minimise borrowing rates and maximise investing rates you should always get more than one quote, a simple rule but one often overlooked in the pressure of events.
And the golden rules?
Keep it simple; stick to instruments you do understand; thoroughly research instruments you don't understand; make sure you know the tax implications.
LESSONS IN LIQUIDITY