

Alan Middleton writes…
27 December 1991
 Greetings from Hamburg!
This past year has certainly gone by quickly.
By the time this appears I will have been here a year (11 January).
1991 has been an interesting year, also a year of many changes.
I have gradually settled into the work and in the coming year I hope to have even more responsibilities in the bookshop and more contact with the customers.
One problem of the past year has been the length of time it has taken me to accept that I need to work in the  bookshop most of the time even though I know this work has to be done and though I enjoy it (most of the time).
The Lord has won a victory over my feelings in this area although there are still skirmishes from time to time!
Please keep praying that I will master the German ways of doing things, that are so different.
The main differences I see between the shop here and Christian bookshops in Britain are (a) that we can order books from an express supplier in the morning and have them in the afternoon, which is very good and (b) that there are more books about Israel and the Jews.
Our best seller of 1991 is the German translation of ‘The Horizontal Epistles of Andromeda Veal’ by Adrian Plass, which has sold 200 copies and appeared early in October!
The best selling English books are the humorous Adrian Plass books and the NIV Bibles.
In September Valentin Scweiglerand I represented the shop at the ‘Day of Foreign Churches’ here in Hamburg.
About 30 nationalities were represented there.
We were able to make contact with Christians from several of the churches and to offer them the possibility of ordering books in their own language via the Christian Literature Crusade in the appropriate countries.
We already have such a scheme in operation for Indonesia.
The Koreans and Japanese get their books via the USA.
But we were also able to offer help to them.
In November we were at the annual bazaar at the English (episcopal) church, where we also made many contacts.
Some of the members have been to the shop since then.
In the autumn a Ghanaian came all the way from Dortmund, about 220 miles, to buy a Bride's Bible!
The just before Christmas a teenager came in with his friends and asked for a book ‘honestly’ listing all the mistakes in the Bible.
Valentin (the manager) said he thought it wasn't possible to do that honestly, and showed him ‘Answers’ by Josh MacDowell, about the lack of mistakes in the Bible, and the boy bought it.
The day after that, a man came in and very loudly said that he had no time for God, but he wanted a colouring book for the children of his Greek neighbours, to show his acceptance of them.
As all our colouring books are based on Bible stories, he bought two of those!
Please pray he himself will open up to God.
The best book I read myself in 1991 was ‘Biography of James Hudson Taylor’(OMF) by Howard and Geraldine Taylor, which showed that even one of the giants of missionary history had his own personal struggles, but also that the Lord brought him through.
It was very encouraging to me, and I would highly recommend it.
1992 is the ‘Year of the Bible’ in Germany.
This is a special project supported and organised by all the Protestant churches in the country.
Please pray that the German people will buy, read and live by the Bible (not that it is only Germans who need to do that!).
I wish you all, and the world, God's richest blessings in 1992.
[As we go to press, we have heard that Alan is due to go into hospital on 13 January to have an operation.]
John and Heather Bath write…
January 1992
On 6 January we fly to Portugal to complete our DTS.
We spend 6 weeks working with local churches doing outreach, and then have one final week of school.
The school has been split into two groups, one going to Setubal near Lisbon, and our group to Alfandanga near Faro.
Our group will be working with a Baptist Church, and a lot of our work will be open air presentations — dramas, dance, songs and testimonies, with local people interpreting for us.
Along with another family, we will be staying in small chalets at a conference centre, not far from the church where the rest of the group will stay.
We are excited about this part of our course, but a bit unsure of what it will be like to work in a foreign country.
It will be a real chance to learn in a practical way many of the things we have been studying over the last few months.
We would love to hear from any of you who would like to write.
Our address from 7 January to 15 February will be:
We will try to keep in touch and let you know what is happening.
We will be home at the end of February, and look forward to seeing you then.
We value your prayers and support so much.
Queens Park Football Team
In November, details were given regarding the season to date and it is now time to update to the midwinter break.
At the end of October Queens Park had 5 points from 6 games and have further fared as follows:
A good victory was secured at Allander, winning by 4 goals to 2 in the first league match in November.
After that it was back to cup action where a victory was won against Kilsyth by 4 goals to nil.
This victory has secured us a quarter final place in the Fraser Trophy which will be played at the end of February.
After that heartening victory it was back to league games and a very poor run of results.
Queens Park lost the next three games to Hamilton (0: 2), to Port Glasgow (1: 2) and finally to Victoria Croftfoot (0: 3).
After these games the ‘91’ portion of 91/92 was surrendered to the weather and no further games were played.
Details of the 92 season's results will appear in future issues.
Gary Kilpatrick writes…
January 1992
 Hi Friends — Happy New Year!
I am starting a Discipleship Training School (DTS) with Youth with a Mission (YWAM) at Lausanne in Switzerland.
The course begins on 2 January and ends on 4 June 1992.
I would appreciate your prayers for me during these coming months as I seek direction from the Lord about my future.
I believe God is calling me to full-time service.
Love and thanks for your encouragement and support.
[If you would like to receive Gary's prayer letter regularly, please see Carol Booth or Douglas Thompson]
DIARY OF JONAH — JANUARY 1992
Monday
Well, that's Christmas over and done with.
I never knew we had so many relatives and friends.
Our house has been like Sauchiehall Street.
I have spent my entire holiday handing round cakes and business.
Still, there have been wonderful services at church.
There are so many great preachers there.
Tuesday
Now we have to get ready for the New Year.
I mean, we cleaned the house last week for Christmas.
It's all these visitors; they make such a mess.
Mum made me go into town with her to spend my Christmas money on clothes.
She wants to make me colour co-ordinated.
I was hoping that P & I's would be having a sale and that I could get a new concordance but she wouldn't even let me look.
Wednesday
I am so busy eating New Year Dinner that I can't write much.
We had a wonderful service in church last night, apart from the fact that my silly wee sister came too.
I mean, I wasn't allowed up late at her age.
Thursday
Mum's made her usual New Year resolution — to lose weight.
She says it's very important to be chic this year, now that we are at one with Europe.
I think she wants to colour co-ordinate Dad too.
Friday
Haven't noticed any difference so far this year.
I mean, a new year should bring new things but my silly wee sister is as silly as ever and Aunt Agatha is as grumpy.
It's very disappointing.
Saturday
I was wrong — there is something new.
Mum says that now we are at one with Europe we are going to have some ‘nouvelle cuisine’.
I am not sure what that means but we are having it for tea.
Later: I have discovered the meaning of ‘nouvelle cuisine’— it means small portions.
It's just Mum's latest diet.
Sunday
Another wonderful sermon.
We never know which pastor we'll get these days, but it doesn't matter as they are all great.
The sermon was on 2 Corinthians 5:17 which is a wonderful verse and exactly right for a New year.
Turned to share this with Mum but she was looking very smug.
I might have known that it would be one of the 2–7 verses.
Philip Merriweather writes…
December 1991
 Hi Amigos 
Now that I know what is happening in my Discipleship Training School (DTS) here in Bolivia, I will try and let you know as well.
During the first two months I was on a King's Kids Outreach Tour.
God did many things in my life and in the lives of friends that I made in different places.
In CHILE — God challenged us in our commitment to him and called some people to work in specific countries in the future.
In RESISTENCIA (N ARGENTINA)— God challenged us on the quality of our friendship with Him.
In PARAGUAY — God said something to me which I will remember all my life.
It was: ‘If you want my will to be done, it requires you to actually do something (which takes time and effort) not just to sit back and expect it to happen’.
Thank you all so much for your prayers over that time — God was so good and taught me so much.
Since DTS started, God has been teaching me not only through the lectures, but through my time alone with Him and also through living in close quarters with people!
In King's Kids, God planted seeds of His character in me.
During the DTS I am determined to see these seeds grow!
On Tuesday and Friday nights I go out to give bread and coffee to the street kids and try to become their close friend.
It is a chance to build relationships with the kids and to get close to just one or two of them.
Many know the words and it is just a case of practically demonstrating the love of Jesus to them.
I would appreciate your prayers for the following:
Continued good health and protection
Continued help in learning Spanish — I can now communicate, but still have a long way to go in fully understanding what people are saying to me
That God will give me a clear vision for the future and reveal to me the next step after DTS.
It is great to be here, but I miss you all and look forward to being with you again soon.
SERMONS FROM THE SEA
The voyage of the good ship ‘Ceilidh’ in September provided us with many lessons in seamanship and Christian living.
This one is the last in the series, it is called ‘Beware of Hidden Rocks’.
The locals call it Bogha nan Ramfhear and it is very, very dangerous.
You can't see it but you need to know that it is there.
It lurks just under the surface close to the shore off the South coast of Mull near the feared Torran Rocks.
The journey South down the Sound of Iona and on eastward towards Colonsay is a tricky piece of navigation, not to be attempted in the dark or without the aid of charts, binoculars, compass and depth gauge.
Our skipper, Neil, explained the procedure in excruciating detail before we started.
We had to sail (or rather motor) the boat precisely along three straight line courses, changing from one to the next at exactly the right places otherwise we would have a most unpleasant encounter with Bogha nan Ramfhear.
The first part of our trip was very pleasant, we glided past the ancient settlement of Iona with its Abbey and cluster of smaller buildings.
One of these used to be the Free Church but has now been converted into a house.
However its old belfry still stands and was most important to us as we navigated our way south.
We had to keep the tower of the Abbey and the belfry of the Free Church exactly in line to stay on our course.
(I will resist the temptation to draw any lesson in ecumenism from this experience!)
Keeping them in sight and in line became quite difficult as we moved further away.
Next we had to locate accurately the various islands and rocks all around us to pinpoint the changes in our course.
One of them, Rhuad Sgeir, was quite easy to identify.
It had a big cairn of stones which made it quite distinctive.
Who, I wondered, had made the hazardous journey through the rocks in a small boat many years ago to build that cairn?
With a ‘fix’ on Rhuad Sgeir and a careful watch on our depth gauge we picked our way between the coast of Mull and Bogha nan Ramfhear.
Only when we were within a few hundred yards of it could we see the waves frothing over and around it, giving just a hint of the menace below.
In our Christian life, we can encounter the most difficult problems or ‘hidden rocks’ where we least expect them.
On a calm day there will be no waves breaking over Bogha nan Ramfhear to indicate its presence.
Sometimes other Christians will, so to speak, have built the ‘cairns’ that warn of dangers nearby, and we can benefit from their experience and example.
At other times we can cope with dangerous situations only with the guidance we receive from God's word, our chart and compass for daily living.
But it takes practice and constant use.
At first sight, all the Torran Rocks look much the same and there are no easily identifiable features on the shoreline of Mull either.
The chart, carelessly applied, using the wrong sightings off the wrong landmarks could lead us into error and be just as dangerous as ignoring it completely.
In 2 Timothy 2:15, Paul emphasised the importance of ‘rightly handling the word of truth’.
The Bible can be a difficult book, and a navigational chart can be difficult too.
Each one shows us the right way to go and we must learn to use it aright.
Report from the East
Now that I am working in Edinburgh you could call this brief report a ‘Capital Update’!
It is hard to believe that Joan and I have now been staying on the east coast for six months.
Incidentally it was great to spend a Sunday at QP during December and to meet again many of our ‘old’ friends.
The financial year for the Edinburgh Medical Missionary Society (EMMS) ended on 11 November 1991 and the auditors are expected in mid-January at our office at 7 Washington Lane, Edinburgh EH11 2HA.
This first year end will inevitably be a difficult one because of all the new situations which have to be dealt with.
Please continue to remember me in your prayers as I adjust and settle in.
EMMS, beside owning the Nazareth Hospital, is committed to raising funds worldwide for the development and upgrading of the hospital to district status.
The Israeli government has a policy of not providing funds to hospitals for capital expenditure so that resources have to be sought elsewhere.
This ministry of reclamation, peace and compassion in the name of the Lord Jesus is worthy of our prayerful and practical support.
We are grateful for some help received to date from QP and if other friends wish to be identified with the work in a practical manner, this would be much appreciated.
The Society will also run tours to the Holy Land this year with Rev Derek Prime and others and if you wish to have details please drop a line to the office or telephone 031 313 3828.
EMMS also serves in three other ways as follows:
1
Medicines for Overseas
The project makes use of surplus medical supplies and medicines from doctors' surgeries, pharmacists, hospitals and medical supply firms.
They are sorted, packed and dispatched from Edinburgh to mission hospitals including the Nazareth Hospital.
Shipments have also been made to Poland.
2
.
Third World Medical Attachment Centre (3W/MAC)
This scheme was devised to advise and support medical students undertaking elective placements in overseas mission hospitals.
Approximately 20 students receive grants each year.
3
.
Hawthornbrae Trust
About one hundred years ago the EMMS directors were given the responsibility of running the Hawthornbrae Trust which currently exists to provide holiday grants to Edinburgh residents who are recovering from illness and who would not otherwise be able to afford even a short holiday break.
Thank you for permitting me to tell you some more about EMMS and I close by mentioning that in November 1991 we celebrated our 150th Anniversary in the Greyfriars Church, Edinburgh.
Our own Hugh and Freda Kennedy, representing the Baptist Union of Scotland, were part of a congregation of over 600 people.
Together we praise God for abundant past blessings and look to Him for direction and strength in the coming days.
Yours in the work of the Kingdom
WORLD CHURCH
This is the first article in a regular series submitted by the Mission Board.
The aim of these articles is to inform the Fellowship of missionary activity, both at home and overseas.
It is intended that these articles should be in addition to current missionary writing which appears in the magazine each month.
Just as a reminder the Mission Board is comprised of Geoff Grogan, Freda Kennedy, Jan Brooks, Lorna McLean, Barry Elder, Scott Alexander and Bill Howieson.
Bill is the contact person for the magazine and as such is keen to receive any suggestions, advice or ideas relating to future articles.
This first article looks at the Baptist Missionary Society World Mission Link.
The Baptist Missionary Society has recently changed the way it organizes home support for its missionaries.
Gone are the days of deputation.
In its place the BMS has created World Mission Link (WML).
History shows that where a church is committed to world mission then its life, worship, work and witness are transformed.
WML has been designed to strengthen such commitment.
‘Link-up’ is the key to the success of WML.
That is, the link a church has, within a group of three or four other churches, with a particular missionary.
It is a real link, not just a ‘we'll be thinking of you from time to time’ relationship.
QP is already involved, being grouped with Cathcart and Newton Mearns Baptist Churches as ‘Glasgow C’ group.
We are all linked up and committed to two missionary families, the Collicts and the Meikles.
As part of the link-up process QP has made a covenant or promise to these two families to support them and the work they are involved in in three ways:
1
Committed to learn
The link missionaries will be writing regularly allowing us to learn about the work they are doing — the hopes and fears, the joys and sadness.
Through that work we will know more about the national church, its leaders, its members, its worship, its life.
2
Committed to pray
Having learned more about the missionaries and their work we as a fellowship will be more informed in order to pray for real people and real situations.
Due to the link-up QP is now a sending church and as such has a responsibility to support its missionaries in prayer.
3
Committed to act
We as a church support BMS financially.
QP is not required to give more at this stage.
It may be that as individuals learn and pray that they would be led to greater personal giving.
But there are many other areas in which we could act.
For example, regular writing to missionaries or taking a stand against issues which are highlighted, such as human rights or ecological problems.
We need to be open to what God would say to us through our link missionaries.
As mentioned earlier, QP is linked to two missionary families, the Collicts and the Meikles.
The Collict Family
This consists of Chris, Marion, Aaron (6), Joel (3) and Rebekah (1½).
Some will already know Chris from his days at BTI.
It is intended that they fly out to Brazil in early January to commence their second period of missionary activity.
This date may be changed as Marion's father died two days before Christmas and Chris's father has recently been admitted to hospital in Greenwich.
The family have asked us specifically to pray for Marion at this time of her bereavement and to ask that the Lord would reveal to them his timing concerning their return to Brazil.
The Meikle Family
At the evening service on 29 December 1991 David Meikle shared with us his calling and the way the Lord had led him into missionary endeavour.
It was a great encouragement to us all to hear David talk of his burden for the young people of Sao Paolo, Brazil.
It was also good to share in his enthusiasm for the work of the Lord and to see his obvious joy that the Lord should use him and his family in such a way.
The Meikle family consists of David and Catherine, Robert (12), Shona (7) and Johann (3) and they have been members of Kirkintilloch Baptist Church for four years.
Cath trained as a nurse and was brought up in Lenzie.
David was born in Glasgow and worked as a motor mechanic.
They were converted, baptized and married in Kirkintilloch Baptist Church.
David was trained for christian service at the Scottish Baptist College and at the BTI.
God has given Cath and David the gift of personal evangelism.
It is good to know that God has chosen QP to share in the work of the Collicts and the Meikles through the BMS World Mission Link.
Together, in partnership, we can reach out to the people of Brazil and share the Good News that Jesus is Lord and that only in Christ can men and women be reconciled to God.
Since both our link missionary families are in Brazil, here are a few facts and figures about the country.
Area 8,512,000 square kms.
The world's fifth largest country.
Population 138,400,000 people.
Annual growth — 2.3%
Peoples
European 54%
African 11%
Mixed 33%
Asian 1.5%
Amerindian 0.1%
Literacy 78%
Official language Portuguese; all languages — 152
Bible Translations 1 Bible, 18 New Testaments, 38 portions
Capital Brasilia 1,332,000 people.
Other major cities — Sao Paolo — 16,412,000, Rio de Janeiro — 12,525,000
Politics A republic with authoritarian military government since 1964.
There was a return to fully democratic government in 1985.
Religion Complete religious freedom.
93% of population Christian, of which 73.1% Roman Catholic (12% practising), 2% other Catholic, 0.5% marginal groups, 17.4% Protestant.
Evangelical Christians 16% of total population.
Probably 14% of all Brazilians are openly associated with spiritism and more than 60% dabble in some form of spiritism.
Missionaries in Brazil — 2,600 in 139 agencies; missionaries from within Brazil — 840 in 35 agencies.
Vigorous evangelism and church planting are continuing among an exceptionally responsive people.
Please pray for the Brazilian church that it may mature and become a blessing to the nation and to the world.
The Evangelicals have become a powerful influence in the land and this lays them open to the wooing of politicians.
Pray for a spirit of humility, separation from worldliness, deliverance from power-seeking among Christian leaders.
Pray that these leaders may seek first the Kingdom of God.