

THE WORLD WE LIVE IN TODAY
Angela Olsen became a Christian on Christmas Day 1991.
This is part of her Testimony.
Here we are in a world of sin
with violence, crime, adultery and rape.
Little did we ever know
there was a God from long ago,
a God of love and honour within.
What such news that I should believe
that he was here for us to receive.
Well, I wondered was it true?
I went to church then I knew
he had a Son named Jesus who
was crucified on a Cross they say.
Well I tell you now I'm on my way
to be forgiven but not forgotten
it was then I wept with grief and pain
at the thought of prayer for my relief
to come to walk in the light of Salvation.
Joy to the World what a Saviour.
Peace on Earth as he lets his light shine,
he touched my heart and now he's mine.
News from Saudi Arabia
Pat McDonald went to work in Saudi Arabia last November.
Before she went she shared with the fellowship group a vision the Lord had given her that she would meet a group of Christians who were asking for help with teaching and counselling.
We realized that Pat would need our prayers and support and this letter is to let you know how she is getting on.
Pat is working as a midwife in an intensive care unit for premature babies.
She works a 48 hour week of 12 hour shifts which keeps her pretty busy.
She has discovered that it is against the law to discuss Christianity in public, even with another Christian.
It is only permitted as a private belief, so any kind of witnessing is dangerous.
Pat has not yet met a group to have fellowship with but she has made contact’ by chance’with a Christian we shall call’George’.
He told her he believed the Lord had sent her to teach and counsel a group.
She had not shared anything about what the Lord had said to her back home, so she feels this to be a confirmation about the work the Lord wants her to do.
George also told her that there are a large number of Christians in Riyadh, mainly Filipinos and Westerners, but also Arabs who have to keep very much underground.
George told Pat of a number of foreign nationals who are imprisoned at present for being found witnessing as Christians.
Some Christians do meet in small groups and George is in a position to be a contact person between them.
All this makes Pat's task seem very daunting but she is challenged by the strength and reality of the faith of the people she plans to meet soon.
She herself has been under attack in several ways already and needs our prayers daily.
We have a small group already praying for her protection and have seen our prayers answered.
George has asked if Pat could possibly get teaching or worship tapes for the Christians there as they are very short of any kind of material, especially the Filipinos who cannot get anything from home.
The Church has already agreed to let Pat have our morning tapes to give them free of charge, and if anyone else would like to send anything, it could be put to good use.
It costs about 75p to post a tape.
Please pray for Pat's health, for fellowship, for her to meet the group and for her protection.
Her address is:
Alternative Medicine — Aromatherapy
Fiona Gennis continues her series on Alternative Medicines.
Articles and responses from other readers are very welcome.
I first became interested in alternative medicine and therapies because of the interest shown by Christians and others in Aromatherapy.
I was concerned about the New Age Movement in the non-Christian world with its supposedly nice and healthy image largely due to the harmless and effective use of Aromatherapy and similar types of treatment.
Aromatherapy uses the essential oils in plants and flowers to bring soothing and healing to various disorders in several ways.
They can be massaged into the skin, or dropped on to a cloth or pillow to be inhaled.
It is non-invasive, uses only’ natural’materials and gives a lovely feeling of well-being to those being treated.
One of the modern proponents of Aromatherapy is Marguerite Maury who wrote’ A guide to Aromatherapy’and is recognised as a leading authority.
She maintains that it is necessary to return to the ancient sources of healing with oils.
These include Hindu medicine with elixirs which contain the soul or energy of the plant and love philtres which draw people together by magical attraction.
They also include Chinese medicine — the forces of yin and yang — and Tibetan medicine which talks of the stages of matter and the three elements of man, Chi — the willpower or spirit, Schara — knowledge and energy and Badgan — love.
Maury believes that Aromatherapy helps to attune the body with the spiritual elements in the universe as practised in these religions.
Robert Tisserand in’ The Art of Aromatherapy’states that essences are like the blood of a person.
They incorporate the characteristics of the plant.
They are like the personality or spirit of the plant.
He teaches that essential oils can also be used to balance the subtle energy forces in the body similar to acupuncture.
As a Christian I cannot accept any teaching that suggests that there is any kind of spirit in plant life.
Nor can I accept any  teaching that talks about becoming attuned to spiritual forces which have nothing to do with the Holy Spirit.
This teaching is quite  definitely New Age, as well as having pagan origins.
From a strictly medical viewpoint, I should point out that not every natural substance is harmless.
Deadly nightshade, laburnum and curare are all extremely poisonous and peppermint oil can cause gastric ulcers.
However my worry is not first and foremost a medical one but a spiritual one.
It has been pointed out that incense was given to Jesus at his birth, and perfume poured over him to prepare him for his death.
If perfume was accepted by Jesus then surely it must be acceptable to everyone.
If a Christian uses these essential oils to heal and comfort the sick or suffering, what possible harm can there be if they are used properly?
But what is really important is the motive behind the use of the oils.
If they are used by a Christian then they are no more than an aid, just as meditation can be biblical or occult depending on what you meditate upon.
This does seem a reasonable argument, and I certainly would not want to lose a therapy which could be of real value to people.
Obviously no Christians who practise Aromatherapy would knowingly have anything to do with any occult practice.
However I know that one Christian friend has given up the therapy because of the amount of occult literature and New Age material she was receiving through the post.
This indicated to her that she was being associated with occult and New Age  practitioners , since becoming a registered Aromatherapist.
I therefore ask the following questions:—
1)
Can any practice based on pagan rituals which call upon spirits in any way shape or form be neutral?
(Matthew 7:14)
2)
If Christians use a therapy which is also used by people who are deliberately following New Age beliefs, this may lead people to be deceived into thinking the New Age Movement is acceptable to Christianity?(1 Corinthians 10:19–25)
3)
Are Christians being drawn into practices that are unbiblical if they use methods that are based on paganism?
(Exodus 20:3–5)
I have no wish to be a scaremonger or an extremist.
But please be careful, measure everything you hear about against scripture and don't accept or take part in any therapy or practice without asking the Lord first.
SELLING OUT ON THE GREAT COMMISSION
’ How then, can they call on the one they have not believed in?
How can they believe in the one of whom they have not heard?
How can they hear without someone preaching to them?
How can they preach unless they are sent?
As it is written — how beautiful are the feet of those who bring good news.’
(Romans 10:14–15)
Christ appointed us, as His Church, to GO and bear fruit, fruit that will last.
As a world-wide Church we are sent out into the whole world — we are not just a localised unit of believers.
It is not until the Gospel has been preached in every nation that our Lord Jesus Christ will return again.
The times are becoming more and more urgent — Satan realises his time is short.
Instead of the universal gospel of salvation and grace through Jesus Christ, the New Age gospel of deception is being peddled.
Apostasy is preached from the pulpits and infiltrates secular and religious thinking.
Worldwide sin is at epidemic proportions.
However the supposedly heathen tribes in the jungle are positively well behaved, compared to our own continent of Europe.
In Europe there are 2 million abortions a year.
In Norway, it is illegal to speak out against homosexual practices and in Denmark, gays can marry in Church.
Italy has corruption in business and social circles so large that police admit the problem is beyond solution, and the newly re-united Germany is fertile ground for racist violence and anarchy.
Northern Ireland has been warring for over 20 years.
France is a predominantly Catholic country yet pornography is shown on television from early afternoon.
These things are just the tip of the ice-berg.
Why have we as Christians let it get this far?
Is it because we have not been speaking out when we should have at injustice, not proclaiming the truth, not listening to our watchmen, not praying, not doing, not sending and not CARING?
The flower that blossomed from earlier pioneers' work is fading.
We cannot rely, as we have, on our Christian heritage and the prayers of a generation ago to see us through.
We are more despondent and needy than ever!
In Bulgaria, some Christians allowed themselves to be manipulated by the State, rather than face severe hardship or persecution.
In the West, we voluntarily sell out to the alluring God of Materialism and allow ourselves to be manipulated and controlled by Western ideals.
Communism is harsh and oppressive but can not stop Christianity thinking.
Materialism is subtle and persuasive and easily the church can become trapped by it, becoming far weaker, more complacent and faint-hearted, voluntarily seduced into the ME-generation and the glorious gospel of self.
Last summer, I had an opportunity to live and work in rural Czechoslovakia, a very different culture.
I began to see the subtle pressures towards our Western ideals creeping into Eastern Europe even in music and fashion.
In many poorer countries they long to send out workers, yet are frustrated through lack of resources.
Here in the west, many workers do not go — they have too much to lose!
Regularly, faithfully, our brothers and sisters across the globe endure hardship, beatings, imprisonment and even death for the sake of spreading the gospel.
Here, despite freedom, we are loath to do an’ evangelistic thing’once every few months.
We have wonderful advantages when it comes to GLOBAL evangelism.
We have the freedom to travel nearly anywhere in the world, English is a language that is widely spoken and understood, most of us have at least a basic secondary education and we have the training resources and ability to go, we do not take full advantage of it.
Much has been given to us, so much shall be expected!
A church's liveliness should not be judged by the singing, dancing or tambourine playing.
It should be judged by the commitment to the lost.
If we do not commit ourselves to our world-wide lost neighbours, then we do not care about them.
If we do not care, then we do not love, if we do not love, then we are nothing.
(Romans 10:14–15)
DANCE GROUP
Are you interested in the use of movement in your personal worship?
Why not join with the Dance Group for a series of four workshops starting Thursday 20 February 1992.
Time:
7.30–9.00pm
Venue:
Church Sanctuary
Equipment:
Please bring a Bible and wear clothing which allows easy movement and suitable footwear (eg trainers)
LINDA COCKBURN WRITES…
 Hiya Folks 
A long overdue letter to thank all my sisters and brothers at Church for cards, letters and prayers.
At the Royal Infirmary my desperate prayer was to be home for the boys' Easter holidays from school — and I was home.
At Canniesburn my next desperate prayer was to be home for Davie and Alan's summer holidays from school — and I was home.
Then in the Southern my next prayer was to be home for the boy's Christmas holidays from school and I got home: it was even more special.
In the Southern the staff as always were great and I met a new doctor who told me that he was my brother in Jesus and in the hospitals I met many Christian nurses too.
I very much thank THE LORD for the NHS and the way he works through the medicines and staff.
If I was charged for all that I get, I know it would cost too much for me to pay.
It's so good that I came to know Jesus as Lord before this silly disease got so bad.
I know that although the doctors have given up on me, the GREAT PHYSICIAN who you and I know will not give up on me.
Wow — I so thank GOD for Jesus.
I will love you and leave you.
Have a good day.
Lot'sa love Linda X X X X
Jean and Martin Currie would like to thank you very much for the clothes, blankets and chocolates you have donated recently — these have been distributed through the Glasgow City Mission.
If you have any further donations of clothes and intend passing them onto Jean at Church would you either leave them in your car boot or give Jean a call first, so she can pick them up…!
A couple of weeks ago a dear sister was helping a sick brother in our fellowship, by doing his washing.
This dear woman brought the clean washing in a black bag to church and left it in the vestibule.
Jean picked up the bag and took it home.
Next day she gave the bag to the City Mission who gave all the clothes away!
We are glad to hear our brother Ian Smith is making a good recovery from his recent illness!!
WORLD CHURCH
Many of us will know already that our brother Gary Kilpatrick left at the start of January to undertake a Discipleship Training School (DTS) with YWAM in Lausanne, Switzerland.
I managed to corner Gary for 15 minutes during his going-away party and asked him to share something of his call from God.
This may help someone who is struggling with God's will for the future.
It all started 2 years ago last October.
Gary became aware of YWAM as an organisation and that God might be able to use him in that organisation.
(Someone has described a similar awareness as faint, unidentifiable longings.)
Gary felt it was right to pray about this and share his thoughts not only with God but with a few close brothers and sisters in Christ.
Over a period of 4 months Gary received scripture verses, most noticeably Psalm 37:4–7, which seemed to confirm that God wanted Gary to become involved with YWAM.
Although Gary had recognised God's calling he felt that it was important to get the timing right.
He had only recently joined QP and considered it important that he should serve the Church and enjoy worshipping the Lord in the place that God had put him.
The following year was spent serving the Church at QP and waiting for God.
After this year, however, Gary became really confused for a couple of months and began to doubt his call in the first place.
He had a sense of inadequacy and at one point almost applied to colleges in order to get some qualifications.
Gary again started to pray about YWAM as he recognised that he had lost something — perhaps his original vision was wrong.
Then he met Iris Barry last New Year's Eve and shared his sense of inadequacy with her.
During their conversation, he realised that the vision was for the present and not 4 years in the future.
Further conversations with Eleanor McCallum and others confirmed that God was wanting Gary to’ move out’.
Having made the decision to act Gary also had a deep sense of peace.
This still left the question of where.
Gary spent a lot of time looking at walls to see if God would reveal His will by writing some messages on them.
God chose Psalm 37:4 to tell Gary where he should do the DTS.
Gary had always had a heart for Switzerland and as he read that verse at Spring Harvest he knew that Switzerland was the place.
Since having been accepted by YWAM God has confirmed in many ways the correctness of Gary's decision.
We look forward to hearing about how God uses Gary to glorify His name in Switzerland and pray that Gary will continue to know the peace of God and the power of the Holy Spirit in his life.
MISSIONARY PRAYER PAGE
Our illustrious and perfectly formed editor has agreed to set aside one page of the magazine for prayer requests concerning missionaries and missionary endeavour.
I will be co-ordinating the input to this page, so if anyone has prayer requests for or from missionaries please let me know.
Any ideas concerning the format of this page would also be greatly valued.