

THE MORAL MAZE
[Christine Jardine spotted the following article in the magazine of Landsdowne Baptist Church, Bournemouth, where she went on holiday — it is used by permission]
This year we face a general election.
Among the issues will certainly be the recession, unemployment and homelessness.
We have more houses than we have ever had, how can we yet have homelessness?
The main cause is family breakdown; with divorce and children leaving home, one family may occupy three houses.
We have more jobs than ever before, how can we yet have unemployment?
The answer lies in inappropriate attitudes to work.
Many men spend every hour of the day at their secular employment, neglecting both their families and God.
They are literally doing two men's jobs.
Married women with young children feel they have to take a job as well, jeopardising their family relationships.
Such attitudes not only displace others from paid employment but also lead to family breakdown.
We are producing more goods in our factories of better quality than ever before, how can there yet be a recession?
The reason is that we have accumulated such a burden of public and private debt that there is no confidence in our economy.
Where does the debt come from?
From an attitude that is greedy for possessions, and particularly from house price inflation, which has put the price of houses beyond the reach of many young couples starting out on their life together, contributing directly to homelessness, and which has its root in the increased demand for homes from family breakdown.
Families break up not only from financial pressures, but also, chiefly from marital unfaithfulness.
Sexual immorality is the major reason for last year's record 184,000 abortions.
And twenty-five years of abortion on demand has led to a disregard for human life that allows people to sleep rough in doorways and under piers and is ushering in an acceptance of euthanasia which hazards the old and the sick and the handicapped.
The moral maze illustrates the relationship between the perceived problems of our present age, the recession, unemployment and homelessness and its besetting sins of greed and sexual immorality.
It also demonstrates that they have their root cause in godlessness; so we should pray for our country, not that we should be saved from recession, but that we should turn back to God.
This article is the substance of what Professor Terry Hamblin outlined during an evening of prayer in Landsdowne Baptist Church in January.
Mrs Jacqui Butler, who is involved in research work with Care for the Family, also mentioned some startling statistics indicating the state of Great Britain today.
Some of these are mentioned below:
one in three marriages ends in divorce
UK has the highest marriage rate in Europe and a divorce rate of twice the european average
every week 2,800 children are involved in divorce, one third aged under five
1 in 5 children can now expect to experience the divorce of their parents before reaching their 16th birthday
1 in 5 children now born outside of marriage, putting UK second to Scandinavia in the european league
Today's population in their 20's is the most healthy, but at the most risk from stress and anxiety
50% of girls under 16 allegedly have sexual relationships compared with 2% 30 years ago
[Editor's note — the above article clearly reflects the experience of the South East of England, perhaps one of our readers would like to contribute a similar article reflecting the Scottish experience]
OBITUARY 
died recently at the age of 87 years.
She came to Queen's Park about 11 years ago, having had a long association at Findlay Memorial Tabernacle.
By that time of her life, crippling and painful arthritis, diminishing eyesight and the burden of years were taking over.
She would not be known now to many at Queen's Park but that would be to our impoverishment.
Before she became a Christian she was active in politics and her prospects in that field were good.
However, after training, she set out by boat for India in 1935 at the age of 30 as a pioneer missionary under the auspices of the Ceylon and India General Mission.
The work was hard but rewarding and Madeline had the joy of pointing many into the Kingdom of God.
This continued for some 20 years.
She went on deputation to North America.
Her book, ‘Hands to the Plough’ added interest to her dynamic speaking as she travelled widely, making the needs and opportunities known to young believers in Canada and the United States.
In the 1940s she first came to Scotland.
From the start her charm and her missionary addresses captivated her hearers and young people were challenged.
The support enlarged throughout the land.
Eventually she was appointed as the Mission's Scottish Deputation Secretary where the full range of her gifts were put at the disposal of the churches.
At her funeral, an old friend, Mr Philip Jones gave fitting tribute to her life and work.
He also acknowledged the kindness of a small group of friends at Queen's Park who stood by her in prayer and practical matters which she could no longer manage herself.
PAT McDONALD WRITES
Greetings from Saudi Arabia in the name of Jesus Christ, our God who is the same yesterday, today and forever!
Thank you all for your continuing prayer support.
I've now been here just three months, but have seen the incredible work of our God who changes lives and situations we ourselves might consider hopeless and too difficult.
I am employed here as a nurse in the premature baby intensive care unit and I'm certainly kept very busy, the work often made more difficult but challenging in that I work alongside people from around 30 different countries.
There is so much to tell you but I will try and share some of the things for which I would appreciate your prayers.
For ‘safety’ reasons, the people I mention will not be spoken of by their true names, but I can explain more about this when I come home on leave around April.
There is a real hunger in many people, with many needs, searching for something, often anything.
Initially each door was firmly closed, but, praise God, many are now opening.
It's only the beginning for me but I thank God for the privilege of serving him this way.
I have had some problems with repeated sinus infections, part of which is due to the area I'm living and working in, therefore will necessitate long-term treatment.
To be a *christian here is ‘tolerated’, provided we don't share our faith with anyone, including other Christians.
Prayer and Bible study meetings are against the law and therefore great care and discretion must be used.
During the recent Gulf war the religious police here lost a lot of their power because of having to lift restrictions when other armies from various countries were here.
We are now in a post-war situation, where the laws are being tightened and enforced as the religious police struggle to regain power and lost ground.
There is much bitterness and resentment because of this.
Initially the fellowship group that I share with in Riyadh was one large group but it was frequently ‘infiltrated’ and many were beaten and imprisoned.
The group eventually and prayerfully decided to divide into 9 smaller groups, taking names like ‘The Church of Philadelphia’, ‘The Church of Judaea’, ‘The Church of Samaria’ and so on.
There are no pastors, only people eager to learn and grow, to share the Gospel.
We do have Elders who lead the meetings.
They learn from any material they can get hold of.
I have passed on to them the teaching and worship tapes sent on to e here and they have asked me to thank you sincerely and they ask you to continue to pray for them.
A recent ‘unofficial’ message from the Mutawa (religious police) is that all ‘born again Christians must be wiped out’.
Several homes have now been raided, many members are now under investigation and 2 of our Filipino brothers have been thrown into jail — without trial.
Many more are having to go underground.
It's hard to say at this point how many are now in prison as some are scattered and some gone underground.
We are desperately trying to find out who has been ‘taken’ and who has gone into hiding.
But as ‘George’ always reminds up in situations like this —‘The battle belongs to the Lord — let's praise God.’
The Lord has given me a heart for the Filipino people, although my work here finds me alongside so many other people.
One miracle to praise God for is that everything that has been sent out to me I have received (at least as far as I know).
People say I'm so ‘lucky’ as their things are confiscated — but we know better!
My other work involves counselling.
Although I've trained and worked in this area since 1982 I am having to learn a whole new dimension that is multi-cultural.
Often what is acceptable in our country would not be considered in others.
Again the doors closed tightly initially, but, praise God, they are opening in a big way.
Sadly, ‘mental illness’ problems do not ‘exist’here and it is not acceptable to express them.
As a result many people are burnt out.
I am now part of a small multi-cultural group which has been asked to take on this task.
This is a big task and I am finding myself swamped.
At the moment, within the group I'm co-counselling as the others are burnt-out.
Since we represent at least 1 in 250,000 per head of population, maybe you can understand the size of the task in front of us.
The priority is to train others in communication/counselling skills.
Together we've drawn up training programmes and as I write (22 Jan) an eight week seminar (one evening per week) is in progress.
At the moment only 2 of us are available to train in this hospital as we are the only ones ‘certified’.
Thankfully I brought my certificates with me.
The others must work outside the project.
I'm enjoying the challenge and regard it as a privilege to share in the lives of others.
All this has to be done on my off-duty time, which of course is limited and irregular since I work shifts.
Please pray that as the need for ‘counselling’ is recognised (and the need is very great) that maybe they can give me some time from working duties to provide a ‘service’in this area.
Thankfully God knows my limitations — I only hope I do too!
Without the Lord Jesus all this would be impossible, but he knows no boundaries, no limitations.
In God there is no failure, only victory!
I'm missing you all very much and looking forward to a time of sharing and renewal with you in April.
To God be the glory, great things he has done — and is still doing!
Your sister in Christ 
THANKS
Thank you to the fellowship of QP for their prayers and get well wishes during my recent stay in hospital following an operation.
I appreciate your kindness very much.
I am now on the way to what I hope will be a speedy and full recovery and look forward  to being  amongst you all again soon.
With love in Christ,
THE MEASURE OF LOVE
Alone and burdened by the guilt
Of a past you want no-one to know,
You wear a mask called ‘I'm alright’
And hope the loneliness won't show.
Deep inside you hide the pain
Of careless and malicious hurts,
A past that makes you fear today
And keeps the gates of your heart shut.
You hold the world at arms length while
Your heart weeps tears but your lips smile.
My child, do you think I don't know
The hurts and fears deep in your soul?
My arms reach out to draw you close
To my heart, there to make you whole.
Put off the mask that bars your heart,
Don't be afraid, you can trust me.
The measure of my love, the Cross,
That heals you and will set you free.
Don't hold me at arms length, my child,
For then your heart and lips will smile.
WITHOUT TEARS
Everything that comes your way
Can be transformed by God
Into a precious gift, if you
In it will call Him Lord.
As soil is barren without rain,
A soul dies without tears.
Through them God's love a rainbow shines
‘Till Christ's likeness appears.
Bereavement, illness, loneliness,
Whatever brings you pain,
God's resurrection power can turn
From dark loss to bright gain.
In the Tomb was laid, to rise
To produce fruit in other lives
Surrendered at the Cross
To the Tomb they came to find Him,
But too late for He had risen.
Sin and Death and Hell all broken
By Jesus on the Cross.
All Creation seen and unseen,
Echoed His cry, ‘It is finished.’
Now with new life we can be blessed
When we come to the Cross.
Begun on Palm Sunday, 24th March 1991, and completed on Easter Sunday, 30th March 1991.
Visit of WHAM ‘92
As most of you will know, Queens Park has had a long standing partnership with the Baptist Church in Doolay Falls near Wichita, Kansas.
The church is best known as the birthplace of the Wichita Home and Away Mission (WHAM).
The minister is Dr Paul T Otheron, well known to most people in QP and he will be bringing the WHAM team to Glasgow in April.
Their musical directors are Thomas and Brenda Gunn, distant relations of our dear Pastor.
Tommy and Bren, as they are affectionately known, are now in their 80's (as indeed are most members of the WHAM choral group) and are probably best remembered for their haunting rendering of songs such as‘Roamin' in the Grogan’, ‘Old Mother Hibbard’ and ‘Annie, Get Your Pistoll’during their teenage years with WHOOPS (Wichita, Home Of Other People's Songs).
The WHAM team has now grown to over 350 people and we are pleased to announce that they will all be coming to QP on the first Wednesday in April to lead the business meeting.
Since the present seating at QP will only accommodate 366 people, those arriving early are asked to sit on the platform to leave the main body of the hall for WHAM.
Those coming along later are asked to stand in Niddrie Square and are advised to bring umbrellas if rain is forecast.
The main item on the agenda will be the possible acquisition of larger premises for our services.
Accommodation for the WHAM team for the whole of April is urgently needed.
Since most of them have been in the army of the Lord for many years, church members will no doubt want to give up their best rooms for these dear people.
Some will want to make available their whole houses and move into bed-and-breakfast themselves.
Who knows, a return invitation may be forthcoming for the whole of the YF to spend a year in Kansas with WHAM, an opportunity QP would certainly want to embrace.
Many of them will also have the opportunity to attend the famous WHAM Bicycleship Training School.
All offers of accommodation should be given as soon as possible to Avril Foux.
Her telephone number is 
BEACON CENTRE
The good news from the Beacon Centre is that two of the men who have been coming along have committed their lives to Jesus.
It has been a great privilege to see how God has been at work in their lives and to be part of His plan for these men.
Both came to the Sunday services immediately after coming along to the centre, one of the lads having a belief in Jesus but had never taken the step of repentance and asking Him into his heart, when he did his reaction was to say he felt the chains fall from him and that he believes Jesus has broken his addiction to alcohol.
The other lad who made a commitment came as a non-believer but was willing to come along with an open mind and on studying the gospels came to believe Jesus was indeed who he said he was and shortly after made his commitment.
It is wonderful to see their enthusiasm and already a heart for others to come to know the Lord Jesus.
At the present time we are much in prayer for a lad called David and we would ask you all to join in prayer for him as he battles against his addiction to alcohol — remembering our battle is not against flesh and blood but against the powers of this dark world and against the spiritual forces of evil in the heavenly realms.
We have other contacts with people who as yet have not come along and we need to stand in prayer for them also.
The general feeling at the centre is one of friendliness and fun.
Amongst others Alec Mack came along with his guitar to entertain us, Mary Marshall put us through our paces with keep fit,(enough said!!) and Derek MacIntosh also tinkled the ivories for us.
If anyone would like to come along some Thursday evening and share something with us we would be delighted to hear from you.
So far we have been self supporting with most of the folks who come along donating to our needs, however we would like to make a donation to the Seventh Day Adventist Church who give us the use of their premises, gas and electricity free of charge.
If anyone feels the Lord prompting them to help meet this financial outlay please see Rosina Kilpatrick or myself.
Please praise God for his faithfulness to us and for using us to help others see the light of Christ and please also pray that others would come along and find help and friendship with us.
Many thanks to all who support us in prayer and in all sorts of ways, we are grateful for your encouragement.
Love to you all.
COUNTRY FOCUS — BRAZIL
After 300 years of Portuguese rule, Brazil declared herself independent on the 7th September 1822, with her own monarch, the Portuguese Prince Regent, Dom Pedroh I. In 1899, a year after the abolition of slavery in Brazil, a further step was taken to form a federal republic, the United States of Brazil.
After a succession of Presidents, in 1964 the military took control following a bloodless coup.
During the 1980s there has been a gradual return to more democratic government.
Immigration during the twentieth century has brought to Brazil many new talents and her political life reflects the input of those who have chosen her as their homeland.
The size of Brazil almost makes it a continent in itself.
Natural regions and climates vary greatly.
In the equatorial rain forests of the north, the Amazon and its tributaries form the largest river system in the world — an area of 750 million acres.
In contrast, the north-east is semi-arid scrubland subject to prolonged draughts.
Much of central and eastern Brazil is highland plateau, over 1,000 metres, with great rolling plains and ranges of hills.
The south, with a semi-tropical climate, contains much fertile land for growing coffee, citrus fruits, cereals and soya beans and for raising cattle.
As a result the south is economically and politically stronger and most large industry is established there.
Because of its extended and beautiful coastline, Brazil is ideal for tourism, a growing industry in the modern world.
It is a little over a century since the first Protestant missionaries arrived in Brazil.
At first they met fierce opposition, but the formation of the Republic and the immigration of many new peoples led to a wide open door for evangelical missionary activity.
The Brazilian Baptist Convention — the BMS partner church — is the fruit of Southern Baptist missionary work started in 1881.
The first church was formed in Salvador on 15th October 1882 with five members.
From that small beginning over 3,300 churches and 650,000 members have grown, grouped into Associations and co-ordinated at State level.
With the advent of the Portuguese, Brazil was declared Roman Catholic and according to the practice of the age, Jesuit priests accompanied the occupation of the country, seeking to baptise the indigenous Indian communities into the Catholic faith.
Currently, Catholicism is the principal church in Brazil, claiming allegiance from more than 80% of the population.
Many Brazilians are involved in some way in spiritism.
There has been a resurgence of interest because of the renewed pride in African roots and black identity.
In many areas, belief in spiritist activities functions alongside participation in the Catholic Church, although this is not officially accepted.
The BMS co-operates with the Brazilian Baptist convention.
The first missionaries began work in 1953 in the State of Paran.
The Convention traditionally puts an emphasis on evangelism.
The request for missionaries initially meant church planters.
The rapid growth of the churches brought the need for trained leaders.
There has been an explosion in the number of seminaries in Brazil.
There are now 44 seminaries and over 5,000 Brazilians in training in Baptist colleges.
Recently there has been a dramatic widening of vision.
The idea that the only thing to do about social ills, poverty and injustice is to evangelize, has been supplanted by a more holistic approach.
Baptist churches are now seeking to serve the community in Christ's name.
More and more are going into politics with the specific intention of working to change the present unjust system.
DO WE ALL HAVE SPECIAL GIFTS?
Your gold and silver are corroded.
Their corrosion will testify against you and eat your flesh like fire.
You have hoarded wealth in the last days.
Your gift is what I have taught you, what I have laid upon your heart and chosen you to use those gifts for me.
Each one should use whatever gift he has received to serve others, faithfully administering God's grace in its various forms.
I Peter 4:10
Anyone, then, who knows the good he ought to do and doesn't do it, sins.
James 4:17
Say YES today — every one of us has at least one special gift.
If you say YES in Jesus' name, God can use your gift.
PATRICK GILLAN WRITES…
[Patrick and Gail Gillan's regular prayer letter will be sent to Tom and Caroline Kane, this is an extract from the first one]
Hello!
At long last we are finally in full-time Christian work.
I was beginning to think that we'd missed the boat, even though we knew in our heart of hearts that the Lord wanted us in some form of full-time capacity.
It will be ten years this June since I left BTI, at that time under the lovely principalship of Geoffrey Grogan.
Ten years wasted?— no!
Ten hard years in many ways, which I'm sure will be put to good use, as the Lord doesn't waste anything.
In the interim period, we moved to Kent to work at Hildenborough Hall.
Gail and I got married and we went to live in Pembury, near Tunbridge Wells, where we found an evangelical church, Pembury Free Church, for whom we are presently working.
Gail was then a nursing supervisor of an Overseas Missionary Fellowship Home for retired missionaries and I was pursuing a high flying career selling shoes.
After four years in Kent, we were moved by my company back to Scotland.
Lesley, our first child was born in 1988 in Rutherglen, but in 1989 we moved again.
I was getting caught up in the rat race and thin round the edges spiritually, when the Lord stepped in and reminded me of a promise He made before we left Kent.
‘Your children will return to their own land’(Jeremiah 31:17).
I knew this to be true and believed firmly that when the word was given me in 1986 it would be fulfilled some time in the future.
Amidst all this, Fraser, our second child was born in September 1991, also in Rutherglen.
So what am I doing?
I'm called full time Youth Evangelist and work for the Pembury Free Church.
The church pay my salary and have provided free  accommodation , a cottage adjacent to the church.
I am involved with the current Sunday School and youth leaders, promoting growth and deepening the young people's walk with the Lord.
I'm also working with the kids at the local YMCA, linking their activities to the church.
West Kent YMCA tends to be evangelically staffed, which is fantastic.
I am initiating, with others, a midweek activity on Friday nights, for church young folk.
I am also seeking to establish a Crusader class with nonchurch young folk in mind, a summer mission for one week, a weekend away in Sussex camping with young folk from various churches and a working holiday in Leicester with Hildenborough Trust.
I am preaching and speaking as well!
Gail is very encouraged by a young wives group she started with a friend.
It is growing steadily and they are planning a coffee outreach morning in March.
Our vision is to build bridges between the church and the community and to see kids and adults coming to faith in Jesus that will last.
I remember years ago Edwin preaching about standing in the gap — that gap between heaven and earth, bringing the two together.
This is what we are seeking to do, taking our place in that gap, introducing folk to Jesus, because at the end of the day, this is what it is all about.
Our love in Jesus,
GETTING YOUR PRIORITIES RIGHT
Nanyuki farmer seeks lady with tractor with view to companionship and possible marriage.
Send picture of tractor.
Box 123 Nanyuki.
Advert in East Africa Standard
SUNDAY SKOOL
A small boy asked his mother for a cucumber to take to Sunday School.
Later that day, when she asked him what it had been used for, he confessed: ‘Sorry, Mum, I got it wrong.
We were supposed to bring a newcomer’.
GNASHING OF TEETH
A preacher waxing eloquent in his sermon on hell-fire exclaimed: ‘There will be weeping and gnashing of teeth there!’
‘I haven't got any teeth’, one old man at the back of the hall retorted.
‘Teeth will be provided’ the preacher replied.
Church member to minister: ‘You'll never know what your sermon meant to me, it was like water to a drowning man’
Overheard at a party: ‘Yours must be a soul-destroying job, vicar’
You can't change the past but you can ruin a perfectly good present by worrying about the future.
C H SPURGEON remarked: some ministers would make good martyrs — they are so dry they would burn well
Hospitality is the art of making people feel at home when you wish they were at home
A real Christian is one who can give his pet parrot to the town gossip Billy Graham
Advert in Ulster paper: ‘Wanted — man and woman to look after two cows; both Protestant’
Quote from a church newsletter ‘The old churchyard has been sadly neglected, largely because there have been no burials there for more than 50 years.
An appeal is to be launched to encourage volunteer bodies to remedy the situation’.
VACANCY
BAPTIST UNION OF SCOTLAND
PERSONAL ASSISTANT to GENERAL SECRETARY
The post, which requires administrative ability, computer skills and complete confidentiality, is available from 1 May.
Application form and job description are available from Baptist Church House,
Closing date for applications 17 April 1992