

ALAN MIDDLETON WRITES
Greetings from Hamburg!
By the time you read this Easter will be past, but here in the shop it is very much present, with many Easter books and cards going out.
Gift books and teaching books for confirmation, which takes place in the Lutheran churches at this time of year, are also selling.
Please pray that the young people, and the people in general, will see the real meaning of the church and of Easter.
Also notable at this time are the efforts of the different Christian publishers for the ‘Year with the Bible’.
Many specially produced Bibles and study guides have been produced and are being bought (and hopefully read.)
One example is ‘6000 Years and a Book’ by Guenther Wegener, which is about the development of the Bible.
In March two colleagues were able to take a mobile bookstall to an outreach in Leipzig and to street stands in other places in the former East Germany.
Please pray that we as a mission will be able to help provide the Christians there with the Christian literature that they need.
In May John  Wimber is coming to Hamburg.
Unfortunately the meetings are happening when the shop is open.
Likewise on 23 May, when there is the March for Jesus in Berlin.
Prayer here could be that the Christians would be strengthened in their witness through the Wimber meetings and that there will be a strong witness to Germany from the March.
For the shop itself, we need to know God's grace under stress, especially so that we continue in fellowship without friction.
Also that we have the opportunities to witness and that we take them up.
BANNERS
‘Q P used to be well-known for its banners.
What's happened?’
‘Isn't anyone making banners here?’
‘I've got a wonderful idea for a banner; can you make it?’
‘Who's in charge of banners?’
These are some of the questions and comments I've heard recently and I thought it was time to give some answers.
A banner group was started 10 years ago in QP, probably one of the first in Scotland.
Soon a good collection was built up, covering most special occasions in the church.
Seven people have been involved in making the banners over the years, with input and ideas from many others.
Fiona Allison was the main designer of our banners and since she moved away in 1989 there has not been a group — you can't call one person a group!
I struggled on for a while, but I know my limitations when it comes to design, especially as we have grown to expect a high standard in QP.
No-one else seemed disposed to take over, in spite of‘ads’ in this magazine, so the whole situation stagnated.
Occasionally I change a banner but I take no responsibility.
The banners we have are getting tatty as no-one worries very much how they are stored.
For anyone disposed to take on the often very satisfying task of making banners I can assure them that there are several very kind ‘Barnabases’ in the church whose comments and encouragements I have valued.
There is also a fair-sized sack of material and bits and bobs in my house.
I would be very pleased to chat to anyone who's interested, even if you just want to find out a bit about making banners.
MISSIONS PRAYER LIST
Mondays:
Prayerfully meditate on Ephisians 4: 15–16 and ask the Lord to guide you in your involvement with regard to the missionary work we as a church support.
Tuesdays:
Pray for our BMS Mission Link Partners, the Meikle and Collict families.
Pray for the work of church planting in the Southern state of Rio Grande.
Wednesdays:
Pray for our own missionaries and their endeavour.
Look at the ‘Praying for Missionaries’ article in this magazine before praying, this might help.
Thursdays:
Continue to remember Pat McDonald in your prayers as she seeks to be obedient to the Lord under such dangerous and difficult circumstances.
Fridays:
Give thanks to the Lord for the work of the Edinburgh Medical Missionary Society.
Pray for the Nazareth hospital management and all those in positions of responsibility that they may receive daily guidance and strength for their tasks.
Saturdays:
Pray for the Missions Board and the Diaconate as the missionary budget for the coming year is finalised.
Ask the Lord to give all those involved wisdom and discernment.
RAINBOW
Coloured is the Rainbow
of God's promises —
Silver the coins
which paid for His death;
Red His blood
which gave us life;
Green the fields
wherever He leads;
Bright the lilies
clothed as we can be;
White our souls
forgiven through faith.
Praise Jesus!
DIARY OF JONAH MAY 1992
Monday
There are so many exciting things happening at church these days that it's hard to keep up with events.
I reckon that our family covers just about every area, I mean, my silly wee sister gets all the little ones' news — not that very much happens there.
Gran comes back from her Senior Citizens with enough news to fill the Magazine.
Dad could probably give us everything that's happening, but now he's a deacon he has to keep quiet.
It's just as well that Mum's 2:7 Group are still on the go or else we wouldn't know anything.
The only news we don't have is from the YF.
I really think it's time they allowed me to join.
Tuesday
Mum came in from the shops and gave us the news that, starting from September, we are to have 2 morning services.
I will have to consider this very carefully.
Wednesday
Still can't make up my mind which service we should attend.
In fact our whole family is divided on this one.
I will have to pray very hard about this one.
Thursday
I just can't imagine how all this will work out.
I mean, how can the two services really be the same?
Surely our Pastor will not preach the same sermon twice each Sunday morning?
I am very confused by it all.
Friday
Had a long chat with Dad about which service we should attend.
He is quite decided that it is important that we all go to the one service although I feel that if we covered both services then we would not miss out on anything.
I mean, of course, anything spiritual.
Saturday
Dad says that he thinks he has the answer to my problem but he will have to consult with the Pastor tomorrow.
I expect they will have to have some prayer about it all.
I mean, it really is a tricky problem.
Sunday
Wonderful sermon!
It really would be worthwhile sitting through 2 services every Sunday just to get such fine teaching.
Dad spent a long time talking to our Pastor afterwards.
Nobody really minded — Mum exchanged 2 recipes and my silly wee sister got invited to 3 parties.
Dad wouldn't tell me what he and our Pastor had discussed until we got home and then he said, ‘Sit down, Jonah.
I have thought of a way for you to attend all the services.
How would you like to help with the younger children?’
I can see why he asked me to sit down!
Later I have been thinking over what Dad said.
I mean, it's all about service.
Maybe I should consider becoming a Power Pack leader.
Later still My silly wee sister has put her feet down and refuses to let me near her Power Pack.
However, Mum has solved my problem.
She has decided that she and I will offer our services as stewards for one of the services.
I am so pleased that we have solved the dilemma and we can feel morally superior!
THANKS
Thank you, QP, for all the kindness you have shown to me over the time of my mother's illness and death.
I am grateful to you for your prayers, fellowship, cards, letters, flowers and the many practical ways in which you have surrounded me with God's love.
I know, too, that my mother valued the people she met here, from the smiles of the young folk to the friends she made at the Senior Citizens' Lunch Club and Meeting.
To everyone who made her feel welcome and very much part of our fellowship, may I say how much I appreciate you all.
NEWS FROM TURKEY
Zekai Tanyar writes on behalf of the Izmir Fellowship:
Warm greetings to you all from us here in Izmir.
We were deeply touched to receive your love-gift sent with Ann Grant.
To see God's love expressed to us in the prayers and giving of people far away is a great encouragement and blessing to us.
We intend to place the money in our building fund and it is also a faith-building experience for us to see God blessing us in this way.
Ann tells us you knew nothing about our fund.
Like you we need larger premises.
For a long time we have been thinking and praying about a place of our own.
Over the coming months we hope to begin the process of finding and purchasing a suitable place.
It is a great blessing to have Julyan and Lenna Lidstone living and working among us.
With their faithfulness, commitment and enthusiasm they are a great support.
It was also a pleasure to meet Ann on her visit here.
May the Lord enrich and increase your witness to the Truth about Himself in the indifferent society around you.
(I Corinthians 2: 4–5).
In the uniting fellowship of God's love.
WORLD CHURCH
This month's Magazine contains the first of two articles by Bill Howieson which it is hoped will help all of us when we pray for our missionary brothers and sisters.
The bulk of this material comes from a Christian Literature Crusade leaflet called ‘Praying for Missionaries’.
Copies of this are available in the Alcove and it is highly recommended reading.
The missionary's physical health
Psalm 103: 3; Psalm 67: 2; Isaiah 53: 5.
One of the most effective ways Satan has to cripple missionary work is to attack the body of the missionary.
Recognise that it is not God's will that Satan strip mission field workers through sickness.
Resist him.
Psalm 97: 10.
Acknowledge that it is the will of God for His children to have health and strength to carry out His work.
Psalm 42: 11; John 10: 10b; Romans 8: 11.
Exercise the God-given authority to bind Satan and loose the child of God from his power.
Matthew 18: 18; Luke 9: 1, 10: 19; Mark 16: 17–18.
The missionary's mental health
The trying climate, the oppression of the enemy, the difference of culture, the loneliness — these all work towards nervous stress and sometimes breakdown for the missionary.
Pray that the missionary may enter into the provision for him in Rev 12: 11.
Pray that the missionary may enter into His rest and peace.
John 14: 27; Hebrews 4: 9.
Pray that the missionary may refuse to hear any accusations from Satan against his fellow workers and believers.
Zech 7: 10.
Satan may defeat a missionary through injecting suspicions against his fellow workers or the national Christians.
This not only separates him from his brothers but also from God and is disastrous.
Protection against Satan's attacks and the missionary's spirit
At times a missionary can get very discouraged.
Intense powers of darkness make work difficult and slow.
Pray for His encouragement and strength to be given to break through the powers of darkness.
Psalm 147: 3; Deut 31: 6.
Pray that the missionary will learn to resist Satan in the name of Jesus I Peter 5: 8–9; James 4: 7.
The accuser of the brethren is always on hand to accuse them of being a failure or out, of the will of God.
A heart filled with the love of God
Missionaries live in abnormal and difficult situations and the natural love of a human heart will not stand the test.
Without the love of Christ filling the heart the difficulties will bring about hardness, impatience, sharpness of speech, anger and even bitterness.
Pray for love for the fellow-missionary who is always at hand.
It is imperative that there is love between missionaries, for only then can God bless the work.
Psalm 133.
Pray that the missionary might truly have God's heart for those who do not know Jesus.
Natural love itself will never stand the test when faced with rejection.
Neither the missionary nor the message is wanted.
Through the love and compassion of Jesus the missionary is able to return time after time until this love has broken through and the message is accepted.