

NOTICE BOARD
MAN'S BIKE NEEDED
Bike wanted, any condition, for New Milns Christian Centre see 
‘HEDDAS’
will be the next production of the DOWN TO EARTH company.
Workshops will begin in June.
WATCH THIS SPACE…
Contact Kirsty Jack
NATIONAL BIBLE SOCIETY OF SCOTLAND
Queens Park Baptist Church is part of the South East Branch of the Bible Society.
Each year we endeavour to be represented in helping in one of their fund-raising ventures.
The aim and prayer of the Bible Society is to put into the hands of men and women, boys and girls, the Scriptures in their own language at a price they can afford.
Last Spring five folks from the fellowship walked 10 miles around the South Side of Glasgow.
Ten other churches also took part.
Over £1000 was raised which was excellent.
This year an auction is to be held on 20 June from 10am to 1.30pm in Shawlands Old Parish Church.
If you can help in any way by supplying small pieces of furniture, bric-a-brac, books etc we will be most grateful.
There will also be a tea-room and a small admission charge.
MISSION BOARD PRAYER DIARY
Mondays
Pray for protection and encouragement for our Mission Link partners, the Meikle and Collict families.
Pray especially for the children — Robert, Shona and Johanne Meikle and Aaron, Joel and Rebekah Collict.
Tuesdays
Ask for guidance for those involved with organising the BMS Bicentenary Celebrations.
Wednesdays
Protection and encouragement for Andy Kennedy in Barcelona
Thursdays
Please pray for the situation in Yugoslavia and also in Thailand.
Ask the Lord to raise up His peacemakers.
Fridays
Pray for the Mission Board, that there might be unity and a singleness of purpose.
Saturdays
Praise God for answered prayer.
Prayerfully meditate on Matthew 28: 16–20
Go, therefore, and make disciples…
From the Pastor
 Dear Friends 
All of us should know by now of the decision taken at the special church meeting on 13th May to go ahead with the purchase of the Camphill building.
It was good to see such a large attendance — probably the biggest church meeting we have had — and to have such a clear majority vote in favour of the project.
Nevertheless there was also quite a number of people who felt strongly that we should not be going ahead.
It is important for us all to remember that everyone who shared in the meeting did so out of good conscience and with a genuine desire to find God's will for us.
We need genuinely to respect one another at that level.
I was greatly encouraged by the good spirit of the meeting and have been very heartened since then by the mature christian attitude of a number of people who were strongly opposed to the project, but who have been willing to accept the decision of the church meeting and move on from there.
That, I believe, is the real test of our fellowship and is right at the heart of what it means to be a responsible member of a Baptist church practising as we do the principle of congregational government.
It is something we should cherish.
It is also important for us to remember that those who were opposed to the project were not merely negative but were convinced that there were other more effective ways for us to go forward.
We need to hear what the Lord may be saying to us in all of this and be open to the challenge of church planting and the support of other fellowships around us.
While the Camphill Development Project will naturally take up time and energy and demand much sacrifice over the next few years it must not become our only goal.
Our prime purpose is to glorify God in reaching men and women for Christ, building them up in Christ, and sending them out for Christ.
However, the faster we can get ahead with the Development Project the better.
That is why we have designated this Sunday as a Pledge Day and asked our people to pledge what they believe God is calling them to give towards the Project over the next few years.
We are setting aside Sunday 20th September as a Special Gift Day when we will bring our offerings for this project and dedicate them to the Lord.
All members should have received information about this, but if you haven't, or of you are not a member but would like to be involved with us in the challenge of these days, then please pick up an envelope from the Vestibule.
Several people have already indicated a desire to give practical service towards the Camphill Project and this is something I hope we will be able to take up.
It will be especially meaningful for those who may be able to make a very limited financial offering, but who could make a considerable offering of time and skill.
In that way all of us can be involved together.
Today, we welcome to QP a group of young people who are offering their time and abilities to the Lord during this year.
They are part of a BMS Action Team and have been working for six months of mission in France.
The other six months are spent with churches in Britain, sharing something of the vision and challenge of overseas mission.
We are acting as hosts for the team during this week.
Please make them welcome.
We also welcome this evening, Rev. Peter White and some students from the Glasgow Bible College (formerly B.T.I.).
The College is celebrating its centenary this year and this will be an opportunity for us to give thanks to God for its tremendous work in preparing men and women for christian service at home and abroad.
Geoff Grogan tells me there are at least eleven students or former students presently in membership with us at QP!
As this will be the last magazine until late August, may I wish you a restful summer.
If you are going on holiday this year, remember to take our greetings to churches where you worship.
Small greetings cards are available at the Information Desk for this purpose.
Yours in fellowship,
NEWS FROM RIYADH
Fiona Gennis writes:
Once again I am writing to you on behalf of Pat McDonald, who is in Riyadh.
Unfortunately the news at the moment is not particularly good.
The church there is undergoing difficult times and badly needs our prayers.
The overall leader of the various groups, ‘George’ has been forced to leave the country, and replacing him will be difficult.
The religious police seem to be very active at the moment and everybody who enters or leaves Pat's compound is searched.
this makes carrying Bibles or other literature risky.
Pat herself has been very ill and people in QP have been praying for her.
We don't know yet if she will have to come home.
We feel that this is another aspect of the spiritual warfare being waged against the church, and Pat feels she should stay there although humanly speaking she would rather come home.
However it's not all doom and gloom.
Pat managed to get 147 tapes and 100 books plus lots of magazines through customs in a miraculous way.
She has asked me to say thanks on behalf of our Brothers and Sisters there.
She has only been able to distribute a few as yet, but they know that they're there and are overjoyed at the prospect of getting them.
Pat has also asked me to thank those who gave their names to be pen friends and asks you to be patient as she is too ill to distribute them yet.
Pat is keeping remarkably cheerful despite being in a lot of pain.
The Lord has given her Psalm 91 and Psalm 121 to hold on to and she knows that He is in control of the situation.
One of the most encouraging things she has found about being in Riyadh is that the Lord has been very close to her and gives her constant encouragement, when things are hard.
I know one thing she needs is mail from home, as this cheers her up and reminds her she is not alone.
Please send her a letter or a card.
I'll be happy to give you her address, or send it on for you.
On a personal note, could you pray for me as I am in the process of getting a job in Saudi Arabia myself and will need all the prayer support I can get.
Christian love to you all,
DIARY OF JONAH
MONDAY
We are all very excited about the Camphill Church.
I mean, QP has been discussing the Accommodation Problem for the whole of my lifetime.
Now, at last, we are doing something about it.
Maybe I will get to join the YF at last.
They can't say they don't have room for me now!
TUESDAY
We had a big family conference tonight about Our Giving.
Dad says we should all be reviewing what we give to the Lord's work.
He says it's not only in terms of money we give but in terms of ourselves.
Will have to pray very hard about all this.
WEDNESDAY
My parents have decided to give of their talents.
They are so fortunate to have so many!
Dad often helps folks with their gardens and he is going to ask them to give a donation to Camphill Development Fund instead of giving him a present.
Mum is going to do the same with her sewing.
THURSDAY
Went to the early morning prayer meeting to see if the Lord would reveal what talents I have, but He didn't.
FRIDAY
Gran has joined in on the act.
She's going to offer baby-sitting and knitting.
It's awful being surrounded by all these talented people.
I haven't a clue what I can do — apart from write sermons, which won't earn very much for Camphill.
SATURDAY
Now I really feel down.
My silly wee sister says she's going to clean our shoes for Camphill.
I'm not going to let her beat me and yet I want to give something really splendid.
How wonderful it must be to be a great artist like Mr Beaumont or a musician like Mr Fergus or even a teacher like half the church.
SUNDAY
Wonderful sermon!
God certainly hears our prayers.
Our Pastor was preaching on Psalm 37 and verses 5 and 6 really spoke to me.
All I have to do is be fully committed to the Lord's work and He will show me what I can do.
Later
Told Mum about my W F T L and she said, ‘Yes, go and look up Romans 12:1.’
Needless to say, 2:7 have got the last word on it as usual.
OBITUARY — FLORA McLEOD
One of our very old members died on 16 May in the Victoria Infirmary.
Mrs Flora McLeod was born in Stornoway before the end of the last century!
She was 96.
Even though she had left Stornoway when she was just 14, she never lost her love for her birthplace or her sweet West Highland accent.
She was the last surviving member of a family of 11.
She had lived a very full life.
Among other pursuits she served for many years as a Stewardess with the Donaldson Line which took her all over the world.
She joined Queens Park some 15 years ago and was a  regular attender and faithful supporter of the Church.
She was a member of the Senior Citizens Meeting which she greatly enjoyed.
A favourite hymn of Flora's was the Metrical Psalm 46.
It closes with the words:
The Lord Almighty is with us
The God of Jacob is our fortress
This was Flora's quiet faith and assurance.
THE WORLD CHURCH — PRAYING FOR MISSIONARIES
That the Missionary May Live in Humility and Gentleness.
When winning the lost for Christ it is often necessary to rebuke sin.
If this is done in hardness of spirit, it tends to harden attitudes and drive people away for the Lord.
In witnessing to the lost, preaching the Gospel with harshness will only harden the heart of the sinner, whereas a life given over to humility, gentleness and brokenness will break the heart of a stone (Psalm 126: 5,6).
For the Anointing of God to be on the Missionary, Acts 1: 8.
How easy it is to labour in the arm of the flesh, depending on one's own strength, wisdom and ability, but how futile.
Satan laughs, for he recognises no power but the power of God.
Only the Spirit-filled Christian will be effective in setting free the captives of Satan.
Pray, pray and continue to pray that the missionaries might be filled continually with the Spirit (Acts 4: 31–33).
That the Missionary Might Know How to Exercise Authority over Satan (Luke 10: 19; Matthew 18: 18; Mark 16: 17–18; Ephesians 1: 17–23)
Satan was completely defeated at Calvary — Hallelujah!
God placed the enforcing of Satan's defeat in the hands of His servants and He has given them the authority.
Satan, however, will not recognise his defeat until forced to do so by the servants of Christ.
For Revival
More is accomplished in a few weeks through revival than is accomplished in years of ordinary labours.
God has promised to pour out His spirit in these last days on all flesh — this means every field (Joel 2: 28–29).
Pray that the missionaries may see revival.
For the Establishment of a National Work
In many missionary fields these days, political and economic upheaval can result in the missionary being driven out at any time.
Recent events in Zaire show this to be true.
If a national work is established then the work will go on.
Also a local Christian, prepared by the Spirit, is more effective in his witness than the missionary can ever be.
Pray for the training of nationals.
For More Labourers — Matt 9: 37
All occupied fields are short-handed.
More workers are needed to advance into new territories.
If anyone is interested in receiving more information on praying for missionaries or missionary activity please contact me.
BREAKFAST BARS
8 teaspoons margarine
1 tablespoon brown sugar
1 egg, lightly beaten
1 teaspoon vanilla essence
6 ounces porridge oats
4 ounces low fat dry milk powder
1 teaspoon baking powder
8 fluid ounces skimmed milk
8 ounces raisins
½ teaspoon margarine
Cream marge and sugar, blend in egg and vanilla essence.
Combine oats, milk powder and baking powder together.
Add to marge mixture with skimmed milk and beat.
Stir in raisins.
Preheat oven to 350F, 180C, Gas 4.
Grease a 9’ x 7’baking tin with ½ teaspoon marge.
Pour batter into tin and spread evenly.
Bake until browned, about 30 minutes.
Remove from oven and leave to cool in tin for 5 minutes.
Invert on to wire rack and cool completely.
Cut in half, then cut each half into 4 bars.
Serve immediately or wrap bars individually and freeze until ready to use.
Serves 8 per serving: 1 fat, ½ milk, 1 fruit, carbohydrate.
30 calories
May 1992
 Dear Friends 
Greetings in the lovely name of Jesus, thanking God for you and the abundance of life we have in  Jesus .
Praying that the real me is in touch with the real God.
I'm overwhelmed with all God's goodness and continual guidance.
Events are falling into place for setting up a work in Glasgow based within my home church, Queen's Park Baptist.
The vision is to see a ministry established that reaches out to working girls.
It will incorporate through proclamation the awesome truth of the love God has for us, and our involvement in actions to help people to believe in a real God.
A team is coming together based in the church with different ministry giftings and callings — Ephesians 4:11,!
Corinthians 12.
Our outreach locations will be Glasgow city centre, Glasgow Green and Gorbals.
These areas are within 2½ miles of the church.
There is a lot of groundwork that needs to be in place before we come out at 2 am!
A team functioning with all its different required ministry components in place, resources set up — ie Care Trust families, housegroups that sense God's call, liaising with statutory organisations — Social Services, Social Security, HIV and AIDS agencies, Housing Department, Drug Dependency units — Police communication and legal systems in place, doctors, a formal prison link…and the list goes on and on as you can imagine.
Pray that we will be directed to a specialist counsellor in occult activities.
A lot of the girls we'll meet won't be from around QP so a network will need to be formed with other churches who sense God's call in this specific area.
We are praying that very ordinary people will be called to a very special task.
Practically, we are looking for office premises and counselling rooms.
I've been very blessed by a positive response after the TV programme ‘Looking for God’.
I was communicating God's heart for working girls and how they are made in the image of God.
Please pray that as more opportunities open in the media they will be God-directed.
Earlier on in the year ‘Blasphemous Rumours’ by Andrew Boyd was published.
The subject is questioning if satanic ritual abuse is fact or fantasy.
I was interviewed and was able to share different experiences and stories while in London.
The book is a very powerful communication on ritual abuse and its effects.
A friend of mine, Donna, is staying at The Lighthouse, currently a YWAM Discipleship House.
She has just written a prayer letter and I quote from it.
’ At the age of 21 I turned to prostitution to provide money for drugs as I now had a heavy addiction.
I also realised at that time that the future had little meaning for me.
I reached rock bottom, which I always said would never happen…
At the age of 24 I found myself back in Corntonvale prison, this time doing a 5 month sentence.
I realised the sheer hopelessness of my lifestyle; I knew I had to change…
I couldn't believe I was sitting in church but that was the start of the road back.
I also attended the group meetings.
Three weeks later at a meeting I knew I had to come to the point where I said yes or no to Jesus.
Now 6 months later I am at The Lighthouse going on with the Lord.
It has been tough going, finding out things about myself which were buried deep but with ministry from the leaders and looking to God for answers I believe he has healed not only my drug problem but has cleansed me from sin so that I feel clean.
Praise the Lord.
‘I believe the Lord is asking me to do a Discipleship Training School (YWAM).
In faith I have applied to go to Sydney, Australia in September.
Humanly speaking, that seems impossible, but if it's God's will I believe he will provide.
I ask you dear friends to pray for me in this area for guidance, finance and I will seek his will in everything.’
Pray and write if you sense God directing you to encourage Donna; please get in contact through me.
Donna's leader on the DTS is the same as I had 5 years ago!
This wasn't planned.
I've been in regular contact with Earl's Court Project and a lot of my friends down there.
I'm going down for a week from 10 May to see many of them.
It's great to see the faithfulness of God in their lives.
I've begun preparing for Go ‘92.
I'm co-ordinating children's ministries there.
It's an event YWAM is holding with a church from Southampton.
We are expecting 120 kids — Praise God!!
PRAYER POINTS
Pray that Jesus’ love will break through the darkness with working girls in Glasgow and that the right people will be available to do this.
Praise God for the opportunity to have a ministry of this nature, church-based and in the heart of community life.
thank God for the job he provided at Overbridge with mentally-handicapped deaf-blind adults.
Saying goodbye is never easy.
Pray for the impact of ‘Blasphemous Rumours’ to set people free.
Praise for the completion of the manual and tracts.
Time can seem scarce to spend on these projects.
Pray for old friends in King's Cross and Earl's Court.
Pray that Donna will know God's anointing on her life as she goes to Sydney, Australia for DTS, and the support of her Christian family.
Pray that God's vision and detail will be at the centre of organising Go ‘92 children's ministries.
Pray for God's anointing and direction for speaking engagements.
In particular, I'm involved June 5 — 7 in a weekend on reaching people with special needs.
It's to be held in Manchester by local churches and YWAM.
Praise God for the opportunity to minister in Corntonvale Prison and for favour with the Governor.
There are 220 women there, many of whom come from prostitution.
Thank you for your continuing commitment to me.
Please share with me how I can pray for you.
Every blessing in Jesus through his Spirit.
All my love
NEWS FROM ZAIRE
Theresa Scott and Helen Chalmers look after the Baptist Missionary Society Birthday Scheme in Queens Park, and from time to time send a gift to the BMS.
Christopher Hutt, financial secretary to BMS writes: Dear Mrs Scott,
On behalf of the Society, and particularly those involved in medical work, I write to thank you for your kind gift of £391.
While most of our missionaries in Zaire were evacuated home last autumn, Gwen Hunter, a pharmacist at Kimpese, remained.
She has written recently of the current situation in Zaire.
Most of the news is very sad.
Many people are not able to work, some because of strikes and others because their work premises have been destroyed in widespread looting.
People are very discouraged.
Gwen does tell us, however, that the hospital has managed to function almost as normal.
They have been able to keep up stocks of medical supplies, largely due to gifts of money.
She also mentions that they are aware of our love and concern, and asks us to keep praying, just as they remember us in their prayers.