

WOMEN'S AGLOW FELLOWSHIP
GLASGOW CHAPTER
Date
Monday 7 September 1992
Time
7.15 pm Tea and Coffee 7.45 pm Start of Meeting
Venue
Lesser Hall, Langside Halls, Shawlands
Speaker
Mrs Hazel Carr from Fife
ALL LADIES MOST WELCOME!
THE BMS BIRTHDAY SCHEME
Helen Chalmers and I would like to thank everyone who supports the Birthday Scheme.
Donations last year amounted to £1,230.50, which encourages members to make a donation annually, as an expression of thankfulness to God for health and strength.
If anyone has mislaid their gift envelope, please use an ordinary one and just put your name and Birthday Scheme on it and place in the offering bag.
We are always looking for new members to join.
Leaflets are available in the alcove or else speak to either Helen or myself.
Yours in Christ
MISSION BOARD
In recognition of the Baptist Missionary Society's bi-centenary celebrations, this month's article is the first of two on the life and work of Dr William Carey whose vision inspired the creation of the BMS and other missionary societies.
Introduction
When William Carey was suffering his final illness, he was visited by Alexander Duff, a young Scottish missionary.
Duff was eager to learn more of Carey's experiences.
After praying together, Duff had got as far as the door, when the old man whispered his name.
‘Mr Duff, you have been speaking about Dr Carey.
When I am gone say nothing about Dr Carey — speak about Dr Carey's Saviour.’
William Carey wanted Christ, not himself, to be in the spotlight: this was the secret of his greatness and his usefulness to God.
He had achieved great things for God but he knew that he could not claim the credit.
His deep sense of his own sinful heart was no mere passing emotion but a life-long reality, as was his absolute trust in a Sovereign God.
On his tomb he ordered the inscription, ‘A wretched, poor and helpless worm.
On Thy kind arms I fall’
Growing Up
William Carey was born on 17 August 1761 in the little Northampton village of Paulerspury, the eldest son of Elizabeth and Edmund Carey, a poor weaver who later became village schoolmaster and parish clerk.
When William left school at about the age of twelve, he hoped to become a gardener but his skin became inflamed with constant outdoor work.
He was finally apprenticed to a cordwainer or master shoe-maker.
There was another apprentice, a Dissenter named John Warr in Mr Clarke Nicholl's workshop at Piddington.
At that time anyone who did not belong to the Church of England was regarded with contempt and prevented from holding many official positions.
William had regularly attended the local parish Church but had not shown any particular religious interest.
Now he became involved in heated discussions with Warr in which he often won the argument on behalf of the established Church but was left feeling that Warr possessed something he did not.
The spiritual crisis in William's life came to a head one Christmas when he was involved in an attempt to deceive his master by passing off a counterfeit shilling.
Mr Nicholl discovered the crime to Carey's great remorse.
The realisation that he was a sinner not only in men's eyes but in God's led to his conversion in February 1779.
He began to attend the Independent (Congregational) Meeting House at Hackleton with Warr.
His later reading, especially of Scripture, led him to a Baptist and Calvinistic position.
On 5 October 1783, he was baptised in the river at Northampton by John Ryland, who later became his close associate in the missionary cause.
In 1781 Carey married Dorothy Plackett.
Their first years together were a time of grinding poverty.
In 1783 their baby daughter, Ann, died of a fever and William himself became critically ill.
He recovered but at the age of 22 was left almost completely bald and had to wear a wig, a fashion he discarded in the heat of India.
The Northamptonshire Pastor
In 1785 the struggling Baptist fellowship in nearby Moulton, with only a handful of members and a building in a state of disrepair asked Carey to be their Pastor.
Under his ministry the Church grew but they could pay him very little.
So William ran a school and continued shoe-making to make enough money to support his family.
The generosity of a Kettering shoe-manufacturer, Thomas Gotch, enabled him to study French and Dutch to add to the Greek he had already mastered.
In 1792, Carey by now the pastor of the Harvey Lane Church in Leicester, was persuaded to publish his pamphlet entitled’ An Enquiry into the Obligation of Christians to Use Means for the Conversion of the Lost’.
It contained a comprehensive survey of the world's countries and their populations and referred to earlier missionary endeavours.
It was an urgent challenge to Christians to take Christ's Great Commission seriously and became very influential.
Carey was invited to preach at the next Northamptonshire Baptist Association meeting on 30 May 1792.
His text came from Isaiah 54:2–3.
A perfect illustration of his balanced theology was given in the memorable sub-division of his sermon; ‘Expect great things from God: attempt great things for God.’
Five months later on 2 October 1792, 14 men, mostly village pastors gathered in the back parlour of widow Wallis' house in Kettering and resolved to form’ the Particular Baptist Society for the Propagation of the Gospel among the Lost’.
Andrew Fuller was appointed the first secretary, and Reynold Hogg the treasurer, with Carey, Ryland and Sutcliff making up the rest of the executive committee.
The subscriptions promised on that evening of £13.2s.6d, from a group of largely poor men, were sacrificial.
It was a painful sacrifice for the Harvey Lane Church to relinquish their beloved pastor but they recognised that ‘his heart had long since been set’ upon work overseas.
In an emotional valedictory service those remaining at home pledged their loyalty in prayer and promised to ‘hold the ropes’ as Carey descended the deep, unknown mine of India.
A passage was obtained on a Dutch ship, the ‘Kron Princess Maria’.
On 4 June 1793 William and Dorothy Carey their four young sons and Dorothy's sister along with John Thomas set sail from Dover bound for India.
Finally, the ship made port in Calcutta on 14 November 1793.
Setting foot on Indian soil at the age of 32, William Carey never again left.
MISSION BOARD PRAYER DIARY
Mondays
Pray for Ruth Zinn as she seeks the Lord's will and gathers support in order reach out to the ‘working’ girls in Glasgow.
Tuesdays
Please pray for the situation in Yugoslavia.
Ask the Lord to raise up His peacemakers.
Pray that the conflict would not spread to neighbouring countries.
Wednesdays
Pray for protection and encouragement for our mission link partners, the Meikle and Collict families.
Thursdays
Give thanks to God for Garry Kilpatrick's safe return to Glasgow after his Discipleship Training School in Switzerland.
Pray that Garry would continue to know the Lord's leading.
Fridays
Pray for the young people from QP who have been on mission or camp this summer.
Ask the Lord to send people to water the seed that has been sown.
Saturdays
’ The Kingdom of God is not about talking but living in God's power’.
Ask the Lord to raise up an army of ‘rope holders’ for those who are ‘down the mine’in the mission field.
Read Isaiah 54:2–3.
‘Enlarge the place of your tent…
’ Ask the Lord to open your eyes to its meaning.
EDDIE HARRIGAN WRITES:
By the time you read this, I will be in Houston, and Christine and I will be married.
Thank you for your many cards, gifts and wishes, as well as your friendship and encouragement over the past five years.
My Houston address is:
FAR AWAY PLACES WITH STRANGE SOUNDING NAMES.
Sounds very romantic and I felt quite excited (and a little apprehensive) as the plane took off from Glasgow Airport that warm Thursday morning.
My colleague and I flew courtesy of British Midland first class to Heathrow.
We just had time to eat a beautiful breakfast and read the complimentary morning papers before we touched down at London.
Heathrow was very busy as usual but it helped not having our luggage to carry as it was booked right through to our final destination.
We found our way to the desk for Saudi Arabian Airlines when we had our first alarm.
The ground Hostess took one look at our tickets and told us that a gentleman was waiting to speak to us.
What was this?
M.I.5? was Mr Fleming my innocent boss really 007 after all?
A tall olive skinned figure bore down upon us.
Ah Mr Fleming and Mrs Gennis, we are so pleased you are travelling with Saudi Airlines.
Is there any service I can give you (honestly).
When we said a rather overwhelmed no thank you, he directed us to the V.I.P.lounge to wait for our flight — cream leather armchairs free tea, coffee or soft drinks, sandwiches, cakes and more free newspapers.
We reckoned it must have been the ‘reason for our visit’ on our visa — to visit the Crown Prince Abdullah Abdul Aziz.
After a very comfortable flight (first class of course— the only way to fly my dear) we arrived bright and cheerful at Riyadh Airport.
Unfortunately my luggage didn't.
At this moment it's either in Heathrow or Bahrain.
And I had enjoyed buying all those nice new clothes!
The worst thing was my Bible and books I had for Pat McDonald were gone too.
However not to worry.
It would all seem better when we got to the hotel.
But they wouldn't let me out of the Airport!
Now what?
My Passport was kept disconcertingly just out of reach.
After much remonstrating during which I was told very kindly and politely that there was no problem, till I felt like tearing my hair out, I was sent to sit in a corner (just a woman you see) and Mr Fleming was ushered off to meet an official, rush off somewhere and come back with a piece of paper which was duly stamped, passport returned, and off we went to meet our contact, who explained in a jocular fashion that I was the problem.
I was in the country without a husband and needed a special permit to get in!
Next stop the Hotel Alkozamah.
It is beautiful.
Fountain playing in the foyer, flunkies in white livery, receptionists in tuxedos (all males of course— not a female employee in the place, even the chambermaids were chambermen) I was very glad I wasn't paying.
Everyone was very pleasant.
Not just polite but really welcoming and helpful.
The hotel was very comfortable, and the food was excellent (and Western).
The next day — Friday — was the weekend so I was able to spend the day with Pat which was lovely.
She took me to meet the Fellowship she helps to lead and we had a lovely time of worship together.
I gave them our greetings from Q.P. and they gave me theirs to return to you.
Saturday arrived but still no luggage.
Fortunately Pat had lent me a few things so at least I was clean.
I had an Abaya (the long black gown) which I had carried with me on the plane and a scarf to cover my hair, so I was able to enter the Ministry of Health without shocking the men too much.
Mind you some of them looked as if they had never seen a woman before.
It was obviously the event of the year.
However all the men we had come to meet were extremely courteous.
We were offered Arabian tea which we HAD to drink (unfortunately) but thereafter were offered tea — black with sugar but not too strong.
Our business concluded it was decided we should go to Jeddah as quickly as possible to visit the Hospital.
We did get a chance to see a little of Riyadh which is a big bustling city.
Very modern, very, VERY HOT!!
I saw the hospital where Pat works which is beautifully made, and met some of her workmates from different countries.
Off to Jeddah!
Another big booming city with some beautiful buildings, wide roads, terrible drivers (all men please note) Arab souks and beautiful shopping malls.
We stayed in a lovely guest villa with four bedrooms and two bathrooms plus two other toilets, four sitting rooms, a dining room and a kitchen (the drains smelled).
The villa was in the compound of the hospital I hope to work in, the King Abdulaziz Hospital.
It has only been opened for two years and is a nice modern hospital though not as posh as Pat's.
We were made very welcome, though true to bureaucracy everywhere nobody knew we were coming!
However people cancelled meetings and re-arranged appointments with remarkable good humour.
I think they have had to learn patience working there.
Even the Arabs in the Ministry of Health office in the hospital hadn't really been briefed, and the poor man who was given the job of meeting our needs nearly had a heart attack when I showed him a copy of the list I had sent out to his head office weeks ago.
But I was assured it would all get done.
Charles Fleming and I had a chance to look around the beautiful shops, and eat out at the RED SEA PALACE HOTEL (pure magic by the way).
We met some lovely people — quite a few from Scotland, and our last night was spent in the company of a group of friends from Scotland, England, Ireland and Holland, having a meal in an Indian restaurant, and hearing about the scuba diving and snorkelling in the Red Sea.
It was quite a trip.
In some ways Saudi seems very repressive, especially for women, who are very much second class citizens.
Everyone must carry an internal passport, and we were always conscious of security everywhere.
Shopping has to be worked around prayer times as all the shops close, and men and women mustn't mix unless they are married.
It's all very different and will take some getting used to.
However I'm going out there at the Lord's command and my trust is in Him.
Please pray for me as I'll need all the support I can get.
I know that the spiritual warfare will be very real but we're on the winning side, HALLEUJAH.
DIARY OF JONAH
Monday
Hurrah!
It's the holidays at last.
I was beginning to feel that they would never come — especially when half the class disappeared on the last week.
Mum said that as a Christian She was not going to write me a note when there wasn't anything wrong with me and that I was to remember that we Christians are the light of the world.
This is all very well but the only men my light was shining upon by the end of last week were Swotty Cyril and a few disgruntled Teachers.
Tuesday
Rain again!
It must be wonderful to go on holiday to a sunny country instead of going to Saltcoats with us.
I mean, it's so embarrassing with all these King's Kids talking about Barcelona, Prague and Morocco.
Saltcoats would really test their faith.
Wednesday
Dad has started complaining about the school holidays early this year.
I heard him grumbling to Mum about lazy teachers with 6 weeks holiday.
I mean, I bet he never complained when he got 8 weeks off when he was a boy.
I knew it was a mistake to help my silly wee sister paste pictures into her scrapbook in the sitting room.
Thursday
Something spiritual at last!
I went to the early morning prayer meeting with Mum.
It was wonderful!
I prayed for all the King's Kids in their work places.
Felt very noble.
I bet they are not praying for me going to Saltcoats.
Mum went off with all her friends to McDonald's afterwards for coffee.
She must have felt guilty about not inviting me as she gave me £1 to get myself home.
If she keeps that up I will be able to buy myself a couple of books from the alcove book shop by the end of the summer.
Friday
Rain again!
This must be the wettest summer on record.
Gran is going to take us to a museum.
That must be why Glasgow has so many museums.
Saturday
I can't believe it!
I mean, after all those years it is difficult to take in.
Dad decided that we are not going to Saltcoats this year because of the weather.
We are all going to FRANCE.
Gran too!
I mean, at last I will be able to try out all the French words I have been learning.
All these hours in Madamoiselle McKirdy's class will not have been for nothing.
Sunday
Wonderful sermon.
Managed to tell at least 15 people that we are going to France this year.
I think they were all impressed, although it may have been at the thought of Gran going camping!
I bet my Gran would outdo any King's Kid anyday!
MARRIAGE MATTERS
large-screen video presentation by Rob and Diane Parsons (Care for the Family) in Cathcart Baptist Church, Merrylee Road on 22 and 29 September, 7.30 — 10.00 pm
Cost: £1.50 per night
An excellent seminar for all engaged and married couples.
It has been attended by over 20,000 people in UK already.
An up-front presentation with no embarrassing discussion groups!
For those concerned about the positive witness of Christian marriages
Whom do we know?
Jesus.
What do we know? eternal life.
How do we know it? through faith.
Why do we know? by grace.
What do we do? praise Jesus.
See Ephesians 2: 8–9 ‘.. by grace you have been saved..‘
The scent of roses
blooming in sunny June —
The twinkle of stars
shining in frosty December —
The trill of blackbirds
singing in early Spring —
The bounce of mossy grass
beneath the feet in any month —
Some of nature's bounty
spreading beauty in God's world.
The smile of a child or a grandma,
as they cling to a hand or an arm —
part of the human story,
reaching hearts which need love.
RHUBARB MARMALADE
4lb Rhubarb
½ pint water
Rind of 4 lemons
6lb preserving sugar
2oz walnuts
Method
Wash rhubarb, cut into 1’ length pieces.
Grate yellow rind of lemons, and finely chop the walnuts.
Mix together rhubarb, water and lemon rind, bring to boiling point and cook for 10 mins.
Add all other ingredients and boil for 30 mins.
Put marmalade into warm pots and cover at once.
MAGAZINE TEAM — 92
There have been quite a few changes in the Magazine Team over the past year.
Ann McDonald has passed over the task of collecting material for the ‘You and Me’ column to Morag Gunn.
Ann and Kenneth will, however, continue to handle the magazine distribution.
This month we have a brand new style of cover, thanks to Karen Wood (and a little help from her friends, we understand).
Those of you with long memories will have spotted that sometimes we have recycled some of Margaret Riley's magazine covers from over 2 years ago.
Several people have helped with the typing of the Magazine over the past year, notably Ann Archibald, Helena Mason and Joy Bell.
This month we welcome Josephine Steel on a more regular basis.
(Incidentally if budding authors are happy to type their own scripts on a word processor, that would usually be helpful.
Just give the floppy disc to the Editor in good time — and yes, you will get it back again quickly).
Susan Barber took over from Catherine Stark at the beginning of the year the task of laying out the Magazine pages including the graphics and illustrations.
Without their work it would be a drab publication indeed.
We are grateful to all our contributors for their articles and for their forbearance when the Editor has not done with them what they were expecting!
Particular thanks go to Jim Brooks and Bill Howieson for their series on ‘Vision for the 90's’ and ‘The World Church’.
Thanks also to Caroline Kane for the centre page spread Prayer Lists and to Theresa Scott and Helen Chalmers for the BMS Birthday Lists.
We are grateful to several people who have produced poems and recipes, particularly Vivette Montgomery, Jeanette Golding and Josephine Steel.
That most important item, the Pastor's Letter, is also the most up to date(ie it always misses the deadline and has to be delivered by hand).
One of the bonuses of being Magazine Editor is that you get a three minute Pastoral visit once a month.
Finally a word of appreciation must go to Jonah for his insufferable Diary.
No wonder he chooses to remain anonymous.
But it is probably the first item in the Magazine that most people turn to!
MISSION IN TIME
MISSION IN TIME is an exciting multi-media presentation with music, mime, dance and audience participation.
It takes a fresh look at the key points of BMS history by using a missionary as a time traveller.
His reward for helping to fix the broken-down Time Machine is to travel to a time of his choice.
He chooses Northamptonshire in 1792 and we journey with him up to the present and then into the future.
Flight brochures to admit travellers can be obtained from Jan Brooks, £3 each, family ticket £8.
OUR NEXT STEPS...
We had all been in Hawaii with Youth With A Mission (YWAM) taking part in the Crossroads Discipleship Training School, YWAM's basic entry course for full time workers.
We had learned a lot about God and ourselves and met new friends.
We were interested in moving on in ministry, wondering if it could be to YWAM's Nuneaton base where the UK Crossroads course is run, to help in the ministry team there.
Over the next few months we talked and prayed about it and in the Spring we submitted applications for staffing on the King's Lodge Base at Nuneaton, starting in April 1993.
When the reply came it was to ask us to consider joining the team in September 1992!
Would it be possible?
We decided to leave it all before the Lord and relax, and we planned a visit down to the base in June.
We received several words from the Lord confirming that the time to move was now.
Jack was offered voluntary redundancy in late August and it was confirmed that there was suitable accommodation at the Kings Lodge base.
And so that's what we plan to do.
We know it won't be easy.
After 20 years working in the Social Work Department it will be hard for Jack to leave a job that has been often exhausting and demanding, but never short of interest and challenge and which he has really enjoyed doing.
For both Jack and Dorothy there is the sadness of leaving family and friends, church and fellowship group to establish a home with the boys in a strange country (England!).
For Matthew and Mark it's the prospect of a new school, old friends to leave, and new ones to make as well as a new system of education.
For all of us there will be the faith challenge of living on a much reduced income and depending on the Lord's provision for at least part of our day to day needs.
We feel called to help to equip people to function in the mission or ministry God has called them to.
We will be leading small groups, praying with and counselling those on the courses and assisting in local outreach to the prison, hospital and streets of Birmingham.
We will also provide pastoral support to help those already in mission to function more effectively and we hope to do some more pastoral training to help us in this area of work.
The Kings Lodge, just outside Nuneaton, is a large mock Tudor mansion with a flatted block nearby which is home to about 100 students and staff.
Meals are eaten communally for the most part and we will meet together regularly for worship times.
All YWAM staff are encouraged to attend local churches, but we will be remaining members of Queens Park Baptist Church where we have thoroughly enjoyed being part of the church family and where we have grown so much.