

ISSUE NO. 152
New Year greetings
— and new beginnings
New centre at Hemlington
ADVENT Sunday, the Church's New Year, marked a special day for the Community of Hemlington.
Eyes were  focused on the new Pastoral Centre strategically placed based on Viewley Way into which an estimated 250 people were gathering.
Bro.
Bonaventure of the St John of God Hospitallers, welcomed everyone on arrival at the centre which was to be used for the first time.
Bishop Harris was principal celebrant at the Advent Mass assisted by Father Wilfrid and Father Stanislaus of the Order, together with Canon P. Harney, P.P. and Father Michael Loughlin, assistant.
In welcoming everyone present to the celebration, the Bishop stressed that ‘patience had its own reward’, as the people of Hemlington has waited over 14 years for their own centre.
Joyful
Mass has been offered regularly in St Gerard's School as funds were raised for a new church centre in Hemlington.
The joyful occasion brought together members of the Order's community, including Bro.
Felix who will live in the centre with Bro.
Bonaventure and Seamus: the Hemlington Community and the Cathedral Choir, under Pt Ryan, who led the singing.
Handover of the building only took place a couple of days earlier so many hands had made it possible for Mass to be celebrated in a beautiful setting.
The centre will be fully operational early in January to meet the needs of the less abled.
A first for the North East, though there are 20 such centres in the country, says Bro.
Bonaventure.
The purpose-built building will become a facility for the local community and for all in need.
The ideals of the Hospitaller Order are as relevant today as they were in the 16th century when the Order was founded — to meet ‘All in Need’, no matter their colour, race or creed.
Cheque
Thanks to the generosity of the Order the centre is ready to meet those needs in the present day and age.
The services of the Brothers in Community will be available to those who wish to benefit from them.
Canon Harney presented Bro.
Bonaventure with a cheque for £8,000, which had been raised over the years by the people of Hemlington for their centre.
Proceeds from the recent Bishop's Annual Charity Social amounting to £2,000 were added, realising the sum of £10,000 towards this exciting new venture in Hemlington.
.
Due to earlier printing over the Christmas period, the full feature and photocall of the centre will appear in next month's ‘Voice’.
Congratulations
Congratulations to the Brothers of St John of God on the completion of their new pastoral centre in Hemlington.
The formal opening will take place next year.
The centre will serve the whole community and meet a wide range of disability, says Bishop Harris.
Bishop Harris and Bro.
Bonaventure
Prayer for the New Year
‘Eternal Father, you have placed us in a world of space and time, and through the events of our lives you bless us with your love.
Grant that in this new year we may know your presence, see your love at work, and live in the light of the vent which gives us joy forever — the coming of your Son, Jesus Christ our Lord.
‘Lord, you who live outside of time and reside in the imperishable moment, we ask your blessing this New Year upon your gift to us of time.
Bless our calendars, these ordered lists of days, weeks and months, of holidays, holy days, fasts and feasts.
May they remind us of birthdays and other gift-days as they teach us the secret that all life is meant for celebration and contemplation.
Bless, Lord, in this new year, each of its days and nights.
Bless us with happy seasons and long life.
Grant to us, Lord, the New Year's gift of a year of love.’
It's good to be here, says new Bishop
I AM writing this foreword to the 1993 Year Book on my very first evening in the diocese after the announcement of my appointment yesterday.
For me it is one of those quite special moments  in life, not at all knowing what lies ahead but trusting that the future of each one of us lies in the hands of god.
Let me say immediately how glad I am to be here, looking forward with hope and enthusiasm to the task that lies ahead, working alongside many others in the building up of God's kingdom within the diocese of Middlesbrough.
My thoughts this evening are much centred on Bishop Harris as he prepares to lay down the ministry which has been his for the past 14 years.
Real joy
Many persons will have their own particular reasons for gratitude to him, and everyone will so warmly want to wish him well for the new place in life which awaits him back in his own native diocese of Liverpool.
It will be a real joy for me to begin getting around the diocese in the months ahead.
Gradually the places in the year book which are at present unfamiliar to me will acquire a flesh and blood reality.
Meanwhile, I ask eagerly for your prayers as I for my part pledge myself, with the help of God, to be at your service to the very best of my ability.
Thank you to the editor, Fr.
Michael Dunn, for his skilful labours to produce this detailed insight into the abundant life of the diocese.
With Bishop Kevin O'Brien, with our priests and people I enter into partnership within the local Church of Middlesbrough which is now my home.
Let me repeat — it is good to be here .
Bishop John Crowley
New venture speaks out!
ON ADVENT Sunday, 29th November, 22 nervous teenager contestants with their families and Catenian organisers met in the lecture theatre of the North Tees Hospital for the first public speaking competition promoted by the Catenian Association in the North East.
Initially, Bishop Harris requested the Catenians in the area to promote a public speaking competition for the youth of the diocese.
A small group of Catenians from Redcar, Middlesbrough, Stockton and Yarm Circles formed a steering group to set about the task of bringing the Bishop's idea into reality.
Although the original idea had been directed to the whole of the diocese it was felt that any pilot project should be confined to a smaller area.
Invitations to schools were then issued in the Cleveland area.
Due to a limited response to their invitation, the steering committee felt frustrated because they were being thwarted by the very establishments that were meant to help prepare our youth for tomorrow to spread the ‘Word’.
It was decided to ‘kick off the dust from our sandals’ and extend the remainder of Province 5 of the Catenian Association.
The response was favourable and the 22 contestants from the North East indicated their willingness to take part.
Meanwhile the committee set the rules and obtained generous sponsorship through local industry, together with donors for the two trophies.
The 22 contestants came from (the following schools and colleges).
Each competitor was to speak for approximately four minutes on a topic that had been chosen from a master list selected by the steering group.
The nerves before and the relief afterwards were evident to all, as was the very high standard of the speeches from the competitors.
The adjudicators were .
Enthusiasm
The first prize in the intermediate section, the Thomas Clifford Catenian Trophy and £50 was won by Mark Seddon of St Michael's, Billingham.
The second prize of £25 was won by Sarah Harker and the third prize for £10 was won by Mark Minto.
All of the competitors received certificates of merit.
In the senior competition the first prize of the Bishop Harris Cup and £50 was won by Richard Owen of St John's School, Bishop Auckland.
The second prize of £25 was won by Deborah O'Neil and third prize of £10 was won by Matthew Harvey.
The initial request from the Bishop was greeted with enthusiasm — that enthusiasm prevailed and the public speaking competition was born, albeit with one or two hiccups.
Perhaps in the future when the competition is open to all Catholic senior schools and colleges between the Scottish border and the River Humber on the east side of the Pennines, those who were given the chance initially might wish to join the fold.
‘Well done’, said Bishop Harris in thanking all the competitors for a high standard of preparation, content and presentation, sentiments reiterated by the adjudicating panel, before the presentations were made.
The Bishop also thanked the Catenian Association, through Province 5, for providing the opportunity and involvement of many people.
Watch out for details of the next competition.
Ed — Sorry the photos were not available at time of going to press due to Christmas printing deadlines.
History of the Diocese
THE Catholic Hierarchy was restored in England by Pope Pius IX in 1850.
However, the growth of the Catholic population was such that it became clear the Diocese of Beverley which comprised the whole of Yorkshire needed to be divided.
This division took place in 1878 with the creation of Middlesbrough and Leeds.
The Diocese of Middlesbrough being the then North and East Ridings of Yorkshire and the City of York, north of the River Ouse.
The first Bishop of Middlesbrough, Richard Lacey was to be in office for 50 years.
During this time the Catholic community continued to grow and flourish.
This was true of the industrial areas but also the rural communities which had ancient Catholic communities.
The 20th century has seen the appointment of five successors to Bishop Lacey.
On January 18th, we will celebrate the Installation of the Sixth Bishop of Middlesbrough, the Right Reverend John Patrick Crowley, in the presence of an invited congregation including Civic and Ecumenical guests, parish and diocesan representatives, together with fellow Bishops and clergy of the diocese.
Bishop Crowley was born on 23rd July, 1941 in Newbury, Berkshire.
He studied for the priesthood at St Edmund's College, Ware.
Appointed
After his priestly ordination in 1965 he was given pastoral appointments in the Diocese of Westminster, including seven years with the Catholic Missionary Society which took him all over England and Wales conducting Parish Missions.
In 1976 Cardinal Hume appointed the then Father Crowley as his private secretary.
In 1982 he was appointed a Vicar General in the Diocese of Westminster and four years later Pope John Paul II appointed Monsignor Crowley as Auxiliary Bishop to Cardinal Hume.
Bishop Crowley appointed as Chairman of CAFOD in 1988.
On 3rd November, 1992 it was announced Bishop Crowley had been appointed in succession to Bishop Harris as Bishop of Middlesbrough.
— Ad multos annos
Thanks for loyal support
A MESSAGE from Bishop Augustine Harris, read out at all Masses associated with Sunday, 20th December.
My brothers and sisters in Jesus Christ.
At the end of this month I hand over the care of the diocese to Bishop John Crowley.
Before doing so I write to thank you all for the Loyal support and encouragement you have given to me during the past 14 years.
During that time many complicated decisions have had to be taken.
It is impossible to meet every person's expectations and my hope is that you will forgive my mistakes and keep me in your thoughts and prayers.
When I leave at the end of the year, I plan to continue in pastoral work but hope to return on occasions to be with the Middlesbrough Diocesan Family.
Once again, I thank you and assure you of my prayers.
May God's blessing be with us all.
Bishop Augustine Harris 1978 — 1992
IN THE course of our lives, events take place, with which the passage of time, we come to realise are like milestones; they have pointed us in a new direction, often posing a challenge which in the providence of God, when accepted, leads us deeper into his life and service.
Undoubtedly, such a milestone was passed in December 1965, when the recently appointed Monsignor Harris, who at that time had just gone to London as the Senior Roman Catholic Chaplain to the prison service, was invited by the holy see, to become an Auxiliary Bishop in his native diocese of Liverpool.
Bishop Harris, was ordained to the priesthood in 1942, spending many years in parochial work and then the testing apostolate of the prison service.
His appointment as a Bishop, was in the immediate aftermath of the closing of the Second Vatican Council; which was to pose new challenges to the whole Church as she sought to renew herself under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit.
Contracts
Thirteen years as auxiliary Bishop in one of the largest diocese in England provided a wealth of experience and opportunities for reflection which Bishop Augustine Harris brought with him when he came to Middlesbrough in November 1978, as the fifth bishop of the diocese, in succession to the late Bishop John .
The diocese of Middlesbrough embraces within its boundaries stark contrasts, even more so in 1978, when the industrial recession was taking a heavy toll on Teesside and the collapse of the shipping and fishing industries in Hull.
The contract provided by the vast acres of farm land, the small market towns, the noble city of York, National Parks and seaside resorts, could hardly be more varied.
GRATITUDE
BISHOP JOHN CROWLEY writes of Bishop Harris: With everyone else I share a sense of gratitude to him for all that he has given to the church at both a diocesan and a national level during his 14 years as bishop here.
He surely goes into the years ahead with our love and prayers for his happiness.
The Catholic community, especially in the Northern part of the diocese was undergoing, as indeed was the whole area, a gradual process of change, having to come to terms with a broader view of Church and society which sat rather uncomfortably with long held views.
Bishop Harris arrived with a willingness to listen, but also because of the nature of his office, to teach with humility, the authentic message of the Gospel and the teaching of the Church in our day.
It could be said the key to his personality and the contribution which he has made to the diocese of Middlesbrough as Bishop is unfolded in an eloquent way by the new Cathedral which he caused to be built.
Any Cathedral tells one a great deal about those responsible for its erection.
The clear lines leading the eye to the altar where the focus of the Christian life is celebrated in the Eucharistic Sacrifice tells you a great deal about Bishop Harris.
No clutter, modern yet not strident, leading to a desire to embrace one another in the  fullness of truth as we share in the very mysteries of redemption through the sacramental life of the Church.
Change
The Blessed Sacrament Chapel, which gives emphasis to the necessity of private prayer, also speaks eloquently, as indeed do the different centres around the diocese for eucharistic adoration; such initiatives do not happen by chance.
The reproduction of an historic statue of the Mother of God in the Cathedral, demonstrates a sensitivity to the vibrant traditions of the past, drawing on them so as to enrich ones own faith not only of God's choice of Our Lady and her example, but also of the many wonderful traditions in the diocese which provides continuity, constantly enriching the present.
In our lives as Christians, the circumstances of life often change, the congenial we look forward to, the onerous we shy from, trying to find an easier path to tread.
Then, we remind ourselves of the supreme example of Christ, who placed his trust in his father's love and ascended the hill of Calvary for our redemption.
The Father's acceptance of this total love, led to the greatest of all triumphs in the Resurrection of Christ.
The role of the Bishop as THE teacher of the faith in the diocese is to live himself, and put before us, in every age, the mystery of our salvation in Christ.
By casting our gaze around the diocese, we see not only the great efforts of the past, but the reality of the present which speaks to us not only of the love and faith of one good man, but of God's unchanging love and compassion towards us all.
Bishop Augustine Harris
BISHOP Harris writes:
‘First of all I wish to repeat my words of welcome to Bishop John Crowley’.
Bishop Crowley will be in charge of the diocese from January 1st, 1993 onwards and his name, John, must be inserted in the Eucharistic Prayer.
The Installation of Bishop Crowley will be on Monday, 18th January, 1993, in the Cathedral, to which diocesan and parish representatives will be invited to join the civic and ecumenical guests, fellow Bishops, clergy and the family of the new Bishop.
On behalf of you all I welcome Bishop Crowley to the North and assure him of our prayers and loyal support in the years ahead.
I want to remind you os some achievements you have made possible during the past 13 years.
Spiritual achievements cannot be measured — these are in the hands of God.
But great material progress has been made, even though much has yet to be done.
Each generation in the Church makes its own effort and then hands over to those who follow.
In this way the good work can be developed.
The September issue of Catholic Voice, our diocesan newspaper, carried an insert — four pages giving an overview of the diocese — what has been done by many people — clergy and laity — during recent years — what should be developed or initiated, together with a general account of the financial position.
From the annual diocesan Year Book you will see that the diocese is promoted and organised by a variety of people, priests, religious and laity.
For over 13 years these good people have advised me or acted in my name and your service.
To all these — whether their names are recorded or not — I offer sincere thanks.
Their work is God's work.
The results of their labours will endure.
Finally, my renewed thanks to you all for the generous support you have given to your parishes and the diocese as a whole.
May our apostolic work be affirmed and expanded in the years ahead.
And may God's strength and guidance be with us always.
QUOTES
I SAID to the man who stood at the gate of the year, ‘Give me a light that I may tread safely into the unknown’.
He replied, ‘Put your hand into the hand of God.
That will be to you better than a light and safer than a known way’.
—, used by King George VI in his Christmas Broadcast, 1939.
It is better to light a candle than to curse the darkness —Confucius .
You are light for all the world.
A town that stands on a hill cannot be hidden.
When a lamp is lit, it is not put under the meal-tub, but on the lamp-stand…—Matthew 5:14–15 .
‘The perfect world, we Christians believe, is beyond the horizon in an endless eternity when God will be all in all.
But a better world is here for human hands and hearts and minds to make’.
—(U.B. Bishop's statement on Peace in the Nuclear Age).
Around the Diocese
Passiontide presentation in Redcar
ON the evening of Palm Sunday 1992, a passion play was performed in Christ Church, Coatham by members of the congregation.
All those who watched found it an experience which transcended that of an amateur play.
The audience was so affected that when the performance ended nobody moved for several minutes.
On the evening of 1st, 2nd and 3rd April 1993 the ‘Churches together in Redcar’ group, members of which include most Christian denominations, will be producing their own version of this play, with added extras, in the Main Hall of West Redcar school, in Redcar, Cleveland.
This ambitious project, the planning of which is already under way, will be one of the most significant Christian unity events to be held in the North East.
Performing
The play has already been written over several months by an enthusiastic team from all the churches involved; and by the time of going to press casting will already have taken place and all performing groups: the singers, dancers and actors, will be involved in their own regular rehearsals in March.
In addition to the writers and the ‘business group’, many others will be beavering away in the background, preparing costumes and scenery ready for this (as far as we know) unique ecumenical presentation of the Gospel message.
Business Group Member
Tour of French shrines
SLIGHTLY tired but spiritually refreshed a group from Middlesbrough area returned at the end of October from a memorable series of visits.
The group were led jointly by Fr.  and Fr.
Gubbins who celebrated Mass each day with the group of pilgrims.
Beginning at St Omer, Mass was celebrated in the Shrine of Our Lady of Miracles, reflecting on the recusants of the past and discovered St Erteinbrod.
The tour continued to Paris with visits to the Shrine of St Vincent de Paul and the Rue de Bac.
Onward to Chartres with its magnificent Cathedral and thence to Nevers and St Bernadette.
Importance
For many of the pilgrims it was a first visit to seen the body of the Saint in the convent Chapel.
A visit to Paray le Monial and the Chapel where the apparitions of the Sacred Heart to St Margaret Mary took place.
Onward to Cluny with the immense site of excavations showing the importance of the church in the Middle Ages.
In marked contrast nearby Taize presented utter simplicity, alive youthful and fresh in the 20th century.
After climbing the hill at Vezelay we could almost feel part of the preaching of St Bernard and the 2nd Crusade.
Rheims Cathedral in all its splendour was the setting of our final Mass, with time for relaxation, before bringing our memories home with use.
The tour was arranged by , and .
From Thornaby to Sierra Leone…
ELIZABETH from Thornaby writes:
I am a Year 10 pupil at St Patrick's, Thornaby.
When Sr. Mary FCJ left the parish she sent some of her presentation present to a boy in Sierra Leone, Sahr Joseph Mamoh.
Our priests told us to write to Joseph, which I did.
I was very distressed to hear that Joseph had been forced to flee to Guinea after his friend and later his mother were killed by the rebels.
St Agnes FCJ was in Sierra Leone, before she was forced to flee and it was Joseph and his friend who helped her at the time.
Fortunately, Joseph, who is 17, is back in Sierra Leone, though is a different town.
He is also in Year 10, due to the costs of schooling, so I would like to help his to continue his education.
The other FCJ Sisters are looking after him and his friend in appreciation of their support and kindness in the past.
But accommodation, food, uniforms, school equipment and fees have to be paid.
My parish had a collection recently at Christ the King and there was a tremendous response amounting to £262.70.
I would like to thank the priests and people of the parish, also the Youth SVP and my friends Bernie, Alison, Susie, Emma and Sarah who helped with the collection for all their help, support encouragement and generosity.
Thank you —(aged 14).
Confirmation day at Howden
OUR Confirmation took place at Sacred Heart, Howden.
It was a great event for us.
We began our preparation just over a year ago when Father Tim announced that people of 15 years or over could apply to be confirmed.
The eight of us have met regularly since then.
The week before the ceremony we spent the weekend at St Stephen's Pastoral Centre in Hull.
Father Pat Day helped us to prepare through meditation, talking about the sacrament, and a service of Reconciliation.
At the Confirmation Mass each of us had our special responsibility as musician, reader or at the preparation of the gifts.
Bishop O'Brien made us feel that we were a very important part of the world-wide Church and he encouraged us for our future as adult members of the Catholic Church.
At the end of the Mass we were each presented with a book of prayers and readings — a gift from our Parish.
The day after our Confirmation many of us began our work-experience from school — a good reminder for us of our new role as Catholic adults in God's world.
— and  
Newly Confirmed with Bishop  and Father Tim  PP.
Justice & Peace Commission
NEWS from Middlesbrough J&P…
On January 18th, there is a chance to find our more about the background to the pit closures dispute.
Cannon &, senior chaplain to the Selby Coalfield industrial Chaplaincy, will speak on the economic, social and theological implications of the closure plan.
The talk is called ‘Sharing a Vision, Church and Miners Together’, and it will take place at 7.30 on Monday, January 18th at St Bedes Pastoral Centre, Blossom Street, York.
On January 23rd, also in York, Fr.
SJ will lead a Day of Reflection on the Spirituality of Justice and Peace.
All are welcome, but as places will be limited by space, please ring   to book.
Members of the Commission who have been involved with Cafod's Latin America Campaign, would like to share their enthusiasm and resources with any parish, womens group, ecumenical group, youth group, senior citizens group etc, who would like to learn a little more about Latin America.
We would offer a slide or video presentation followed by discussion and scriptural reflection.
All we need is petrol costs, and an invitation.
We could lead an evening or afternoon meeting on Street Children, shantytown life, organising for change, or the coming of the First Europeans and the consequences of the indigenous peoples.
For more information please ring  .
CLEVELAND NEWMAN CIRCLE
‘PAUL the Lord's Journeyman’ was the subject of talk given to the Cleveland Newman Circle by Fr.
CP, at their last meeting.
He reminded them that this was the 500th anniversary of the New World by Christopher Columbus, an important discovery as was St Paul's discovery of the new world of Incarnation, for mankind.
Paul came from Tarsus, a town famed as a centre of learning and culture, to Jerusalem.
From here he set out about 36 AD for Damascus to capture and punish those Nazarene who were claiming that Jesus was the Messiah expected.
Paul, although a Roman citizen was a Jew of Blameless life, highly trained as a Pharisee and fluent in Aramaic and Greek.
Near Damascus Paul had an extraordinary experience and as he said of himself, was captured by Christ — God had pleased to reveal His Son to him.
He spent the rest of his life living out that experience.
Fr.   indicates that for St Paul and for us this poses three questions:(1) Who is Jesus?(2) Who is Jesus for me?(3) Who am I?
Jesus is the disclosure of God.
The Word.
Before, God was Jave; Now He is Abba (Father):
In answer to the second question; Christ is Paul's loving Redeemer and the Giver of the Spirit empowering Paul to have a new way of life.
Through a gratuitous and gracious gift Paul was a freeborn child of God.
Sin is self-destructive for us.
We have been freed from its reign.
The Law itself was good, Christ had freed us from its misuse as spiritually crippling.
A further freedom was from the thrall of death — whose sting is fear, through Christ we see that death is not final.
Paul took this message about life and the mystery of humanity all over the Mediterranean world.
In doing this Paul was always on his feet, preaching to the Jews of the Diaspora as well as to the Gentiles.
He adapted what he had to say according to those he was concerned with and their situation.
In our lives today we have to continue that journey of exploration and answer the same questions as Paul did.
We have for instance to transpose the freedom from fear into present circumstances and to help others to make the same journey.
This talk led to a lively discussion and question time.
*The next meeting will be on Wednesday, 17th February, with  of the Diocesan Marriage Tribunal — all welcome.
Diocesan Youth Service
THE past year saw a great development in the upgrading of the facilities at Middlesbrough Diocesan Youth Centre, Postgate House, Lartington.
Thanks for this go to many generous people for their time and expertise and a specific mention must go to HM Army personnel at Catterick Base for the donation of carpets, chairs and cutlery.
Also special mention must go to , President of Hull and District Catholic Women's Luncheon Club and all members for the generous cheque for £400.
This year welcomed a new Assistant Diocesan Youth Officer, Miss , who has already established friendships with many young people and groups throughout the Diocese.
Also during the summer months, one of the Diocesan students for the priesthood came to Lartington on placement.
Some events to look out for in the coming year.
February 12–14 Weekend for those 16–18 years Postgate House, Lartington.
March 14 — Lourdes, Youth Section Meeting at Knights of St Columba, Southfield Road, Middlesbrough at 3pm.
April 5–9 — 5th year Leavers' Days Postgate House, Lartington.
May 11 — Conference Day, Diocesan School Chaplains.
May 28 — Diocesan Pilgrimage to Lourdes including Youth Mass.
June 5 — Day of Recollection for those working with young people, Ampleforth College.
July 11 — Springboard, Annual Diocesan Youth Day, Ampleforth College.
NB: World Day of Youth with Pope John Paul II.
This will take place in August in Denver, Colorado, USA.
Any young person over the age of 18 who wishes to obtain further details of  this event please contact Fr.
Cope as soon as possible.
Linking family life and Christian life…
MARRIAGE and family life is the setting within which most us are called to live our Christian life.
But today the family is under great pressure and it is often difficult to seen the connection.
For this reason the Family Ministry courses due to start in Middlesbrough on 16th January are of vital importance.
They are designed to help parishes to be more sensitive to the needs of and provide the necessary practical and spiritual support.
The full course last from January to November 1993, but it is made up of six separate units.
Each of these units can be attended as though it was a complete course in its own right.
The first one ‘What is Family Ministry?’, consists of one Saturday 16th January from 10am-4pm), and three Wednesday evenings (27th January, 3rd and 10 February from 7.30–9.30pm).
It will be led by Mrs , Pastoral Director at Ushaw College.
If you are interested, there is still time to do something about it.
Further details from:,
Proclaim the Good News TV Mass
TYNE-Tees televised Sunday Mass from St Joseph's Middlesbrough (pictured) on the Feast of Christ the King the following comments speak for themselves:
‘It was a privilege to join in your lovely Mass on TV on Sunday morning.
I felt very moved by the sincerity of worship, the music, the servers — such dignity.
Your sermon was inspiring, and thank you for sharing this moving service with so many all round the country, so that we felt as one with your own congregation…
I am 82 and housebound, and so you can imagine how I look forward to seeing a meaningful TV presentation.
I hear from two of my friends that they were likewise inspired and helped by the Mass of Christ the King’.
(From a lady in Chelmsford, Essex).
‘I together with countless others had the pleasure of ‘attending’ your Mass on the feast of Christ the King, televised and very much appreciated’.
(A man in the West Midlands).
…
‘I do so much want to congratulate you and your parish on the televised celebration of your Mass for the Feast of Christ the King yesterday.
Just by chance I happened to have the opportunity of watching yesterday morning and found it a prayerful, joyful experience with so many of the parishioners of very generation actively involved.
I am sure that you will have felt indeed did the diocese of Middlesbrough proud too’.
KSC WALK RAISES £1,011 A NORTH Yorkshire Moors 21 mile hike, organised by the Knights of St Columba, York raised £1,011 for the Woodlands Respite Care Centre (a Multiple Sclerosis Care Centre.
Pictured,, KSC presenting the cheque to , chairman of management Committee, with Matron , deputy,, administrator,, with staff committee members and walkers.
The support party on the hike was led by Major  and Sgt.  Mgr..
Bereavement support
SR.
FCJ had a busy weekend in the Diocese recently.
She addressed a group of clergy from the Diocese, sharing with them her experiences of bereavement as a religious, a hospital chaplain, a nurse, and also someone who has done research into the needs of the bereaved.
Sister  also took the opportunity to address the needs of the clergy who, in their pastoral work, are dealing with bereaved people at a most crucial time.
On the Sunday, the theme of ‘They shall be comforted’ continued when about 70 people attended the Awareness Day in St Thomas More's, Middlesbrough.
This day provided an opportunity for participants to be together, to listen to Sister , to share experiences and generally relax and enjoy the peace of the day (yes, there was plenty of laughter!).
The day ended with the Eucharist celebrated by Fr.  with music provided by Sr.  FCJ.
Hospitality
The organisers are once again grateful to Fr  for his hospitality and the parishioners who supplied endless cups of tea and coffee.
Also thanks to Sr.  and Sr.  and the Community of Madonna House for their support and prayers.
At this time, the beginning of 1993, the Bereavement Support Groups offer their prayers and thoughts to all who are experiencing pain because of loss and bereavement.
May the Lord bless you on your journey.
Superswim cheque
A £100 cheque has been presented to the Cleveland CMAC (Catholic Marriage Advisory Council) by the 1992 Superswim a team of counsellors taking part in the sponsored event.
Some 83 lengths of Eston baths were swam in 55 minutes in relay and swimmers raised £130.
Superswim distributed £10,000 to over 90 local charities including CMAC and the Catholic Handicapped Fellowship.
At the CMAC 1991–2 annual meeting members heard that the three counsellors working in that period averaged 68 interviews each.
The number of couples attending pre-marriage courses was 31.
Radio Cleveland Lent Course
BBC Radio Cleveland will again be presenting a Lent Course in 1993 when the theme will consider the ‘Beatitudes’.
The ‘live’ broadcasts with guests speakers and an invited audience will be transmitted from the Middlesbrough studios between 7.30pm and 8.30pm on the following Thursday evenings: on 95 FM (95.8FM on the Whitby transmitter).
A booklet as a background to the series will be available early in 1993.
Producer:, BBC Radio Cleveland,.
Coffee date
Bar Convention Association Coffee Evening, Friday, January 8th, at 7.30pm., to held in the Bar Convent Museum Cafeteria.
All present pupils welcome.
SPUC date
January 21: SPUC Hull Branch meeting, St Charles Parish Centre, Hull, 8pm.
All welcome.
Praying for peace in the Balkans
THE POPE and the European bishops have invited Christians, Jews and Muslims to pray and fast together in Assisi for peace in the Balkans.
It will be the second Prayer for Peace event to be held in Assisi from January 9th to 10th.
The lst one was in October 1986.
The aim is to focus world attention on the conflict in Bosnia-Herzegovina and in other parts of Europe and to encourage humanitarian aid for the victims.
New Year
As part of the same appeal, Pope John Paul II and the Catholic Bishops' Conferences of Europe call on every Catholic Church in Europe to set aside New Year's Day as a ‘special day of prayer for peace in Europe, and in particular in the Balkans’.
They ask the Bishops Conferences, the dioceses, individual parishes and Church communities to organise ‘appropriate celebrations of prayer and penance’.
The appeal for a day of prayer for peace came as the conflict in  Bosnia-Herzegovina grows worse and threatens to spread into other areas of the Balkans and beyond.
Peace Day ‘93
JOHN Paul II has chosen the theme for the 1993 World Day of Peace: If you want peace, reach out to the poor.
The Pope's decision was influenced by events over the past year.
People's lack of a bare minimum was regarded as a prime inspiration in selecting the theme.
In opting for the topic the Pope ‘focused attention across the world on the fact that several million people do not have the minimum necessary to lead a life in accord with their dignity as daughters and sons of God’.
He said: ‘Poverty is both a source and a result of conflict and the extraordinary contrasts between rich and poor nations and classes are a source of discord and division.
The world must reflect on its responsibility to eliminate wars and poverty, yet it must live the spirit of poverty that is that of Christ.
Peace Sunday will be observed in England and Wales on Sunday, 31st January (see local notices for details of services/events).
Interreligious understanding
THIS year is the year in which the centenary of the World's Parliament of Religions is being celebrated.
Pope John Paul II has said there can be no peace in the world unless there is peace among religions.
His initiative in calling together the World Religions at Assisi and his message to the annual meeting of World Religions each year since Assisi shows how important he considers interreligious understanding and co-operation.
Respect and friendly relations amongst the faithful of different world religions is essential for true peace.
In 1893 the World's Parliament of Religions took place in Chicago marking a step in the modern interfaith movement.
This centenary year is being promoted as a year of interreligious understanding and co-operation.
We ask God for the help we need to discover what we have in common with our neighbours of other Faiths, so that, with peace among all believers, we may promote universal peace together.
Your prayers are asked for this intention:
Suggested Bidding Prayer:
For a better understanding and greater co-operation between people of different religions that we may build trust and friendship among our neighbours of other faiths to promote true peace…
Lord hear us.
The Committee for Other Faiths suggests/proposes that a Bidding Prayer be included at Mass on the Sundays in January 1993 to draw attention to the centenary year, and also on Sunday, 24th October, to make our people aware of the need to be involved.
A study pack for 1993 is available from:(£3.50 post free).
Coming soon, LIFE care centre
THE York ‘LIFE’ group is at last on the point of acquiring premises in Stonegate in which they hope to open York's very first Pregnancy Care Centre early in 1993.
To get to this exciting stage is a great achievement.
A lot of hard work has been done by the members to raise money and gain support.
It is an ambitious project to undertake but ‘LIFE’ in York is spurred on by the knowledge of how badly women in York need our help to cope with a crisis pregnancy.
The ‘LIFE’ centre will initially open for one or two sessions a week and gradually increase as more counsellors complete their training.
If you would like to support York ‘LIFE’ by fund-raising for our ‘Care Centre Appeal’or by becoming a non-active member please write enclosing your name and address to York LIFE 49,.
If you are a warm and caring person perhaps you would be interested in training as a LIFE counsellor.
If you have an hour to spare every two weeks or so, and think you would make a good listener, our ‘Caring Officer’ would love to hear from you.
For more information — no obligation — contact  at the above address or phone her on .
Some members of the York group with their little helpers!— from left —.
CATHOLIC COUNTRYSIDE
ONE of the most charming sights of winter comprises a family of otters ‘sledging’ down a snow-covered bank into the river.
It is a rare sight nowadays, partly because otters are such shy animals and partly because they are much scarcer than hitherto.
For their sledging trick, they love a steep, snow covered bank and will lie on the top, facing downhill, then tuck up their front paws so that they slide along upon their chests.
They love this game and will repeat it over and over again, provided they are not interrupted.
This gives some idea of the playful nature of otters.
Families, even adults, will play with each other in the water or on land, chasing and staging mock battles, but even a solitary otter will amuse itself with a pebble!
It will toss it into the air with its front paws, then try to catch it in its mouth as it comes down.
Waterproof
Part of this fun might include an attempt to teach the babies to swim.
Young otters do not like the water and quite often, mum has to forcibly shove the reluctant infant into the river for its first lesson!
This is done only when the fluffy coat of the youngster has developed into the waterproofed fur covering of an adult.
Otters are very shy animals and for their peace of mind require an undisturbed stretch of riverbank, preferably several miles in length.
A dog otter's territory can stretch for up to a dozen miles which gives some indication of their range.
The river needs to be deep enough for the otters to swim and catch fish, the dog otter eating two or three pounds of fish every day, it needs to have thick covering of vegetation along the banks and above all, the water must be clean, fresh and not polluted in any way.
Not all otters are restricted to rivers, however; some can be found upon the quiet shores of our lakes or even beside the sea.
Unfortunately, not many of our rivers now comply with the basic requirements of the otter.
Since the 1950s, lots of our rivers have changed beyond recognition, some being rendered sterile through pollutants such as industrial waste or the effects of agricultural chemicals, while others have become noisy with leisure craft and visitors.
Protected
The ingredients of some pesticides have been found not to be injurious to fish, but when an otter consumes a large amount of fish which have absorbed those chemicals, then the otter can become affected and may die or become sterile.
Happily, there are now restrictions upon the use of specified chemicals and so our rivers and waterways should be less polluted.
The otter and its haunts are now protected by law too and so this lovely animal has been given an opportunity for a new lease of life.
The otter is a member of the weasel family and is a larger version of animals like the stoat, mink, pine marten, ferret, polecat and, of course, the weasel itself.
An otter is about three feet long and its tails adds a further fifteen or sixteen inches.
CAUSE hamper success story
THE CAUSE hamper campaign this Christmas has once again been a great success, thanks to the generosity of so many people in our diocese.
Ten schools joined the campaign and we were able to donate hampers to 130 families and buy presents for over 400 children.
We know that this is only a small proportion of the people who are unemployed in this area but we hope we have made their Christmas a little bit more enjoyable.
Each class ‘adopted’ a family without knowing the true identity.
This personal touch made us really enthusiastic about our hampers and our gifts as we put a lot of thought into them.
Being involved and working together for ‘our’ families was an important part of our Christmas preparations.
If the families who received our hampers had as much pleasure as we did in planning them, then it was all worth while.
A big thank you to all the schools who helped, St David's, Sacred Heart, Redcar, Kings Manor, Beverly School for the Deaf, St Paulinus, St Josephs, St Thomas More, St Bernadettes, St Augustine's and Newlands.
Thanks also to the parishes for their support and donations and also to the members of CAUSE who delivered the hampers.
We hope we have put Christ back into Christmas.
— CAUSE/Cafod group 10th year pupils Newlands School 
Lourdes Pilgrimage news
LOURDES SOCIAL EVENING, KSC Club, Southfield Road, 8pm.
All Lourdes helpers and friends welcome.
LOURDES ‘93 — Friday, May 28th — Friday, June 4th, 1993. 40th Pilgrimage from Diocese.
LED BY BISHOP JOHN CROWLEY.
Book the dates NOW — Tangney Tour have been appointed travel agents for the 1993 Diocesan Pilgrimage to Lourdes.
Travel will be by air from Teesside Airport with Associated Coach Travel.
John Tangney contracted all Pilgrims who booked for the ‘92 Pilgrimage, by letter, inviting them to join the Diocese on Pilgrimage in 1993.
Booking forms available this month for all intending pilgrims.
Book with confidence that Tangney Tours are ABTA Bonded, adequately to meet the legal requirements of Tour Operators in 1993.
Prices quoted are based on the exchange rate quoted on November 26th, 1992, eg: with *One Star hotel £393, excluding Airport Taxes and insurance.
Associated Coach Travel from £270.
Depending upon Hotel.
Intending pilgrims please apply to Father   Pilgrimage Director.
Meanwhile Fund raising events continue, your support is always appreciated.
See Local Notices.
Feast of Our Lady of Lourdes, is on Thursday 11th February, 1993, the World Day of Prayer for the Sick.
Mass, 7pm, The Cathedral,— everyone welcome.
World Day for the Sick
Thursday 11 February 1993 Our Lady of Lourdes
ON 13th May, 1992 the Holy Father formally established a new World Day for the Sick to be observed each year on the feast of Our Lady of Lourdes on 11th February.
The Pope says: ‘I want to inform you that I have decided to establish the ‘World Day of the Sick’, which is to be celebrated each year on 11th February, the liturgical memorial of the Blessed Virgin Mary of Lourdes.
Indeed, I consider it more opportune than ever to extend to the entire ecclesiastical community an initiative already observed in some countries and regions that has yielded truly valuable pastoral results.
MISSION
The church, which throughout the centuries, following Christ's example has always felt that the obligation to serve the sick and suffering is an integral part of her mission (Dolentium Hominum, n.
I).
CARE
The annual celebration of the ‘World day of the Sick’, therefore, has the manifest purpose of making the People of God and, as a consequence, the many Catholic health care institutions and civil society itself, more aware of the necessity of ensuring the best possible care for the infirm; of helping the sick person to make the most of suffering, on the human level, but most of all on the supernatural one; of especially helping the dioceses, Christian communities and religious families to be involved in the health care of apostolate; of enhancing the ever more valuable commitment of volunteers; or reminding people of the importance of the spiritual and moral training of health care workers, and last of all of creating a better understanding of the importance of religious care for the sick among diocesan and religious priests, as well as among those who live and work at the side of the person in pain.
SUFFERING
Since it was on 11th February in 1984 that I published the Apostolic Letter Salvifici Doloris on the Christian meaning of human suffering, I believe it is significant that the same day is set for the celebration of the ‘World Day of the Sick’.
LOURDES
Lourdes, one of the Marian shrines most loved by the Christian people, is both a place and a symbol of hope and grace, characterised by accepting and offering up redemptive suffering.
I therefore ask you to make the institution of the ‘World Day of the Sick’ known to those responsible for the health care apostolate so that, in accordance with local circumstances, its due observance may be provided for with the participation of the entire People of God: priests, religious and lay faithful.
PRAYER & SHARING
‘World Day of the Sick’ is a special time of prayer and sharing, of offering one's suffering for the good of the Church and of reminding everyone to see in his sick brother or sister the face of Christ who, by suffering, dying and rising, achieved the salvation of mankind.
My hope is that everyone will fully co-operate for the best beginning and development of this ‘Day’.’
—
* Full text in Diocesan Year Book
* The Annual Lourdes Reunion for the Feast Day will be held in St Mary's Cathedral, Coulby Newham, with Mass at 7pm to which everyone is invited — sick and healthy — Lourdes pilgrims and friends.
Education Sunday
Education Sunday is on Sunday, 7th February, 1993.
The theme this year is Challenge and Change.
Materials will become available on how this theme may be currently promoted.
Parishes might find that they have some local situation to which the theme of Education Sunday could be specially applied.