

ISSUE No. 151
NEW BISHOP NAMED
Diocesan welcome to Bishop Crowley
TUESDAY, November 3, was an historic day for the Diocese when Pope John Paul II appointed Bishop Crowley as the Sixth Bishop of Middlesbrough Diocese.
The initial response of Bishop Crowley immediately after his appointment was ‘Let me say immediately how glad I am to be here’.
The new Bishop also paid tribute to the Ministry of Bishop Harris over the past 14 years.
The full text of the Bishop's message can be read in Foreward to the Diocesan Year Book 1993, described as a detailed insight into the abundant life of the Diocese (available in all parishes before Christmas).
‘With Bishop Kevin O'Brien, with our priests and people I enter into partnership within the local Church of Middlesbrough…it is good to be here’.
Bishop John Crowley views the interior of The Cathedral.
Bishop Harris assures him of our loyal support
FIRST OF ALL I wish to repeat my words of welcome to Bishop .
He has already paid a brief visit to Middlesbrough and Hull and has been briefed in general terms on the hopes and needs of our diocese.
He brings with him a wealth of experience and for our part, we assure him of our loyal support’.
Bishop Crowley will take formal possession of the diocese on December 31st, when he meets and celebrates Mass with the Chapter of Canons and the College of Consultors.
Mass will be celebrated in The Cathedral, Coulby Newham, on Thursday, December 21st, at 11am, to which the people are invited.
Installation
Bishop Crowley will be in charge of the diocese from January 1st, 1993 onwards and his name, John, must be inserted in the Eucharistic Prayer.
The installation of Bishop Crowley will be on Monday, 18th January, 1993, in the Cathedral, to which diocesan representatives will be invited to join the civic and ecumenical guests, fellow Bishops, clergy and the family of the new Bishop.
On behalf of you all I welcome Bishop Crowley to the North and assure him of our prayers and loyal support in the years ahead.
Bishop Crowley, at 51, brings a blend of youth and experience.
Bishop Harris
Rt.
Rev. John Patrick Crowley, Auxiliary Bishop in Westminster
JOHN Patrick Crowley was born on 23rd July, 1941 in Newbury.
He was the third of four children of John and Julia Crowley.
He was educated at St Aloysius' Primary School, Somerstown and St Aloysius' College, Highgate.
He studied for the priesthood at St Edmund's College, Ware, and was ordained priest by the late Cardinal Heenan at Westminster Cathedral on 12th June, 1965.
From 1965–1968, he was an assistant priest at Holy Trinity, Brook Green.
In 1968 he joined the Catholic Missionary Society and in 1975 he was appointed assistant priest at Muswell Hill.
In 1976 he was made private secretary to Cardinal Hume and in 1982 he was made a Vicar General of the Archdiocese with special responsibility for priests.
On 8th December, 1985 he was consecrated bishop in Westminster Cathedral by Cardinal Hume, as has special responsibility as area bishop for Central London.
He is currently the Episcopal Liaison for the National Council for the Lay Apostolate.
Since 1988 he has been chairman of CAFOD.
Bishop Crowley has appeared on religious programmes for radio and television.
He has also written for various Catholic journals and produced a pamphlet ‘Prayer in a Busy Life’.
Among his interests he lists reading and listening to music.
He is also a jogger and a keen Arsenal supporter.
Letter to the people


Dear Sisters and Brothers,
With the announcement last week of my appointment as bishop elect of Middlesbrough, life has changed quite dramatically for me.
From now on my home and my ministry as a bishop will be amongst you.
I do want to tell you quite simply and sincerely how much I look forward to that.
Bishop Harris, who has welcomed me so warmly, has expressed his willingness to continue on until the end of the year whilst I complete my own duties in Westminster diocese.
With everyone else I share a sense of gratitude to him for all that he has given to the church at both a diocesan and a national level during his 14 years as bishop here.
He surely goes into the years ahead with our love and prayers for his happiness.
I hope to be in residence by the end of December in readiness for my installation as bishop on Monday, 18th January, at mid-day in St Mary's Cathedral.
It would be lovely if many of you were able to be present on that day.
Meanwhile, in asking so very earnestly for your prayers I pledge myself, with the help of God, to serve the diocese of Middlesbrough to the best of my ability.
It will be good to get to know you as the months go by, as we share our gifts together for the good of many and to the glory of God.
Affectionately, John Crowley Bishop Elect of Middlesbrough
Celebrating Advent
Times and Seasons
Each year has four seasons which in their coming and going mark out the passing of time in their distinct ways.
Spring brings hope as new growth appears; summer is the full flowering of that hope; autumn expresses the fall of leaves and preparations for the hardships of winter; winter seems cold and dead but is a time of hidden growth
As the years unfolds the Church invites us to journey with Christ in the seasons celebrated by the Liturgy and Sacraments — Advent, Christmas, Lent and Eastertide.
The scripture readings and prayers used by the Church call us to make the presence of Christ a reality in our lives week by week.
ADVENT
The first of the seasons of the Church's Liturgical Year is Advent.
It consists of four Sundays leading up to the great Feast of Christmas, four weeks of waiting and expectation.
Each of these weeks has its own theme, rather like a signpost leading to the next part of the route.
As we make the Advent journey the Sunday Liturgies are milestones along the road.
Advent means ‘coming’ and this season celebrates the coming of Christ.
In fact there are three coming of Christ:
Past:Jesus who came as a baby at Bethlehem; the Messiah promised by God and long-awaited by his people; the Lord who sets us free.
Present:Jesus who is very near and comes to us daily in the needs of our brothers and sisters; where two or three gather in his name; in the faces of those who show us Christ in joy and pain; in Word and Sacrament.
Future:Jesus who will come again at the end of time as King of Kings; as Judge of the living and the dead; and who will usher his faithful people into the Kingdom of his Father.
WEEK BY WEEK
Week 1 The Church's Liturgy introduces us to the prophet Isaiah whose words echo throughout Advent, calling us joyfully to live in God's presence.
Our salvation is near.
As we wait for Christ to be revealed we do not know when he will appear.
The gospel calls us to live in readiness for that hour.
Week 2 John the Baptist, with his urgent message, preaches the need for true repentance if we are to prepare a way for the Lord.
God promises his people comfort and invites us not to live in sorrow.
Advent people are people of joy.
Week 3 This week begins with ‘Gaudete’(rejoicing) Sunday.
We meet Christ in daily events.
When life seems ordinary St James encourages us to wait patiently and joyfully for Christ's coming and not to lose heart.
John the Baptist urges us to lose no time in making a straight way for the Lord.
Our salvation is at hand.
Week 4 The prophecy of Isaiah is fulfilled in Mary who is to bear a child of the house of David.
The mystery kept secret from all eternity is now about to be made clear.
The sense of expectancy grows in these last few days before the  fulfilment of God's promise.
Christ's coming in his birth at Bethlehem means that God-is-with-us — Emmanuel!
The new candle lit each week on the Advent Wreath is a prayerful reminder of the meaning of this season.
We await the Light of the World with this powerful symbol underlining for us the real nature of Advent: a time of expectation ‘as we wait in joyful hope for the coming of our Saviour Jesus Christ’.
God of all ages, stir up your power and come.
You have promised to be with your Church until the end of time.
May we experience the joy of your presence in our midst, for you live and reign as Lord of all, one God to be praised and glorified for ever and ever.
Amen.
Cardinal welcomes Catholic Woman 
I WELCOME this second edition of Catholic Woman.
I am grateful to the national Board of Catholic Women for making this effort to reach all women in the Church.
The Board has my warm support in its task of gathering together all Catholic women's organisations and listening to their varied voices.
It is a fact that women are in the majority in many of our Church organisations.
The contribution you make to the life of the Church is immense.
There is still much to be done.
The Church does not always use to the full all the gifts that women have.
But it is right to notice and celebrate the many positive experiences we already have of the activity of women in the church.
I am glad that the Joint Working Party, established by the Bishops' Conference and the National Board together, is presently gathering examples of good practice.
In due course their work will help us to move further forward.
The involvement of women in ministry is a matter of some ecumenical concern among the Churches at present.
It is easy to overlook the great strength in our Catholic tradition.
Catholic women are active in the life and mission of the Church in full-time pastoral work, in liturgical roles and ministries, with catechetical and theological responsibilities, in leadership in pastoral councils, to name only a few areas.
All of this is rooted in your baptism.
It is as baptised lay people that these vast fields are open to you.
This is a real upholding of the dignity of baptism and the vocation of the people.
In Christifideles Laici, 51, the Pope speaks of ‘two great tasks’ which merit our attention.
The first is the support to be given to what women can and must do to unfold the full meaning of marriage and motherhood.
This is always a priority.
The second task is making our culture more sensitive to ‘the true welfare’ of human persons.
The Pope is affirming here that women have work to do not only in the Church, but also in using their gifts for the good of society.
This urgently needed today, when there are so many ways in which culture dehumanises people.
Your gifts for healing and building relationships and creating community make an essential contribution to our evangelising work in society.
I hope that Catholic Woman, as it develops, will encourage all Catholic women…single, religious and married…to see the significance of what they already do and the potential which they can yet realise, both in the Church and in society.
Cardinal Basil Hume
One voice Mission in York
THE Barbican Centre was the venue for the Ecumenical Mission to York supported by 300 churches of all denominations in the York area.
The Mission which comprised theatre, music and mime was launched by leading churchmen from Roman Catholic, Methodists, Anglican, Free Church, Salvation Army and Society of Friends.
On each of the six nights the auditorium was packed to capacity with a seating of 1,500.
To help raise money for the venture Fr.
Cyril Brooks, of the York Pastoral Centre, cycled from York to John O'Groats then to Lands End and back to York, a total of approximately 2,000 miles.
The Mission finished with a united service in York Minster which again was packed to capacity.
Photo shows (left to right):
Women's views and concerns
The Bishops have asked the National Board of Catholic Women to represent the range of views and concerns of women in the Church.
 They have said that they need to listen to the voices of women and they are ready to do so.
 They recognise the importance of these perceptions and their relevance to the ministry of bishops in the Church.
Their request, therefore is that the NBCW provides a regular input expressing as far as is possible, the concerns and views of women in the Church on topics which seem to women to be most crucial or fundamental.
During an Ad Limina address to Bishops in March 1992, Pope John Paul II said, ‘The National Board of Catholic Women can be of particular help at this time when the role of women in society and in the Church is undergoing such a radical questioning and transformation.
It is essential that these structures and their activities be inspired by genuine love for the church’.
For an annual subscription of £10, parishes, groups and individuals will receive 50 copies of each edition of Catholic Woman, Newsletter of NBCW.
Further details *Cheques payable to: Catholic Woman,.
The Advent Wreath
The Advent Wreath is an old custom.
Whether you are on your own or surrounded by family why not make one for your home this Advent?
You will need some kind of circular base (a wire coathanger will do), some evergreen foliage, three purple candles, one pink candle, one white candle (optional).
If you wish to add ribbons, feel free to do so.
Say a prayer and light one of the candles each Sunday in Advent gradually building up the light as Christ's coming draws nearer.
Candles
.
The circular form reminds us that God's love is eternal, it has no beginning and no end.
.
The evergreen leaves of the wreath remind us that God never changes.
.
The colour purple represents sorrow.
Three of our candles are in this colour to represent our sorrow for our failure to love in so many parts of our lives.
.
One candle id pink and this represents our joy and happiness at the coming of Christ.
We light this candle on the third Sunday of Advent.
The white candle, which is placed in the middle of the wreath on Christmas Day, represents the Christ child born that day and whose teaching will be our guiding light for the coming year.
First lay students of Ushaw
THIS autumn three Catholic lay people made history.
, and  became the first lay students of Ushaw College, the Northern Catholic seminary, to train for ministry.
For most of its history, Ushaw has educated lay people as well as intending priests (though there has been a gap in the tradition since 1973).
What is new is that lay people are being given ministerial training.
The lay students will study at Ushaw for three years, following a new degree course (a Durham University BA) in theology and ministry.
They will learn about all branches of theology, such as scripture, liturgy, church history and morals.
They will be taught the pastoral skills of counselling, work in hospitals, schools, prisons and parishes, and will be given practical experience in these fields.
In reflection sessions, they will relate their academic studies to pastoral needs.
On graduation, they will be competent to undertake many aspects of ministry in the Church.
What does it feel like for the select band of lay students?, a mother and trained nurse who commutes daily from Stockton on Tees, says: ‘Ushaw's students have made us feel very welcome.
Delight
I am delighted to have the opportunity to further the work of collaborative ministry in the Church.
This degree is an exciting new venture, and I see myself as the first of many lay people who will benefit from the training here’.
The senior tutor, Bernard Robinson, himself a layman, says that the college welcomes the new type of lay student and is glad that layfolk are taking the place in the Church marked out for them by Vatican II.
Ushaw's lay graduates, he says will be well qualified to make an important contribution to lay ministry, not least in the increasing number of parishes lacking a resident priest.
Left to right: Mary Simmons, Susan Warriner and Anne Burdess outside Ushaw College.
Welcome to Northallerton Group led by Father Joe Brennan
£2,000 worth of thanks for Social
THE New Hemlington Pastoral Centre benefitted from the recent Annual Charity Social, as reported in last month's ‘Voice’.
The inaugural Mass was celebrated by Bishop  on the First Sunday of Advent, in the centre.
Next month's ‘Voice’ will carry a feature on the new Day Centre, for those with learning difficulties.
An estimated 400 dancers gathered in the Marton Country Club for the annual event which brings together many people from a wide area of the North of the Diocese, from the coastal area through to Northallerton.
Guests
Bishop  welcomed all the guests including the Mayor and Mayoress of Middlesbrough, Coun. And Mrs Frank Platt.
A well stocked tombola provided many potential Christmas presents for the lucky winners.
Raffle tickets were also quickly snapped up with an additional star prize of two first class rail tickets anywhere in Britain proving very popular.
Bro. , newly appointed Superior of the Centre, received the cheque from Bishop  and expressed thanks to all.
Councillor  recorded his pleasure at being present at the Social, together with appreciation of the new centre, nearing completion, in Hemlington.
who produced the music for dancing was taken ill and unable to perform.
His substitute and colleague , ensured that the dance floor was filled all night with dancers young and not so young enjoying a varied programme, leaving the floor reluctantly at 12.30am.
The Committee led by Michael Boyes, wish to thank all those who made this an enjoyable event and a great reunion; as well as a financial success.
To the donors of prizes, donations of cash, and ALL who supported and attended this annual social reunion — a very sincere thank you!
Hope to see you again, on Friday 25th October, 1993.
Left to right: Mayor of Middlesbrough, Coun. Frank Platt, Bishop Harris, Mayoress Mrs Platt, Michael Boyes, Chairman and Brother Bonaventure.
40 years Thanksgiving
The Lourdes Sick Fund recently benefitted by £400 as a result of Teresa and Kenny Riley's Ruby Wedding Anniversary.
Mass of Thanksgiving was offered in St Thomas More's Church followed by a celebration party in the Knights of Columba.
The family and friends who joined Teresa and Kenny were advised that they would prefer donations to the sick fund in preference to gifts on their special anniversary.
They are presently living in Nottingham but hope to return to their former parish in Beechwood in due course.
Sincere thanks to all who contributed so generously to the thanksgiving anniversary.
Well stocked Tombola — thanks to donors.
LOURDES NEWS
LOURDES '93 — Friday, May 28 — Friday, June 4, 1993. 40th Pilgrimage from Diocese.
LED BY BISHOP JOHN CROWLEY
Book the dates NOW — Tangney Tour have been appointed travel agents for the 1993 Diocesan Pilgrimage to Lourdes.
Travel will be by air from Teesside Airport with Associated Coach Travel
John Tangney contacted all  Pilgrims who booked for the ‘92 pilgrimage, by letter, inviting them to join the Diocese on Pilgrimage in ‘93.
Booking forms should be available later this month for all intending pilgrims.
Book with confidence that Tangney Tours are ABTA Bonded, adequately to meet the legal requirements of Tour Operators in 1993.
Prices quoted are based on the exchange rate quoted on November 26, 1992; eg. with *One Star hotel £393, excluding Airport taxes and insurance.
Associated Coach Travel from £270.
Depending upon Hotel**.
Father D. Spaight, Pilgrimage Director, Christ the King, Thornaby.
Lourdes '92 —‘The film’
‘CLOSE Up North’ the BBC current affairs programme is screened on Thursday evenings at 7.30pm on BBC2.
The ‘92 Diocesan Pilgrimage will be screened, hopefully on 17th December, the last in series.
The BBC team followed the pilgrimage in all its aspects, including the Church as seen through 50 years of Bishop Harris’ priesthood.
A programme which will be of interest not only to our 1,400 pilgrims of ‘92 but also to all members of the Diocese.
Check the TV schedules on Thursday for the actual date of transmission.
Meanwhile, producer James Macalpine sends his renewed thanks to all who co-operated in the making of this film.
£1,560 from sponsored walk
THE autumn sponsored walk from Egton Bridge realised £1,560 for the Lourdes Sick Fund.
Despite the heavy mist nearly 40 walkers assembled at St Hedda's Church and were led by John Brown who had arranged and co-ordinated the walk.
Sincere thanks to all the walkers and especially to the many sponsors for their generosity, also to the support team.
Details of future fund raising events will be published in Voice.
Around the Diocese
Cleveland Newman Circle
In October, Mr John Mulholland gave a talk entitled ‘Our Neighbours in Brazil’ to the Circle at St Patrick's, Fairfield, Stockton.
His first attended a Newman meeting in this area when Evelyn Waugh spoke.
This evening's talk was primarily an account of Mr Mulholland's recent journeys, lasting over several months, in Brazil where he was working with CAFOD.
By displaying a map of the area he made it easy to understand his talk and he emphasised the enormous size of Brazil.
The direct journey between the two towns he visited was further than that from London to Moscow.
There are two Brazils, one seen by many international visitors, the other found in much of the country.
He had visited shanty settlements known as fa las owing to their  resemblance , at a distance, to honeycombs.
He told us of families who had built ramshackle premises on unused land only to see them bulldozed.
In one case this had happened twice on the same land and was about to happen a third time for bulldozer had arrived to destroy a newly erected building where a woman stood in the way, she was one of the nuns helping in the area; the defence was successful.
Decorations
Typically in these places there was no sewerage, cholera was rampant.
Children had often only one years' schooling.
We were shown photographic slides of people enthusiastically learning how to read and write.
Despite the circumstances of living, the photographs presented showed how the Festival of St John the Baptist was celebrated with many attractive decorations.
In the big cities children lived in the streets.
In one urban area 85 children had been murdered by squads set up by business men who regarded the children as vermin who robbed.
Some centres had been very successful in training these children to make valuable objects.
Intentions
We were shown pictures of the far West in the Amazon valley where forests were cleared; for one good mahogany tree trunk 100 trees might be destroyed.
Land was reclaimed and settlements begun but then, owing to the poor quality of the ground following deforestation, they became the home of cattle.
In Brazil there were good intentions, good laws were made and then not observed, a school for natives built but no provision for teachers.
Finally he showed us examples of the work being done by Christians and others fighting AIDS and HIV in communities in Sao Paulo on the East coast.
Fr.
Pat Clarke and Sr. Gariella were prominent, with others, in organising these endeavours.
He concluded by pointing our how the work of CAFOD was an example of practical charity.
Hosting
HOST is looking for friendly people who would like to invite a lonely overseas student studying in Britain to spend Christmas, Easter or a weekend in their homes and experience British home life.
If you know of any parishioner who would be willing to invite a student the address to contact is:.
Spread the good news
WHAT's on in your church, your parish, your Youth group, your Prayer Group?
Special Days?
Fund-raising events?
Concerts?
Special celebrations?
Liturgical occasions?
Why not let the people know?
Send your parish Newsletter or other information to the ‘Sunday Breakfast Programme’,.
The Religious Broadcasting Team will do the rest.
Your announcement will be on the airways on Sunday morning.
Listen to Radio Cleveland, 95FM, between 7.30am and 9am on Sundays.
Bishop's visit to Kirkbymoorside
BISHOP Augustine Harris went to St Chad's Kirkbymoorside, at the invitation of the parish, to celebrate Mass.
Fr Alberic Stacpoole, OSB, PP, welcomed Bishop Harris and concelebrated Sunday Mass.
The Papal flag was flying and Mass was celebrated in thanksgiving for the work of the Bishop during his time in the diocese.
A full turnout of altar servers assisted, young children brought up gifts and their drawing at the offertory, all the Special Ministers came first to receive Holy Communion, and after Mass people gathered to greet the Bishop and share wine and refreshments in the parish house.
World record
Fr Alberic spoke about the work of the Bishop and commented that he had consecrated two new cathedrals in his time, a record achievement.
He presented the Bishop, from the parish, with a crystal goblet engraved with the symbols of the two dioceses.
The Bishop in his reply added that he had in fact consecrated a third pro-Cathedral; after extensive repairs, St George's in York had been re-consecrated by him.
Was this, he asked, a European and even a world record?
A cake made by Miss Catherine Lavan and iced by Mrs Rita Gibson, carried the Bishop's coat of arms, and the Bishop's motto ‘Serve the Lord with Gladness.’
In his homily, the Bishop had referred to George Villiers, the second of Buckingham who died in Kirkbymoorside in 1687.
In his last letter he wrote: ‘The world and I shake hands for I dare affirm we are heartily weary of each other.’
Bishop Harris went on to comment: ‘We must make choices in this world between the true God and other influences which can dominate our lives, e.g. the pursuit of money, health, fashion, career.
God is waiting for our choice.
When we pray or repent or worship God this does not increase God's love.
God's love is always infinite.
Our response means that his constant offering of love enters in to complete our lives.
Fr.
Alberic led the parishioners in wishing the Bishop joy in his retirement, and in his new work back home in his Liverpool archdiocese.
Bishop Harris with Fr.
Alberic, OSB and parishioners of Kirkbymoorside.
Helping Cafod in Somalia
PUPILS and staff at Newlands School, Middlesbrough, FCJ raised £1,550 for CAFOD's work in Somalia and this was given to Mark Harris, the regional co-ordinator for CAFOD in November.
The sum was raised by a wide variety of events including sponsored penalty competitions, swimming and silence; cake and sweet making; guess the name of the frog, own clothes day with uniform for the staff and portrait photographs.
CAFOD also exists to raise awareness of the causes of poverty and injustice in the Third World and the steps we can take to bring about change.
This involves:
.
listening to the voice of the poor;
.
reflecting on their needs in the light of the Gospel and the Church's social teaching;
.
responding with a programme of action.
The agency's Education department runs regular campaigns that involve study and a practical response from participants.
CAFOD's 1992/93 Campaign looks at Latin America.
Titled ‘Land, Hope…and Glory’ it celebrates the resilience of the continent's people in the face of 500 years of oppression.
There is a particular focus on the distribution of land.
The department organises programmes for adults, schools and youth groups, the Justice and Peace network, priests and religious communities, and produces a wide range of resources and liturgical materials.
These include books, posters, spiritual reflections, fact sheets about specific countries and aid programmes, videos and tape/slide presentations.
CAFOD also produces regular publications for fundraisers, parish groups, schools, Campaign activists and others.
Youth News
Postgate House
POSTGATE House is the residential youth centre for the Diocese of Middlesbrough.
Its primary purpose is to provide a place for the young people of the Diocese to spend time together to develop their faith and to offer training programmes for those in parishes working with young people.
The centre is also used by special needs groups such as young people from inner-city areas, handicapped groups and is part of a programme in which the Team works with young offenders.
When it is not being used for these purposes it is available for use by other organisations.
Bookings are only accepted however, from groups of people who have a leader who will be responsible for them.
Accommodation
There is sleeping accommodation for 25 people at Postgate House.
Twenty of these places are in rooms fitted with bunk beds: two for eight people and one for four people.
In addition there is a three bedded room and two single cubicles where group leaders may be accommodated.
Bedding is not provided: sleeping bags, pillow cases and towels should be brought by guests.
The house is centrally heated and there is an efficient hot water system which supplies wash basins in the dormitories and down stairs shower rooms, each with two showers.
Costs and Bookings
All enquiries and bookings should be made through the warden at Postgate House by letter or telephone.
Lartington
At Lartington we learn to share,
Each day begins and ends with a prayer,
The day time is filled with fun and laughter,
We help with meals, before and after,
We go on walks we play some games,
We collect things from the woodland, then
learn all their names,
But most of all we are there for our Father,
Jesus Christ who dies for us all,
He gave His life for us to be free,
I love him, and I know he loves me.
Weekend at Lartington
WE arrived at Lartington at 6pm on Friday night.
WE met Therese and then unpacked and had tea.
Lartington is near Barnard Castle, Country Durham.
Where we stayed is a church and is also the Diocesan Youth Centre for young Christians.
The weekend was about sharing, God and having fun.
We played games like Pictionary and body dice.
On Saturday we went walking with Fr.
Pat Cope in Hamsterley Forest.
Then we learned the hymns for mass the following morning.
We shared all the jobs and started and ended the day with a prayer.
The weather was mostly sunny but at times it was cold.
Therese who had made us very welcome said we were fantastic company and that the weekend was enjoyable.
The rest of us said that it was different, exciting and a chance to get to know each other better.
St Mary's College clean sweep
ST Mary's sixth form college, Middlesbrough was the scene of an action packed sporting contest.
The College stormed to victory in the annual challenge to their sister college from Blackburn.
The Battle for the Thorpe Cup was fought between two boys football teams in exciting matches.
St Mary's A team won 3–0 and the B team scored an impressive 9–0 against their opponents.
The girls from Middlesbrough St Mary's also swept the boards with a 24–14 scoreline in the netball match and a draw against a mixed hockey team from Blackburn.
This gave them a resounding lead in the contest for the McCormack Shield.
The return matches will be played in Blackburn on the weekend of March 13th when Blackburn's St Mary's College will be out for revenge.
Stage struck students
SIX stage-struck students from St Mary's Sixth Form College, Middlesbrough, seized the chance of a lifetime this week when they were offered the opportunity of working with the Royal Shakespeare Company, says a recent school report.
The six students, studying ‘A’ level Drama and Theatre Arts at St Mary's were chosen to help out with Britain's leading theatre company.
The Royal Shakespeare Company performing at the Rainbow Leisure Centre, Coulby Newham and the lucky students helping with their production of Richard III.
Christine Lawson is helping withe scenery; Tom Ashton and Michael O'Hare are stage hands; Bridget Ladyman is a dresser; Naomi Hayes and Kirsty Garbutt are wardrobe assistants.
Jacob's Well
THE Autumn Newsletter of Jacob's Well, in Beverley, gives an interesting and varied account of their activities.
Poland, Russia, Bulgaria, Romania and Afghanistan have all received help thanks to generous donors and benefactors.
Beryl and Peter Benyon acknowledge their thanks and say: ‘We wish to thank you for your great support and for being part of our work.
Without your help this year the work would not have grown, but it has.
We give thanks to God.
May you have peace and joy this Christmastide.
For further information contact:.
Pro-life event in Hull
HULL's first ever pro-life demonstration was held in October.
Bishop O'Brien kindly led a special prayer service in St Charles Church, arranged by the S.P.U.C. Hull Branch.
The branch then help up posters and leafleted in Victoria Square, meeting with some friendly responses as well as some  regrettable abuse.
On the 25th anniversary of the Abortion Act, branch chairman Brendan Gerard spoke on Radio Humberside's ‘Soapbox’, explaining the pro-life position and alerting listeners to the tragedy of 40 million unborn children killed worldwide every year.
The Hull delegate to the National Conference of the Society for the Protection of Unborn Children, in Nottingham in October, was surprised to learn that China is less than half as densely populated as the UK, despite the forcible abortion and sterilisation carried out on women in China and used as a means of genocide in Chinese-occupied Tibet.
Brendan Gerard heard how the ‘population’ explosion exists only in the minds of the Chinese government and of western population lobbyists desperate for an excuse to justify their activities.
CATHOLIC COUNTRYSIDE
SALES of mistletoe at Christmas have been reducing over the past decade or so.
The decline has occurred since the 1950s, but little of the mistletoe on sale came from British sources.
Much is now imported, especially from France, for few British gardeners can produce this parasitic growth.
It will grow on several varieties of British tree, the apple being the favourite, although others include the plum, poplar, hawthorn and mountain ash.
It will grow on the oak too but this is by no means common.
In fact, when the Druids found mistletoe growing upon the oak they regarded it as magical and raised the status of both oak and mistletoe to one of holiness!
Thus both became sacred to the Druids.
Plant seeds
The growth occurs when the seed finds its way into a groove in the bark.
In the wild, birds wipe the stocky seed flesh from their beaks to deposit the fertilised seed into a space where, if left for three months, it might flourish.
But a very tiny proportion will germinate, either because they are washed from the tree by rain, brushed out by the actions of wild creatures or even because they have not been fertilised.
If you wish to encourage mistletoe to grow upon an old apple tree, you should not use seeds which are left after being hung inside the house over Christmas — these will have dried out and besides, winter is not the time to plant them.
Keep a sprig separate from the decorations and pop it into a vase of water in a cool place, and keep it until spring.
Press it into a crack in the bark on the underside of a branch, securing it if necessary, and then wait.
You should plant many seeds, for the chance of success is slight.
You may produce home-grown mistletoe, so desirable at Christmas..
For centuries, it has provided an excuse for people to kiss each other, even encouraging shy folks to kiss their hearts' desire.
The Druids used mistletoe at Yuletide, which was their winter festival.
They called it All-Heal and laid it upon their altars as an emblem of the advent of the Messiah.
So highly regarded was the mistletoe, that it had to be cut with a golden knife.
For this reason, it was called the Golden Bough and was believed to cure diseases in humans and cattle.
Folklore
The origins of the kissing custom date to ancient Norse folklore and to a battle between Baldur and Loki.
Baldur was magically protected from everything produced earth, air, water or fire, but was hated by Loki because of this privilege.
Loki wanted to kill Baldur, but how?
Everything was useless against such protection, then he found something which did not grow from the earth.
It was mistletoe, a parasitic plant.
He made an arrow from a branch of mistletoe and gave this to the blind god, Hoder, saying he wished him to test it.
Loki made sure it was fired towards Baldur and the arrow killed him.
But the gods were kind to the stricken Baldur and restored him to life.
He gave the fatal arrow to Freyja, the Goddess of Love who then kissed everyone who passed beneath it and so the mistletoe became the emblem of peace and love.
Fr.
Bernard Hawksworth R.I.P.
IN his 47th year as a priest and the 75th of his life Father Bernard Hawksworth died asleep on 31st October, 1992, in his own Market Weighton home.
He has twice served as parish priest there over 10 years.
His deterioration through Alzheimer's Disease with its abundant frustrations had long been for him a physical and mental martyrdom.
Martha lovingly supported him to the end, friend and housekeeper for 25 years.
Bernard's spirit was sustained by ever-weakening awareness of the Eucharist and familiar prayers and by abiding grace.
Born in York on 16th October, 1918, he was baptised in St George's Church where he was to be ordained a priest on 8th April, 1945.
The monastery of the Poor Clares knew him well as a loyal altar server after his mother's early death.
Faithful
He has trained at Ushaw (1937–45) after office experience at Rowntree of York.
His father, Joe, and step-mother, Winifred Ryan, has met the costs of his Ushaw training.
St Patrick's and the Holy Name parishes in Hull successively knew his scrupulously faithful service over 18 years until he became parish priest of St Mary's, Market Weighton (1963–1968), of St Mary's, Grangetown (1968–1973), returning to Market Weighton (1973–78) before his last appointment to St Joseph's, Newby, Scarborough (1978–1982).
He retired through increasing ill-health.
Fr Bernard's years as an assistant priest were marked by enthusiasm and expertise over the whole range of his work, not least in the Scout Movement — finally as Assistant Commissioner — and in the schools and at Endsleigh Convent and College.
As a parish priest he also served as a diocesan representative on the first National Liturgy Commission and as a schools commissioner with the North Riding of Yorkshire in the diocesan office.
He achieved much in his quiet way for the Church and its people.
His record will be little noted as the years and colleagues and companions have passed, but it is a proud record of willing service.
A true priestly work.
May this shine out in him now in the presence of the Lord.
Amen.
50 priests at funeral Mass
The Reception took place at St Mary's, Market Weighton, on Tuesday, 3rd November, with Bishop O'Brien as Principal Celebrant at the Mass.
Bishop Harris was Principal Celebrant at the funeral Mass on Wednesday, 4th November, together with 50 diocesan priests.
Among the congregation which filled the church were representatives of the local Christian churches, Sisters of Mercy, together with people from all the parishes in which Father Hawksworth has served during his Ministry.
In his Homily, Canon J. O'Mahony, a personal friend for many years, paid tribute to the faithful service of Father Bernard through his own quiet way leading to his final illness and death.
Tribute was also paid to Martha, a devoted friend and housekeeper over 25 years, who supported him to the end.
The final Commendation and Farewell was led by Father Michael Murray PP., a daily visitor with the Eucharist during Bernard's final illness.
Private interment took place in York led by Canon O'Mahony with immediate family and Martha present.
May he rest in peace.
AMEN.
Family Ministry Course evening
THE new Family and Community Ministry Course commences in January with the first unit: ‘What is Family Ministry’.
This consists of a study day on Saturday 16th January, followed by three Wednesday evening sessions from 27th January to 10th February, 1993.
This unit will be conducted by Mrs Chris Smith, Pastoral Director at Ushaw, and people are welcome to attend this as a complete course in its own right, or as the first stage in the longer course which contains five further units.
There will be an information evening in the KSC Club, Southfield Road, Middlesbrough at 7.30pm, on Wednesday 9th December, 1992.
This will be an opportunity to find out more about the course, and how parishes can  be more active in helping families to provide mutual help and support to each other in carrying out their vital role in the Church and society.
These courses are a very important initiative not just for this diocese but for the whole country at a time when we need to find new ways of helping lay people and priests to work together in furthering the mission of the church.
So it is hoped that ALL PARISHES in the Middlesbrough area will try to send a representative to the meeting on 9th December.
For further information contact: Michael Foley,,.
Helping the blind
A braille edition of the Sunday Missal is now available.
Not only does this enable blind people to follow the liturgy but it also makes it possible for those who wish to become readers.
It is published in 15 volumes by the Royal National Institute for the Blind,.
It is available to blind people at a concessionary cost of £17.55.
The Association of Blind Catholics has a lending library of books recorded on standard cassette.
Details about the association can be obtained from Mr Paul Questier, ‘Mayfield’,.
CAUSE hamper appeal
CHRISTMAS is coming but for some people the goose isn't getting fat.
CAUSE (Catholics against Unemployment and Social Evils) have launched their annual appeal for hampers, for those who are not looking forward to Christmas.
Help fill a hamper for a family, if you wish.
Last year CAUSE were able to assist nearly 100 families thanks to your generosity.
What can I do??— Donations of gifts of food or goodies: gift tokens or donations can be left at the John Paul Centre (daytime or Knights of St Columba, Southfield Road,(evenings) to enable the CAUSE group to make up suitable Christmas Hampers.
Confidentiality is the keynote, hence no names of recipients.
The look: the smile: the tears occasionally: the promise of prayer: are the thanks the donors receive as the team deliver YOUR gifts to put Christ back into Christmas.
This year it is anticipated that more requests than every will be made.
More schools in the area have agreed to support the Hamper Appeal.
Many other schools already distribute gifts to the local community.
Financial donations to CAUSE may be sent to Mrs Pat McBride, Newlands Schools, Middlesbrough.
‘It is in giving that we receive’.