

No 135
AS THE JOBLESS TOTAL CLIMBS…
WHAT CAN WE DO?
THE news about the closure of Cammell Lairds, and redundancies at British Aerospace, Umbro and many many others, meant that the end of 1992 brought bad news to many of the people in our diocese.
Bishop Gray was very quick to speak out and express his ‘dismay and extreme disappointment’ at the announcement of Cammell Laird's closure.
‘It will be like taking the heart out of Birkenhead,’ he said.
He expressed his concern for the workforce and their families.
In an area of high unemployment, this decision, with its knock-on effect in the local economy, is nothing short of a tragedy.
Bishop Gray, with the Bishop of Chester, the Rt Rev Michael Baughen, and the Rev Dr John Newton, had jointly made efforts to bring the extra funding that was needed to give some hope to Cammell Laird.
There is hardly an area in the diocese where the scourge of unemployment is not biting hard, and our parishes have to do what they can for those who not only have no work, but see little prospect of employment in the future.
It is hard for parishes to know what exactly they can do for the unemployed.
They can of course pray for them, and to give that prayer high priority.
But what else?
To come together to help the unemployed has led many churches to take part in Unemployment Sunday.
This is an ecumenical venture, organised by Church Action with the Unemployed.
This will be kept February 21.
The importance of this Sunday is being realised more and more as the Churches face the sharp edge of unemployment.
There is an Unemployment Sunday fact pack available from Church Action with the Unemployed, with suggestions for prayers, for homilies, and practical action.
Keep on striving says THE BISHOP
WE HAVE just celebrated the Feast of Christmas, the Birth of Christ, the Prince of Peace.
As we look around the world, that might sound rather hollow.
Fighting continues in many parts, and large numbers of people, especially children, are dying through lack of food and water.
We also see many people striving to improve these conditions.
Envoys for peace are trying to bring warring factions together, and individuals and organisations are battling to feed the hungry.
Millions of pounds have been given by ordinary people in response to appeals for help.
Medical and rescue teams to quickly to disaster areas.
Often these people, who have responded to a need, are living out their Christian commitment.
Closer to home we see a rise in unemployment and crime figures, drug and alcohol abuse, in addition to higher prices in the shops.
There seems no end to the spiral.
Being the Bishop of an area which stretches from the North West to the Midlands, a I see a great variety of difficulties, yet I also see a wonderful breadth of support both spiritual and material.
Golden year
DURING June of this year, Bishop Gray will celebrate his golden jubilee, the 50th anniversary of his ordination to the priesthood.
A small committee is being established to make plans so that the diocese can share in the celebration.
It is hoped that representatives from our parishes, our religious communities and our schools will all be able to take part in the celebration.
The date fixed for the Celebration Mass is Friday, June 18, at Our Lady's, Birkenhead.
Further details will be published as plans are drawn up.
SPACE SUCCESS: St Simon's School at Hazel Grove launched their ‘Space Venture’ to raise money to give themselves more space in the school — a new mobile classroom.
After a wonderful effort by parents, teachers, children and parish, they achieved their aim quickly, and Father John Rafferty, the parish priest, had the pleasure of cutting the ribbon to open the classroom before Christmas.
The classroom is now fully operational, with a very happy pre-school group.
Father Rafferty is pictured with some of the children and group leaders and parishioners Lorraine Newcombe and Kath Kipling.
Homeless lobby a great success
MORE than 3,000 people lobbied Parliament at the beginning of December in the hope that the Government would address itself to the plight of the homeless.
The organisers of the Church National Housing Coalition described the lobby as one of the most effective political campaigns ever to have been undertaken by the Churches.
There were many representatives from churches all over our diocese who went to lobby their MPs.
They were armed with thousands and thousands of signatures they had collected from their parishes and their local communities in the weeks leading up to the lobby.
Initial results show that more than 90 per cent of MPs have agreed to undertake some follow-up action as a result of the lobby.
Niall Cooper, the national organiser, said that the lobby had been a tremendous team effort, bringing together a unique alliance of Church leaders, Christian organisations, tenants and people in housing need.
All those attending the lobby have expressed their outrage at the deepening crisis in housing, and many MPs were surprised by the level of concern and involvement of Church groups.
We must build on the success and continue to press all political parties to develop financial and social policies which ensure that sufficient affordable homes for rent are made available as a matter of policy.
Children in danger
WHILE many people are aware of Amnesty International, and its work for the release of prisoners of conscience, not as many know of its work for the rights of the children.
They now have formed a Working Group for Children as part of their overall work.
In 1989, the United Nations drew up a convention on these rights, signed by 74 countries.
This was to ensure by international law that children everywhere would be covered for all their needs.
It contains 41 articles — including the right to a name — through to health, education, and so one.
Sadly, more than 50 countries from Latin America through to Africa and the Far East, brutalise their children.
Thousands of children are homeless — they are called street children.
Having nowhere to go, they live on the streets and survive by theft and prostitution from the age of eight, and take to glue sniffing.
The children with no-one to protect them are in headlong confrontation with the police.
The way the police deal with them is brutal violence — making them swallow a complete glue bag, torturing them, burning out their eyes, cutting out their tongues and their ears.
This by the very people who should be protecting them.
Only by publicising the plight of these children can we hope to bring an awareness to their government and the rest of the world.
If anyone would like further information about this aspect of Amnesty's work, please contact.
Reach out to the poor
IF YOU want peace, reach out to the poor.
That is the Pope's message for World Day of Peace.
That will be celebrated in England and Wales on January 31.
The Pope states that alongside the relentless logic of war, prevalent in local conflicts across the world, conditions of extreme poverty are threatening peace.
Many individuals and even whole people are living in conditions which are ‘an insult to their innate dignity.’
The Pope's invitation to join with him in fasting and prayer at  Assisi on January 9 and 10 was accepted by leaders of the Jewish and Muslim communities, as well as other Christian leaders.
The Pope in his message for Peace Sunday, refers in particular to the problems of foreign debt, drugs, and mass migrations caused by grave economic difficulties.
He is at pains to stress that conflict, another cause of poverty, resolves nothing.
He asks that states be committed to rejecting all ‘temptations to secure economic dominance over other nations,’ thus renouncing profit and opting for solidity.
It's a worthwhile offer
MORE and more Catholics are interested in spiritual guidance — retreats.
Many with memories of school retreats that were a matter of being silent and often boring, wonder about the different types of retreat they hear about today.
Contemplative retreats, directed retreats, individually guided retreats, theme retreats.
The National Retreat Movement which has existed for 30 years to promote spirituality and retreats of all kinds within the Catholic community of England, Wales and Scotland, has the information available.
It also takes part in the ecumenical National Retreat Association which through its National Retreat Centre offers resources, information and an annual magazine called Vision which gives information about retreats and retreat houses.
The National Retreat Movement recognises that the parish is a vital context for the promotion of spirituality.
Clergy and parish workers seek spiritual support, parishes organise quiet days and prayer weeks, while catechists, RCIA teams and prayer groups want spiritual input.
Although parishes often have good resources of their own, they may wonder how to get things started, and sometimes there is a need for resources from outside.
Because of this, the National Retreat Movement has decided on a new form of membership — Parish Membership.
The NRM does not organise its own retreats but offers to members information, advice and a conference.
.
Information involves leaflets about the many different kinds of retreats, its magazine Vision, and details of courses and workshops around the country on spiritual guidance and parish-based retreats.
.
Advice offers suggestions to help organise prayer weeks to help organise prayer weeks or parish-based retreats.
.
Then there is the annual conference to which members are welcome.
Parish membership is £15 a year, and individual membership is £7.50.
If anyone is interested in membership of the National Retreat Movement, they should write to Sister Bonaventure, The NRM.
NEWS ROUND-UP
Thank you, Anne
ANN PLATT joined the editorial team of the Voice shortly after the present team came together.
She has faithfully contributed the Children's Corner for every edition since.
She has maintained a happy mixture of information, entertainment and stimulation in a neat package.
At times, pressure on space meant we could not do justice to the work she did for us, but nevertheless she continued to keep up the high standards she set herself.
Now her time and talents are required elsewhere, and we would like to say a sincere thank you, and assure her of our prayers and good wishes in the months and years that lie ahead.
Welcome sister
ST JOHN the Baptist Parish, Timperley have welcomed Sister Marie O'Donnell, who will be working in the parish each week, particularly to help those preparing for baptism.
Sister Marie was a teacher for 20 years, and a provincial of the Loreto sisters for 12 years, and more recently has been involved in pastoral care in the prison service at Strangeways and Risley.
The parish is delighted to have her assistance, and Sister Marie is very happy to have this new mission.
Off to Seville
CANON Kevin Byrne is leading a Diocesan Pilgrimage to Seville for the Eucharistic Congress from Monday, June 7 to Monday, June 14.
Because of the variations in the pound, the exact costs are not yet finalised, but the price will be something in the region of £479, which includes bed, breakfast and evening dinner.
There will be a variety of events at an English-speaking church, and there will also be optional excursions to Cordoba and Jerez.
The pilgrimage will be run by the Catholic Travel Service, with Dominic Demolder as the agent.
Further details will appear in the Voice.
Crib appeal
FATHER Michael Gannon wrote his first newsletter as Director of the Children's Society just before Christmas.
He highlighted the great work which the society continues to do, as well as the continuing need for an increase in their funding.
The Christmas Crib appeal brings in much needed revenue for the work of the society, and Father Gannon asked for the continued support of clergy, schools and people of the diocese.
Now a deacon
BROTHER David Christopher Jones IC, of Our Lady of Pity Parish, Greasby, was ordained deacon on November 23, by Bishop Howard Tripp, at the Rosminian House (St Mary's, Derryswood) at Wonersh, near Guildford, Surrey.
He has studied for four years at the Beda College in Rome.
Get a copy
A REPORT of the Diocesan Assembly held in October has now been sent to every parish.
Those who came to the assembly are requested to ask their parish priest for a copy.
Included in the report are the bishop's proposals for action in our parishes.
PARTNERSHIP IN PRACTICE: More than 130 heads, priests and governors of the diocesan primary schools met at Wistaston Hall in December to listen to and discuss with Father Jim Gallagher SDB, the introduction of the new National RE programme Here I Am.
Father Peter Morgan, Director of the RE Service, explained the importance of the partnership between home, school and parish.
He welcomed Father Gallagher once again in the diocese, confident that he would give a stimulating and informative day.
That his confidence was not misplaced was reflected in the enthusiasm of everyone present.
Bishop Gray gave his full support to the work going on in many of the schools and parishes, and expressed a wish that the programme would be quickly at the heart of all our schools.
The Bishop is pictured with Father Gallagher and Sister Catherine Darby of the RE team, and the other picture shows some of the delegates.
Our schools are backing CAFOD
SUPPORT for CAFOD is evident in an increasing number of schools in our diocese, reports John Mulholland, CAFOD representative for Shrewsbury Diocese.
‘During 1992, CAFOD has  featured as part of the life and curriculum in more schools in the diocese than before,’ John says.
‘That welcome development is true at both primary and secondary levels.’
Raising money to support CAFOD's work for the poorest in the world is one way in which schools are involved.
In the past year, at school assemblies across the diocese, John has been presented with cheques totalling the magnificent sum of £10,000.
In addition teaching pupils about CAFOD's work around the world is taking place in more and more schools.
Sessions range from a one-hour slide show by John on his visit to Brazil, to full ‘development days’ making use of CAFOD's educational resources.
John spoke to a conference of RE teachers in the diocese about CAFOD's educational resources and methods and comments: ‘CAFOD's high quality education resources enable teachers to explain the causes of poverty and its effects on people's lives.
This touches all aspects of the curriculum, history, geography, economics as well as religious education, which is at the heart of it all.’
John praises the teachers, including heads and RE specialists whose initiatives and commitment are promoting this work.
John Mulholland will be pleased to meet teachers to discuss CAFOD's work and educational resources.
Here's a warm welcome
THE Wellspring soup kitchen at the back of St Joseph's Church in the centre of Stockport is doing great service.
It is now open five days a week, including Saturday and Sunday.
Twenty-five to 30 people are able to have a midday meal there each day.
The kitchen opened on Christmas Day and Boxing Day, and had a full Christmas dinner on December 20.
While there is a steady stream of visitors looking to be fed, the volunteers are also needing a steady stream of food, especially soup.
And help in the form of money and labour is also welcome!
County plans for a new future
THE inaugural service of the Churches Together in Shropshire in Shrewsbury Cathedral on Sunday, January 17, will be truly representative of the Churches of Shropshire.
Bishop Gray will host the service, and with him will be the Anglican Bishop of Lichfield, the Assistant Bishops of Ludlow and Shrewsbury, the Rev J Samson (Methodist), the Rev P Turner (Welsh Presbyterian), a representative of the United Reformed church, and representatives of Councils of Churches and similar groups from all over Shropshire.
To symbolise their commitment to work together in the future, they will read together an extract from the Swanwick Declaration.
BBC's Radio Shropshire hopes to broadcast a recording of the service at 5 pm on the same afternoon.
The aims
Churches Together in Shropshire is the latest of a number of County Intermediate Bodies — since the formation of Churches Together in England — in 1990.
Among the aims of Churches Together in Shropshire (CTS) will be:
.
To support and encourage churches in Shropshire to work and act together.
.
To encourage and support local ecumenical groups and to enable communication between them and Churches Together in England.
.
To seek to serve Shropshire and give a united voice to the Christians of Shropshire.
.
A county ecumenical secretary has been appointed, and will be  commissioned at the service on January 17.
The inaugural meeting of CTS will be on Wednesday, February 10.
Telford is not included in the new body, because ecumenically speaking.
Telford is almost unique.
There will however, be closer liaison between Churches Together in Shropshire and the Telford Christian Council.
New president
ON the Feast of Our Lady of Lourdes (Thursday, February 11), the Lourdes Hospitality Mass will be celebrated at St Augustine of Canterbury, Latchford, Warrington, at 8 pm.
On the recent Feast of the Immaculate Conception, at the celebration at Sacred Heart, Moreton, Canon Healey announced that the Bishop has appointed Mrs Mary McDermott as President of Lourdes Hospitality, following Edgar Candlish's request to retire from the office.
Canon Healey has asked that Hospitality members should write to him as soon as possible with nominations for the duties of matron and chief handmade to the pilgrimage, both roles previously carried out by Mrs McDermott.
Meanwhile, Mr Candlish expresses his gratitude for assistance received during his period of office as president.
Ready to help
IF YOU are planning your 1993 programme of activities, why not invite Cato Crane and Co to help you raise funds?
The company are currently arranging the 1993 programme of talks, charity auctions and valuation days, and would be delighted to accommodate any parish who would like to make use of their talents.
They have conducted a number of Antique Roadshows in different part of the diocese, and would be pleased to hear from parish secretaries who would like to the come to the parishes.
There is no charge for their services.
Just right
ON February 3, Dr Mike Monaghan will address the Newman Circle of North East Cheshire on the subject of Justice and Peace, and the Integrity of Creation.
He follows Father Giles Hibbert OP, the chaplain to the circle, who took as his theme the topic of Righteousness and Justice at the December meeting.
Father Giles reflected on the Beatitudes — their original meaning and the meaning that has developed in the course of time, up to the present day.
All are welcome to the circle meetings, which are held at Loreto Convent Grammar School, Dunham Road, Altrincham, on the first Wednesday of each month.
Their revenge
IN keeping with all great hits Pied Piper II — The Rats' Revenge, continued the well-known saga of Hamelin city.
It's played by St Peter's Players at Hazel Grove.
Chris Webb, a parishioner, wrote the pantomime, which is being performed this weekend, January 9–10, in the parish centre.
Silver smiles IT WAS in November 1967 that Bishop Grasar invited Father John Burgon (now Canon) to take care of the newly erected parish of St Peter.
The building of two council estates meant that large numbers of people would be moving into the area.
After four years, Father Burgon moved on and the parish was given into the care of the Salvation Fathers.
In 1968, St Peter's Primary School opened, to be followed eight years later by the opening of the church.
In 1978, the parish was divided in two, and the northern part became St Paul's, Beechwood.
In 1986, the parish reverted to the diocese and Father John Gordon, the present parish priest, was appointed.
On November 27, 1992, the parish marked its Silver Jubilee.
Mass was concelebrated by Bishop Gray, former priests of the parish, and priests of St Bede's Deanery.
Among the guests were the Deputy Mayor and Mayoress of Wirral, Councillor and Mrs Peter Corcoran, Frank Field MP for Birkenhead, with local councillors and clergy and people from other local churches.
After Mass, there was a social evening in the school.
The picture above shows Canon Burgon (left), the first parish priest of St Peter's and Father John Gordon, the present parish priest.
A REMINDER TO DIOCESAN YOUTH
Diocese of Shrewsbury Catholic Youth Service
IF YOU have any news items, information of forthcoming events or photographs that you would like to be considered for publication on The Youth Page of The Voice, please send them to Paul Rowlands.
Material needs to arrive by the 8th of the month previous to publication.
Alternatively, material can be handed in at the Emmaus Evenings held at Dehon House on the first Friday of each month.
Let's hear about all the good things that young people are doing around our diocese.
Thanks for the challenge
KATRINA MURRAY tells of a special retreat
IT HAS to be said — a compulsory retreat was not an enthralling prospect.
Many sceptical remarks passed between the lips of the lower sixth at Loreto.
Altrincham, although personally I was looking forward to the retreat as time for winding down!
As it was, our retreat turned out to be much more than that — it was a warm experience where we shared thoughts and feelings with others, and where our static everyday lives were challenged.
And I, for  one will always remember that retreat.
A group of about 20 girls arrived at the Outreach Farm centre in Lancashire that wet Wednesday morning.
Our first challenge was put to us by Father Peter and Phil, the youth volunteer.
This was to figure out ‘Why are we here?’
It was very entertaining, despite the groans at the predictable, ‘We'd now like you to portray these ideas in a role play.’
It is impossible to describe all the uplifting and thought-provoking sessions we had at the Farm, but an especially wonderful experience for me was the fantasy meditation.
Phil led us through it, only adding the occasional sentence…we were walking down a path, do we turn left or right…?
I felt stimulated and refreshed by these imaginary events.
It really helped me to get my feelings into perspective.
I would say the highlight of the retreat was the night walk.
A stroll in the moonlight by the old St Joseph's seminary and the lake, and then looking down on the lights of Wigan.
It felt strange to be watching in silence all those lives going on, and although we were aware of all the comings and goings of their lives, they didn't even know we existed.
There was a fantastic atmosphere of pulling together, an almost overwhelming strength which bowled me over.
Again, it was the challenge to acknowledge God's presence in other peoples' lives as well as our own.
Dead Poets Society was quite a surprise film treat when we got back to the Farm, but as we watched, I noticed a certain relationship with the storyline and what we had been talking about.
The challenge to ‘seize the day.’
The next day we shared a three-course meal (I have to say the food was excellent, thanks to Jimmy and Martin, the youth workers at the Farm) called an ‘agape.’
This is a Greek work for love, and so instead of celebrating the eucharist, we shared this meal of love and friendship which brought in themes of the past two days — seizing the day.
Encouragement
We left with heavy hearts.
We could have stayed for longer.
We all enjoyed it so much, and not only enjoyed it, but gained something very special from the experienced.
Not only had we increased our self-awareness, but we felt content, happy with ourselves and we'd also received the encouragement to go for the things we want — to seize the day.
Peter, Phil, Jimmy and Martin — thanks for the questions, the insight, the atmosphere, the openness, the sharing, but most of all, thank you for the challenge.
MAGNIFICENT MYSTERIES: St Mary's College, Wallasey, presented highly entertaining performances of The Mysteries at English Martyrs, Wallasey, in December.
The Mysteries, based on the York and Chester Mystery Plays, is one part of a trilogy of plays.
St Mary's chose to perform The Nativity, which was appropriate for the time of the year.
The pupils responded magnificently under the direction of drama teacher Mike Quinn, with outstanding performances from all the cast.
The musical content of The Mysteries was provided by a group of musicians and singers made up of pupils and staff and even the school chaplain, Father Nick Kern on bass guitar.
Everything about the production was of a very high quality.
It provided a thoroughly enjoyable and meaningful evening's entertainment.
The picture shows some of the cast during the final song.
First youth day lights the fire
ST THOMAS More Deanery held their first ever Deanery Youth Day towards the end of last year, at St Edward's Church Hall, in Runcorn.
The theme of the day was Tongues of Fire.
Through music, drama and discussions, we examined the world in which we live, with particular reference to homelessness, poverty, the environment, and helplessness.
The feedback from the small discussion groups was most encouraging.
As a result many of the groups have decided to take practical measures to improve the society in which we live.
Such measures include producing Mass tapes to ensure that the housebound do not miss out on hearing Mass in their local parishes, and to form a young people's liturgy group, so that we can continue to celebrate the Eucharist in style.
The groups came together to share their thoughts with everybody else, and through drama and collages, young people between the ages of 11 and 18 from Runcorn, Warrington and Frodsham were able to share their ideas with each other.
Together, everybody planned the evening Mass at St Edward's.
Jim McQueen and the music group from St Chad's provided the music, while the homily and reading were prepared by ourselves.
The celebration of the Eucharist itself was a very enjoyable and moving occasion, that brought people of all ages together.
The event came to a close with a disco which rounded off an absolutely brilliant day that was a very moving and thought-provoking for all concerned.
Roll on the next youth day.
Two follow-up meetings have been arranged for all young people interested in producing Mass tapes and the youth liturgy.
MATURE HELP FROM SIX OF THE BEST!
During last year's summer holidays, 57 handicapped or deprived children were able to enjoy a week of varied activities with the help of six girls from Upton Hall Convent School on the Wirral.
Michelle and Elizabeth Irwin, Sarah and Susan Christley, Danielle Greenall and Vicky Gorse, led by Mrs Jane Christley, organised trips to the beach, and country walks.
Using St Catherine and Marina's Church Hall in Hoylake, the children enjoyed noise games and sing-songs, puppet-making and on one day, a bouncy castle.
Mrs Christley said that the girls' help was invaluable.
‘They showed great maturity and care, quickly building up a relationship with the children.’
TALKING POINT by TREVOR LIGHTBOWN Headteacher of St Mary's College, Wallasey
Are league tables fair?
THE league tables of school exam results have been in the local and the national papers, and have been featured on the television.
What are your thoughts?
Should the results have been published?
It is a fact that lists of exam results make no allowance for the academic levels of a school's intake of pupils.
Can we really compare the exam results of a grammar school in leafy suburbia with those of a non-selective school in a deprived inner city area?
How do we add up the value of a school's work for its pupils, not just academically but in all sorts of other ways?
What of the merits of a school's pastoral care of pupils, the extra curricular sporting and other activities, school visits at home and abroad, foreign exchanges, the youth club, school productions, links with industry, links with the community, and much more, including things that never become public knowledge?
All these added values should concern us, as should the question, what motivates us?
What of faith, and understanding of what the gospels teach?
What nourishes a Catholic school?
From where and whom does it draw its strength?
Good teaching and good learning must be a constant target for a staff of any school.
But in a Catholic school especially, fundamental and crucial is that striving for unity and service, which comes from the teaching of Our Lord.
And how do we measure our response to that?
Education cannot be assessed on the simplistic measure of a league table of exam results.
And yet, as a parent and a school teacher, I am conscious of the importance of results.
When a pupil leaves, with him or her goes some of that added value and its potential which the school has sought to generate.
The pupil also takes to the prospective employer or the university admissions tutor the raw scores of exam results.
They do matter.
At the end of it all, I am left with an uneasy feeling.
What of the many schools with dedicated staff who do so much for pupils in deprived areas?
League tables inevitably put these schools at the bottom.
Is this the way to recognise the merit and growth of all our people — people made in the image and likeness of God?
The best job in the world
MY name is Dave Marsden.
I am the youngest member of the new youth team at Dehon House.
There are four of us — Monica, who is 25, Margaret 23, Alban, 20, and myself 19.
We live and work with three priests from an order known as The Sacred Heart Fathers.
Father Chris and Father Paul lead the retreats, and Father Stephen is vocations and promotions officer.
He is an excellent cook, as is Margaret but that is slightly off the point!
I started working here in September 1992 and will finish in July 1993.
The youth team are employed either on a one or two year programme.
I am here for one year.
How did I get the job?
I was approached by my head of RE, Marie Kelly, last summer, after completing two years of A-level study at St Mary's College, Wallasey.
I was told that there was a position at Dehon House for a year's employment and would I be interested?
I went for a chat with Father Chris and eventually got the job.
I had known him for a number of years.
I cam to Dehon in my fourth and fifth year at school and I am now in my fifth year of attending Emmaus Evenings.
I really am having the time of my life.
This is the best job in the world.
It gives me the opportunity to see God in young people and watch them develop in their faith in the short time that they are here.
Everybody here is brilliant.
I couldn't ask for a more caring and loving bunch of people.
I am truly blessed.
I look forward very  much to seeing you all in the coming months.
Love and Prayers.
PUPILS and staff of Upton Hall Convent School on the Wirral took part in the 1992 Amnesty International Christmas Card Campaign.
The event was held in the school library and messages of hope were written to prisoners of conscience all over the world.
More than 200 cards were sent to countries in South America, the Middle East and Asia.
Throughout the day, Bud Richards, chairman of the Wirral group, was available to offer advice.
When the cards were written, they were taken to the school chapel where prayers were said for everyone imprisoned for their beliefs.
Each girl lit a candle and placed it at the altar, symbolic of the light of Christ which burns throughout the world.
ON COURSE: Twelve members of the Spectrum Inter Church Youth Worker Programme finished the course at The Wellspring Centre, Stockport, and were presented with their certificates by Father John Rafferty.
Twelve other members will continue their course through to Lent this year.
If you work with young people in a Church-based youth group — or would like to — and are interested in the Spectrum Course, please contact Una Doyle at The Catholic Youth Office at Stockport.
THREE students from Aquinas College, Stockport, completed a 60-mile sponsored walk from Canterbury to London in aid of CRISIS, to raise money for the homeless.
This was the second time they had done the walk, and they found it tougher than in previous years.
They raised between £400-£500 from staff and students.
THE first students at Aquinas College, Stockport, who have studied on a BTEC course, had an assignment to set up and run a branch of the Yorkshire Bank in college.
They had to conduct market research, advertise and promote the bank, as well as look at health and safety aspects involved.
Two of the staff of the Yorkshire Bank trained them.
CONGRATULATIONS to Plessington Catholic High School, Bebington, champions of Great Britain senior girls' cross-country.
THE under-16 girls' team of All Hallows, Macclesfield, were champions of Great Britain in the National Catholic Cross Country Championships at Bebington.
The under-14 girls and the under-12 boys were runners-up, with the under-14 boys third, and the under-12 girls fourth.
ST JOHN'S Primary School, Bridgnorth, has enjoyed another successful autumn of cross country running.
The first and second year girls' team (Gemma Becke, Holly Lees, Martha Hocking, Sarah Hodgson and Hanah O'Boyle) were the first from the school to win three consecutive races.
They have also won the Shropshire Schools (middle size schools) Championships for the last three years.
Gemma Becke was the first girl to win three races in a row.
Gary Hodgson, captain of the third and fourth year boys' team, was the first pupil from the school to win four consecutive tournaments.
The third and fourth year girls' team (Bryony Parkyn, Debbie Hopkins, Esther Gilbert, Ruth Baker, Sarah O'Boyle and Katherine Greenwood) came second at the Shropshire Schools races at Much Wenlock.
Bryony, returning after breaking her leg, came third, the same position she held the previous year just before her accident.
It's time to celebrate
THIS year marks the 80th anniversary of Catholic education at Harrytown School, Romiley, Stockport .
The original school was opened in 1913 by the Sisters of Our Lady of Evron, and although many changes have taken place over the years, the school continues to thrive and would like to mark this milestone by celebrating the life of the school across the decades.
A small planning group is being formed to organise a grand reunion of as many former staff, pupils and friends of the school as possible.
If you would like to help, have any memorabilia of any age, or could provide contacts with former pupils or staff, please contact the school.
Meanwhile Harrytown is one of only 13 schools nationally to be involved in phase one of the Technology Enhancement Programme.
There are 25 year-ten pupils at work on the project.
This involvement has meant that the school has been able to open a new technology suite — pictured above.
The money for the suite has come from three sources — £35,000 under the Technology Enhancement Programme (TEP) organised by the Engineering Council, £20,000 from the Gatsby Charitable Foundation (the Sainsbury family), and £15,000 from Stockport Council.
YOUR VOICE
Just a gimmick
REGARDING your story about the dancing display at St Wilfrid's.
This could be the conversation of some of the ladies who had been in the church on that occasion:
‘Wasn't it lovely?
Didn't the girls act and dance well?
I really enjoyed it.
Such a change from Sunday Mass.
I thought it was grand.’
Just the kind of remarks one would hear as parents come out of the display of their children at annual ballet school spectacular.
What then was the spiritual harvest?
Do you think the children of the congregation went away with a great love of the mass?
Did the children gain a deeper knowledge and appreciation and love of the mass?
Did they learn anything more about the divine sacrifice?
Did it make them stronger in their faith so that when they leave school and face the terrible temptation of the world, the fact that they danced on the altar during mass strengthen them against the temptation?
I think that the whole business was just another gimmick to add to the many introduced to the Church over these last 20 years.
Why not teach our children some doctrine?
Grace, the sacraments, the church is divine, Our Lady, the saints, etc.
Perhaps if we fed our children on some solid doctrine and not gimmicks they would not be leaving the Church in such numbers.
Very worried mother.
The West is in trouble
PLEASE will somebody explain to me  what Collaborative Ministry means?
Surely the laity have always worked with their priests in various capacities?
It has always been so.
But it must be remembered that a priest is different from the laity.
This is being forgotten.
I have heard that one day there will priestless parishes, and communion services conducted by special eucharistic ministers.
Why do not the Bishops of England and Wales sit down and ask themselves why there is a shortage of priests, why there are not many vocations, and why laity are lapsing in numbers, including many young people?
Yet in the Middle European countries, Africa and India, the Catholic Church is expanding.
Seminaries cannot cope with the number of young men wanting to enter.
It is the West which is in trouble.
Cardinal Heenan warned a long time  ago that by the year 2,000 there would be no Catholic Church in our country if something was not done to rectify things.
I ask what is being taught in our schools, and in our seminaries?
We need the Universal catechism that will shortly be available.
The powerful chain
I THOUGHT I should draw  your attention to the Merseyside Pro Life Chain which was held in October, in the Liverpool city centre.
In gale and hailstones, 125 pro-Lifers from Merseyside met at the pier head and brought the attention of shoppers to the plight of the most defenceless of all.
Chris Walsh, president of SPUC, John Livingstone (Liverpool councillor), Dave Alton (Merseyside MP) and Joe Benton (Bootle MP), addressed the gathering.
On the 25th anniversary of the Abortion Act, this was a successful demonstration on behalf of all true Christians.
God bless.
God bless them all
I WOULD like to convey my many thanks and praise to all the helpers, workers, nurses and priests, and to my Bishop, for the joy I received through their care and kindness at Lourdes.
I cannot find words to thank them enough.
I am 76, and go with the hospital.
And the care these young folk give us is fantastic.
One young person gave up a holiday to America just to help us.
I only want to say through the Voice: I am truly grateful to them all, and God bless them all.
I pray every night for them.
OUR VOICE
Let us be channels of peace
AS WE move into 1993, our hope and prayer for all is for a peaceful and grace-filled New Year.
Each year the Church asks us to begin with a day of prayer for peace.
It is hard to believe what we witnessed last year.
The deep divisions which exist between people and the dreadful atrocities in so many parts of our world, the ethnic hatred, religious fanaticism, and racial strife are tearing apart the human family.
Such scars will take a lot of healing.
They will not simply go away.
As we pray for peace, we have to be makers of peace, channels of peace.
 The extremists, the fanatics, those in opposite camps, need some way of being reconciled, some means of communication.
There has to be a go-between.
The Holy Spirit has been described as the ‘Go-between-God.’
Yet the Spirit needs the human heart to be open.
Being peacemakers, we have to be the open-hearted go-betweens, to enable the Spirit to work through us.
Yet to be a go-between means being in the middle.
To be a healer, a reconciler, means being in the middle of the road, and the middle of the road is where you get knocked down.
Let us hope and pray that we have faith strong enough and trust deep enough to bring the love that our world so desperately needs.
President Mary
MARY BROGAN of Disley, a parishioner of the Sacred Heart parish in Whaley Bridge, is President of the National Board of Catholic Women.
Since it was established in 1938, the board has endeavoured to coordinate all the organisations for women in the Church, and to promote action in them.
It is consulted regularly by the Conference of Bishops, and in recent years has made great strides in making the women's voice heard, and enabling women to play their part in the collaboration at all levels in the Church.
The second issue of the newspaper Catholic Woman, has just been published.
Mary and the rest of her national co-ordinating team hope that it will be helpful in facilitating the consultation processes that they are engaged in.
Big business blamed
BISHOP Patrick Kalilombe of Malawi, who directs the Black and White Christian Partnership in Birmingham, delivered the keynote address that opened the Upper Sixth One World Week conference at Loreto Sixth Form College, Moss Side, Manchester.
Bishop Patrick said that attempts to create a fairer and more just world were being blocked by business interests.
Attempts by the Church to solve trade problems like Third World Debt were branded ‘political’ by those whose intrinsic interest were in preserving the economic status quo.
At the same time, our own responsibility to be aware of our actions and how they affected the less developed countries should not be overlooked.
Guest speakers then led sessions of workshops and discussion groups.
Speakers included Vin McMullen of CAFOD, Tim Byains of Church Action on Poverty, Liam Black of CRISIS, Mary Cronin of the Catholic Aids Link and many workers involved in justice issues both in the Third World and Great Britain.
A Christian response to AIDS
MANY churches were focusing their prayers on the first Sunday of December to guide them in their response to AIDS.
One of the country's leading and Christian AIDS charities is ACET (Aids Care Education and Training).
It is a Christian response to AIDS and provides schools with AIDS education and practical home care.
AIDS touches areas of sickness, death and personal behaviour.
It brings out prejudice and fear.
People with the disease are often isolated and rejected.
as if massive trauma and often great suffering are not enough to face, those who are informed that they are infected have also to deal with social stigma (unlike many other diseases).
‘The last thing those facing such turmoil need is the condemnation of the Church or individual Christians,’ says Maurice Adams, who is the executive director of ACET.
‘Two thousand years ago, Jesus showed clear leadership when he showed love and compassion to those who had become the outcasts of society.
Can the Church today, can the individual Christian, really do any less?’
The Bishops of England and Wales have set up a working party to prepare guidelines for all our schools, to help their teaching about these questions.
Five years ago, schools were asked to develop their programme of personal relationships so that the right sort of foundations could be laid at an early age.
The way that the media has conducted a campaign using fear, and attitudes to so called safe sex, has given the wrong sort of messages to our young people.
It is up to our families, our school and our parishes to ensure that the right values are conveyed to our young people, and help them to develop positive attitudes.
THE VOICE PRESENTS NEWS FROM AROUND THE WORLD
Life is rewarding in this other Bethlehem
SISTER Catherine Hughes, a Notre Dame Sister, has been in Bethlehem for nearly two years — Bethlehem South Africa.
Even though she was more than ‘three score years and ten,’ she did not hesitate when asked to go to South Africa to help in the education of young Africans.
This is a extract from a recent letter to her friends and former students on Merseyside:
BETHLEHEM is on the east of the Orange Free State; it is farming country and Bethlehem as ‘house of bread’ has some meaning here — we are in the middle of wheat and maize growing areas, though the maize crop is ruined by drought.
Sister Gemma, a Holy Rosary Sister, and I have 11 schools to look after — three in townships (that is, black towns attached to white towns) and eight in rural areas (that is , farm schools, built on farm land for children of farm workers).
Children walk many miles to school.
They are all primary schools as there are no Roman Catholic high schools in the diocese.
We hope to make contact with the many Catholic teachers in state high schools to see if we can organise an RE programme for the Catholic pupils.
Teaching standards are very poor — lots of rote learning and copying notes from the blackboard.
A rigorous syllabus and lots of tests dictate the kind of work done.
The people's language is Sesotho, but from 11 years onwards, the medium of education is English, and Afrikaans is also taught.
The white parish in Bethlehem is mainly Portuguese, and we have a small cathedral, but most of the Catholics are in the black township (6,000) and there are two churches and two black priests there — that is where the cathedral should be.
Enjoyable work
Sister Gemma and I are enjoying our work, and we have been recently  joined by the third member of our team, Sister Dorothy Castles, a Notre Dame Sister from the Ipswich Province in America.
Our work is expanding and deepening all the time.
In our bungalow we also have  Sister Susan, a Franciscan Sister of Atonement, an order which began as Anglican at the turn of the century, and then came over to Rome.
She is from Derry, Northern Ireland, but has lived in New York state ever since she entered.
She has come to help a diocesan Franciscan order here.
So we are a mixed community of four Sisters from three orders.
We get on very well and take turns to cook, share the housework and the shopping.
Sister Ellen, our SND General Moderator, visited us at one of the farm schools.
Most of these schools are in very remote spots and this particular one is surrounded by mountains (close the borders of the kingdom of Lesotho and near the spot where Donald Woods escaped over the river to Lesotho, if you saw the film Cry Freedom.
Two new classrooms were being opened that day, a tree was planted and we watched traditional Lesotho dancing (the dancers kneel in a line behind each other and just jerk their necks and shoulders, like double-jointed ostriches, while someone plays a drum).
Both students and parents had a go at this.
I had to make a speech which a priest translated into Sesotho.
I had to direct my words to the teachers, so I said they were like cardinals because they were the hinges on which the new South Africa would turn.
Unfortunately, there is no word for hinge in Sesotho and Father George had a tough time trying to translate.
Last week I gave a talk to a parents' committee in one of our schools on how to make a constitution — I felt I was contributing to the growth of grass roots democracy in South Africa.
We have a portable overhead projector and it is one of the few schools with electricity, so I was able to use slides.
This went down very well, all translated into Zulu by the headmistress.
The schools are very inadequately provided with text books, so, as we are able to buy them, we give tutorials to the teachers on how to use them with pupils.
The teachers have been very badly trained, but are very open and welcoming — they even allow us into their lessons.
Recently I taught a class of Zulus (in English) and afterwards, the head offered me a job on the staff.
We are also giving fortnightly lectures to fourth year education students in Uniqwa, the University of Qwaa Qwa, a homeland near us.
It is all very exciting and rewarding, even though it is a little chaotic at times.
Quiet and peaceful
Our town, and diocese, are still quiet and peaceful, because it is mainly a rural area.
Two Notre Dame Sisters still live in Soweto, and are very calm about their situation.
LAURA STONE, of the Liverpool Notre Dame Association, who sent us this report, commented: ‘Let us remember all lay and religious people who are away from their own countries and families, working for those less fortunate than ourselves and bringing in the Good News from afar.’
Can you help poor Victor?
VICTOR is 18 and the eldest of a large family.
He lives with his parents and brothers and sisters in a run-down, derelict shack in Ecuador.
They have no beds or furniture.
Food is scarce and more often than not they go hungry.
Victor's job is to climb mango trees and pick the fruit for his father to sell in the city three hours away.
This is their main source of income.
Several weeks ago Victor came crashing down out of a tree and on to his back.
He was completely paralysed.
The family, poor, simple folk, took him to hospital in the city, but doctors there said that nothing could be done.
The family took Victor back home because had he died in hospital then they could not have afforded the funeral expenses.
They laid Victor on the floor of their shack and prayed for him, but Victor, realising that nothing could be done just gave up and refused to eat.
As the weeks went on Victor grew weaker and the family feared the worst.
Then a few weeks ago, Victor felt very slight movement in his leg and hope surged through him and he began to eat again.
With his father's help, Victor began slowly exercising his limbs, but doctors have said that he needs controlled therapy in the city hospital — something the family will never be able to afford.
Victor and his parents have precious little but what they do have is — us!
We have to be their voice as they ask for someone, anyone, to help Victor.
His quality of life can be improved through medical treatment.
If you feel you could contribute towards Victor's medical treatment, please contact  