

Church and Kingdom
THE ‘GOSPEL’ IN THE GOSPELS
Each of the Gospels, representing different versions of our Lord's life, was written with a clear evangelistic purpose.
They were produced to introduce enquirers to the authentic and essential facts of the gospel and used as a basis of instruction for those who were preparing for baptism.
Michael Green draws attention to the fact that the Gospels represent an entirely new literary form, which was neither history, nor biography, but a highly selective weaving together of fragments using preaching and teaching ‘arranged in order to show what sort of person Jesus was, to give the evidence on which the disciples had followed him and had adjudged him the Messiah and Son of God, and by the strongest possible implication, challenge the readers to make the same act of faith in Christ as they themselves had done’(Green 1970:229, 230).
In a more recent book he suggests that the gospel was also made available as  widespread and cheaply as possible by a novel process.
The gospel was bound in a compact book form rather than produced as a bulky scroll, with paper made from cheap papyrus rather than the very expensive vellum (i.e. treated skins)(Green 1979:125).
These also made for easier reference with page turning being easier than unwinding a scroll to find your place.
The early Christians may therefore be credited with the invention of the forerunner of the popular paperback!
There has been a great deal of argument as to what a new enquirer needs to know before or immediately upon making  a decision to follow Christ for that decision to be meaningful.
As we have seen, the Gospels were written to meet that need, so by examining carefully their contents we will gain an overall impression of the range of information which the early Christians deemed to be necessary for an adequate ongoing commitment to be made.
In the great majority of cases this teaching would be communicated orally, for Gospels were in short supply and many converts were illiterate.
As a general rule those who could read had to make their own copy.
Having to write it out was a good way to absorb the contents.
By switching from concentration on a few ‘proof texts’ in evangelism to a more balanced and comprehensive approach adopted by one of the four Gospels we might see better short and long-term results in our evangelism.
They give a clear picture of the identity of Christ, show the radical all-or-nothing nature of commitment to him, describe the life of discipleship as a corporate not individualistic activity, spell out the cost involved, and show how our present experience relates to the Kingdom of God, which is both present and yet still to come.
The first three Gospels each place a heavy emphasis on the ‘Kingdom’.
Matthew, to suit Jewish susceptibility, prefers to speak of the ‘Kingdom of Heaven’ rather than the ‘Kingdom of God’, because Jews were reluctant to utter the divine name.
He refers to the Kingdom fifty-two times, while Mark uses it nineteen times, Luke forty-four times and John only four.
The lack of Kingdom emphasis in John is probably explained by the fact that he is writing more in retrospect and possibly to play down false expectations in the contemporary Jewish understanding of the Kingdom.
The ‘Kingdom of God’ is only mentioned twice (3:3, 5) because it ‘calls to mind that apocalyptic Judaism which John seems for the most part to avoid.
Perhaps this general avoidance suggests his criticism of that Judaism which was content to await the miraculous vindication of Israel in the Kingdom of God and to ignore the necessity for inward conversion and rebirth’(Barrett 1960:173).
If John, apart from the important reference in Chapter 3, which we shall consider later, avoids the term  Kingdom of God, he does on the other hand lay more stress than the other three Gospels on Jesus as King of Israel (Barrett 1960:346).
The Gospels therefore lay a heavy emphasis on the gospel of the Kingdom and the Kingship of Jesus.
The writings of Donald McGavran do not make clear the relationship he sees between the Church and the Kingdom.
At several points he seems to use the terms interchangeably.
Church planting becomes synonymous with Kingdom building.
Mission is not simply self-proliferation, for the Church is not the Kingdom.
As Rene Padilla cautions, ‘To speak of the Kingdom of God is to speak of the purpose of God, of which the empirical church is little more than a pale reflection’(Padilla 1975:43).
The failure of church growth thinking, at least in its early formulations, to differentiate between Church and Kingdom has led to a great deal of misunderstanding and criticism.
It has resulted in Christian mission being caricatured as denominational aggrandisement, or a plan for survival for western-based churches and their related mission agencies.
Church growth thinking has been slow to come to terms with the problem of nominality within existing churches, and has consequently given the impression that mission is simply making more and more people to become like ourselves.
It has not sufficiently emphasised that the Church itself is in the process of becoming and through its disobedience can present a distorted or even completely erroneous picture of the Christian life.
In recent years this aspect has been corrected to a large extent through the response of Third World Christian thinkers and the radical discipleship movement which is emerging among younger Christians in the more affluent nations.
THE GOSPEL OF THE KINGDOM
From the outset the Gospels establish the relationship between the coming of the Kingdom and the appearance of the Christ.
John the Baptist, as the last in the long line of Old Testament prophets, called upon the nation to repent to prepare for the Kingdom whose coming was imminent (Matt.
3:2).
When his public voice was silenced through imprisonment, Jesus  established the continuity of his ministry with that of John.
Like him, he calls the nation to turn away from their sins because the Kingdom of Heaven is near (Matt.
4:23; 9:35), but with a significant new emphasis.
Whereas for John the Kingdom came as a threat to a people who were unprepared, for Jesus it represented good news to those who felt unworthy or excluded.
‘The transition from ‘the days of John the Baptist’(Matt.
11:12) to Jesus' independent career was signalled by the priority of ‘the reign of God’ over ‘the wrath about to come’…
The call to baptism bore immediately on the restoration of Israel and the concomitant salvation of the nations.
The key to the difference is the motif ‘free gift’, with which Jesus charged the expression ‘the reign of God’.
This is why his proclamation came eventually to be known as ‘gospel’ or ‘news of salvation’’(Meyer 1979:130).
As the Gospel narrative unfolds we are quickly made aware that the good news signifies more than rescue from divine wrath.
It is the establishing of God's Kingly rule, which entails both God's provision for his people and requirements from them.
The inauguration of the Kingdom is an act of God and not the result of human achievement.
However, its coming is not automatic; it requires a response from people.
For this reason the message of the Kingdom has to be both proclaimed as fact and promise.
Christ himself came preaching the Good News of the Kingdom, describing its nature and calling for a response.
His silent presence was not sufficient of itself.
The Kingdom needed explaining and people needed exhorting.
If presence was inadequate by itself as a strategy to extend the Kingdom in the ministry of Christ, it is even more deficient when left to his stumbling followers.
This need from proclamation is expressed with sensitivity in section three of the World Council of Churches Conference on World Mission and Evangelism Report (Melbourne May 12–24, 1980)The Church Witnesses to the Kingdom , in the following paragraph:
The proclamation of the Word of God is one such witness, distinct and indispensable.
The story of God in Christ is the heart of all evangelism, and this story has to be told, for the life of the present Church never fully reveals the love and holiness and power of God in Christ.
The telling of the story is an inescapable mandate for the whole Church; word accompanies deed as the kingdom throws its light ahead of its arrival and men and women seek to live in that light.
(1:3)
In fact Christ explicitly commanded his disciples to proclaim the Kingdom.
He sent out the Twelve to the towns and villages of Israel with this charge, ‘Go and preach, ‘The Kingdom of Heaven is near!’’
(Matt.
10:7).
Subsequently, with the sending out of the Seventy, they were to announce, ‘The Kingdom of God has come near you’(Luke 10:9).
Seeing the extent of the need and the readiness of the response, Jesus calls upon his followers to pray to the owner of the harvest that he will send out workers to gather in his harvest (Matt.
9:37; Luke 9.2).
Elton Trueblood comments, ‘when Christ said the labourers were few, He and those to whom He spoke were surrounded by large numbers of priests and semi-professional religious men.
The priests in Jerusalem were so numerous that they had to take turns in performing Temple ceremonies.
The dearth was of persons who could give the only kind of witness that counts with those looking for help, the kind that is couched in the first person singular’(Trueblood 1961:51).
The Kingdom must be announced by ‘insiders’ and not simply treated as a subject for speculation.
Within hours of his death, Jesus sets forth a world-embracing scenario.
‘And this Good News about the Kingdom will be preached through all the world for a witness to all mankind; and then the end will come’(Matt.
24:14).
This leaves no doubt as to the universal and abiding significance of the Kingdom concept.
Gospel preaching will be seriously deficient if this dimension is omitted.
The Kingdom gives content and purpose to the act of commitment.
It represents a radical and all-embracing transfer of allegiance.
It is therefore  essential for the Christian witness to understand to what ‘the Kingdom’ refers in Scripture.
THE OLD TESTAMENT EXPECTATION OF THE KINGDOM
Although the Old Testament nowhere expressly mentions the Kingdom of God, the world is represented as existing under his cosmic rule (Pss.
24:1; 93:1; 95:3).
His sovereignty is not confined to the created order but includes political powers.
As the King of the Nations (Jer. 10:7; Pss.
47:3; 99:2), he exerts his sovereign power by guiding their fortunes and acting in judgment.
Certain individuals and peoples become instruments of his justice and anger.
Thus, in a number of ways through the Psalms and Prophets the Old Testament continually reminds us that God is King (Snyder 1977:14).
While for the prophets the envisioned universal rule of God is an eschatological event, for the Psalmist the enthronement of Yahweh is ‘a present reality experienced in the cultic ceremony’(Klappert 1976: Vol.
II, 372–389).
For the prophets the new age of the Kingdom represented an era of peace, prosperity and justice for Israel brought about by radical economic and social changes (Mic. 4:1–5; Zech. 9:10; Isa. 2:4; 9:7; 42:3 and 65:21ff).
It would also transform the created order, resulting in geological changes bringing about a favourable climate and fertility of the soil, so that Israel surpassed her early reputation of being a land of ‘milk and honey’(Isa. 11:6–9; 32:14–20; 38:1f; Zech. 14:3f; Amos 9:13).
Conflict in nature would be resolved, with the lion lying down with the lamb.
Humanity would also be renewed, both physically with the disappearance of sickness, and the diminution of the power of death; and spiritually with men being given a ‘new heart’ through the Spirit coming upon all flesh and spreading a universal knowledge of God (Jer. 23:5ff; 31:31; Ezek. 36:24–28; Zech. 8:20–23; Joel 2:28).
As we noted in the previous chapter, the nation of Israel occupied a central place in the realisation of this hope, serving as the gathering-point of the nations (Isa. 24:23; Zech. 14:9; Obad.  21).
She would not achieve this position of prominence through conquest but through example and inspiration.
Thus, when John the Baptist and then Jesus spoke of the ‘Kingdom of God’ or the ‘Kingdom of Heaven’they were not introducing a novel concept which needed explaining.
On the contrary, the idea of the Kingdom had a long history in the life of Israel, and the coming of Christ coincided with a feverish wave of expectancy within the nation.
They longed for deliverance from Roman oppression, and were encouraged to think that they would not have much longer to wait as the prophetic voice was heard once more in the land after centuries of silence.
As the crowds listened to Christ's unconventional preaching and observed his miracles they acknowledged him as sent from God.
After Jesus feeds the Five Thousand the crowd respond by declaring, ‘Surely this is the Prophet who was to come into the world!’
As they advance on him Jesus realises that they are about to seize him to make him King (John 6:15).
Similarly, when he enters Jerusalem crowded with pilgrims and with a politically charged atmosphere, they prepare a royal route and cry out, ‘Praise God!
God bless him who comes in the name of the Lord!
God bless the coming kingdom of King David, our father!
Praise God!’
(Mark 11:10).
Matthew in his version makes clear that this was no mistaken identification.
The event was staged to fulfil Zechariah's prophecy of the Messianic King riding into Jerusalem (Matt.
21:5).
However, the crowd missed the symbolism of his riding on a donkey in humility rather than a horse as military conqueror.
Chief among the political activists were the zealots, who were the Jewish first-century freedom fighters.
Their motivation was not simply political or patriotic, but religious.
By their guerrilla activities they hoped to generate a revolt against Rome, thereby hastening the coming of the Kingdom.
In the New Testament we read of the insurrection under Judas and Theudas (Acts 5:36, 37), and a further revolt under an unidentified Egyptian (Acts 21:38).
The eventual destruction of Jerusalem was brought about by the Romans to crush the  rebellion of Bar Kokhba who was styled by the Akiba, the most famous rabbi of the time, as the Messiah.
Israel's expectation of the Kingdom was not confined to the political activists and zealots.
It was also shared by the pious saints, referred to as ‘the quiet in the land’.
Other groups such as the Essene sect had withdrawn completely from society to await the eschatological consummation of the Kingdom.
They expected the angels to come down and join battle with them —‘the sons of light’— against their enemies —‘the sons of darkness’— and to give them victory over all other peoples.
Within the New Testament we find reference to pious individuals who were awaiting the redemption of Israel through the mission of a Messiah who would be King David's greater son.
Such longings find expression in the Song of Mary (Luke 1:46–55), the prophecy of Zechariah (Luke 1:68–79), among Andrew, Simon Peter, Philip and Nathaniel as disciples of John the Baptist, who were encouraged by their self-effacing master to transfer their allegiance to Christ (John 1:29–50), by spiritually discerning Pharisees such as Nicodemus (John 3:1–8), and in the case of Joseph of Arimathea, a member of the Jerusalem Council, who ‘was waiting for the coming of the Kingdom of God’(Luke 23:50, 51).
So Christ ministered in Israel to those who had preconceived notions about the coming Kingdom.
His many references to the Kingdom recorded in the Gospels must be seen against this historical background and contemporary context.
After being so intimately associated with Christ and hearing his parables of the Kingdom and private commentary interpreting those stories, his disciples still expected the Kingdom to come in the material and nationalistic terms of the Old Testament (Acts 1:6).
To what extent were they in line with Jesus' teaching?
THE NEW TESTAMENT REALISATION OF THE KINGDOM
Our Lord emphasises the continuity with the past when he inaugurates his public ministry with the announcement ‘The  right time has come, and the Kingdom of God is near!
Turn away from your sins and believe the Good News’(Mark 1:15).
‘The two Testaments are organically linked to each other.
The relationship between them is neither one of upward development nor of contrast; it is one of beginning and completion, of hope and fulfilment.
And the bond that binds them together is the dynamic concept of the rule of God.
There is indeed a ‘new thing’ in the New Testament…it has introduced a tremendously significant change of tense.
In referring to the Kingdom the Old Testament spoke in such terms as ‘Behold, the days are coming’.
But in the New Testament we encounter a change: the tense is a resounding present indicative — the Kingdom is here !’
(Bright 1953:196, 197).
For Jesus, the Kingdom of God represented an approaching new order of things.
This new order was no distant hope but already operative…
God's final saving act was already operative in Israel: now is the new creation, time of the new wine and the new cloak (Mark 2:21M!
The fields are ‘white’(John 4:35), the harvest ‘great’(Matt.
9:37)!
Now is the wedding, the espousal of Israel!
‘Can the wedding guests mourn?’
(Mark 2:19).
The young man dead through sin ‘is alive again’(Luke 15:24, 32), ‘so it is right to be glad’(Meyer 1979:131).
The reign of God has already come upon you (Matt.
12:28).
But in what sense can the Kingdom be understood to have arrived in the person and ministry of Jesus?
Part of the mystery is unravelled by our appreciating the differences in the concept of ‘time’ within the Bible and our modern western understanding.
For us time is a quantity measure.
For the Hebrews, on the other hand, it was a quality concept.
They thought in terms of a right or wrong time, rather than long or short duration.
Ecclesiastes 3:1–8 well illustrates their way of thinking, ‘There is a time for everything, a time for every occupation under heaven: a time for giving birth, dying, planting, killing, healing, knocking down, building, etc.’
’ For the Hebrew, to know the time was not a matter of knowing the  date, it was a matter of knowing what kind of time it might be.
Was it a time for tears or a time for laughter, a time for war or a time for peace?
To misjudge the time in which one lived might prove to be disastrous’(Nolan 1976:74).
The task of the prophet was therefore supremely to interpret ‘the times’.
So when our Lord spoke about the Kingdom of Heaven being at hand, he was referring to its being qualitatively present.
His public ministry inaugurates this new ‘quality time’, and his ascension to the throne of power and sending of the Spirit upon his disciples represents its coming in power.
The Kingdom of God as a new dimension of living opens up to those who turn away from their sins, evidencing a radical break with the past.
For them it begins to be present as an ‘insiders’ experience.
At the same time, for those who have not arrived at, or hold back from such a step of faith, the Kingdom is not yet.
Our Lord came to inaugurate the Kingdom.
As he began his ministry it was present in his person.
He represented the dawn of a new age which would never be engulfed by darkness.
His amazing words and miraculous deeds were signs of the coming Kingdom.
As his disciples were identified with him in his ministry and experienced the healing powers of the new age operating through them, so they became partakers of the Kingdom.
Wherever they went they represented a frontier of the Kingdom (Luke 10:1).
To the Pharisees, who were blind to the evidence before their eyes, and were postponing their hopes to the future, our Lord responded, ‘No one will say, ‘Look, here it is!’ or, ‘There it is!’because the Kingdom of God is within you’(Luke 17:21).
The Greek word entos translated here as ‘within’ should more accurately be rendered ‘among’you or ‘in your midst’(Nolan 1976:46).
The point Jesus was making was that it was all around them and they hadn't noticed!
In the Acts and Epistles Christians are regarded as experiencing the Kingdom as a present reality.
It is evidenced in the lives of believers who serve Christ in ‘Righteousness, peace, and joy which the Holy Spirit gives’(Rom. 14:17).
Paul describes the Christians in Colossae as having been rescued  from the power of darkness and ‘brought’(past tense) into the Kingdom of his dear Son by virtue of the saving work of Christ (Col. 1:13).
The church in Thessalonica is urged to live the kind of life that pleases God, who calls them (’ now,’not ‘one day’)‘to share in his own Kingdom and glory’(1 Thess. 2:12).
While John the Divine describes himself to the seven churches in Asia as your partner in patiently enduring the suffering that comes to those who belong to his Kingdom’(Rev. 1:9).
Alongside this emphasis of the Kingdom as a present reality to be experienced and enjoyed, there is an equally strong strand of teaching which speaks of the Kingdom as in the future and, therefore, to be anticipated and longed for.
This second strand, like the first, runs through the entire New Testament.
It is associated with the final curtain descending on present world history, when Jesus will descend from heaven in power to destroy his enemies and restore the entire creation.
This coming of the Kingdom will be a time of separation (Matt.
25:34; Luke 13:28) and judgment (Matt.
8:12; 2 Tim.
4:1).
It will also be a time of rejoicing and feasting in the Messianic banquet (Matt.
26:29; Luke 22:28–30).
The Kingdom is at the same time a heavenly as well as an earthly reality.
Our Lord left this earthly scene to occupy his throne and to sit at the Father's table.
For the believer the Kingdom as a heavenly reality is no more than one generation away.
Jesus said to the penitent thief, ‘Today you will be with me in paradise’(Luke 23:43).
Paul expresses his assurance to Timothy, ‘the Lord will rescue me from all evil and take me safely into his heavenly Kingdom’(2 Tim.
4:18).
The coming of Christ was therefore to inaugurate the Kingdom in a provisional form.
Its final consummation still lies in the future.
This future emphasis of the Kingdom is most strongly present in the Apocalyptic books of the Bible.
In the Old Testament the eschatological expectation is elevated to a transcendental level (Dan.
7:13ff, 27), while the book of Revelation represents the Kingdom as final consummation (Rev. 11:15; 12:10).
The coming glorious age co-exists with  the present evil age.
In other words, ‘The Age to Come has overlapped with This Age’(Ladd 1974:42) which results in intermingling and close combat.
Thus in his embodiment of the Kingdom Jesus confronts demonic powers which openly manifest their opposition.
We therefore find ourselves living in disputed territory.
‘The Kingdom has come, but is not yet perfected’(Mark 9:1; 13:26); ‘The enemy is stricken, but not yet destroyed’(Stauffer 1975:125).
There is one further related problem which we must now briefly consider, namely our temporal distance from the events described in the New Testament.
In the Gospels there is a powerful sense of imminence regarding the Kingdom.
Then it seemed that the consummation would follow soon on the heels of its inauguration.
Indeed it would come within the lifetime of Christ's hearers (Matt.
24:34; Mark 9:1).
Whatever the intended meaning of those words, there is strong evidence in the New Testament that many of the early Christians expected the Lord's return at any moment.
The German theologian, Wolfhart Pannenberg, emphasises this impact of the future on the present in Jesus' teaching.
‘God's Kingdom does not lie in the distant future but is imminent.
Thus, the present is not independent from that future.
Rather does the future have an imperative claim upon the present, alerting all men to the urgency and exclusiveness of seeking first the Kingdom of God.
As this message is proclaimed and accepted, God's rule is present and we can even now glimpse the future glory’(Pannenberg 1975:54).
The Kingdom is not and cannot be relegated to an appendix which follows the turning of the last page of world history.
This is an attitude of life which the twentieth-century Church urgently needs to recapture.
We must avoid the temptation to project time-spans from the past into the future.
We need to ‘feel’ time as well as measure it.
‘The eschaton is a future event but, to the extent that our lives are determined and qualified by it, it is also a contemporary event, an event that can be seen in the signs of the times’(Nolan 1976:76).
‘Now’ is not a panic word, but one which conveys the idea of both  opportunity and urgency.
It is not a command from God to advance on all fronts, but is a strategic word identifying and emphasising his order of priorities.
THE SIGNS OF THE KINGDOM
The signs of the Kingdom are clear pointers to the coming Kingdom.
The sign contains sufficient of the content of the thing signified to be more than a symbol.
But the sign acts as shield as well as pointer.
It shows enough to reveal the nature and genuineness of the reality, but not so much as to overwhelm.
Thus the sign can be ignored or disputed.
The clearest, most powerful ‘sign’ of the Kingdom is the presence of Christ himself.
In much recent talk about the Kingdom Jesus' centrality has been overlooked, or refuge has been taken in the concept of his anonymous presence which does not square well with the New Testament Kingdom emphasis.
The Kingdom of God is equally described as the Kingdom of his dear Son or the Kingdom of Christ (Eph. 5:5; Rev. 11:15).
The verdict passed on people in the final judgment will be determined by the attitude they adopted to Christ during their lifetime (Matt.
10:32, cf.
Luke 12:8).
The unrepentant cities will be condemned because they did not turn from their sins despite his mighty works (Matt.
11:21; Luke 10:13).
Christ himself will appear as the judge of all people to separate the sheep from the goats (Matt.
25:31).
He will discern between those who say ‘Lord, Lord’ as an empty profession and those who yielded their lives to the service of God (Matt.
7:23; Luke 13:27).
He will plead before the Father the cause of those who confess him (Matt.
10:32; Luke 12:8).
The presence of the Kingdom in the person of Jesus faces the individual with a clear-cut decision (Matt.
5:30; 15:8ff; Mark 9:43–48; Luke 9:62).
The signs of the presence of God are various.
It is to be seen in the healing ministry of Christ (Matt.
4:23; 9:35; Luke 9:11) and of his disciples who healed in his name (Luke 9:2; 10:9).
These healing acts follow directly on from his teaching about the Kingdom.
Yet these signs in themselves emphasise  the provisional nature of the Kingdom, because all of those who were healed in the New Testament subsequently became sick and died.
In the subsequent experience of the Church in exercising this ministry there have been many instances of failure, partial, delayed and temporary healing, reminding us that we live with the tension of the ‘now’ and the ‘not yet’of the Kingdom.
Tom Smail, writing from a charismatic perspective, maintains a healthy balance.
‘Within that tension of the already given and the still to come all Christians have to live — including charismatic Christians.
God gives enough evidence of Christ risen to call to faith, but not enough to compel to acceptance…
In the realm of healing much happens to authenticate Christ's present will and power to heal the otherwise incurable, and yet, often distressingly, enough fails to happen to serve to remind us that we are not yet at the last day, and to leave the mystery of the ‘not yet’ all around us’(Smail 1975:124).
Closely linked with healing is the casting out of demons .
This ministry was also exercised by Christ and his disciples.
Deliverance provided proof that the Kingdom of God had already come (Matt.
12:28; Luke 11:20).
This was especially significant for a society in which demonic possession was so prevalent and feared.
Such miracles constitute more than signs and wonders.
They are ‘mighty works’ demonstrating the powers of the Kingdom in operation.
They show that ‘Satan has met his match (Luke 10:18; Mark 3:27); the cosmic end-struggle has begun’(Bright 1953:218).
Instances of dead people brought back to life (Matt.
10:8; Luke 9:2; John 11:44) were also a sign of the life in abundance which Christ came to bestow (John 10:10).
When Jesus began his public ministry he made his manifesto the prophecy of Isaiah 61:1–2 which he selected and read in the synagogue at Nazareth (Luke 4:18, 19):
The Spirit of the Lord is upon me,
because he has chosen me to bring


good news to the poor.
He has sent me to proclaim liberty to the
captives
and recovery of sight to the blind;
to set free the oppressed
and announce that the time has come
when the Lord will save his people.
Such promises were meant to be fulfilled in the life of Israel in the provisions of the year of Jubilee scheduled for every forty-nine years.
However, there is no evidence for that provision of the law ever being implemented.
If this is indeed the case, the significance of Jesus' words to the congregation as he gave back the scroll, ‘This passage of scripture has come true today, as you heard it being read’(Luke 4:21), is even more poignant.
Jesus liberated not through a programme of political activism, but simply through his spoken word.
His word conveyed power and achieved results as it had from the time of creation itself.
Western commentators have frequently ‘spiritualised’ this prophecy in the sense of individualising and internalising its application.
The ‘poor’ become the spiritually impoverished, the ‘captives’those who are enslaved to sin, the ‘blind’those who are unaware of their spiritual plight.
On the other hand, there are those who turn this prophecy into a programme for political and economic emancipation: the poor are the exploited proletariat, the captives are the prisoners of conscience and the recovery of sight to the blind is achieved through ‘awareness building’ so that the exploited recognise the factors which have contributed to their plight and come to realise that their situation is not inevitable.
The victims can become victors by taking power forcibly in their own hands.
Neither of these interpretations does full justice to the text.
There can be no separating of the vertical from the horizontal dimensions of reconciliation.
The preaching of the Good News brings reconciliation with God and makes reconciliation possible with our neighbour.
Repentance includes turning away from social as well as personal sins.
Salvation is not  simply individualist and other-worldly.
It means God's saving grace working through individuals and communities of people who know him as Saviour and Lord to influence a wider society.
But I fail to see how we can talk about the ‘redeeming of structures’ without an effective Christian presence.
This is not to say that there are not many people of good will who are working conscientiously for a more humane society, but such efforts inevitably succumb to the demonic.
They are like the newly swept house of which our Lord spoke which was then taken over by more spirits than before (Matt.
12:43–45).
Poverty and prosperity are both characteristics of the Kingdom.
Poverty is the recognition that we possess nothing to buy privilege with God, and prosperity results from our readiness to receive from God.
A characteristic of the Kingdom is an attitude of forgiveness which further should pervade all our relationships.
It comes about as a result of our gratitude to God for his wiping out of a colossal debt that we could never have paid back (Matt.
18:22ff).
We are able to forgive because we know what it is to be forgiven, and the love of God shed abroad in our heart gives us a new capacity to do so.
The Kingdom also demands willing obedience to the law of God (Matt.
5:19, 20).
This is not the keeping of the letter by escaping through the loopholes which we have opened up through clever casuistry.
This is a joyful response to the spirit of the law, as we see its deeper meaning and wider application.
For ‘every teacher of the law who becomes a disciple in the Kingdom of Heaven is like the owner of a house who takes new and old things out of his storeroom,(Matt.
13:52).
The new does not cause us to discard the old, but to see its contemporary worth.
Last, but by no means least, the Kingdom is characterised by suffering .
This comes inevitably to those who belong to the Kingdom precisely because it is ‘not of this world’ and presents such a challenge which arouses hostility.
‘Happy are those who are persecuted because they do what God requires; the Kingdom of Heaven belongs to them!’
(Matt.
5:10), Jesus  assures the children of the Kingdom.
Such was the experience of the believers through subsequent years (2 Thess. 1:5; Rev. 1:9).
The faithful Church has been described as the suffering form of the Kingdom of God (Snyder 1977:30).
ENTERING THE KINGDOM
Life in the Kingdom presented a challenge to the status quo.
Where the gospel of Christ is faithfully proclaimed it is always subversive.
It undermines the power-seeker, the affluent materialist and the self-righteous.
It comes with equal challenge to the religious as to the irreligious.
Many wealthy people will be prevented by their love of money from entering into the Kingdom.
Although entrance is free we have to lay aside everything to enter through the narrow gate, so that it costs us everything.
The Kingdom of Heaven belongs to the poor who have nothing to bring in with them.
The ‘poor’ in Scripture does not simply refer to those living at or beneath subsistence level — it ‘can be extended to cover all the oppressed, all those who are dependent upon the mercy of others.
And this too is why the word can even be extended to all those who rely entirely upon the mercy of God — the poor in spirit’(Matt.
5:3)(Nolan 1976).
Whatever our position in society, the Kingdom makes an absolute demand; we either seek it first or not at all(Matt.
6:33).
Having accepted the prior claim of the Kingdom, we then discover the generosity of God.
We no longer have to worry about what we eat or drink or wear, for we will know his provision.
However this is only a practicality within the economy of the Kingdom, where God's will reigns.
For the adequacy of God's provision is dependent on our corporate responsibility, including our stewardship of resources and equitable distribution.
Individual saints may testify to God's supernatural provision, but their experience cannot be universalised.
Among the millions who die each year through malnutrition there are many children of the Kingdom.
For we still live with the tension of the ‘now’ and ‘not yet’of the  Kingdom.
This is allowed to happen not only because of the sin in the world, but also because of sin in the Church.
To quote a Christian Aid slogan, because we refuse ‘to live more simply that others may simply live’.
It is difficult for the twentieth-century, non-Jewish reader of the Gospels to appreciate just how radical Jesus appeared to his contemporaries, and especially to the religious establishment, who held such a powerful position in Jewish life.
He completely disregarded strictly enforced social conventions and religious restrictions in order to contact the outcasts of society.
He was not afraid to be seen deep in conversation with a Samaritan woman whom he knew was cohabiting with another man after having gone through five husbands.
He accepted the devotion of a prostitute who anointed his feet with costly perfume, and he dined out on a number of occasions with tax collectors and sinners, who represented the social outcasts — the ‘untouchables’ of the day.
Within an eastern culture, table-fellowship and the sharing of a meal is regarded as a particularly intimate form of association, The fact that Jesus was prepared to act in such a fashion, and to be seen doing it, communicated as powerfully as any pronouncement, both to his friends at the table and his enemies at the window (Matt.
11:19; Luke 15:2; Mark 2:15ff; Matt.
9:10; Luke 5:29).
For a man who claimed and was popularly acknowledged to be a man of God, such behaviour was extraordinary to say the least.
His actions were deliberately intended to demonstrate the present reality and radical nature of the Kingdom.
In contrast to contemporary society which denied social misfits and those deemed ‘irreligious’ their civil rights and spiritual privileges, such people are especially welcomed into the Reign of God.
‘By accepting them as friends and equals Jesus had taken away their shame, humiliation and guilt.
By showing them that they mattered to Him as people He gave them a sense of dignity and released them from their captivity.
The physical contact which He must have had with them when reclining at table (compare John 13:25) and which He obviously never dreamed  of disallowing (Luke 7:38, 39) must have made them feel clean and acceptable’(Nolan 1976:39).
Such socialising had significance not just at the time but for the future, for table-fellowship was, in Jesus' thinking, an anticipation of that great feast which will mark the consummation of the Kingdom.
Those in company with Jesus, therefore, occupied seats which represented the possibility of a future inheritance as well as the privilege of a present association.
Jesus pressed home the truth that the Kingdom breaks through all social and religious barriers not only by his startling personal actions which sent shock-waves through society, but also by a story with a sting in its tail.
To that representative of the religious élite who by his bland statement, ‘How happy are those who will sit down at the feast in the Kingdom of God!,’ revealed that he counted on a reserved seat, our Lord told the parable of the Great Feast.
In the story, those invited to attend made excuses; a response which so infuriated the host that he ordered his servant to ‘Hurry out to the streets and alleys of the town, and bring back the poor, the crippled, the blind, and the lame.…’
’ I tell you all that none of those men who were invited will taste the dinner’(Luke 14:15–24).
The implication is clear.
Those who were rejecting Christ's ministry were thereby refusing their invitation and relinquishing their place.
However, Jesus' free association with the poor and despised should not be interpreted to indicate their automatic admission into the Kingdom by virtue of their downtrodden position in society.
In addressing them he utters no words of condemnation as he does in the case of the scribes and Pharisees, yet he nevertheless looks for an unconditional and wholehearted response from them.
Having assured the woman caught in the act of adultery of forgiveness, he tells her, ‘do not sin again’(John 8:11).
It is after Zacchaeus has stood up and said to God, ‘Listen, sir!
I will give half my belongings to the poor, and if I have cheated anyone, I will pay him back four times as much’, that Jesus exclaims, ‘Salvation has come to this house today…’
(Luke 19:8, 9).
Of the two thieves crucified with Jesus, it is only to the one who expresses his penitence that Jesus responds, ‘I promise you that today you will be in Paradise with me’(Luke 23:39–43).
Entry into the Kingdom is not automatic.
It is not a consequence of hereditary privilege.
Neither is it a reward for human effort.
Indeed Jesus warned that those who came with an attitude of exclusive nationalism or spiritual complacency were in danger of being thrown out (Matt.
8:11, 12).
The New Testament makes abundantly clear that the key to entry into the Kingdom is the acceptance of Jesus as Saviour and Lord.
Taking this step demands genuine repentance and a baptism which signifies cleansing from sin and death to the old way of life and resurrection to the new.
It is not simply a matter of a verbal profession but of whole-hearted, life-yielding response.
Matthew and Luke record our Lord's solemn reminder, ‘Not everyone who calls me ‘Lord, Lord’ will enter the Kingdom of Heaven, but only those who do what my Father in heaven wants them to do.
When Judgment Day comes, many will say to me, ‘Lord, Lord!
In your name we spoke God's message, by your name we drove out many demons and performed many miracles!’
Then I will say to them, ‘I never knew you.
Get away from me, you wicked people!’’
(Matt.
7:21–23)(cf Luke 13:25–27).
Peter was given the keys of the Kingdom when he came to the point of confessing Jesus as the ‘Messiah, the Son of the living God’(Matt.
16:19).
But his profession was deficient at the time in that he failed to recognise the necessity of suffering.
Entering the Kingdom is by invitation only, and that invitation must be given top priority.
Other commitments must be held over (Matt.
22:1–4).
Some people stumble across the Kingdom without looking for it, like discovering a hidden treasure while turning over the soil in the field (Matt.
13:44).
Others only enter the Kingdom after a prolonged and intense search, like the pearl merchant who sells his entire assets to buy one pearl which was everything (Matt.
13:45).
Membership of the Kingdom is non-transferable.
No one can shift responsibility on to others or trade off their resources.
The five foolish virgins with no oil for the lamps could neither buy nor borrow from those who had supplied their own lamps.
Life in the Kingdom is one of constant readiness (Matt.
25:1–13).
There are no gate-crashers; it cannot be taken by storm.
To enter the Kingdom of Heaven one has to come as a little child, with an attitude of trust, and prepared to be teachable and flexible (Matt.
18:1).
This same point was made to Nicodemus who came to consult with Jesus cautiously and privately under cover of darkness.
The Lord told him plainly that entering the Kingdom demanded a new start.
He had to be born of water — that is, new life after the burial of baptism — and of the Spirit.
Kingdom membership was only possible through an act of God.
The work of the Spirit cannot be predicted or controlled by the religious profession!
(John 3:1–13).
GROWTH OF THE KINGDOM
As we noted previously, ‘Kingdom’ is a dynamic concept which might better be rendered ‘Kingly rule or government’.
Its growth, therefore, does not come about by territorial gains, but by individuals and groups submitting their wills to that of their Heavenly King.
While entry into the Kingdom has an essential personal and individual element, it also has profound and extensive community ramifications.
Individuals make their response not as one man islands, but within a framework of family, group, community and national involvements.
Dr McGavran has drawn attention to the corporate dimension of conversion in describing ‘people movements’ to Christ, which we will be considering later in greater detail.
At this point I simply want to underline the fact that Scripture demonstrates clearly that it is God's intention that the Kingdom should grow and not merely remain static.
The manifestation of the Kingdom often starts with small and seemingly insignificant beginnings .
It is like the tiny mustard seed which grows into a sizeable bush that provides sufficient shade for the birds to come and shelter in its branches (Matt.
13:31; Mark 4:30; Luke 13:18, 19).
At first many people may have been tempted to discount it.
The opponents of Jesus were unimpressed by his followers.
‘If he really had a divine mission, ran the objection, he would not be surrounded by this rag-tag band, but by the best and the brightest.…
Appealing for faith and confidence, the parable invites the hearer to see in Jesus’ followers the seed of the vast communion of the saved…out of this unprepossessing band of disciples is destined to come the restored people, not only the lost sheep of Israel's house, but the nations, as well,(Meyer 1979:164).
The spread of the Kingdom might be unobtrusive like yeast in the dough (Matt.
13:33) which causes the whole mixture to rise, or like salt rubbed into the meat to preserve and flavour it (Luke 14:34).
On the other hand the Kingdom might appear like a blaze of lights from a city located on high ground which can be seen from miles around (Matt.
5:14).
Although the Kingdom may have its origins in small beginnings in the majority of places, it is none the less capable of surprising growth.
The seed planted in the good soil produced thirty, sixty and even a hundred times the original sowing.
Even by the standards of modern high-intensity farming this is a remarkable yield (Mark 4:3–8).
John Kessler writing in the International Review of Missions in qualified support of Dr McGavran comments, ‘The parables of the mustard seed and of the leaven (Matt.
13:31–35) give an implied warning of the dangers attending numerical growth, but at the same time they confirm that such growth is characteristic of the Kingdom of God’(IRM July 1968:299).
Other imagery, apart from husbandry, is also used to illustrate the growth of the Kingdom.
It is represented as a  net full of fish (Matt.
13:47, 48), and as a banquet in which all the places must be occupied (Luke 14:21–24).
In our concern for church growth it is imperative that we discern the relationship between the growth of the Church and the realisation of the Kingdom.
Too close an identification will blind us to the shortcomings of the institutional Church, so that church growth becomes denominational aggrandisement.
As soon as our focus of attention moves from Christ to the Church we move towards ecclesiastical deification and our evangelism is in great danger of degenerating into proselytism.
On the other hand to disassociate the Church from the Kingdom breaks the nerve-cord of hope and destroys the community of commitment to Christ as Saviour and Lord.
‘Christ points the Church toward the Kingdom of God that is beyond the Church.
To the degree that the Church follows his pointing and heeds his reminder, the Kingdom of God will manifest itself through the Church’(Pannenberg 1975:77).
‘But note that this is quite different from attributing to the Church in its established structures the dignity of being the Kingdom of Christ.
The rule of Christ is effected wherever man becomes aware of the coming Kingdom of God and lives in accord with that awareness.…
Precisely because the Church mistakes herself for the present form of the Kingdom, God's rule has often had to manifest itself in the secular world outside, and frequently against, the Church’(Pannenberg 1975:78).
The New Testament provides strong evidence that the Church occupies a central place in God's redemptive purpose for the world.
We have already noted that entering the Kingdom entails a personal, saving relationship with Christ.
When Peter made his profession of faith at Caesarea Philippi, Jesus declared that this was the rock foundation on which he would build his Church, which realisation provided the keys of the Kingdom (Matt.
16:17–19).
At the time of his ascension, how does Jesus respond to the question put to him by his disciples, ‘Lord, will you at  this time give the Kingdom back to Israel?’
The way they phrase the question reveals the fact they are thinking in the old materialistic and nationalistic terms.
His response is to impress upon them that the time is not now, that only God knows when it will be, and in the meantime they are to concentrate on the number-one task of world-wide witness for which the Holy Spirit would equip them (Acts 1:8).
This is in line with his earlier command.
When Jesus appeared after his resurrection to his disciples in Galilee, he told them, ‘I have been given all authority in heaven and on earth.’
In other words, he has assumed the throne of the Kingdom.
The consequences for his followers are clear.
He commands them, ‘Go, then, to all peoples everywhere and make them my disciples…’
(Matt.
28:18–20).
When Philip is preaching in Samaria and the residents believe his ‘message about the good news of the Kingdom of God and about Jesus Christ’, their immediate response is to be baptised in his name (Acts 8:12).
Paul, in presenting the gospel to Jews during his missionary journeys, equated his message about the identity and saving work of Christ with the Kingdom (Acts 19:8; 20:25; 28:23; 28:31).
In his letter to the Colossians Paul describes Aristarchus, Mark and Justus, his companions in evangelism and church planting, as those who ‘work with me for the Kingdom of God’(Col. 4:11).
Finally, the Epistle to the Ephesians, looking forward to the consummation of the Kingdom, with Christ ruling above all heavenly rulers, sees him given ‘to the Church as supreme Lord over all things.
The Church is Christ's body, the completion of him who himself completes all things everywhere’(Eph. 1:23).
Charles van Engen deals with the issue of the relationship of the Kingdom to the Church in a sensitive and scholarly way in his book The Growth of the True Church .
In this exhaustive treatment he makes some helpful distinctions between the Kingdom and the Church which are presented below in summary form:
The Church represents the rule of the King:
1
It is the community of those who know the rule of the King
2
It is the central focus of the rule of the King
3
It is an anticipatory sign of the rule of the King
4
Its purpose is to spread the knowledge of the rule of the King
The Kingdom cannot be identified with the Church:
1
For the scope of the Kingdom is more inclusive than the Church
2
For the time of the Kingdom is more extensive than the Church
3
For the growth of the Kingdom is more comprehensive than the Church
(van Engen 1981:282 — 299)
To these we might add a final point,For the consummation of the Kingdom will be more compelling than the Church .
In this chapter we have seen that growth is an inherent characteristic of both the Kingdom and the Church.
This raises the question as to whether the genuineness of the Church should be judged by its effectiveness in achieving growth.
Van Engen argues that the growth factor should be included with the other traditional ‘marks’ of the true Church.
These ‘marks’ are identified as ‘one, holy, catholic and apostolic’.
However, he makes the point that the faithfulness of a church cannot be determined on its actual growth , because that is determined by a range of contextual factors outside of the control of the congregation.
He therefore suggests that yearning for growth , should constitute the criteria by which a church is assessed (van Engen 1981:448ff).
SUMMARY
Yes, the Kingdom is a much broader concept than the Church.
God's activity is in no way restricted to the Church.
His arena is the world he came to save.
Outside the Church are to be found signs of the Kingdom in the form of his image, recognisable, though sadly disfigured, in the lives of all men.
These traces not only witness to a sad history, but also  hint of glorious possibilities.
God, by his unpredictable and uncontainable Spirit, is guiding the destinies of nations and individuals who do not know him, or deny his very existence.
Without such works of grace the world would rush even more rapidly towards the abyss.
But such divine activity does not obviate the urgent need for witness.
It makes it all the more opportune.
I believe that there may be many true children of the Kingdom outside of the institutional churches.
Some have dissociated themselves because the churches have turned them off through their disobedience and indifference.
Others are isolated individuals with no church within miles of where they live.
Still others throw themselves on the mercy of God without being able to name the name of Christ because they have never been told about him.
But such responses are inadequate, being less than the best that God intended, and has provided for.
While evangelism may not represent the totality of mission, it rests at its heart.
‘How can they hear if the message is not proclaimed?’
(Rom. 10:14).
Having looked at the broader canvas of mission in these first two chapters, we now focus our attention without apology on the need for ‘church growth’.
In using this phrase I identify with the popular definition offered by Dr Peter Wagner of the School of World Mission, Fuller Seminary.
‘Church growth means all that is involved in bringing men and women who do not have a personal relationship to Jesus Christ into fellowship with him and into responsible church membership’(Wagner 1976:12).
This narrowing of focus does not mean that we are laying to one side the issues raised in these two chapters as now dispensed with.
On the contrary, they form the foundation blocks to all that follows, and serve as a constant reminder of the need to ensure that we are building on the right foundation and that the materials with which we build have spiritual survival capability (1 Cor.
3:12).
The emphasis of the book from now on is of a pragmatic nature, but I hope it is a sanctified pragmatism applied to operating within and shaping the contemporary manifestations of the Church of Christ.
We  recognise that the Church is a divinely constituted organism and not merely a human institution.
Its task is to point beyond itself and not to indulge in self-glorification.
If it is to be truly the Church it must submit to the Lordship of Christ and live its daily life in dependence on the presence and resources of the Holy Spirit.
It must be incarnated in the world Christ came to redeem, in which he is already present, and for which he has prepared a transformed future.
When such growing churches manifest the marks of the Kingdom of righteousness, peace and joy (Rom. 14:7) both in their own lives and in engagement with the world, then we will be able to pray less wistfully and more hopefully ‘thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth, as it is in heaven.’
Gospel and Culture
Effective communication of the gospel depends not only upon a thorough understanding of the content of the message, but also on an ability to relate that message to the contemporary situation.
Most Christian communicators have been more message than receptor oriented.
They have not been sufficiently sensitive to the fact that the message received may differ substantially from that which they imagined they had delivered.
When it comes to evangelising, Michael Green reminds us, ‘Evangelism is never proclamation in a vacuum; but always to people, and the message must be given in terms that make sense to them’(Green 1970:115).
In the case of Christian communicators seeking to convey the essence of the gospel and establish a church in a culture other than their own, the communication process becomes still more complex.
Missionaries who have lived with a cultural expression of the gospel adapted to their own context have to divest the message of that cultural adaptation and seek to introduce the gospel in a form which is culturally appropriate to the community in which they are seeking to communicate.
Once the gospel has been received by a group and a church formed, the next question which must be faced is, ‘How should this Christian community live and organise itself to express most authentically the new life of the gospel within that cultural context?’
These are some of the complex issues which will be our concern in this chapter.
It is the author's conviction that this subject is highly relevant not just to the overseas missionary  situation, but to many sectors of society in the western world which as yet have remained unreached and resistant to the traditional approaches of the institutional churches.
During his time as Bishop of Woolwich, responsible for an area stretching from the inner-city boroughs of South London to the Surrey commuter belt, David Sheppard conducted a survey of 150 parishes to show the electoral roll members of the Church of England as a percentage of the total population.
The results, based on the revised figures of 1972, were as follows:
Surrey 9%
Blackheath and Dulwich 4%
Outer suburban 3.25%
Inner suburban 1.8%
Working class 0.9%
(Sheppard 1974:45)
This pattern is also repeated in an unpublished survey conducted by Richard Whatmore on Church of England parishes in Brighton and Hove.
His research showed that the electoral roll membership per percentage of population was 5.6 per cent for upper middle-class areas, falling to 0.9 per cent in working-class parishes consisting mainly of council housing.
Such statistics clearly show that the Church of England has a more widespread appeal in middle-class than in artisan areas.
Many people still regard it as the Tory party at prayer.
But have the Free Churches succeeded where the Church of England has failed?
Regrettably the answer is ‘No’.
They too failed to make any significant impact, and many struggling churches have either been forced to close or to relocate in the suburbs following the migration pattern of their members.
Bishop David Sheppard raises the question, ‘If it can be shown that visible response to the Church is on a totally different scale in working-class areas from middle-class areas, who can we blame?’
He identifies four possibilities:
1
Working-class people — presumably for being harder-hearted than others.
2
God — for not sending revival to those areas of society.
3
The Church — for not learning how to be an effective vehicle of the gospel.
4
Society — for what it has done to those who are trapped by the forces of the big city.
(Sheppard 1974:42)
Few would deny that the answer to the bishop's question lies with alternatives three and four.
Although the Church was slow off the mark following the population migration and concentration in the expanding towns during the Industrial Revolution, failure has not been for want of trying.
The root of the problem is located in the culturally inappropriate methods which were adopted in response to this evangelistic and pastoral challenge.
North American experience is significantly different from Europe, in that the working classes have never been alienated from church life.
Survey data indicate no variance in church attendance between blue- and white-collar workers.
Not only have the churches in Britain significantly failed to appeal to those within artisan cultures, they have also been unsuccessful in attracting those of other races from among the West Indian and Asian communities.
As the majority of the latter are either Moslem, Sikh or Hindu, it is understandable that the Church has encountered severe problems in trying to communicate her message, either with a view to attracting them into her fellowship or to see the significance of the gospel of Jesus Christ within their own cultural context.
The same problem did not exist, however, in the case of the West Indian communities, as the majority of these were members of churches in their home countries, but lapsed on migrating to Britain.
DEFINING CULTURE
When we speak of ‘culture’ we are not thinking about high-brow music, or good table manners.
We understand  the term in the more technical anthropological sense.
Paul G. Hiebert offers the following definition of culture ‘as the integrated system of learned patterns of behaviour, ideas and products characteristic of a society’(Hiebert 1976:25).
For Dr Eugene Nida ‘culture’ is ‘all nonmaterial traits which are passed on from one generation to another.
They are both transmittable and accumulative, and they are cultural in the sense that they are transmitted by the society, not by the genes’(Nida 1954:28).
The Willowbank Report — Gospel and Culture helpfully expands Dr Eugene Nida's definition to show its comprehensive coverage of all aspects of life.
‘Culture is an integrated system of beliefs (about God or reality or ultimate meanings), of values (about what is true, good, beautiful and normative), of customs (how to behave, relate to others, talk, pray, dress, work, trade, farm, eat, etc.), and of institutions which express these beliefs, values and customs (government, law courts, temples or churches, family, school, hospitals, factories, shops, unions, clubs, etc.), which bind a society together and give it a sense of identity, dignity, security, and continuity.’
(Willowbank Report 1978:7).
CHRIST IN RELATION TO CULTURE
When the gospel is proclaimed and the Church begins to emerge there is an inevitable interaction with the cultural milieu which surrounds and permeates this activity.
We need, therefore, to understand the relationship of gospel to culture in general terms, and then go on to examine in detail its engagement with the specific culture in which we are involved.
H. R. Niebuhr has shown the range of thinking with regard to the relationship between Christ and culture adopted by theologians at various times (Niebuhr 1951).
He categorises five views:
Christ against culture
This is the radical position which sets the Church against the world.
When the individual turns to Christ he rejects the  world, for the world ‘is in the power of the evil one’.
Support for such a position can be found in the Gospel and Epistles of John.
The ‘world is under judgment’(John 12:31), it is a place of tribulation for believers, which has to be ‘overcome, by the Lord (John 16:33).
His Kingdom does not belong to this world (John 18:36).
Believers are not to love the world, and one day it will pass away (1 John 2:15, 17).
The ‘Christ against culture’ position was adopted by Tertullian in the fourth century and Tolstoy in recent times.
It is represented by the thinking of Anabaptists and many fundamentalist and Pentecostal groups, who regard the Church as a rescue post from the world.
Charles Kraft exposes three fallacies in this approach:
1
‘it equates the concept ‘culture’ with only the negative use of the Greek word kosmos in the New Testament.’
He points out that when John uses that term in a negative sense it is with ‘specific reference not to the whole of culture, but to a particular use of that culture by the forces of evil.’
2
‘it assumes that it is possible by ‘running’ to escape from one's culture.
However, this is to misunderstand the nature of culture as something external to us.
Culture is within as well as surrounding us.’
3
‘it assumes that since Satan is able to use culture to his ends, all of culture is evil.
As we shall see shortly, the Scriptures employ ‘kosmos’ in a positive as well as a negative sense.’
(Kraft 1979:105, 106)
Christ of culture
In this view, Christ is regarded as the inspirer and perfecter of culture.
The best ingredients of each culture are selected which most express his values and purposes for humankind.
This was the position held by many of the Gnostics, Abelard, Ritschl and those who express syncretistic sentiments within the ecumenical movement.
Some would turn the argument around and claim that the concept of deity is the product of that culture, being no more than an idealisation and personalisation of cultural elements, without any objective existence.
In the case of  the Judaeo-Christian concept of deity this can be strongly challenged on the grounds of the historical basis of divine revelation.
For, while the Scriptures speak within particular cultural contexts, they present a constant challenge to the concepts of deity and morality which are generated by the cultures addressed.
God is in no sense an idealised self-image to be possessed and manipulated.
Israel is constantly reminded of the ‘otherness’ of Yahweh.
He dwells in the unapproachable light of the shekinah glory, and reminds his people Israel that his thoughts are not their thoughts or their ways his ways (Isa. 55:8).
Christ above culture
This is the position of Justin Martyr, Clement of Alexandria and Thomas Aquinas, who see Christ as ‘the fulfilment of cultural aspirations and the restorer of the institutions of true society.
Yet there is in him something that neither arises out of culture nor contributes directly to it.
He is discontinuous as well as continuous with social life and its culture’(Niebuhr 1951:42).
Christians who adopt this conceptual framework recognise that within culture there are laws additional to those expressed by Jesus Christ which are also from God.
They must therefore seek to achieve a synthesis of those God-imposed requirements rendering ‘to Caesar the things that are Caesar's and to God the things that are God's’(Matt.
22:21).
Christ and culture in paradox
This view accepts the ‘Christ above culture’ position, but fails to achieve a workable synthesis.
It therefore places them in a paradoxical relationship and leaves the believer to live with the tension of relating to the world.
This dualistic position can be detected in the writings of the apostle Paul, a view endorsed by Luther, where the Christian is described as ‘under law, and yet not under law but grace; he is a sinner, and yet righteous, he believes as a doubter; he has assurance of Salvation, yet walks the knife-edge of insecurity.
In Christ all things have become new, and yet everything remains as it was from the beginning…’
(Niebuhr 1951:156, 157).
In its negative assessment of human effort it is akin to the ‘Christ against culture’ position, yet differs in response to that situation.
Recognising that man cannot escape, it leaves him to cope with the paradox and frustration, content to walk by faith, not by sight, believing that one day all things will become new and be reconciled in Christ.
Christ the transformer of culture
This represents a more positive attitude towards culture than the previous three positions, although it is more critical than the second position listed here.
While culture remains under the judgment of God it is also subject to his saving rule.
This view is sometimes seen as represented in the Gospel of John.
In support of this view are the positive responses of John to the world.
‘God so loved the world that he gave his son’(John 3:16).
John regards him as Saviour of the world and records Jesus' declaration to be the light of the world (John 8:12).
Augustine, John Wesley and F. D. Maurice have identified with this emphasis.
For them culture is there to be converted rather than replaced by something entirely new.
‘Culture, therefore, is seen as corrupted but convertible, usable, perhaps even redeemable by God's grace and power’(Kraft 1979:113).
To Nida's original five categories we venture to offer a sixth.
Christ above but working through culture
This is the alternative accepted by Kraft.
He argues ‘though God exists totally outside of culture, while humans exist totally within culture, God chooses the cultural milieu in which humans are immersed as the arena for his interaction with people’(Kraft 1979:114).
Such an approach represents a deliberate self-limiting on the part of God in order to speak in understandable terms and with perceived relevance on the part of the hearer.
He acts redemptively with regard to culture, which includes judgment on some elements, but also affirmation in other areas, and a transformation of the  whole.
We will trace in this chapter the significance of the ‘Christ above but working through culture’ model in terms of God's revelation and the Church's communication task and structural adaptations.
Despite the mixed benefits, people cannot dispense with culture.
For culture helps to explain and evaluate the realities of life.
It provides the stability of psychological reinforcement.
It establishes a commonality of understanding on which to build a community.
It weaves the societal framework which serves as a bridge to the next generation, preserving continuity and providing a wall against encroachment and disintegration.
No one lives outside a cultural context.
We are all to a great extent the product of our culture.
As we have noted, there are good and bad, strong and weak elements in each culture.
The cultural framework in which we have been raised and within which we have been taught to operate provides both security and significance within its frontiers.
But beyond those frontiers are alien cultures which impinge on our own for good or ill.
Sometimes the relationship is one of co-existence — two cultures exist side by side but in separate compartments.
At other times they may exist in competition , each endeavouring to gain influence in a third area.
Yet again, they may give rise to conflict , with one seeking to dominate the other either through conquest or infiltration.
At other times they serve to enrich each other through the mutual benefit of cross-fertilisation .
These options indicate something of the complexity of relationships between cultures.
Eugene Nida argues that humans are ‘culture-shaped and culture-transmitting beings’(Nida 1954:28).
Each person transmits culture down to the next generation and out through his or her network of relationships.
One cannot but help notice the presence of other cultures when they come into contact with one's own, because their influences are all-pervasive.
Having become aware of the difference, a deep-seated bias often becomes evident as the individual concludes that his or her way of thinking and behaving is better just because it is different.
‘To view other people's ways of life in terms of our own cultural glasses is called ethnocentrism’(Keesing and Keesing 1971:21 — quoted by Kraft 1979:48).
In the early days of the development of anthropology it was the fashion to place culture on an evolutionary ladder ranging from primitive to developed.
The fact that Western cultures were placed by the anthropologists on the uppermost rungs reflects their ethnocentric perspective!
This evolutionary model has subsequently been replaced by a relativistic one; this maintains that ‘an observer should be careful to evaluate a culture first in terms of its own values, goals, and focuses before venturing to compare it (either positively or negatively) with any other culture’(Kraft 1979:49).
Patterns of behaviour which appear strange or even wrong from the standpoint of the outside observer interpreting what he sees in terms of his own cultural frame of reference, may, when understood in their broader cultural setting, be perfectly reasonable and even commendable.
This is easier said than done.
But to highlight the problem helps us to identify and confess our bias.
It requires special gifts of insight and patience to move from a mono-cultural to a cross-cultural perspective.
CULTURE AND BIBLICAL REVELATION
The biblical perspective of divine revelation is of God speaking at specific times addressing himself to particular situations.
He uses language and imagery which communicate most precisely the truths he wishes to convey to a specific audience.
‘He reveals Himself in a receptor-orientated fashion’(Kraft 1979:169).
Though God is totally free of culture he chooses to clothe his message in cultural form so that people will immediately see its relevance and feel its impact.
By the way it is expressed it becomes a word from God to them , at their level of understanding, indigenous and applicable to their times and struggles.
Kraft, in Part IV of his book Christianity in Culture entitled ‘The Dynamics of Revelation’ introduces a new perspective to the debate on the inspiration of Scripture among evangelicals.
He sees the Bible as containing a section of classic case  studies of the ways God deals with humankind in a variety of situations across a considerable period of time.
As such, it emphasises that God's revelatory activity is a dynamic process rather than a static product.
The completion of the canon of Scripture by the early Church does not signify that they thought the Lord had stopped speaking or that he had nothing fresh to say.
The purpose of Scripture is to act as a ‘yardstick’ and ‘tether’by which to assess any claim to contemporary revelation, and to regulate its interpretation.
The Holy Spirit continues to operate in revealing the mind of Christ to his Church.
‘But the nature of his teaching ministry has changed.
We believe that his work of ‘inspiration’ is done in the sense that the canon of Scripture is closed, but that his work of ‘illumination’continues both in every conversion (e.g. 2 Cor.
4:6) and in the life of the Christian and the Church’(Willowbank Report 1978:9).
He speaks in the life situation as well as through the sacred page.
Yet God still speaks by his Spirit to throw fresh light on his word so that we might see its relevance to the contemporary world, and he speaks to his servants to guide them through the perplexities of life.
Though he may say things to them that have no exact parallels in Scripture, his word does not contradict Scripture, neither does it have the same normative quality.
It is a specific word for a particular situation.
The Bible is no academic tome with an esoteric appeal to those with scholarly minds who can handle abstract concepts.
It is a record of events, with interpretative comments woven into the narrative.
Kraft records that ‘even the most theological portions (e.g. Romans) participate in the ‘eventness’ of the facts that they were written as letters from specific persons to specific persons to meet specific needs’(Kraft 1979:128).
The literary combination of narrative content and picture-language commentary make for powerful communication.
No wonder the Bible has such a universal appeal, and its potential impact so alarms political and ideological leaders antagonistic to its message that its production and distribution is severely restricted in half the world.
Our emphasis on the culture-conditioning of revelation poses some problems which must be squarely faced.
First it must not lead us into a relativist position regarding Scripture as but one of many revelations of God .
The Bible occupies a unique and normative position by which to judge the statements of other sacred writings, be they from other religions or Christian devotional classics.
Lesslie Newbigin expressed the problem in terms of two dogmatic systems.
‘According to one dogma, world history is in some sense a coherent whole, and it is therefore possible to affirm that certain events have a unique significance for the entire story.
According to the other dogma, there are no events which have such unique significance and therefore no universally valid affirmation can be made about the meaning of history as a whole’(Newbigin 1978:174).
The acceptance of the former dogma rather than the second depends on an acceptance of the unique salvation history expressed by God through his people Israel which has significance for the whole of mankind.
However, such acceptance does not extend to a recognition ‘that the cultural forms of the semitic world have authority over all other cultural forms’(Newbigin 1978).
Paul firmly resists the strenuous efforts of the Judaisers to demand cultural conformity from the Gentile converts (Gal.
2:11–14).
Newbigin cites the evidence of not one but a variety of Christologies in the New Testament reflecting ‘the attempts of that community to say who Jesus is in terms of the different cultures within which they bore witness to him.’
The variety of Christologies actually to be found in the New Testament is part of the fundamental witness to the nature of the gospel; it points to the destination of the gospel in all the cultures of mankind.
The unity of the New Testament, the fact that it contains not every Christology, but only those which were judged to be faithful to the original testimony, reflect the origin of the gospel in the one unique person of Jesus (Newbigin 1978:176).
Second the fact that God's personal self-disclosure in the Bible was given in terms of the hearers' own culture inevitably means  that misunderstanding may arise and points be missed when read by people of another culture who are unfamiliar with the cultural milieu of the Bible .
If questions are put to the text which the particular passage was not written to answer then wrong conclusions can easily be drawn.
This is a problem with which Bible translators constantly have to battle.
They recognise that it is inadequate and sometimes completely misleading to translate the text word for word, or phrase by phrase from the Hebrew, Aramaic and Greek into their mother tongue.
Their task is to so translate the text that it speaks with the original intention and force as it did to those originally addressed.
In order to achieve this they may from time to time have to change the form in order to preserve the meaning.
This translation principle is called the ‘dynamic equivalence, as distinct from the ‘formal correspondence’ method.
Dr Eugene Nida has a fund of examples to illustrate the need for ‘dynamic equivalent’ translations.
‘One cannot say to the Zanaki people along the shores of the sprawling Lake Victoria, ‘Behold I stand at the door and knock’(Rev. 3:20).
This would mean that Christ was declaring himself to be a thief, for in Zanaki land thieves generally make it a practice to knock on the door of a hut which they hope to burglarise, and if they hear any movement inside, they dash off into the dark.
An honest man will come to the house and call the name of the person inside, and in this way identify himself by his voice.
Accordingly, in the Zanaki translation it is necessary to say, ‘Behold, I stand at the door and call’’(Nida 1952:46).
The translation problem is even more difficult when faced with presenting Jesus as the ‘Good Shepherd’(Ps. 23 and John 10) in parts of Africa where the care of sheep is relegated to children or the mentally subnormal.
It is the care of cattle which is regarded as man's work.
Therefore, simply to represent Jesus as the Good Shepherd without any explanatory note would convey entirely the wrong impression.
Westerners are equally prone to misunderstand because of our cultural distancing.
For instance, we can easily miss the point made by our Lord when he set a child in the midst  of the crowd and declared to the surrounding throng that if they wished to enter the Kingdom of Heaven they would have to become as a little child (Matt.
18:4).
He was not here primarily teaching the need for simplicity and trust, though this is within the range of permissible interpretations according to Kraft's ‘tether model’.
His main point, which his immediate audience would not fail to grasp, was that the ‘little child’ had not yet reached the age of the ‘bar Mitzvah’ceremony, or ‘coming-of-age’, which within the Jewish culture meant that the ‘little child’had no rights before the Law of God.
He was in fact confronting the self-righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees.
Such illustrations lead to a third problem:Does the culture conditioning of God's self-revelation mean that the Bible cannot be understood by ordinary people without the help of theologically trained interpreters ?
The foregoing illustrations emphasise problems of interpretation across cultures, however much of the teaching of Scripture is so plain and obvious that no great intellectual capacity or specialist training is required.
Enlightenment comes through spiritual perception which results from the work of the Holy Spirit in the individual's life (1 Cor.
2:10–13).
‘The reader interprets the text as if it had been written in his own language, culture and time….
For God intended his word for ordinary people; it is not to be regarded as the preserve of scholars; the central truths of salvation are plain for all to see; Scripture is ‘useful for teaching the truth, rebuking error, correcting faults, and giving instruction for right living’(2 Tim.
3:16); and the Holy Spirit has been given to be our teacher’(Willowbank Report 1978:10).
One does not need to acquire hermeneutical skills to appreciate the significance and personal challenge presented by the great truths of salvation.
If a point is missed because it is too deeply embedded in its cultural setting in one place, it stands out prominently and unequivocally in another.
In many places the cultural context of the original account may bear sufficient likeness to our own to enable us to interpret  what transpires without much difficulty.
The exhortations of Scripture which relate to personal qualities and Christian virtues require little adaptation when transposed from one culture to another.
The command to ‘love one's neighbour’, for example, is a cultural universal.
Furthermore, despite the diversities of cultures there remains a great deal of commonality.
It is chiefly in the realms of historical context, social customs and economic arrangements that we must have specialist knowledge of the context to enable us to interpret the passage accurately.
Yet, notwithstanding the problems generated by a culturally conditioned revelation, it has enormous value.
‘Because of their specificity to the cultural agreements of the original hearers, these materials communicated with maximum impact to them.
This is a major part of the genius of God and of his Word — that it speaks specifically to people where they are and in terms of the culture in which they are immersed.
At the same time this fact enormously complicates the task of the person immersed in another culture who seeks to interpret the Scripture’(Kraft 1979:134).
CULTURE AND CONTEMPORARY COMMUNICATION
In the preceding section we emphasised the fact that revelation in Scripture is ‘receptor-orientated’, not in the sense of affirming the hearers by telling them only what they want to hear, but by speaking specifically to their situation so that they cannot miss what they need to hear.
In both the Old and New Testament people are addressed through concepts which are already familiar to them.
The Old Testament alluded to ‘leviathan’ the Babylonian sea-monster.
It takes up the concept of ‘covenant’ already familiar in the ancient world.
In the scriptural usage of that term there is both continuity and discontinuity with that wider understanding.
The Old Testament also alludes to a three-tier universe.
Within the New Testament concepts from the Old Testament are taken up and spiritualised, for example‘messiah’, ‘Son of  Man’ and ‘Kingdom of Heaven’.
The teaching and life style of John the Baptist identifies him with the prophetic tradition in Israel.
Our Lord's ministry was styled along the lines of the rabbinic model, with the itinerant teacher followed by a group of disciples who learned by listening, questioning and working under supervision.
Yet at the same time there was discontinuity, for Jesus taught ‘not as the scribes’, for unlike them his message was self-authenticating.
He did not flinch from declaring ‘I say to you’ and then made astounding claims about himself.
As soon as the Church spread from Jewish into Gentile cultures further adaptation was required.
Michael Green writes, ‘Once Christianity took root in Hellenistic soil, it became necessary to do a tremendous work of translation.
Not only words, but ideas had to be put into other dress.
Without such a task of translation, the message would have been heard, perhaps, but not assimilated’(Green 1970:115).
The terms Logos (Word), Lord, Kingdom, Adoption were meaningful to pagan ears, so the person of Christ and the nature of his mission is expressed in those concepts.
As for initiatory rites, while circumcision was peculiar to Judaism in the Roman world, baptism was widely practised.
‘For in the first century water initiation rites were used to induct people into a number of different groups.
Among these were Judaism (for proselytes) and the Greek mystery religions as well as the Church’(Kraft 1979:68).
The one form is given a new meaning in its Christian context in which the initiate is identified with the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ.
In the communication process the one who speaks and the one who hears each formulate their ideas within their own frame of reference.
Each frame of reference is constructed largely through cultural influences.
Broadly speaking there are four possible approaches:
Isolation .
This describes the process of non-communication.
Speakers express their message in terms of their own perceptions and within their own frame of reference without  making any attempt to relate what they want to say with what the other person is likely to hear.
Their hearers completely fail to comprehend because the message is couched in unfamiliar vocabulary and does not make contact with any of their felt needs.
Their speaking is no more meaningful than the conversation of adults as portrayed in the televised version of the Charlie Brown cartoons.
These adults never actually appear on the screen and their speech is represented as no more than an incoherent buzz of verbal static, because adults are irrelevant to the world of Charlie Brown, Lucy, Linus, Snoopy and Woodstock.
Extraction .
This describes the classroom (and frequently also the pulpit) approach to communication.
The teacher (or preacher) establishes the lines of communication by educating the pupils (or congregation) into his terminology and concepts.
Such a method introduces two serious inhibitions to the communication process.
The persons being processed into the speaker's frame of reference may in so doing lose contact with their own, so that they cannot relate their new knowledge to their life situation; neither can they communicate it to others.
‘Extraction’ applies to the form of the communication as well as to the content.
A Bible translator in one of the Andean republics recounted the following story to the author.
The particular tribe among whom he was working couched their teaching in story form, and the main story-line was always the same — the events were set in the context of a journey, for they were a nomadic people.
He noticed that when local church leaders had been away for Bible School training, they ceased to tell stories in their preaching.
They had been trained at college to preach Western-style sermons based on abstract thinking arranged in linear form.
As a consequence they were ‘extracted’ from their culture and failed to communicate to their own people.
He decided to adopt a different approach and to try and teach the Bible through story-telling.
He soon realised that the Bible was full of journeys!
What better way to describe God's dealing with Israel in the Old Testament, than with the stories of Abraham, the Exodus and the Exile.
In the Gospels Jesus is for ever on the move.
The Acts is a non-stop travelogue.
Paul's letter to Philemon tells how he has urged Onesimus to stop running and return to the scene of his crime and seek reconciliation with his master.
Identification .
In this communication process the speaker explores the hearers' frame of reference, seeking to identify areas of common ground between them.
They then couch their message in terms with which their hearers will be familiar, seeking to move from the known to the unknown.
Thus, Paul in Athens uses language and concepts with which the Stoics in his audience can identify and before the Sanhedrin, the Jewish supreme court in Jerusalem, he establishes common ground with the pharisees among the council members.
Reciprocation .
In a mature relationship imitation is replaced by reciprocation, in which the parties frankly recognise their differences while resisting the temptation to think that ‘because my ways are different from yours they are therefore better’.
The reciprocal relationship embodies two-way communication, with each open to be influenced by the other.
Through such cross-cultural pollination the ideas of each are challenged, affirmed, enriched or modified,
THE COMMUNICATION PROCESS
The human sciences of anthropology, psychology and sociology have thrown much fresh light on the complexity of the communication process in recent years.
Much of this insight has a valuable application to the communicating of the gospel.
The Christian communicator is never the primary source of the message in the sense that one is not the originator of that which one is seeking to convey.
One's primary source is the written word of God through which the Spirit of God speaks to him or her.
The prophet and apostle fulfil the role of secondary sources when they speak in God's name prefacing their message with an introductory ‘Thus says the Lord…’.
To a lesser extent the preacher and the witness stand in the same relationship to their message, as they declare what has been revealed to them or that which they have personally  witnessed.
A degree of interaction between themselves and their source is required for them to act in this capacity.
What they are seeking to share with others must have become true for them.
The communicator who has not interacted with the material and is merely passing on what he or she has read or been told functions as a tertiary source .
They are often more of a blockage to communication than a channel.
One has to get behind them to appreciate the significance and ‘impact’ of the message.
In the process of transmission the message does not have an independent existence.
It is encapsulated in the mind of the speakers who send a complex pattern of signals which enable the receptor to build up his perception of the message in his own mind.
In the ideal communication event the result is that the receptor's understanding corresponds exactly with the intention of the communicator, but this ideal is seldom achieved.
In most instances the communicator must settle for an approximation within acceptable limits.
This state of affairs causes no surprise when it is recognised that ‘what is understood is at least as dependent on how the receptor perceives the message as on how the communicator presents it’(Kraft 1979:148).
The transmission of a message inevitably involves first that the message be encoded by the communicator and then that it be decoded or ‘translated’ by the receptor.
It is in this complex procedure that ‘slippage’ occurs.
The extent to which this is likely to occur is compounded when there is a wide cultural gap between those involved in the verbal exchange.
One does not have to be a missionary in a remote situation to become aware of the communication barriers.
Many Christians experience them whenever they attempt to communicate their faith to their non-Christian friends.
The longer they have been Christians and the more they have been preoccupied with their Christian activities, the more difficult it becomes to relate their beliefs to the perceived needs of their friends.
New converts, on the other hand, have no such problems because pre-Christian experience is  still fresh in their mind and they communicate their faith in an everyday language because they have not yet learned a new jargon.
The communicator ‘encodes’ the message by the concepts he or she uses, the language employed and the communication format adopted whether that be monologue, dialogue, question-posing, or a dramatic presentation, prose, poetry or song.
The encoding process will also include what Abercrombie describes as ‘paralinguistic phenomena ’.
‘paralinguistic phenomena are non-linguistic elements in conversation.
They occur alongside spoken language, interact with it, and produce, together with it, a total system of communication.
They are not necessarily continuously simultaneous with spoken words.
They may also be interspersed among them or precede them, or follow them; but they are always integrated into a conversation considered as a complete linguistic interaction’(Abercrombie: 72:55–59).
They include sounds such as‘tut tut’, ‘phew’, ‘ugh’, ‘shshsh’, ‘ahem’; gestures (shrugs, nods, winks, hand and arm movements); posture (sitting, standing, leaning forward and back, crossing and uncrossing legs) and facial expressions (smiles, frowns).
They are expressed in voice control.
The ways in which we say things convey as much as what we say.
This is reflected in how loudly we speak, texture of voice, use of pauses, and so on.
Eye contact is also an important element.
‘In the mutual look the participants express their involvement with one another.
The longer the periods of eye contact, the greater the level of this mutual involvement, other things being equal.
But in any situation there is a limit to the amount of mutual involvement that may be tolerated, and too much mutual looking may arouse anxiety’(Argyle and Kendon 1972:39).
When the preacher looks at the ceiling before long his congregation look at their shoes and then their watches!
Yet another element in ‘paralinguistic phenomena’ is the distance between those engaging in face-to-face interaction.
These vary between cultures and in accordance with the  nature of the communication in the scale: intimate, casual, social, public or frozen.
In the communication process a change of distance can signal change of relationship.
I have noticed that when older people put out chairs in preparation for a church meeting they will tend to place them in straight rows and arrange them further back from the speaker.
This reflects the emphasis on ‘status’ and the formal school classroom layout which was more prevalent in former years.
When receptors receive and decode the message in order to uncover the meaning, the operation is no less complex.
They will be concerned with the status of the source; statements may be accepted quite uncritically from a peer whom the receptors admire and emulate.
They will examine the credibility of the source to ensure that the person is genuine and sincere.
As we have previously noticed, they will perceive the message within his own frame of reference and proceed on the basis from the known to the unknown.
They will assess the person on his voice quality, mannerisms and dress.
If the message is to influence the other person it must have an appropriate degree of impact (Kraft 1979:7149).
Due to the fact that we are all constantly being bombarded with stimuli, we have learned from an early age to be very selective in our response.
Our listening ability is related to the relevance of the communication, its intelligibility, and a level of predictability.
We listen more quickly than we speak, and when we can anticipate what is coming next then we switch off.
Often what we ‘hear’ is not what is said, but what we think we are going to hear!
Where there is a high level of predictability then there is a low impact.
One gifted preacher known to the author frequently resorts to the shock statement to break through the ‘selective hearing’ of his audience.
He began one address with the statement that, ‘1 Corinthians chapter 13 is not about love…it's about the need to exercise gifts in love.’
In another he riveted the attention of his hearers with the statement, ‘Samson was the weakest man in the Bible!’
Sometimes what we expect to hear is predetermined by cultural influences as well as the ways in which facts have previously been presented to us.
At  every stage in the communication process we can detect the powerful influence of culture.
Up to this point in our discussion we have been preoccupied with the mechanics of the communication process.
We must now turn our attention to the spiritual dynamics which operate in relation to the communication of the gospel.
In addition to the cultural blocks there is a spiritual blindness in the hearts and minds of people which prevents them from hearing the Good News.
Paul explains to the Corinthians that those who do not believe have minds which have been kept in the dark by the evil god of this world.
‘He keeps them from seeing the light shining on them, the light that comes from the Good News about the glory of Christ’(2 Cor.
4:4).
Therefore, the application of communication techniques, no matter how skilled and imaginative, will not of itself ensure the effective transmission of the gospel message.
The Holy Spirit is the essential communicator.
If he is absent, the message will not get through.
The Old Testament prophets knew the impossibility of making any impression on those who were stiff-necked and hard of heart (Isa. 6:9, 10; 29:10).
Even our Lord experienced the frustration of trying to communicate to those who did not have ears to hear (Luke 10:16; Matt.
13:14; Mark 6:52).
He taught his disciples about the role of the Holy Spirit as communicator, who would lead them into all truth (John 14:17; 16:13) and would ‘convince the world concerning sin and righteousness and judgment’(John 16:8 RSV).
Paul the missionary, that master of cross-cultural communication, admitted that the message about Christ's death on the cross was nonsense to those who were being lost (1 Cor.
1:18).
For God in his wisdom made it impossible for people to know him by means of their own wisdom (v. 21).
How, then, are they to know him?
Paul replies, ‘by means of His Spirit’.
He continues, ‘So then, we do not speak in words taught by human wisdom but in words taught by the Spirit, as we explain spiritual truths to those who have the Spirit’(2:13).
If the New Testament witnesses were truly to communicate, they had to speak in the ‘power of Spirit’(1 Thess. 1:5; Rom. 15:19; Acts 1:8; 4:33; 6:8; 1 Cor.
2:4).
At the same time the Holy Spirit was at work on the receptor's end of the communication process (1 Thess. 1:6; Col. 1:9).
The Christian communicators' awareness of the essential role of the Holy Spirit does not provide them with a short cut to achieve instant impact.
Rather the role of the Holy Spirit is to heighten their awareness of the problem and enable them to identify with those to whom they are called to speak.
There is no true communication without genuine incarnation.
And the incarnational route is always costly intellectually and emotionally.
It requires a special gift of the Spirit (Eph. 3:7).
CULTURE AND CHURCH STRUCTURE
The relationship between conversion and culture is of enormous importance to the task of evangelism and church planting.
These activities inescapably take place within a specific cultural context, which may be a clearly defined mono-cultural situation, or, more frequently, within a multi-cultural environment.
As we have seen, culture permeates the whole of life and has a profound influence on the meaning which people attach to the messages they hear, the way they make decisions and the social and institutional structures which they build around their creeds and values.
The insights of the church growth movement in showing the impact of culture in these areas has been a major contribution to the Church's understanding of its missionary task in recent decades.
These perceptions are as relevant to the mission of the Church in the United Kingdom as in Asia, Africa and Latin America.
The spread of the gospel through homogeneous units
In his examination of the working of the Great Commission, McGavran draws attention to the significance of ta ethne in the phrase translated in most English versions as ‘all nations’, but rendered more accurately as ‘all peoples’ in the Good News Bible.
‘Go, then, to all peoples everywhere and make them  my disciples…’
(Matt.
28:19).
McGavran and Arn point out that ethne does not mean ‘modern nation states’ such as India, the United States, or China.
Ethne means the castes, tribes, peoples, ethnic units of mankind (McGavran and Arn 1977:38).
This distinction has been widely overlooked in modern missionary strategy to the extent that when a church has resulted in a particular country, it has been assumed that an adequate base for evangelisation has been established.
However, the extent of the command in the Great Commission is not simply the spread of the gospel outwards territorially but down through the cultural layers.
McGavran describes society as honeycombed in a ‘cultural mosaic’.
Individuals need a social identity — a sense of peoplehood — if they are to identify, develop and function in society.
They therefore form themselves into various groups in which they identify themselves as ‘we’, as distinct from those who are outside and described as ‘they’.
He defines such sociological groupings as ‘homogeneous units’, which he admits ‘is an elastic concept, its meaning depending on the context in which it is used’(McGavran 1970:86).
Simply stated, the homogeneous unit is a group in which all the members have some characteristic in common.
The homogeneity may be represented by a political unit, a culture or a language, a tribe or caste or tribal sub-unit.
Within western society it might represent a socio-economic group, people in a particular employment or a young people's counter-culture and so on.
These are groups which share a particular life-style, language, and assumptions so that they feel at home with one another.
Each develops its own behaviour pattern.
‘Thus, within each homogeneous unit, individual action is considered typical or atypical as judged in the light of the social roles determined by the group’(Wagner 1979c:59).
In Britain denominational planning has depended too exclusively on the ‘geographical map’.
Within the Church of England this has been influenced by the parish structure inherited from rural society with a feudal structure.
While  the geographical map may be helpful to ensure a measure of blanket coverage, it can at the same time be very misleading if used as the only planning model.
The homogeneous unit concept provides a valuable alternative map by which to gauge the Church's effectiveness in relation to the ‘mosaic’ of peoples which make up the population of the British Isles.
When applied to particular urban or rural situations it will reveal the dynamics which, while attracting some into the fellowship of the churches, are at the same time excluding others.
Church growth theorists have observed that churches tend to grow within homogeneous units.
Peter Wagner claims that between ninety-five and ninety-eight per cent of churches are basically homogeneous (Wagner 1978).
While it is impossible to either prove or disprove this estimate, as a matter of observation it is true that a high proportion of churches seem to attract ‘their kind of people’.
The reason for this is stated by McGavran as, ‘men like to become Christians without crossing racial, linguistic or class barriers’(McGavran 1970:198).
If people outside the Church can see people among its membership like themselves, they are more likely to want to identify.
On the other hand, when people outside the Church see no one within the Church with whom they can readily identify, they will not be so easily attracted.
They will conclude, as people on a South London council estate expressed it when they observed the middle-class congregation going into their local church each Sunday, ‘That church isn't for the likes of us.’
The other major contribution to missiological thinking by McGavran has been his stress on the corporate dimension of the decision-making process.
He has provided a much needed corrective to the over-individualistic approach to conversion which has been characteristic of many western evangelists and missionaries.
Such strategy he describes as ‘one by one against the tide’(McGavran 1970:299).
Against this, McGavran points out that historically in the Christianisation of Europe individuals have come to Christ in great numbers through ‘people movements’.
‘People become Christians as a  wave of decisions for Christ sweeps through the group mind, involving many individual decisions but being far more than merely their sum.
This may be called a chain reaction.
Each decision sets off others and the sum total powerfully affects every individual’(McGavran 1970:12).
People movements take a number of forms.
In the first place, there is the ‘follow-my-leader ’ model, in which groups respond to peer pressure.
We also read of crowd conversions through the preaching of the Christians in Jerusalem after pentecost (Acts 2:37–41; 4:4).
There are a number of instances of household conversion.
The extended household of the centurion Cornelius (Acts 10) and the business woman named Lydia in Philippi (Acts 16) were all baptised, presumably following family deliberation.
This pattern can be extended to become a community decision .
The villages of Lydda and Sharon turned to the Lord (Acts 9:35).
The fifth pattern is that of a web movement when the decision of one person triggers other people with whom he is in contact.
In this way Andrew influenced his brother Peter (John 1:40–42) and Philip found Nathaniel (John 1:45).
This is perhaps the most common pattern by which the gospel spreads.
To this list we might also add a sixth,media movement which is seen in the rise of the ‘television church’ through congregational sponsored televised services in the USA (Olson 1979:133–142).
Dr McGavran first introduced the people concept in Bridges of God written in 1955.
Fifteen years later he provided further elucidation in response to his critics.
‘The kind of conversion on which people movements are based is the root of the difficulty.
The crucial question is: Do people movements rest on group conversion?
The answer is No.
There is no such thing as group conversion.
A group has no body and no mind.
It cannot decide anything whatever.
The phrase group conversion is simply an easy inexact description of what really happens.’
The process is more accurately described as ‘multi-individual, mutually inter-dependent conversion’(McGavran 1970:302).
Although there is a powerful chain reaction or ‘knock-on’ effect, each individual  is personally responsible for his or her decision within the total group dynamic.
Whenever there is a widespread turning to Christ there is a very real danger of superficiality leading to nominality.
Steps must be taken to ensure that each decision is genuine, and adequate post-baptismal (or post-conversion) counsel and care must be provided to ensure a good environment for the nurturing of new life (McQuilkin 1973, 1974:48).
Values of the homogeneous unit concept
This concept heightens the Church's awareness of the unreached groups within a nation, county, or local district.
It provides an alternative map to complement the geographical one most commonly used, which, when exclusive, may mask as much as it reveals.
It also helps congregations understand why they are finding it so difficult to reach ‘resistant areas’ for which they feel a responsibility.
As we noted at the beginning of the chapter, white, middle-class churches in Britain have a poor ‘track record’ on relating to artisan, West Indian and Asian cultures.
It underlines the need to adopt methods appropriate to the group which is to be reached.
Part of their resistance may be explained in terms of the inappropriate methods pursued in the past by well-meaning people who were ‘foreigners’ to the area.
It also helps to sensitise the Church to the dangers of cultural imperialism.
Earlier in the chapter we outlined the various views on the relationship of gospel to culture.
Here I would identify with the position held by Charles Kraft, namely that God, whilst being above culture, chooses to work through culture (Kraft 1979:113–115).
In such instances the Church can become more of a barrier than a channel in the communication of the gospel.
THE IMPACT OF THE GOSPEL ON CULTURES
The gospel criticises cultures.
While some aspects of a culture will be either affirmed or enriched by the gospel, other elements will be brought under judgment.
No area of  culture can escape scrutiny.
When the gospel is subsumed beneath culture, the result is enculturation — which signifies the muting of the gospel challenge.
Therefore the laudable desire to contextualise the message must not be pressed to provide a carte blanche advocacy of every aspect of a particular culture.
Rather the approach adopted by the Christian communicator should be in the form of critical contextualisation , which endeavours to criticise culture according to the values of the gospel of the reign of Christ as it impacts on a specific community.
The gospel redeems cultures.
Every culture represents a mixture of good and bad, of ennobling and degrading elements.
We must, therefore, seek to discover what the gospel has to say to our culture.
What elements does it affirm, what does it reject, what does it accommodate, and which need to be redeemed?
Wagner states that ‘cultural integrity is part and parcel of human identity, and any system of thought or behaviour that denies cultural integrity is dehumanising’(Wagner 1979c:97).
He is strongly opposed to an extractionist approach in evangelism.
‘When a gospel is presented that explicitly or implicitly teaches that becoming a citizen of the Kingdom of God requires a denial of peoplehood, its authenticity must be called into question’(Wagner 1978).
The same point is emphasised by Tippett: ‘Church growth theory believes that the Lord wants converts who can live the Christian life within their own social structures — be they industrial, nomadic, or subsistent.
We ask the question: what does it mean to be a Christian in this or that kind of society?
If our missionary methods extract converts from their society and leave them as social isolates or misfits, there is something wrong with our missioning’(Tippett 1970:34).
The Christian communicator tries to avoid this unfortunate outcome by seeking reference points in the other's frame of reference.
There must be an open dialogue as a result of which the participants will not only enter each other 's world-view, but will as a result have re-evaluated their own position.
An American Indian proverb cautions, ‘One man  should say nothing to another until he has walked in his moccasins.’
The gospel does not impose a cultural uniformity.
From a Christian perspective cultural diversity is not simply the result of the interplay of sociological and environmental factors, it is a demonstration of the creative ingenuity of God.
In 1978 an international group of evangelical theologians gathered in Pasadena under the auspices of the Lausanne Committee for World Evangelisation.
They declared, ‘We are unanimous in celebrating the colourful mosaic of the human race that God has created.
This rich variety should be preserved, not destroyed, by the gospel.
The attempt to impose another culture on people who have their own, into a colourless uniformity, is a denial of the Creator and an affront to his creation.
The preservation of cultural diversity honours God, respects man, enriches life, and promotes evangelisation.
Each church, if it is to be truly indigenous, should be rooted in the soil of its local culture’(Pasadena Consultation 1978:3).
Such cultural diversity we should expect to find expressed in the structures and institutional life of the churches.
Overseas too many missionary-planted churches are over-influenced by their imported histories, which reflect controversies and emphases which may be irrelevant to their environment into which they have been transplanted.
Here at home there are denominations which, while they may boast a doctrinal comprehensiveness, manifest a cultural exclusiveness.
They impose liturgical traditions, organisational structures, communication methods and leadership models which are alien to their environment.
This is not to say that the world dictates the pattern for the Church to adopt, but to point out that the Church must be constantly examining itself to ensure that it is remaining true to the gospel and that the only barrier is the inescapable offence of the atoning message of the cross which stands at the centre of that gospel.
The gospel brings reconciliation.
Sometimes the common traits of homogeneity which bind people together are evil; these may be expressed in the form of hostility or antagonism to those outside.
This has been reflected in the attitude of the National Front towards new commonwealth citizens in the United Kingdom in recent times.
At other times cultural groups regard themselves in a superior relationship to other cultures.
In the New Testament the gospel is depicted as a power of God to deal with enmity and superiority.
‘For Christ himself has brought us peace by making Jews and Gentiles one people.
With his own body he broke down the wall that separated them and kept them enemies’(Eph. 2:14, 15).
The Jews had to accept the fact that Gentiles could become Christians and that in so doing they did not have to come to Christ via Jewish cultural conditioning.
They did not have to take on board the Jewish ceremonial Law.
When Paul was writing to the Galatians he was confronting the Judaisers who were trying to act as cultural imperialists.
Their attitude is firmly rejected by Paul as ‘another gospel’ which was in reality no gospel at all.
In protecting the minority rights of the Gentile believers he states, ‘there is no difference between Jews and Gentiles, between slaves and free men, between men and women; you are all one in union with Christ Jesus’(Gal.
3:28, 29).
The gospel brings about a reconciliation between groups which were formerly antagonistic to one another.
Yet the unity for which Paul strongly argues is not a uniformity.
He is not urging the Jews to become more Gentile, or the Gentiles to become more Jewish.
If such were his meaning here, it would make a nonsense of his other statement that ‘there is no difference…between men and women’!
Rather he is declaring the abolition of enmity and favouritism.
The gospel encourages mutual support and enrichment.
Negatively, the New Testament says that believers should take care not to offend one another(Gal.
2:11, 16) and positively that they should recognise that they belong to one another and take active steps to welcome and support one another(Rom. 15:7).
The supracultural dimension of the gospel must be demonstrated in the strife-torn world of today.
The Church should not simply reflect the divisions and distancing present in its social context.
This attitude is reflected by the Pasadena Consultation at which the delegates agreed ‘that in many situations a homogeneous unit church can be a legitimate and authentic church.
Yet we are also agreed that it can never be complete in itself.
Indeed, if it remains in isolation, it cannot reflect the universality and diversity of the Body of Christ.
Nor can it grow into maturity.
Therefore, every Homogeneous Unity church must take active steps to broaden its fellowship in order to demonstrate visible unity and the variety of Christ's Church.
This will mean forging with other and different churches creative relationships which express the reality of Christian love, brotherhood, and interdependence’(Pasadena Consultation 1978:4, 5).
At every level of church life, international, inter-denominational, intercongregational and intracongregational structures must be developed to express both the unity and the diversity of the Body of Christ (1 Cor.
12:12, 13).
In this search the closer one gets to home the more difficult it becomes.
Where white and black churches exist side by side, some congregations are now meeting to worship together on a quarterly basis.
This has resulted in a great deal of mutual education, and most would not want to worship together any more regularly than that!
Other churches have endeavoured to build effective congregational structures to express both homogeneity and heterogeneity.
The main congregation is divided into ethnic groups for time of worship, study and fellowship.
This is sometimes done as part of Sunday worship, or, more frequently, in mid-week fellowship.
The groups come together regularly for acts of celebration worship, cultural interchange (a Caribbean evening), joint action over community concerns, and to share and challenge each other 's perception of the gospel and understanding of contemporary Christian discipleship.
SUMMARY
In this chapter we have opened up some of the complex issues raised by the impact of the gospel on culture.
My purpose has been limited to increasing a level of awareness, rather than attempting to supply solutions.
In reality there are no pat answers, for each situation has its distinctive cultural milieu and must, therefore, be approached with as open a mind as we can achieve.
Such open-mindedness is an essential part of the missionary gift which the Church needs in order to function effectively in any cross-cultural situation.
As we engage with the culture in which we are located or which we are seeking to reach, we need to keep a whole range of questions continuously in mind: What elements in this culture reflect gospel values and should consequently be highlighted and affirmed?
How does the gospel relate to those areas with which the culture is least able to cope, or which have a dehumanising influence?
What practical steps are we taking to discover how the Church appears from the outsider's perspective and how its message is being interpreted; remembering it's not what we say but what they hear which really counts?
What aspects of our ecclesiastical tradition facilitate and what create a barrier to our communication attempts?
What are the most effective communication channels in this culture, and how can the Church gain access to them and speak authentically through them?
If we were starting from scratch what would we do differently?
And even after years of existence here, should we now start doing any of those things?
Measurement and Meaning
One of the great services which McGavran has rendered to the missionary enterprise has been his insistence on the need to gather objective and accurate data in order to disperse the fog in which it has operated for so long.
He argues, ‘The numerical approach is essential to understanding church growth.
The Church is made up of countable people and there is nothing particularly spiritual in not counting them.
Men use the numerical approach in all worthwhile human endeavour’(McGavran 1970:83).
The persistent tendency to cover up for our lack of effectiveness by using vague language must be strongly resisted.
Such head-in-the-sands mentality is particularly evident throughout Europe, where prolonged and serious church decline is the prevailing trend.
James Scherer, writing in the International Review of Missions , makes the following appreciation of McGavran's emphasis on data-gathering.
‘So rigorous is he (i.e. McGavran) in dispelling romantic notions and false theological rationalisations of non-growth that he may be said to have de-mythologised this subject.
His own interpretation stresses measurable environmental factors and insists that situations be weighed in terms of their social and cultural complexity.
The rigour and honesty brought to the task will put students of church growth in Dr McGavran's debt.
Much to his credit, the author is even-handed in his criticism of conservative evangelical and ecumenical groups for the rationalisations (theological and promotional) which both employ in justifying or covering up non-growth situations’(IRM April 1971:127).
Church growth data-gathering needs to be undertaken at least at two levels, national and local.
The accuracy of the former will depend on the quality of the information gathered by the individual churches and their readiness to make their results more widely available.
Denominational headquarters also need sound data-handling methods to ensure an accurate national picture.
At both national and local levels trends can be analysed not only within churches and denominations, but across denominations, to learn from those who appear to be exceptions to the general rule.
Only by painstaking research are we able to paint an accurate picture of what is really happening.
Without such essential information we cannot plan responsibly for the future.
We must take account of the cause and effect relationship which God has built into his created order, by unearthing and facing facts.
What are the most basic areas of research which the Church needs to undertake if it is to take growth seriously?
McGavran identifies the following:
1
Church membership and attendance totals and the rate at which they are changing.
2
Homogeneous unit totals (to determine the degree of penetration into the different sub-groupings of society).
3
An analysis of the kinds of church growth, to identify how much represents conversion growth from the world into the Church.
4
A family analysis to determine how many full families, partial and singles.
5
A leader and worker analysis to ascertain the proportion deployed in extending the Church's witness in the community.
At this stage we merely introduce them in passing; we will return to them in greater detail later on.
Demographic and social characteristics are also important in the interpretation of all the above data.
Before delving into the practicalities of the subject we must first examine four of the main questions about data-gathering in the context of church life which lurk in the minds of many committed Christians.
ANSWERING OBJECTIONS TO DATA-GATHERING
‘Data-gathering is unscriptural’
On the basis of 1 Chronicles 21, where it is recorded that David incurred divine displeasure because he ordered a national census, some Christian leaders refuse to gather statistics of their membership.
They feel that to embark on such an undertaking might spiritually jeopardise their work.
But the incident recorded in Chronicles must be balanced by other parts of Scripture.
For instance in the Book of Numbers (sic!)
Moses is expressly commanded to count the people upon entering the Sinai wilderness to ensure that they can subsequently be accounted for.
He is told, ‘You and Aaron are to take a census of the people of Israel by clans and families.
List the names of all men twenty years old or older who are fit for military service’(1:1–3).
He needed to know both the size of the total community for which he was responsible and the strength of the army he would soon have to deploy (see also Num. 2:32–34; 26:1–4, 63–65).
Why then is David punished for counting in 1 Chronicles 21?
On this occasion we are informed that the idea was prompted by Satan and not by God, who did it ‘in order to bring trouble on the people of Israel’(v. 1).
David insisted on proceeding with his intentions despite the opposition of Joab, his commander-in-chief, who sensed the wrong motivation for the exercise.
Tippett suggests that, ‘Such temptation was possible because David was now proudly aware of his kingdom and his military strength and organisation.
The numbering was a sin because it was self-glorification’(Tippett 1970:15).
At this time David failed to recognise that his strength lay in the arm of the Lord rather than in his own military capability.
The principle of counting to ensure pastoral care and effective deployment of manpower is carried over into the New Testament.
In our Lord's parable of the lost sheep (Luke 15:3–6) we see that it was as a consequence of counting his sheep into the fold each night that the  shepherd discovered that he was one short.
If he had failed to take this action he would probably have been unaware of the emergency.
But as soon as his regular check brings to light the absentee he is able to take prompt and appropriate action.
From the gospel record we know the precise number of Jesus' select team of disciples and that on one occasion seventy were sent out two by two on a mission to prepare villages for Christ's coming (Luke 10).
Other ancient manuscripts give the number as seventy-two which shows that even then there was some confusion about statistics!
In his account of the performance of the Church in the Book of Acts, Luke displays no inhibitions in speaking about numbers.
We are informed that there were 120 believers meeting in Jerusalem (1:15).
Three thousand were added to the Church on the day of Pentecost (2:41), and before long the number of male believers grew to about 5,000 (4:4).
Paul likewise informs us that on one occasion our Lord appeared to more than 500 believers at once(1 Cor.
15:6).
While it must be conceded that the New Testament displays no great preoccupation with data-gathering — which is not surprising considering the complexity of numeration in both the Hebrew and Roman world!— there is no positive evidence to suggest that Christ's mission should be pursued in ignorance of obtainable facts.
‘Data-gathering is inappropriate’
Many people discount the value of statistical analysis by saying that what matters is quality, not quantity.
This viewpoint was upheld by no less a missionary statesman than Max Warren.
He speaks of ‘the strictly limited value of all statistical assessments of the value of missionary work.
Scripture provides no justification whatever for taking statistics seriously.
This is one of the quantitative fallacies of far too much missionary thinking.
Quality is undefinable and known only to God’(Warren 1979:155).
While Max Warren is right to caution against an obsessive preoccupation with numbers, I believe that he overstates the case when he is so dismissive of all quantity measurement.
McGavran highlights the fact that, ‘Luke did not scorn numbers.
He rejoiced in the large numbers becoming Christians and carefully recorded them.
The early churches did not scorn numbers.
When they heard that multitudes in Samaria had received the word of God, they gladly sent them Peter and John; and when they heard that in Antioch a great number had believed and turned to the Lord, they at once despatched Barnabas who, when he came and saw, rejoiced’(McGavran 1959:25).
The task of mission, while depending on the empowering and guidance of the Holy Spirit, also requires human planning.
The interventions of God do not set aside the need for careful evaluation.
The surprises of God are not intended as a substitute for strategy.
Responsible decision-making requires well-researched data.
Such research does not set aside the need for divine guidance, but the evidence produced by investigation forms some of the ingredients.
The Holy Spirit guides us through discernment as well as by signs.
McGavran and Arn spell out the attitude which should characterise Christians in their decision-making.
‘Father, I've endeavoured to gather all the facts available, and still I'm uncertain which is the best decision.
I need your guidance and direction.
I'm asking for your leading.
I am listening for your instruction’(McGavran and Arn 1977:29).
Baptismal, confirmation, membership and communicant figures do not tell the whole story.
They constitute only some of the ingredients in the evaluation and diagnostic processes.
When a doctor takes the temperature of a patient, the reading gives no more than one item of information.
Neither will the examination alter the situation, for the thermometer has not yet been invented which can bring down the temperature of the fever-stricken patient.
It does, however, provide helpful data which, when combined with the results of other investigations, reveals the state of health of the patient.
The point to emphasise is that the data is only of help to those who know the patient and can build up a case history.
McGavran, in addition to emphasising the importance of data-gathering, balances this statistical emphasis by underlining the need for careful and competent interpretation.
‘It cannot be over-emphasised that statistics, if these are to have any meaning, should be gathered by those who know the churches well and who are concerned that the statistics reveal the truth.
They should also be accompanied by a full description of the churches, their natural groupings, and their geographical, social and spiritual environment.
Statistics are a summary of significant information and care should be taken that they convey true meanings’(McGavran 1959:27, 28).
‘Data-gathering is unnecessary’
This may not be the case in a small house fellowship, or of a small church in a face-to-face village community where everyone knows everybody else.
In such locations the leader who knows both the congregation and community and is aware of the facets of growth to keep under surveillance may not need to do a formal count.
However, most churches in today's world, with its high population density, complex relationship networks and mobility will need to take a more sophisticated approach to alert themselves to the significant trends.
This is part of the explanation of the lack of statistical concern to be found in the Scriptures.
There churches were just beginning.
For the most part they consisted of small groups of people meeting in homes.
Individuals were also part of extended households so their absences would immediately be noticed.
This is a very different situation from many churches today which meet in large buildings and with eclectic congregations, the members of which are unlikely to meet unless they plan to do so.
It is inadequate and misleading to rely on general impressions in such churches.
We need to isolate significant measuring points to assess current trends and the influences at  work which produce them.
Time after time, ministers who thought they knew their churches inside-out discover new factors relating to their growth or lack of it, of which they would have remained blissfully unaware if they had not taken the trouble to investigate.
Ministers as a professional group tend to be averse to data-gathering because they are more people focused than organisation orientated.
Another hesitation arises in the minds of some ministers who are men of action and feel that data-gathering and detailed long-term planning are simply a cover-up for procrastination.
They want to get on with the job, and are afraid of what a former Archbishop of York, Stuart Blanch, has described as ‘analysis paralysis’ setting in.
This needs to be said, because some churches feel more competent at the analysis than the action.
So any activity which serves to postpone involvement in a church growth programme is to be welcomed!
‘Data-gathering is uncomfortable’
Some denominations and local churches reject data-gathering because they are not prepared to face the truth about themselves.
They are like patients, who, suspecting that something is seriously wrong, steadfastly refuse to see a doctor in the hope that their troubles will clear up without the need to be told the truth about themselves or undergo painful treatment.
Some growing churches which have broadcast their ‘success’ do not want to look too closely at where their new growth has been coming from.
They rejoice that their pews are full, without facing the sobering fact that they are only filling them by emptying someone else's.
One further aspect needs to be mentioned for churches which have experienced prolonged decline.
Their data-gathering can be a disheartening exercise.
If they merely project their ski-slope profile membership and attendance graphs, they will plan for continuing decline.
Retrenchment will be the order of the day, with the result that we achieve what we have planned for.
In the knowledge that so much of the central and parochial planning has been  based on these kinds of projections, many ministers want to ignore the evidence from the past and present, and work in the hope that God will do a new thing.
THE VALUE OF DATA-GATHERING
Having considered the objections, we now turn briefly to outline the advantages of collecting relevant statistical information about the progress of the Christian Church in a locality or nation.
These have been mentioned in passing in the previous section, but they are summarised here for the sake of convenience and for added emphasis.
To be aware of general trends
As situations grow in size and complexity it becomes increasingly hazardous to rely upon hunches and rule-of-thumb measures.
Furthermore, it is likely that trends will be well advanced before they begin to become apparent.
The more entrenched unwelcome developments have become, the harder it will be to reverse them.
Data-gathering provides an early-warning system so that the situation can be analysed soon after the trend has begun to take shape and corrective measures can be applied promptly.
To evaluate their significance
It is frequently said that you can make statistics say what you want them to say.
This is a half truth.
You can use them arbitrarily when you are speaking to those who can neither verify the accuracy of the data, nor have sufficient knowledge of the situation from which they are drawn to appreciate their significance.
However, when the data are studied by a group of people who are all intimately involved in and have detailed knowledge of the situation they describe, they become an invaluable tool.
If you want to put this to the test, simply present your membership, attendance and income and expenditure figures to the church committee in graph form without comment beyond that of simple clarification.
Then divide the committee  into groups of three to spend twenty minutes drawing out their significance and listing questions to which they give rise.
On a blackboard or overhead projector write the heading ‘WHAT THE FIGURES SAY ABOUT US’ and list the points identified by each group.
To allocate resources to responsive areas
In marketing terms you sell where you are selling best.
In terms of the mission of the gospel you put your human and financial resources to reap where God has prepared a ripe harvest.
Many a temporary gain has been lost because the significance of the development was recognised too late in the day and additional resources could not be made available.
As we will describe in the final chapter, we should plan from strength and not from weakness.
Effective planning for mission in Britain as in many other countries has been hampered at every level by lack of reliable data.
In 1972 the report of the Committee on Mission for the British Council of Churches entitled ‘Stand Up and Be Counted’ expressed the conviction ‘that a fresh approach to the collection and use of statistical information is the basic prerequisite of any realistic planning for mission in the United Kingdom’(p. 1).
For future planning the report recommended the regular collection and review of statistics at four levels:
1
At the national level, by improving, standardising and centralising the categories of data collection so that these provide a more reliable basis for research in depth and reflect changes in the work of the Church.
2
At the regional level, by relating material to demographic and socio-economic statistics and deriving projections as a guide to strategic forward planning.
3
At the local authority level, by the constant monitoring and adjustment of resources to meet changing needs and the changing social situation.
4
At the level of the local church to enable them to formulate their missionary task in the area and assess their work in a creative manner.
In response to this pressing need the work undertaken by Peter Brierley of MARC Europe is to be highly commended.
In addition to his monitoring of church membership and attendance trends in the United Kingdom he is also seeking to provide country profiles for every country in Western Europe.
As 1992 approaches, the year for the fulfilment of the Single European Market, it is even more important for the Churches of Europe to have a more accurate and comprehensive picture so that strategies for the re-evangelisation of the European Community can be developed.
At the present time church leaders tend to be too limited in their experience and outlook, having focused almost exclusively on the fortunes of their own denomination, or on the spiritual conditions prevailing within their own country.
The advent of 1992 will demand a new breed of Euro-Christians who are embracing the entire continent in their strategic thinking.
To draw up long-term plans for resistant areas
Emphasising the responsive does not mean neglecting the resistant.
So what was said under the previous heading needs to be counter-balanced.
McGavran argues that resistant areas should be occupied lightly.
While this strategy may be appropriate for a ‘mission area’ where only a few pockets of Christians are to be found and they have to decide between going to one place at the expense of another, it must be applied rather differently in a situation where the Church has extensive geographical coverage.
In England there are identifiable resistant areas of society, representing particular kinds of people.
Each will require a distinctive approach, which will take much prayer, research and expertise to develop.
We must seek to discover through the experimental work of small teams which approaches have the best chances of success, before committing the battalions.
Such schemes require adequate data-gathering, otherwise we will continue to hear ingenious theories unsubstantiated by facts.
DATA-GATHERING AT LOCAL CHURCH LEVEL
In many ways this is the most important level of data-gathering.
People are intimately involved in the situation which they are endeavouring to analyse so they are well placed to assess the accuracy and relevance of the information and also to interpret its significance.
The local church also plays a strategic role in building up a regional and national picture, the accuracy of which will depend upon the quality of the data which churches have amassed and are willing to divulge.
Before embarking upon data-gathering exercises some of the potential pitfalls must be recognised so that as many as possible can be avoided.
People's suspicions are quickly aroused, so from the outset the congregation must appreciate the purpose and significance of the exercise and be assured that confidentiality will be preserved.
This latter point is not easily achieved, especially when questionnaires are used with small numbers.
Individuals may be identified by their handwriting, or their answers to the range of questions may serve to point clearly in their direction.
If such a possibility is likely to arise, then the analysis of the actual forms must be confined to one person who will act in complete confidence, destroying the forms as soon as his analysis is complete and there has been adequate discussion of the data; or preferably, an outside person should be invited to undertake the task.
In most situations it is advisable that the research project be given a ‘low profile’, with the actual work of data-gathering and analysis confined to a small group of four or five suitably qualified people.
By this means the church is preserved from ‘analysis paralysis’, with the church curtailing its activities and returning its plans to cold storage while it contemplates its navel.
The church should resist the temptation to merely tick over.
Once programme momentum is lost it becomes twice as hard to generate it again.
Church leaders should gather data much as airline pilots read their instrument panel during flight.
There is a comprehensive range of information before them and their practised eye quickly detects any malfunction.
They do not then relay all the information to the passengers, for to do so would serve no useful purpose.
On the contrary it would merely increase their anxiety level, even if there was nothing to worry about.
The information is mostly of concern to the crew in the pilot's cabin, who will then make the necessary course, altitude and speed corrections, and note items of equipment which may need a maintenance check, once the aircraft has reached its destination.
In a larger, more complex church, the minister should receive relevant information such as worship service attendance, Sunday School, Youth Fellowship and Home Group attendance on a monthly basis.
The church committee may need a concise report every three or six months, and the congregation a pictorial summary once a year.
This ensures adequate data for the decision-makers and a general awareness of the situation through the membership so that they can reassess their level of commitment.
In communicating with the congregation, emphasis should be placed on the positive and encouraging aspects of the data.
Those which give cause for concern are primarily the responsibility of the leadership to ensure prompt and effective action.
A further point to remember in the presentation of data is that most people cannot ‘take in’ lists of figures, so ensure that they are always presented in a diagrammatic form to show clearly proportions, relationships and trends.
While a plain line graph may be adequate for the church committee, it is advisable to represent the information to ordinary church members in terms of concrete symbols of people for members, and pounds signs for financial graphs.
These communicate far more effectively.
Membership
This is the most readily available statistic in most churches.
In Europe it is of most value as an indication of commitment in Free Churches, especially where the membership roll is kept up to date.
However, it does present problems for Episcopalians, Lutherans and Roman Catholics, who think  of their ‘membership’ as their total community.
To illustrate the problem let us pose the question as to who are members of the Anglican Church in England.
Are they the thirty-nine per cent of the total population who are baptised as infants?
Or the sixteen per cent who are confirmed, or the five per cent who take the trouble to obtain and return a completed electoral roll form, or the four per cent who fulfil a basic ‘membership’ requirement of taking communion at Easter?(1979 figures).
For historic reasons the infant baptism figure most accurately represents the ‘external constituency’ of the Church of England, that is, those who are favourably disposed, but most of whom do not bother to attend.
If we are to speak meaningfully in terms of membership it is probably better to define it in terms of communicant or active membership.
How this is measured will vary from denomination to denomination.
In Catholic and High Anglican circles it may be done on the basis of weekly attendance at Mass.
In Presbyterianism it will be by attendance at the quarterly communions, and in Anglican Churches with a central or evangelical tradition the most accurate measure will be the numbers at Easter and possibly Christmas communion, although in some churches these two seasons will present difficulties if there is a tradition of members going away for holidays or to visit relatives at these times.
Therefore, each church must work out for itself the best way and time to measure ‘membership’ which most accurately and helpfully reflects their situation.
The important thing to ensure is that the measure is done in the same way each year so that true trends can be discerned by being able to compare like with like.
A revealing refinement in collecting membership data is to take notice of the number of full families (where husband and wife are both Christians) in the total as distinct from part families (where only one partner is Christian)(McGavran 1970:92).
If you then discover that of your part families a high proportion consist of the wife in membership to the exclusion  of the husband, this should lead to some questions being raised about your programme which is obviously proving more effective in one area than another.
And what about the children in adolescent years?
What proportion have neither one, nor both parents as members of the church?
And to what extent is the church ministering effectively to the needs of single parent families?
What do these results indicate you should be doing to minister to the situation?
Once you have established the rule of taking a membership count each year, after a period of time you will be able to represent these figures on a graph to compare one year with another.
Having displayed in this clear format what has been happening, you will then be able to interpret the general trend, and raise questions regarding those years which proved to be exceptions to the overall picture.
Attendance
At first glance this might seem to be a more straightforward operation than gathering membership statistics — after all, attenders are visible on church premises and therefore easily counted.
On further thought it is soon evident that it is not as easy as that, because the same people are not at church every week, some come more than once on Sunday and will, therefore, be counted twice, and there is an attendance fluctuation depending on the state of the weather and the time of year!
While smaller churches may be able to count every week, this may prove impractical for large churches, especially with more than one exit, without some fairly elaborate means of arriving at a total for each service.
One of the simplest means is to buy a tally counter.
An alternative in churches where hymn books are given out is to note the empty spaces in the shelves where they are stacked or count those that remain and deduct them from the total.
Many large churches, however, provide hymn books in the pews.
An alternative scheme is to keep a record of the service sheets which are frequently distributed in churches of this size.
In order to compare one year's attendance with another, it is important to count at the same time each year.
For England I suggest the best time is between late September and the end of November, avoiding Remembrance Sunday.
This is when the new annual church programme gets under way after the summer holidays, and is before the bad winter weather sets in (hopefully!).
Choose four typical Sundays during this period, i.e. excluding festivals and other special occasions, and divide your total attendance on those Sundays by four.
This figure will be inflated by those who have attended more than once on a Sunday, but, provided that church-going habits do not change, you will still have an accurate trend measure over a number of years, which is our primary interest.
If, over the years, you suspect that there has been a swing to or away from attending more than once a Sunday, you may want to take the trouble of further refining your data.
You can do this each year on a percentage basis which you set for that year on the basis of your knowledge of the church-going habits of the congregation.
Alternatively on the ‘count’ Sundays you can ask people to register their attendance by placing a disc in a box just once during the day.
The total number of discs will give you the total number of different people who have attended church that day.
Another way of tackling the problem is to separate completely morning and evening attendance figures so that you can evaluate church-going and the appropriateness of your morning and evening programme of services.
In addition to the ‘four typical Sundays’ measure, we recommend that churches keep a record of attendance at the most popular services on the major festivals of Easter and Christmas.
It is these occasions which attract the ‘fringe’ members or the ‘external constituency’.
Growing churches tend to be those with the widest circle of ‘fringers’.
If your church is one which succeeds in attracting the crowds for special occasions, these people should constitute your prime target for deeper Christian commitment and church membership.
Churches with an active membership in excess of two hundred should also keep a record of those who attend primary and secondary groups (these are defined in Chapter six) in order to identify those who only attend Sunday worship and are involved in no other activity.
These people will constitute those who are at greatest risk, in that such people can easily go missing from a large church without being missed until it is too late to recover them.
Finance
The weekly offering is one of the most sensitive indicators of the extent of the commitment of the membership to the local church.
Of the total annual income this figure should be separated from money which comes through legacies and other sources of income such as the hire of the hall and investments.
Churches which achieve inspiring worship and operate a meaningful programme seldom have insurmountable financial difficulties.
The level of giving is a barometer of church health.
But as you graph your annual giving year by year, remember that to give an accurate impression you will need to correct for inflation.
Many churches, in comparing their giving with previous years, neglect to take this sufficiently into account, thus giving a false picture, which may breed complacency if the church is succeeding in paying its bills.
Having represented the giving for a number of years on a graph, next ask what the figures have to tell you about the relevance and quality of your programme.
Trends
Establishing trends from the past is of enormous help in determining precisely where we are at present and where we should be going in the future.
Year by year we should be concerned to know precisely the rate of growth or decline.
This can be done on an annual basis with a bar graph which reveals the annual growth rate.
The annual growth rate can be calculated by subtracting the earlier year's membership  from the later year's.
Divide the answer by the earlier year.
Then multiply this answer by a hundred, which gives you the percentage figure.
One word of caution.
A new church with a rapid initial growth rate should beware of an over-optimistic future projection.
This is not to limit faith, but to recognise that it is increasingly difficult to maintain a high figure based on small numbers.
The normal pattern is for the initial expansionist phase to give way to a marginal state, which eventually leads through recession to the residual phase.
This sequence is not inevitable, but is highly likely to occur eventually unless adequate steps are taken to prevent it.
Gains and losses
In their church growth analysis, Currie, Gilbert and Horsley distinguish between autogenous and allogenous growth (Currie, Gilbert and Horsley 1977:80).
The former represents those accruing from the families of those already members, while the latter represents those recruited who are from families of non-members.
In simpler language, autogenous growth may be described as biological , that is the children of church members coming to Christian commitment or church allegiance, while allogenous growth we may describe as conversion from the world.
Growing churches should seek to identify where their growth is coming from.
Biological growth of itself will not increase the size of the congregation, at least in the case of white Protestant churches, for the simple reason that white Protestant families tend to have fewer children.
A second classification is transfer growth, which means people are leaving other churches in order to join ours.
It therefore represents a tidal flow, without any overall increase.
One church is growing at the expense of another.
A third possibility is conversion growth , which is the most important category in terms of church growth.
A church must  regularly identify those coming to faith in Christ from a non-church background or with minimal previous church contact (McGavran 1970:87).
To these we may add a fourth,restoration growth, which is a significant category in areas which have witnessed serious church decline.
These are people who have been restored to membership after a lapse of some years.
They have usually been caused to reconsider their position vis-à-vis the church through contact with a zealous Christian friend or by the church demonstrating a quality of life which was previously unknown to the disillusioned ‘back-slider’.
Not only does a church register gains, it also experiences losses.
These too should be classified and measured.
There are three possibilities; people can be lost through death (which may be a high proportion in an elderly congregation located in a retirement area),transfer out (high in an old community due for demolition, or where people move in search of employment or as they are relocated or promoted), or reversion (may be high where the social pressure is hostile to the church, or where church morale is at a low ebb).
Charting the gains and losses will help to give a more accurate picture of the church's growth profile.
Let us briefly consider the profiles of four hypothetical churches, whose gains and losses during a given year are represented in the bar graphs below.
Church ‘A' is seven years old and located in a new development area of detached houses.
Their prices are such that they are beyond the means of most first-time buyers.
The estate is just five minutes’ drive from the motorway and fifteen miles distant from an international airport.
It therefore attracts people employed in middle and upper management positions.
The development is now four-fifths complete.
When the final group of houses is occupied it will have a total population in the region of ten thousand.
Through its attractive worship, effective publicity, well-planned visitation campaigns and interest groups it has attracted 375 worshippers.
Looking now at the gains and losses bar graph for the year we see that the main explanation for their growth has been the addition of thirty-two members through transfer.
The fact that the area is an expanding and highly mobile community with a high percentage of nominal church-goers means that it is relatively easy to bring them into church services.
As they were mainly couples who had been married for a number of years and were now able to move to a larger, more expensive home, their children ranged in age between seven and nineteen years.
Thus the church added twelve through ‘biological growth’ as they became of age for church membership.
The most dominant age group among the adults  was thirty to fifty years.
They were fairly set in their ways, committed to a particular life style, and anxious to climb the promotional ladder.
The non-church-goers in the community proved hard to win, and those who had lapsed from church attendance some twenty years previously saw no need to reconsider at their time of life.
The church, consequently, only added four through conversion from the world.
These people had been contacted by a couple who had opened their home for evangelistic supper parties.
The two restored to Christian commitment and active church membership were brought back through the testimony of their teenage son and daughter.
Members gains and losses
During that year the church had lost seventeen members.
As they were a new and active church they lost no one through reversion.
There were few elderly people in the congregation as people moved away at retirement, so they lost only two through death.
The major loss was through transfer out as fifteen people were relocated or moved abroad on promotion or on changing to a new firm.
One suburban Anglican church in Surrey, England discovered on doing this exercise that they had to gain on average thirty-four new members each year just to stay where they were in terms of membership, such was the high level of mobility in their community.
Church ‘B' is located in an urban area of mixed housing, some of which is a pre-war estate owned by the local council and the remainder older semi-detached houses constructed between 1900 and 1920.
The church is 120 years old.
From the post-war years until the mid-1960s it had experienced steady decline.
But in the mid-1970s things began to look more promising, with the arrival of a young new minister which coincided with movement into the area of young couples who found that older properties were the only type of house they could now afford as a first buy.
Young marrieds represent one of the most responsive groups in Britain today, as is witnessed by the popularity of family services.
Church B had grown to a Sunday morning  attendance of 200.
During the year twelve people had been converted, eight of whom were young wives brought to Christ through a young wives’ group.
A further two mothers from single parent families had been brought into the fellowship through the understanding and practical help offered by the group.
Among the young couples moving into the area were those who had dropped out of church life when they had left home to go to university, or when they got married.
However, now that they had family responsibilities and were beginning to put down roots, they returned to their former church-going.
This occurred when they had their children baptised or mothers came into contact with other Christian young mums through the play group organised by the church.
As most of these young people would move on before their children reached their teens, the church experienced little ‘biological growth’ in its adult membership.
Some of the older properties were occupied by elderly couples, and, as the life expectation of women is seven years longer than for men, there were a number of widows in the area.
Many of these had had church links in the distant past, and were brought into the church's fellowship by elderly members of the Women's Bright Hour group.
During the year the Church B lost seven through death, nine moved out of the area, four of whom were elderly people who transferred to an old people's home in another part of the town, and five to a ‘better neighbourhood’.
In addition, four people in the fifty to sixty-five age bracket left because they didn't like the family service and other changes which the young new minister had introduced.
Church ‘C' is located in a run-down, vandalised, inner city area which is due for redevelopment.
The old terraced houses are being demolished to make way for a new shopping centre.
The church no longer has a Sunday evening service and the morning worship is attended by about thirty-five ‘old faithfuls’.
Although few people now reside in the immediate locality, it is a gathering point for young people, who hang  around the shopping area and occupy the bench seats located in a landscaped approach.
A local evangelist working with a youth mission saw the potential of Church C's premises for coffee bar evangelism.
He gained the permission of the elders to occupy and renovate a section of their hall, and enlisted the support of Christian musicians from other churches in the town.
The coffee bar saw thirteen young people converted during the year, who were baptised on profession of faith.
The coffee bar evangelist had identified with Church C to the extent of becoming a member, but as a newcomer he was not able to influence the traditional pattern of Sunday worship.
In consequence, many of the young people drifted off.
Other factors contributing to the high loss rate were lack of parental support, ridicule by their peers, and no examples of maturer Christians with whom they could identify.
As there was no movement into the area, the church was unable to grow through either transfer or restoration.
Church ‘D' is a black church, now seventeen years old.
It is located in an inner-city residential area.
Originally it met in the hall of the local Anglican Church.
Five years ago the host church was made redundant and was purchased by the independents.
This church added sixteen members through restoration.
These had been regular church-goers in the Caribbean but had not felt at home in the more restrained worship of the British churches, and some had felt cold-shouldered by the white members.
However, once there was a church in the area which reminded them of ‘back home’ and with black leadership, they were restored to membership.
This opened the way to twenty conversions from the world, through the extended family network to those who had no previous church connections.
On the debit side the church also witnessed a high proportion of reversions, particularly among their young people through the secularising influence of their English education and the fact that they did not share their parents' nostalgia.
Of all the areas of local church data-gathering the identification and classification of membership gains and losses is one of the most important.
To understand the dynamics of the situation, one must be aware of who is joining , where from and why, and who is leaving , where to and why.
A church with a static membership may equally describe a stable community or a church in rapid transition which is just managing to hold its own.
The water level and dip-stick don't tell you everything.
We need to know if the tap is on and whether the plug has been removed from the plug hole!
Having identified who has joined the church in the past year we need to know what were the main influences which caused them to make their decision.
In this way we can learn more clearly about the strengths of our church in order to improve on them further.
Information can be gathered by means of a questionnaire which new adherents are either invited to fill in themselves, or which can be completed in an interview by one of the church leaders.
When you have analysed a number of completed questionnaires you will probably discover that the most influential factor in introducing people to your church is the personal invitation of a friend.
One of the greatest impediments to effective out-reach on the part of local congregations is their lack of meaningful contact with non-Christian people.
But when the church breaks through this isolation it has created a potential for growth.
One Gallup survey of church-goers reveals that ‘fifty-eight per cent of those who now go to church regularly, first began going when they were invited by someone they knew.
Conversely, sixty-three per cent of those who do not go to church report that none of their friends or acquaintances has ever invited them’(McGavran and Hunter 1980:33, 34).
On the other side of the picture it is also instructive to know who has left the church during the past year and their reasons for leaving.
We are particularly concerned to identify whose who have lapsed while continuing to live in  the locality.
Such people obviously cannot be approached to fill in a questionnaire!
But they will almost certainly have friends and perhaps relatives who are still church members who can be approached to discover the real reasons for their departure.
Most churches, when asked, claim that they are friendly churches.
But the committed membership are not those best able to give an accurate assessment.
Their very ‘friendliness’ towards each other may have excluded others by its exclusiveness.
Once you have collected the data from those who have joined the church and about those who have left, then decide what action you will need to take to correct any deficiencies in attracting and holding people.
In subsequent years when you prepare your gains and losses bar charts you will then have objective data on which to evaluate the effectiveness of your plans.
QUALITY OF COMMITMENT
McGavran cautions that numerical increase ‘is not adding mere names to the roll or baptising those who have no intention of following Christ.
Roll padding, aside from being dishonest, is useless.
The numerical increase worth counting is that which endures from decade to decade.
Roll padding and dishonest baptising will never produce lasting growth’(McGavran 1959:16).
As we emphasised in the opening chapter, church growth is far more than increasing the head count of those who profess to be Christians.
In developing measuring tools for the local church we are concerned with quality control as much as quantity performance, to use commercial language.
Responsible leaders want to know how people are growing in their understanding of the Christian faith, whether relationships are deepening and extending throughout the church-fellowship, and to what extent the Christian presence is evident in the community outside.
Such information cannot be gathered with such precision as numerical data, but it is essential that each area be investigated to ensure that there is a balance between  worship, fellowship, learning, evangelism and service.
Healthy organic growth is proportionate, with each area and function developing in relation to the other.
Quality of church life can be measured in the following three ways:
Continuous assessment
The true shepherd knows the sheep.
This becomes increasingly difficult as the flock increases in size.
The time comes when under-shepherds will need to be appointed to maintain growth in numbers and quality.
We must be observant to detect what is happening and continually be asking questions to test knowledge and measure reactions.
Sample interviews
From time to time draw up a questionnaire on some aspect of Christian truth or church life or community concerns and use those in contact with different segments of the congregation to interview selected individuals in order to sample opinion and collect suggestions.
This method might be used to gather ideas for the next course of sermons, for example.
Congregational questionnaires
Congregational questionnaires can be very threatening to the individual and should be used only in churches where there is a high degree of cohesion and commitment to agreed goals.
Otherwise they may prove divisive and generate defensive attitudes.
They are best used in an inspirational setting as part of a total church-life conference.
For the responses to be regarded as in any way representative of the views of the congregation, there should be at least a seventy-five per cent response rate.
USE OF FACILITIES
Our buildings are an asset to be used to the full.
In some areas the church premises represent the only public amenities; they must, therefore, be utilised to meet the needs of that community to which God would have his people minister.
How many hours a week is each room, the hall and the church, sanctuary used, and by how many people each week?
In what ways can their use be rightly extended?
What alterations need to be made to our programme and the structure and decor of the building to make them more adaptable and attractive?
Again, by measuring each year, we can determine what progress we are succeeding in making.
COMMUNITY PROFILE
At the outset the church needs to identify the geographical area or kind of people it is seeking to reach with the gospel.
For the city-centre church this will mean working with a map of the entire city, in recognition that the majority of their congregation will be scattered over a large area.
Estimate how many people live in the area you cover, and then describe the different kinds of people within those boundaries in terms of socio-economic levels, race, employment, age groups and interests.
Describe and quantify each group as accurately as you are able.
Next locate the other churches in the community and identify the kinds of people to whom they appeal and the numbers they are successful in reaching.
Such an exercise is, therefore, best done not in isolation but in co-operation with the other churches.
This reduces the workload and helps in the production of a more comprehensive and accurate picture.
Having worked together in the area of analysis, it is then more likely that you will be able to co-operate in developing a corporate strategy.
In such an exercise we should be especially alert to identify the unreached, contact new arrivals and respond to unmet needs.
Such a community profile must have an eye to the future.
The churches should seek to discover the community trends and local authority plans for the coming years.
This will save the church from planning for yesterday rather than tomorrow.
As a generalisation it is a fact that new churches grow better than old.
So growing communities need new churches to be established within them.
FUTURE PROJECTIONS
Data-gathering should only be undertaken if we intend to act upon the information which has been accumulated.
One of Murphy's Laws states that if the statistics don't prove your point then you obviously need more statistics!
We might extend this in many church investigations to state that even when the statistics prove your point, your next course of action is to gather yet more statistics.
James Engel defines research as ‘the gathering of information for use in decision-making’(Engel 1977:13).
Thus research must be phased into strategy.
The consistent failure to implement findings has given rise to cynicism regarding research.
Engel explains, ‘…research must be undertaken for the right reasons.
It is especially essential that those who are responsible for implementation must have a thoroughgoing commitment to change if research is to be anything other than counterproductive’(Engel 1977:176).
Our efforts in data-gathering are to maximise our chances of making right choices and decisions.
Having drawn up our membership, attendance, financial and other relevant graphs, we can then project them forward not simply as an extension of the existing trend, but as a ‘faith projection’.
This will represent what we believe it is possible, by God's grace, to achieve.
It is called a ‘faith projection’ because it relates to the measure of faith which God has granted as we have analysed our performance, related these to biblical priorities, and prayed through our response.
If we simply allow events to take their natural course it is likely that the church will follow the life phases of most other institutions.
The rapid-growth progressive phase, characterised by conversion growth and a high loss rate due to instability and immaturity, will eventually settle in the marginal phase, in which the institution is maintained by a high level of biological growth and a lessening appeal to non-members.
This in turn will give way to the recessive phase as the external constituency from which the institution recruits its membership dwindles and biological growth declines.
Eventually the institution  will find itself in the residual phase, in which the external constituency has ceased to exist and the biological growth is eroded by the loss to the movement of the uninterested children of the members.
To prevent such a sequence of events the church must seek continual spiritual renewal; deploy a high proportion of its members to work in the external constituency; in McGavran's terminology, to turn them into class two leaders and workers, i.e. ‘members whose energies are primarily directed to serving and evangelising non-Christians in their ministry area in an effort to bring them into the Body of Christ’, and to establish new groups and plant new congregations.
SUMMARY
One of the drawbacks in presenting such a wide range of analytical exercises in quick succession is that we become so overwhelmed by the options that we end up by doing nothing.
In a one-off-data-gathering exercise the results are a highly perishable commodity; they date immediately.
Therefore, before embarking on any research project we must make clear that we intend to act on the results.
Review your situation in the light of the preceding pages asking yourself, ‘Are there areas of church life where we are operating in the dark, and where hard evidence would help us do things better?’
The responses to this kind of question should help you pin-point where to begin.
Medium and Message
A number of excellent books are available on personal evangelism, dealing with the one-to-one and small group situations.
One of the best to appear in recent years is Out of the Saltshaker by Rebecca Manley Pippert (IVP).
She describes how she was ‘turned off’ by the way evangelism was presented as a stereotyped technique.
It appeared to be an assembly-line processing methodology.
Consequently, she admits, ‘There was a part of me that secretly felt evangelism was something you shouldn't do to your dog, let alone a friend’(Pippert 1980:16).
The book goes on to describe, in a reflective and anecdotal way, an approach to evangelism which is true to our experience, moulded by our personality and sensitive to the needs of the individuals with whom we believe it right to share openly our faith.
For personal evangelism to be effective it must be spontaneous, flexible and sensitive.
When we turn from personal evangelism to community-focused church-based evangelism there are far fewer books which provide practical help in this area.
This is a serious omission because the church is both medium and message in the process of gospel communication.
Evangelism does not simply happen through persuasive individuals, but through communities of believers, who give credibility to the proclamation, by demonstrating something of the reality of what they speak.
Our concern in this chapter is, therefore, to highlight a number of considerations which a local church should bear in mind in pondering its evangelistic effectiveness and over-hauling its strategy.
In our concern that evangelism  should happen spontaneously we cannot ignore the need for planning and structure.
The church is intended to facilitate, not hinder, growth.
Our purpose in this chapter is not to offer a blueprint, but to outline basic requirements which are applicable to almost any evangelistic programme.
When a church has established the prior requisites, then it will be in a position to consider and experiment with a number of different approaches maximising their potential.
MAKE PRAYER MEETINGS THE POWER HOUSE
The concern of this book to provide practical guidelines to assist churches in developing growth-enabling strategies must not be pursued to the neglect of the spiritual dimension.
No matter how helpful some of the tools presented seem to appear, they will prove useless and even harmful if taken up by those with eyes which are spiritually blind and whose hands lack spiritual strength.
As one studies case histories of growing churches there is one recurring factor — they are all praying churches.
The Pentecostal movement in Chile was born in a prayer meeting.
The Lord spoke to a nightwatchman in the port of Valparaiso in a dream, instructing him to go to his pastor and tell him to gather his most spiritual people together to pray every day.
For the Lord revealed, ‘I intend to baptise them with tongues of fire’(Wagner 1973:16).
Within months revival began, and overjoyed Christians overflowed into the city streets.
Seventy years later the Pentecostals of Chile, now numbering over a million, regularly meet for their vigilias — their nights of prayer.
Presbyterian ministers from South Korea have told me of their daily dawn prayer meetings, many of them attended by thousands of people.
In addition, many churches hold all night prayer meetings and encourage their members, from time to time , to spend more extensive times in prayer and fasting.
The example of the Korean church in this regard presents a strong challenge to many Western Christians to renew their  commitment to a disciplined life of prayer.
In response, a growing body of clergy and laity, on both sides of the Atlantic, are committing themselves to dedicate at least one hour a day to prayer for the renewal and growth of the Church and for the transformation of society.
Ministers of all denominations testify to the fact that renewal and growth began as they met with those in their churches burdened by God to confess their spiritual apathy or impotence and to seek his power to heal their defeated lives and divided churches in order to become the people he intended them to be, not only in the Church, but in the world.
Yet prayer meetings for the renewal of the church and for revival in the nation are not an automatic answer to decline.
I have sometimes been saddened by encapsulated groups praying along these lines.
They are nostalgic rather than expectant, thinking only in terms of God doing a ‘repeat performance’ rather than a new thing.
Although their sentiments sound very pious as they earnestly cry, ‘Lord, send revival’, what they are in fact engaged in is not so much a prayer meeting as a spiritual buck-passing session.
For coupled with the voiced appeal for revival is the unspoken rider, ‘…and until you do we are not budging’!
One learns to grow suspicious of cosy, predictable and sentimental prayer meetings.
Effectual prayer is ‘in the name of Jesus’, which ascription means, ‘according to his character and purpose’— and we are part of that purpose!
If, while we are praying for the Lord to do a new thing, we are failing to take action in areas where his intentions are perfectly clear and his resources for their implementation guaranteed, then he is unlikely to respond to our appeals to do more.
Indeed, if he were to accede to our request, we would probably become so alarmed by the manifestations of his power that you wouldn't see most of us for dust!
Expectation is generated not through the effervescence of the enthusiasts, but through the intercession of the people of God.
We plead not simply that God will change our circumstances, but that he will change us so that we can become catalysts, through whom his plans can be implemented.
We must be prepared to face the cost of being a part of the answer to our own prayers.
Such an attitude underlies all of the strategy described in this chapter and those that follow.
ESTABLISH A POSITIVE ATTITUDE
In some churches a casual visitor gets the impression from the mournful atmosphere of the service that the congregation must be rehearsing their own funerals!
Where such an atmosphere of gloom persists it needs to be dispersed by affirming the Christian hope.
This was delightfully expressed at the national Roman Catholic pastoral Conference held in Liverpool in 1980 where Christians were described as ‘Easter People’.
The people of God should never consider themselves as being the people of yesterday.
The authentic Church is part of a Kingdom which is not on the way out, but on the way in.
The people of God, therefore, have a stake in today and an inheritance for tomorrow.
No matter how unpromising the immediate situation may seem, they have an unshakable hope that the best is yet to come.
Nostalgia needs to be replaced by expectancy.
‘Remnant theology’ exercises a powerful influence in the Protestant churches of Western Europe.
When the future seems to be filled with storm clouds, it may appear that the Church has no other recourse but to batten down the hatches and attempt to ride the storm.
Our Lord did indeed warn of persecutions, heresy and growing violence in the last days.
These ‘last days’ have in measure been with us since his crucifixion two thousand years ago.
The Church was born in troubled times.
In many places it advanced in the teeth of opposition.
But the policy then was not to lie low until a more favourable climate developed.
When the Jerusalem authorities, both Jewish and Roman, attempted to gag the Christian witnesses by threats and the token arrest of Peter and John, the Christians responded by taking the matter to the Lord in prayer.
They placed the facts before God, declared  their faith in his complete control over circumstances, and resolved to carry on despite the dangers, and requested that the Lord should continue to authenticate their testimony through signs and miracles (Acts 4:27–31).
We are not abandoned waifs or orphans, but adopted sons and daughters in a growing family.
The future is not a blank wall to line up against, but a way to be walked.
Establishing a positive self-image does not depend on a cheery morale boost, but on appropriating the promises of God and praying and planning expectantly for their outworking in the situations in which God has already placed us or challenged us to become involved.
BUILD AN ADEQUATE BASE
In missionary strategy people come before buildings and equipment.
On a new housing estate the priority task is to establish Christian cells rather than launch into a brick-by-brick building scheme.
New residents are at their most receptive during the first six months.
If the opportunity to reach them is missed through a preoccupation with building plans and bricks and mortar, then a never-to-be-repeated golden opportunity has been lost.
From the four Gospels we can see the extent to which our Lord invested his time in people.
In addition to addressing the crowds as he journeyed through Galilee and around Jerusalem, he drew aside to be with his closest associates.
They represented his investment in the future.
The twelve disciples were the core of the new people of God which had originally been organised in its twelve tribes.
The writers of the four Gospels show their awareness of this strategy by the emphasis they place on his relationship to the twelve and the teaching he shares with them.
The need to build an adequate base is not only relevant to the pioneer missionary situation, but also to many run-down, inner city locations — only here the problems are even greater because of a history of decline, premises which are impossible to maintain in good order and totally unsuitable for the task  in hand, and demands made upon inadequate resources by the needy people in the community and overstretched social services trying to meet their needs.
Sometimes the building is a major stumbling-block to progress.
Its maintenance costs can absorb a major proportion of the available funds.
It is more of a liability than an amenity.
Some of the Victorian monstrosities are less inviting as a place of worship than a cold-store warehouse.
I remember visiting one such on a freezing winter's day.
Clouds of vapour formed as we sang the opening hymn and three people walked out from sheer cold before the sermon.
To heat the building to a reasonable temperature would have cost so much that they would have needed to charge a substantial entrance fee!
I read the account of an architect who was consulted by a church with unsuitable premises which they wanted to adapt.
After his inspection, he tried to think of something positive to say.
His only comment was, ‘Well, at least it's militarily defensible!’
Another church suffered from a lack of adequate base not in terms of buildings, but of people.
This was a Baptist church in an inner city area with a modern dual purpose building surrounded by high-rise local authority dwellings.
From the outset the denomination planned that the church should serve the local community in two principal ways: through an open youth club and by providing sheltered accommodation for elderly people housed in purpose-built flats alongside the church.
However, the new minister on arrival soon found that he was faced with a seemingly impossible task.
On the one hand he had to contend with a tough gang of young people attracted to the youth club, and on the other to care for the elderly people who made up a considerable proportion of his congregation.
The local authority had provided half the capital for the dual purpose church and the salary for a youth leader, so the church had obligations to maintain the club open despite continuous vandalism and verbal abuse directed at the elderly people, who became understandably reluctant to attend church.
To sustain the ministry among the youth and  elderly people demanded a substantial core of local leadership.
It was this vital element which was lacking.
Most run-down inner city churches need more than an isolated minister, however devoted, to get things running again.
They require a missionary team, which, in addition to having a gifted leader, comprises a task force with an allocation of funds.
Experience of urban mission in other areas of the world needs to be applied to the European situation.
If there is little or no local Christian presence, then a team from outside needs to be brought in.
Ministers for such tough assignments need pioneering gifts (i.e. they need to be made in the apostolic mould) and cross-cultural training if a church is to put down local roots.
Unfortunately, theological colleges give little specialist training in the area of new church planting or moribund church rejuvenation.
AGREE ON YOUR EVANGELISTIC GOAL
Before it embarks on the task of proclaiming the gospel of Jesus Christ the local church must have a clear idea as to the hoped-for result of such an undertaking, and should make appropriate plans to maximise the chances of achieving it.
Of the four activities mentioned in the Great Commission recorded by Matthew — going, baptising, making disciples and teaching — the objective of these activities is to ‘make disciples’.
The going is in order to establish effective contact.
The baptising is the act of initiation into the community of the redeemed.
‘Teaching’ is about the personal life style, ethical standards and world-view consistent with discipleship.
The content of that teaching is to be found in the discourses of our Lord recorded in the Gospels.
His relationship with his disciples prior to the crucifixion provides a model for the fellowship that believers are to enjoy in subsequent centuries.
A disciple is one who hears the call of Jesus and joins his company.
In its Jewish context it means much more than in secular Greek.
For the Greek it meant student, pupil or apprentice.
In the New Testament it means total allegiance.
This is reflected in the teaching emphasis in making disciples.
Such teaching is not simply with the object of enlightening the mind or to satisfy curiosity, but to mould the personality and give direction to life.
Our Lord's teaching is presented to us not as information to be sifted, but as guidelines to be followed.
It welds together understanding (Matt.
13:52) and commitment (Matt.
27:57).
In any assessment of evangelistic effectiveness the church growth movement stresses the need to focus attention not so much on decisions registered but on disciples made.
This is a healthy shift of emphasis, although in itself it does not completely clarify the goal.
Discipleship is far more than initiation into a particular congregation or even accepting the terms of membership prescribed by a particular denomination.
The significance of the individual's decision in terms of‘responsible church membership’ will depend on the congregation's understanding of ‘discipleship’and its quality of life and breadth of vision in working that out in practical terms in today's world.
A. W. Tozer makes this timely and uncomfortable reminder:
Many of us Christians have become extremely skilful in arranging our lives so as to admit the truth of Christianity without being embarrassed by its implications.
We arrange things so that we can get on well enough without divine aid, while at the same time ostensibly seeking it.
We boast in the Lord but watch carefully that we never get caught depending on him.
(Tozer 1955:49)
The man of pseudo-faith will fight for his verbal creed but flatly refuse to allow himself to get into the predicament where his future must depend on that creed being true.
(Tozer 1955:50)
Perhaps it is because we are so aware of the unsatisfactory nature of so much of contemporary church life that we are so reluctant to define our evangelistic goal in terms of disciples made.
We are not convinced that the object of the exercise is to make yet more people to become like ourselves!
If there is little to distinguish the Christian from his non-Christian neighbour, then discipleship can have little significance.
This is a further reason why the renewal of the Church cannot be divorced from  evangelism.
By inviting people to follow Christ, we must also be in a position to include the invitation to join us in the pilgrimage.
The Church is more than the herald announcing the message, it is a demonstration model which gives credence to the effectiveness of that message.
IDENTIFY THE EVANGELISTS
Peter Wagner has described the ineffectiveness of attempts to mobilise the whole Church by putting the entire membership in the front-line of evangelism (Wagner 1971: Chapter 7).
Such a strategy, he says, rests upon the mistaken premise that every Christian is called to exercise the gift of evangelism.
To attempt to dragoon people to fulfil a role for which they are not equipped by God is to invite frustration and instil feelings of guilt as Christians become aware of their inadequacies and ineffectiveness in this area.
Every congregation is none the less called to fulfil the evangelistic mandate.
It must, therefore, ensure that it has the means within its membership to fulfil this inescapable obligation.
Accepting that evangelism is no optional extra, the church must seek to identify, train and deploy those with the evangelistic gift.
And while not everyone has the gift of the evangelist, everyone must be prepared to contribute their gift and fulfil the role of witness in the church's evangelistic programme.
At this point it may be helpful to try and distinguish between a witness and an evangelist.
A witness is someone who can and is ready to speak from personal experience of what Christ has done in his or her life.
This verbal testimony stems from the silent witness of a quality of life which demands an explanation.
When questioned witnesses should, therefore, be able to give adequate and appropriate testimony.
‘Be ready at all times to answer anyone who asks you to explain the hope you have in you, but do it with gentleness and respect’(1 Pet.
3:15, 16).
They should be able to interpret their experience and assurance in the light of the revealed truths of the gospel.
All Christians are called to fulfil this role without exception.
Our  Lord heavily underlines this responsibility.
‘If anyone declares publicly that he belongs to me, I will do the same for him before my Father in heaven.
But if anyone rejects me publicly, I will reject him before my Father in heaven’(Matt.
10:32).
Witnesses must be clear and open about their own position, but this does not necessarily imply that they will be effective in convincing and persuading others.
To do this requires the particular gift of the evangelist.
Peter Wagner defines the gift of the evangelist as ‘the special ability that God gives to certain members of the Body of Christ to share the gospel with unbelievers in such a way that men and women become Jesus’ disciples and responsible members of the Body of Christ’(Wagner 1979b:173).
It is clear both from Scripture and in the long experience of the Church, that some Christians can do this much more effectively than the majority.
Accepting the fact that not all Christians have the gift of evangelism, it is important to know those who do, and by what means they may be identified, especially when such persons might seem in very short supply or completely non-existent in the local church.
On the basis of extensive research in a number of congregations in the United States, Peter Wagner has postulated an estimate of ten per cent who are either effectively or potentially gifted as evangelists.
If this percentage potential could be considered to hold true outside the USA, we would certainly have to ask of the great majority of congregations, ‘What has happened to your ten per cent?’
If it exists at all, their efforts must be going unrecognised, or have been rendered inoperative, or were never activated in the first place.
The fact that there is little or no evidence that a gift is operating does not necessarily mean, however, that it is not present.
Gifts can atrophy.
Timothy was admonished by Paul to reactivate the gift which had been bestowed upon him (2 Tim.
1:6).
For the evangelistic gift to emerge within the life of the local church, evangelism must be placed high on that church's list of priorities.
It must be the concern of the minister, the church  council or board of deacons, the range of organisations, the home groups and the membership as a whole.
What kind of people are evangelists?
They are likely to be fairly extrovert personalities, who are clear and confident in their approach to people and can easily relate to a stranger by establishing immediate contact.
We all have people in our churches who have this sunny disposition, who can chat unselfconsciously with the shy and defensive newcomer, and so relax them that quickly and imperceptibly he takes them from small talk on to more serious matters.
These people may either develop into evangelists or degenerate into gossips.
Perhaps some of our gossips are unemployed, untrained and unrecognised evangelists!
In pleading, however, for home-grown evangelists we are not excluding the role of the itinerant evangelist.
From time to time it is helpful to have a fresh voice with a different approach.
And there are those with an exceptional gift whom the church has recognised and set apart to serve the Church at large.
They either operate through independent organisations or, as is becoming increasingly the case today, are based in a local church, which anchors them, provides a support team, and keeps them in close touch with the need for post-evangelistic care and of the difficulty widely experienced of integrating the convert into the life of the local church.
Such gifted people will, however, be most effective in churches where there is a prayerful concern and sense of expectancy and which have an ongoing programme of evangelism.
Unless the inviting church can show that it has the capacity within itself to attract and retain the outsider, it is unlikely to do so as the result of a brief visit from an itinerant evangelist, no matter how gifted.
TRAIN THE CHRISTIAN COMMUNITY TO COMMUNICATE.
The character of the members, the priorities and performance of the organisation and the appearance of the premises all communicate something.
The question is, do they enhance or impair the church's evangelistic ministry?
There must  be a correlation between the medium and the message, for the medium is an essential part of the message in the communication process.
Within the evangelical tradition there has been a strong emphasis on the need for clear proclamation in evangelism.
It draws attention to the centrality of preaching in the New Testament.
This form of communication must not, however, be equated with the formal, structured monologue which may reflect classical Greek influence rather than the Judaic-Christian tradition.
In addition to‘heralding’ the gospel the New Testament mentions discussing (Acts 17:2, 17; 18:4, 19; 19:8) and arguing and debating (18:28).
Communicating, then as now, was a two-way process.
In his monograph Communicating The Good News in a Television Age Tom Houston has an important section on the Bible as Media.
There he writes:
It is clear that many media underlie the revelation we have in the Scriptures.
The progressive dominance of print since the invention of the mechanised production of books in the fifteenth century has given us a very prosaic and flat image of the Bible that hides its true nature.
If we try to identify the media pressed into the service of God's revelation of himself in the Bible, there is an astonishing variety.
(Houston 1978:7)
He then goes on to list and classify a lengthy and diverse list: visions, dreams, voices, discussions, parables, speeches, proverbs, rituals, laws, songs, drama, poetry, letters, ciphers, anthologies, history, records and stories, and for each he gives chapter and verse.
In the unimaginative and uniform way that we present this exciting range, we give the impression that God's appointed way of gaining our attention is by throwing a book at us!
Tom Houston reminds us that ‘it takes a community to communicate’(Houston 1978:12).
The task cannot be handed over to the superstar preacher and those with ‘the gift of persuasive oratory’.
The message has to be presented in a multitude of ways, recognising that different  people respond to different approaches.
In addition to the sermon, others will be reached through song, drama, dance and mime, poetry, or dialogue.
Monologue is certainly not the only medium.
When one begins to take passages of Scripture and to ask how those can be so presented that they speak with equal force and with the same intended meaning as when they were originally communicated, all kinds of possibilities emerge.
These will involve a wide range of communication from skills supplied by teachers, writers, interviewers, dancers, actors, artists, photographers, electronic experts, as well as the preacher.
Of course, too much should not be attempted at any one time, and the ideas should not run ahead of our abilities to put them into effect.
It is better to keep things as simple as possible and to avoid mere gimmickry.
The style of presentation must be suited to the audience.
A gimmick is a communication attempt which has failed.
A group should be organised to take charge of these presentations, representing a range of skills, and preferably including someone with some knowledge of communication theory.
In order to experiment without threatening the Sunday services, some churches have found it profitable to hold ‘creative worship’ services on a week night.
Those attending can choose between a number of groups, electing to do either music, drama, poetry, collage or banner work, etc.
This helps to identify the hidden talent and to capture a vision of the wide range of communication possibilities.
IDENTIFY RECEPTIVE GROUPS AND INDIVIDUALS
In Church growth thinking the distinction is made between three kinds of evangelism.
These are Presence Evangelism, proclamation Evangelism and Persuasion Evangelism.
Consideration of the first of these categories will hold over to the next section.
With regard to proclamation and persuasion one of the major difficulties in urban society is, how do you bring together those who want to tell with those who want to find out?
The sharer needs to be brought into contact with the seeker (Reid 1979:32–36).
Within Western societies what are the most likely responsive sectors (these may also apply in some measure to North America and Australasia)?
New residents
When people move house to take up residence in a new community they are likely to be more open to change in other areas of their life.
Their old behaviour pattern has been interrupted, while they adjust to their new neighbours, work, school, shops or recreational centre.
Churches located near areas where new housing estates are being built or where there is a high population turnover should be alert to this fact.
It is significant that most growing congregations are located where there is a new and growing population.
As a general rule, the older and more stable the community, the more difficult it is to penetrate.
The church should make contact with new residents as soon as possible after their arrival.
Some operate a ‘welcome wagon’ scheme consisting of a pack of information about the locality — half-day closing of shops, local schools, doctors and dentists, bus times, recreational amenities and information about the church.
In many areas such schemes are operated by the local chamber of commerce or residents' association.
When this is the case the churches can ask to provide their material to add to the pack, and then ensure that they follow up with a personal call.
Many churches which have area-based house groups give them the task of contacting new arrivals.
As soon as the removal van is spotted by a neighbourhood group member, the new family is welcomed into the area with a few pastries and an offer of practical help.
This initial contact can then be followed up through subsequent casual encounters in the street or at the local shops, and through an invitation to a coffee-chat or meal to meet other neighbours.
The people visiting your church
This is so obvious that at first sight it might seem superfluous to state it.
Yet experience shows that such people are frequently both overlooked and mishandled.
When people do cross the threshold of the church, do we make it easy for them to take that step?
Many church buildings are so austere and fortress-like from the exterior that the visitor not only has to pluck up a great deal of courage, but also has to exert considerable effort to force open the creaking, heavy door.
What can we do to make it easier for the potential visitor?
Can the entrance be ‘opened up’ in any way?
Do we need a strategically placed welcoming notice outside?
Does the lighting need to be improved?
And when people step inside, what will happen to them?
First impressions are of enormous importance.
As regular, well-known members of the church it is difficult to put ourselves into the shoes of the first-time visitor.
To find out what it is like, why not arrange for a member of another church to come unannounced one Sunday morning, playing the role of a visitor?
Then get him to recount his experiences and suggestions to the church council.
It is salutary to learn how we appear not simply through our own eyes, but through the eyes of an objective assessor.
It is important that visitors be made welcome on the way in rather than left until they are on the way out.
practical arrangements for the conducting of public worship should be finalised as far as possible before Sunday, leaving the minister free to welcome people as they arrive.
In addition, the stewards handing out the hymn books require alerting and training in their responsibility in making the visitor welcome.
Some churches with large congregations find that they have to make additional arrangements.
The minister gets waylaid by members of the congregation who want to discuss urgent matters or exchange pleasantries.
The stewards are also preoccupied stacking books, inserting leaflets and handing them out.
They cannot hold up a stream of people to talk to an unfamiliar face.
Those experiencing a major crisis in life
There are specific occasions in life when we are more open to God, for example:
1
At the birth of a baby when we marvel at the appearance of new life.
2
During adolescent years when we face the responsibilities of adulthood and the prospect of choosing a career and making a living in the world.
3
When facing the prospects of marriage which brings personal adjustments and added responsibilities.
4
Serious illness and the prospect of death and what lies beyond.
5
The threat of unemployment and the prospect of retirement.
6
The trauma of separation and divorce.
The church must seek to develop its spiritual and personal resources to minister imaginatively and responsibly in all of these situations in its care of people from the cradle to the grave.
One Anglican minister then working in a church on a housing estate in the Coventry area concluded that his methods of dealing with families bringing their babies for baptism and couples coming to make wedding arrangements needed radical reappraisal.
His sincere and careful counselling was ineffective in introducing them to the life of the church.
After the ‘great event’ they were not seen again in the church until the next ‘rite of passage’came along.
He decided on an entirely new approach.
Instead of seeing them individually in the privacy of his study, he arranged regular ‘Sharing Jesus’ evenings to which the baptism families and wedding couples were invited.
There they met an equal number of members of the congregation, people like themselves, who would be invited to share their experiences.
This new policy has paid dividends.
Some of the couples coming to the church respond to the claims of Christ upon their lives as they see the evidence in the lives of the church members.
With increasing unemployment and early retirements, the Church will need to do fresh thinking in the area of ministry to those with time on their hands, opening up opportunities to learn new skills and engage in spheres of community service.
In the United Kingdom perhaps churches have been too ready in the past to leave such concerns to the local authorities.
The current serious cut-backs in adult education and the social services due to economic difficulties are perhaps an indication that the Church should step in to make available its local resources in building plant and volunteer personnel.
In many parts of the Western world political leaders are encouraging a new spirit of volunteerism.
EMPHASISE A BIBLICAL THEOLOGY OF CONVERSION
Growing churches recognise the radical nature of conversion to Christ and preach the need for a decisive commitment to him.
They are not prepared to accept an ‘easy believism’ by baptising the status quo.
They require a genuine allegiance to Christ demonstrated by a new quality of life.
While churches may differ in their understanding of the timing and mode of water baptism, they must emphasise the decisive spiritual reality depicted by the sacrament.
It represents both the washing from the stain and defilement of sin and also death to the old way of living and the beginning of a new resurrection life.
Conversion
This is the act of turning by the individual.
It represents a complete turnaround rather than a minor course correction; a turning away from sin to salvation and service in Christ.
As an initial act it is a once-for-all, unrepeatable experience.
It is a turning from darkness to light, from the domain of Satan to the Kingdom of God, from slavery to sin to freedom, service and worship of Christ as Lord (Matt.
18:3; Acts 3:19; 4:15; 26:18; 1 Thess. 1:9).
However, conversion does not refer exclusively to the initial act of reorientation.
For as we mature in the Christian life so we  come to recognise that there are still unconverted areas in our life which need to be repented of and handed over to God.
As Keith Miller has pointed out, ‘all a man does when he commits his ‘whole life’ is to commit that of which he is conscious….
So the totally committed Christian life is a life of continually committing one's self and problems day by day as they are slowly revealed to his own consciousness’(Miller 1965:60).
Conversion, which emphasises the human response, would be impossible without the accompanying initiative-taking and power-enabling act of God.
There are five key theological terms: Reconciliation, Redemption, Justification, Regeneration and Adoption, which express God's involvement in the total process.
‘Reconciliation ’ means the ending of a quarrel by which former enemies become friends (Rom. 5:10ff; 2 Cor.
5:18ff; Eph. 2:13; Col. 1:20).
The New Testament clearly teaches that humankind in its natural fallen state is opposed to God (Rom. 5:10; Col. 1:21; Jas 4:4).
The seriousness of this condition should not be minimised.
Until people are unequivocally taught this unpalatable truth there can be no preaching of good news.
If they are left unaware of impending judgment they will not appreciate the significance of salvation.
So Paul calls upon all people everywhere to be reconciled to God (2 Cor.
5:20).
Our acceptance is not represented as a reward for good conduct.
No probationary period was required before the prodigal son was received by the waiting father.
He ran towards him as soon as he came in sight, and he was still a long way from home when the father first spotted him (Luke 15:20).
It was while we were yet sinners that Christ died for us (Rom. 5:8).
Furthermore, we are not left in any doubt as to whether we are fully accepted.
Reconciliation is not an event in the future to be anticipated but to be received now, because it is offered now (Rom. 5:11).
‘Redemption ’ expresses the means by which reconciliation is made possible.
It describes how deliverance from evil is achieved through the payment of a price.
Thus prisoners  of war may be released or slaves freed on the payment of an agreed sum being received.
In the New Testament those who do not enjoy salvation in Christ are regarded as slaves of sin (John 8:34; Rom. 7:14).
Christ's atoning death on the cross is described as the price paid to release the slaves and free the condemned (Eph. 1:7; Rom. 3:24; Heb. 9:15; 1 Cor.
6:19ff; 7:22ff).
The cost to God of his redemptive act is underlined by the fact that it was only achieved through the death of his Son.
In other words it was on the basis of substitution .
The innocent one stood in place of the guilty (Gal.
3:13; Mark 10:45).
While the concept of substitution is not the only way in which the atonement may be understood, it is an essential feature as represented in Scripture.
‘Justification ’ is a legal term meaning to ‘acquit’or declare righteous.
God, in Scripture, is represented as judge of all the earth.
And because he is at the same time King, he is also responsible for the executive as well as the judicial aspect.
He not only passes the verdict, but also implements the sentence.
In the New Testament it is Paul who develops the concept of salvation in terms of justification.
Justification means to Paul God's act of remitting the sins of guilty men, and accounting them righteous, freely, by His grace, through faith in Christ, on the ground, not of their own works, but of the representative law-keeping and redemptive blood-shedding of the Lord Jesus Christ on their behalf.
(Lilley 1962:683)(Rom. 3:23–26; 4:5–8; 5:18ff)
Thus having passed the appropriate sentence, he then, through the atoning work of Christ, stands in the sinner's place and stead.
The sinner is thereby declared righteous, not because he or she was innocent of the charges brought against them, but because of the righteousness which belongs to Christ and is bestowed on them.
Technically this is known as ‘imputed righteousness’.
(See also Gal.
2:15–21; 2 Cor.
5:16–21; Phil.
3:4–11).
The grounds of the sinner's justification  is by faith, exercised by placing confidence in Christ for salvation.
Justification is on the basis of God's grace not human merit.
‘Regeneration ’ describes the new beginning and permanent change brought about by the presence of the Holy Spirit in the life of the person who has responded by faith to Christ.
Indeed that very initial act was only made possible through the Spirit who bestowed the gift of faith (Eph. 2:8).
The new birth (John 3:3–8; 1 pet.
1:3, 23) has brought us into God's new creation (2 Cor.
5:17; Gal.
6:15).
The new beginning has permanent and far-reaching effects, as individuals become part of God's plans for the future as citizens of his coming Kingdom.
‘Adoption ’ is a concept closely allied with the previous one.
The idea that all people are the children of God is not found in the Bible.
To be able to call God ‘our Father’ is a covenant privilege, not a universal right.
John, in the prologue to his Gospel, makes it clear that we do not become God's children by natural means, that is, by being born as children of a human father, but by receiving Christ as God's son and our saviour (John 1:12–13).
Our adoption is only made possible through the exercise of God's grace and the operation of his Spirit (Eph. 1:5; Gal.
4:1, 3; Rom. 8:15; Gal.
4:6).
The gift of becoming sons or daughters does not come through our being born, but through our being born again.
Dr James I. Packer describes ‘adoption’ as ‘the highest privilege that the gospel offers; higher even than justification’(packer 1973:230).
While ‘justification’ is the primary blessing it is not the highest blessing.
‘Adoption is higher, because of the richer relationship with God that it involves’(Packer 1973:231).
Because we have been made children of God; we carry the family likeness through the indwelling of the Holy Spirit; we want to live so as to please our Heavenly Father; and we enjoy his Fatherly protection and generous provision.
In these few paragraphs we have not been able to do more than provide a sketchy summary of these rich concepts.
But  it is only when we see conversion as a miraculous, radical and gracious act of God, that there is an adequate basis and motivation for church growth.
DEVELOP A LONG-TERM STRATEGY FOR RESISTANT AREAS
So many attempts by Christians to communicate the gospel begin where we would like people to be rather than where they are actually at.
Our minds are so full of the ‘pre-packaged’ message that we have not stopped to think how it relates to those for whom it is intended.
George Hunter reminds us that ‘Effective communication of the gospel begins with a demonstration of its relevance…the point of contact between people and the gospel is people's needs, hopes, yearning, fears, longings, and deepest motives’(Hunter 1979:39).
This was the communication principle which our Lord himself used.
With the adulterous woman who came to the village well to draw water, he spoke first of the water and then of the men in her life.
When the impetuous wealthy young man rushed up to him, he turned the conversation to the subject of money.
Surrounded by the crowd, among whom were many subsistence farmers, our Lord's opening words were, ‘A sower went forth to sow.’
They were with him immediately.
With the demon-possessed, disintegrated personality, our Lord exposed the situation after the direct question, ‘What is your name?’
An inductive approach to communication means knowing the audience, whether that audience is an individual or a group, and beginning in the area of their known or anticipated needs.
If it is a group, then you will need to identify the elements of community.
Whilst the Spirit is ready to help prayerful communicators to guide them to hidden personal needs of which otherwise they would be unaware, he also expects us to take practical steps to discover the needs around us.
Robert Schuller, of the Crystal Cathedral near Los Angeles, built up his congregation on the motto, ‘Find a need and feel it, find a hurt and heal it’.
This, however, was more than a slogan — it was a strategy.
He spent several weeks calling on the homes  around his church to discover the needs of the community and the inhibitions which kept them from church attendance (Schuller 1974:81).
In a very different context from California this same strategy has been applied to good effect.
An Anglican church in Cambridge, England recognised that there were a lot of elderly people around the church.
The gospel touched their lives at the point of loneliness, so the church opened a day care centre providing a lounge with comfortable chairs and a hot meal as an alternative to depending on the local authority ‘meals on wheels’.
We must begin at the point of the individual's, or group's, needs and perceptions.
Abraham Maslow has drawn up a model of seven motivational needs, all of which are basic to human personality.
He lists them as follows:
1
Physiological needs
2
Safety needs
3
Love and belonging needs
4
Esteem needs:
a)
self esteem,
b)
esteem by others
5
Need for self actualisation
6
Desire to know and understand
7
Aesthetic needs
While all these elements are continuously present, not all are to the forefront of our consciousness.
At any given time one or more will emerge to motivate a particular train of action.
Effective communication occurs when the relevant motivational need is identified and addressed.
But such a model must be applied with caution.
Considered in isolation, it may lead us to tell people only what they want to hear, which may be very different from what they need to hear.
Our Lord's ministry, for instance, provides examples to guard us against this danger.
In identifying and responding to real needs he did not shrink from touching the painful spots.
We may have to sound a warning note of challenge as well as minister a word of comfort.
Beginning at the point of need does not imply changing the gospel to suit the situation.
The gospel is changeless and is centred on the saving power of Christ and his lordship over our lives.
Here we are focusing attention on the point of contact which will vary from person to person.
But, by whichever door they enter they will then need to come to terms with the whole gospel, which applies equally to all.
RECOGNISE THE EVANGELISTIC POTENTIAL OF GROUPS
Most congregations are subdivided into groups of various kinds.
One of the most significant developments in English church life during the past fifteen years has been the mushrooming of home groups.
Such groups may now number more than 100,000, and represent potential launching pads for mission.
The sad fact is that the vast majority are failing to realise their evangelistic potential, preferring to concentrate on spiritual nurture of the existing group members.
They are locked in on themselves out of a sense of fear or inadequacy.
Where such nervousness has been overcome and groups have invited their neighbours along, they have often been surprised by the level of response (Gibbs 1977:13; 1979a:22).
For many groups this is an idea so novel and daunting that it is unlikely to happen spontaneously.
It will need positive leadership and in many cases the provision of a skilled person to initiate and guide the home group evangelistic programme.
We will, however, postpone further discussion of this important topic until chapters six and seven.
ACHIEVE VISIBILITY
While it is probably advisable for the church to aim for a low profile in the small, stable, face-to-face village community, the opposite is almost always the case in the urban and suburban scene.
Where there is a high population density and a rapid population turnover, the church must achieve visibility.
This is achieved not by headline-grabbing sensationalism, which method Jesus repudiated in confronting Satan (Matt.
4:5–7), but by its members being seen whenever possible in the community, contributing to its life and responding to its needs.
The church will be seeking to serve, expecting nothing in return, which is an essential characteristic of self-giving love as described and demonstrated by our Lord.
But in addition to the church's calling to be the invisible yeast leavening the whole dough and the salt savouring the whole meal, it is also called to be a light placed prominently and strategically upon a lamp-stand so as to light the whole house.
It is to be as visible as a city built upon a hill.
The illumination is not the neon-sign of self-advertisement, but the outshining of a spirit-filled life.
The light is the Shekinah glory of God's presence which is not restricted to the Tabernacle and Temple as in Old Testament times, but shines through every believer and Christian community.
In modern urban life, prominence involves skill in handling publicity.
Most churches produce a magazine or news sheet .
If we have such a periodical the key question to ask, and to keep on asking, is, ‘Who is it written for?’
Is it a domestic journal intended primarily for the church members?
If so, then one would expect it to read like an extension of the church notices.
However, if it is intended for the community, the contents must reflect the concerns of the community, with comments on the wider world and put together with a certain degree of journalistic skill.
When church events are mentioned, they need to be ‘angled’ to the community, with plenty of human and local interest to catch the eye.
Many church magazines attract a readership far wider than the congregation, so it is strategic that these be prepared as attractively as possible both in content and format to create a favourable response.
The next significant area is the local newspaper .
While national newspapers have to work hard to increase their readership levels, the sales of local newspapers continue to rise.
Their editorial resources are, however, limited, so the church will be welcomed if it can provide good story ‘copy’ and clear photographs, thus saving them the expense of sending their  own paid staff along to the various functions.
There is always the danger that if they do send someone, it will be a junior reporter who does not know how to handle ‘religious’ news or is unsympathetic.
Newspapers welcome with open arms a regular, efficient news service on which they can rely.
In addition the church might consider placing paid advertisements from time to time, highlighting forthcoming events which could be made especially attractive to the outsider.
The themes and wording should be related, not to the regulars who will be there anyway, but to the felt needs of the additional people you are hoping to reach.
IMPLEMENT NEW MEMBERS PROCEDURES
Most churches have membership classes which consist of a course to teach basic Christian beliefs and membership requirements.
Usually such classes only run once a year, which may leave someone who has come to the point of decision too late for that year's class in limbo for several months.
During the waiting period that person may fade from the scene.
A further problem arises in relation to those who return to church life after an absence of many years, or who transfer from one church to another.
In many churches their arrival receives no public recognition.
Individuals slip in and out without most people being aware of the fact.
New converts and transfers in should be introduced to the church leaders and members of the congregation.
They need to reel that they are part of the family.
St Andrew's Anglican Church, Chorleywood, England has started an annual welcome evening which provides an opportunity for the Parochial Church Council to meet all those who have started coming to the church during the past year.
Some larger churches can be so impersonal that to think in terms of‘joining’ is as meaningless as joining the cinema!
Do people have a clear idea how to become members and to transfer that membership?
Are the procedures for doing so effective in practice?
Even in the case of the large church with a regular new members' class, this may need to be supplemented by  a sponsorship scheme in which the converts are matched with church members of the same sex and similar age and background, to help them find their feet and be introduced to the family.
If such a scheme is implemented, there must also be procedures established to deal with any possible mismatch.
Someone in charge of the scheme will need to establish contact with both parties to assess how things are working out.
Some churches have found it helpful to set out a few simple guidelines to indicate what is entailed in responsible church membership'.
Here is a suggestion:
1
I will endeavour whenever possible to worship with God's people each Sunday.
2
I will endeavour to be a consistent witness to Jesus Christ in the way I live and speak.
3
I will join some group within the church so that I relate to others on a personal level.
4
I will become a functioning member by involving myself in a specific area of regular Christian service within my church.
5
I will contribute financially in a systematic and sacrificial way.
6
I will uphold my church and especially the leaders in my daily prayers.
SUMMARY
In this chapter we have looked at twelve issues relating to the church's task in communicating its message effectively.
Not every point will be applicable to every situation.
But pondering each may heighten awareness or trigger new avenues of thought to help us break through the double walls which arise around every church: one built by the members and the outer one constructed by the community.
List the points you have identified as especially relevant to your local situation and keep them particularly in mind as you read through the remaining chapters.
Let us think beyond the problems to the opportunities and potential which lie before us.
To prevent our visions degenerating into day-dreams they will sooner or later need to be earthed in goals and plans.