

THE COMMANDO IDEA — 1940
Feet firmly on the ground, the stocky Private Donkin methodically swung his tommy-gun, firing from left to right.
Some 15 Germans, startled by his sudden appearance in the doorway, were cut down.
In another action, the speed marchers stretched their stride to cover the last 6 of 20 desert miles after a sharp night action.
Ignoring their thirst and the ache of hunger after two nights and a day in the enemy's hills, they pushed on, fearing his tanks might encircle them.
Elsewhere a lone swimmer fought off a chilling exhaustion, his senses dulled by three hours of silent reconnaissance swimming and crawling among the enemy's beach defences.
He felt pangs of doubt: would his fellow canoeist see the flickering torch among the waves before an enemy patrol boat caught sight of it?
Men in these situations need more than courage; they need a rare determination, extreme physical fitness, and great skill in their profession of raiding, as this commando, these rangers, and the Royal Navy navigator turned canoeist showed in typical actions of the Commando and American Ranger units (see diagram p. 14).
In their amphibious war were all the hazards of land patrols and raids, with the added uncertainty of a seaborne approach all too easily foundering on an adverse change in the weather or some unexpected shoal.
In preparing for a raid on a beach there was less opportunity to see the lie of the land than before conventional military raids.
At best the amphibious raiders might have panoramic shots from aerial reconnaissance, or be given a flight over the target beach.
Neither of these showed the sea-level view from an assault craft, when the ‘white house’ reference point for a beach could be hidden by trees.
From a canoe the view was even more restricted: the looming hinterland was there, but was the beach below it the right landfall?
Or was this the bay with a mined shore west of the intended landing point?
This was just one of the many problems in getting ashore.
The general reconnaissance raid, mounted to find out what enemy defences if any stood along a stretch of coast, developed into the assault pilotage surveys of 1943 and 1944, secretly landing for specific intelligence of beach conditions and defences.
Would the exit road from the beach not only carry tanks but could a matting road be laid beside this route to carry wheeled vehicles?
Were the peat workings of Roman times now impassable mud holes behind that beach?
Would this island's coral make an airstrip for fighters?
Whatever the answers, the enemy must not discover these questions were being asked, for this would give away the landing areas of a future invasion.
The assault pilotage parties, therefore, carried other people's secrets which could betray an invading army.
Sabotage raids were no less difficult to execute than recces, although these raiders carried no one else's secrets.
Throughout all these Commando and Ranger operations, however, the raiders wore military uniform, although often without their commando  shoulder flashes for reasons that will become obvious.
As the war moved towards amphibious invasions and a clash of continental armies, the Commandos' numbers increased but there were proportionately fewer involved in small-scale raids.
The strength of a full Commando varied with some reorganisation from time to time(see Appendix 2) but in November 1942 the establishment was 24 officers and 435 other ranks (enlisted men).
At other times in action there were up to 630 men in a Commando.
Each Commando had a headquarters and several Troops, the equivalent of platoons in infantry companies, the usual arrangement being six Troops, one of which was — after late 1942 — the Heavy Weapons Troop armed with medium machine-guns and heavy mortars.
A Commando was therefore not unlike an infantry battalion but had only five small rifle or fighting Troops by comparison with the battalion's four companies, each with over 120 all ranks.
At full strength a rifle Troop with its three officers ‘was handled like a strong platoon’, to quote Major General J.L. Moulton, CB, DSO, OBE who in 1944 was the colonel commanding 48 Royal Marine Commando.
When the 60-strong Troop was reduced through casualties to the 38 or so of an infantry platoon, their handling was very similar.
However, the official composition of these rifle Troops, each having two 30-man Sections with their sub-sections of 15 men, was not strictly followed; and a number of Royal Marine Commandos deployed five rifle sub-Sections rather than two Sections and the headquarters in each Troop.
There was a higher proportion of officers and NCO's in Special Forces than in regular formations (a term used in this book to distinguish Special Forces from other units), particularly in the specialised reconnaissance and raiding parties.
But the essence of Commando organisation was its flexibility, and a Heavy Weapons Troop, for example, might be strengthened from its established two Vickers machine-guns and two 3 inch (76mm) mortars to twice that number for a particular operation.
(Metric and Imperial measure comparison of all weapon sizes in this book are mathematical and do not take account of slight variations in different countries' measurements of bore sizes, etc.)
The choice of target beaches could be critical.
General Holland M. Smith, USMC, has written of one Pacific raid that ‘it was a spectacular performance by (the) 2nd Marine Raider Battalion but it was a pure piece of folly.
The raid had no useful military purpose and served only to alert the Japanese…the intensive fortifications of Tarawa dates from that raid.’
Although speaking of the Gilbert Islands in the Pacific, where the Raiders had landed on Makin Island in August 1942 leaving nine men behind to an undeserved fate, the General's stricture could apply to several amphibious operations.
When the US Marine Corps' 2 Division stormed ashore at Tarawa in November 1943, a third of the 5,000 marines landing on the first day were casualties because the Japanese were well prepared and the tide played fateful tricks over the reefs.
There are arguments for suggesting the landings at Tarawa were unnecessary, much in the way the Dieppe raid on the French coast the previous summer is considered by some historians to have been a waste of many Canadian and other lives.
Yet in Europe, as in the Pacific, a great deal of the art of amphibious warfare was learnt from  these two operations.
The Allies modified their strategy, as readers will see in chapter 11, while the Germans — satisfied they had repulsed a possible invasion attempt — did not modify their posture defending major ports and paid the price in defeat at Normandy.
In 1940, however, there were many lessons to be learnt, for little thought had been given to major amphibious assault.
The British hardly conceived the French could be defeated and few Americans expected to be embroiled in a global war.
What work was done in the United Kingdom on raiding and amphibious operations had been mainly carried out by the Inter-Service Training and Development Centre (ISTDC) and the Royal Marines' Mobile Naval Base Defence Organisation (MNBDO), the Royal Navy being responsible for amphibious operations.
The Centre — with raids in mind — had devised plans for a relatively silent, low silhouette landing craft that became the LCA (Landing Craft, Assault), and produced some other worthwhile ideas, including methods for supplying troops by air.
The MNBDO, more concerned with landing heavy guns for harbour defences, did not include an assault force to capture a naval, base because economies prevented this planned development.
The US Marine Corps was responsible for the United States inter-war plans for amphibious operations; and although they did a number of landing exercises in the 1930s, not until 1940 were they joined in these by the US Army's 1 Division.
The British, in late 1940, began to integrate command for all three services deployed in what became Combined Operations.
(Allied planners, however, used this term to describe a campaign by forces of several countries and ‘Joint Operations’ for actions involving three services.)
Combined operations became the commando's  métier  and he would become as accustomed to calling up a battleship's gunnery officer or the leader of a flight of rocket firing Typhoon aircraft as he might be radioing for mortar fire from his own Heavy Weapons Troop.
The call to the Navy or RAF might be made indirectly through Forward Observation Officers or others but the effect was the same, if not more devastating.
Long before they reached this degree of sophistication, however, in the main stream of Commando forces (see diagram p. 14) were spawned many small fry.
The administrative problems were solved, for the early Commando units were without ‘a tail’ of cooks, cobblers, and others so essential in keeping a fighting unit in the field.
At least sufficient  transport was found to carry these Special Forces from one action to another in a land battle, a far cry from 1940 when one or two trucks might be the only vehicles a Commando had on its strength.
Transport nevertheless remained a major problem, and as Commandos' equipment for raiding roles did not include those infantryman's delights of defensive wire and mines — not, that is, in the normal course — they always had problems in battles of attrition.
Nevertheless, as their story does not follow the usual path of military organisation, it was not particularly surprising to find later commandos coming ashore with anti-tank mines strapped to their equipment.
However, they were not normally set up for the heavy infantryman's tactics of prolonged defence before a steady advance, although they were misused in these roles at times.
They were nimble-footed, lightly equipped for the in-and-out thrust over terrain where others might not be expected to beach or march.
But all the speed of foot is no substitute for an anti-tank gun to beat off armoured attack, ‘nor does a Green Beret make you bullet-proof’(again to quote General Moulton).
That Commandos and other Special Forces of World War II were superb light infantry, is a fact all too often forgotten in the fashion of the 1970s when every political cut-throat wants to be called a ‘commando’.
From the Independent Companies — forerunners of the Commandos — who landed in Norway in 1940, to the Rangers in 1945 who landed in the Philippines, the Special Forces' story is full of interest and paradox.
How were those Independent Companies to operate from a ship as their base if the enemy had air superiority?
Might the Rangers in the Philippines have saved the fleet if the approaches to Leyte Gulf had been studded with mines controlled from the shore?
This book is not concerned, however, with might-have-beens but with the facts as they were, so far as can be told.
Four Independent Companies were the first British special service forces in action in World War II.
They came ashore at the small fishing ports of Mo i Rana and Bodö; their headquarters group landing from their parent ship HMS Royal Ulsterman on 13 May 1940.
In skirmishes on the rugged Norwegian mountains made dangerous by an early thaw, these companies screened the Allied operations a hundred or so miles to the north around Narvik.
Among the companies' officers were 20 experts on mountain warfare, flown home from the Indian north-west frontier, who put to good use their knowledge of Pathan tribesmen's tactics, ambushing some 60 Germans who came ashore to probe northward.
Despite such setbacks, the Germans continued their infantry frontal attacks with supporting parachute infantry outflanking Allied positions, and after nearly a month of confused fighting the Independent Companies were withdrawn through Bodö along with elements of the 24th Guards Brigade and Norwegian troops.
The operations in Norway showed clearly one of the paradoxes of the commando idea.
These special forces were used as infantry, although the Independent Companies had been hurriedly raised for guerrilla operations, an idea fostered by Major Holland, an engineer who, by a lucky chance, was appointed head of the general staff's research section, then known as GS(R), in 1938.
His research into the possible use of guerrillas led him to champion preparations for all types of irregular operations, although he could make little headway against the traditional thinking of those directing military operations.
However, a study dated 1 June 1939 concluded that ‘if guerrilla warfare is coordinated…(with the) main operations, it should, in favourable circumstances…present decisive opportunities to the main forces’.
Holland was joined by (Sir) Collin Gubbins and the GS(R) section — renamed MIR (Military Intelligence Research)— became a powerhouse of ideas, including escape organisations, deception techniques, and commando-like formations.
These guerrillas — Collin Gubbins had pointed out in 1939 — would be in actions usually fought ‘at point-blank range as the result of an ambush or raid’.
By the spring of 1940 the War Office had been persuaded to put some of these ideas into practice and a number of companies were raised to act independently in guerrilla roles.
In April 1940 Colonel Holland put Collin Gubbins in charge of the Independent Companies and he went with them to Norway, where through no fault of Collin Gubbins much — if not all — of his and the ISTDC's teachings were ignored.
The Independent Companies were intended to be a ship-based force slipping ashore to harass German communications and cut the supply line of Swedish ore, but they often fought as infantry because the Allies had no other troops available; an unavoidable reason for deploying special forces in this role in Norway.
Their successor units were misused with less reason.
An added paradox to the Narvik actions was the Germans' own demolitions that destroyed much of the port's facilities, reducing iron-ore shipments to little more than a quarter of the pre-war level.
Ten Independent Companies, each with 20 officers and 270 men (see Appendix 2) had been formed from Territorial Army volunteers with a leavening of regular and reservist soldiers.
While the Independent Companies were returning from Norway, an extension of the idea for independent forces was being shaped in Whitehall.
The first amphibious raid — three officers landing between Boulogne and Etaples — had been mounted on 2–3 June by MIR with informal contacts in the Royal Navy, who provided a trawler.
These first raiders successfully fired 200,000 tons of fuel near Harfleur and then rowed 13 miles back to safety on 10 June bringing a lone straggler.
However, the Prime Minister was pressing for even more positive action.
On 4 June, the day the Dunkirk evacuation ended, he wrote to the Chiefs of Staff: ‘if it is so easy for the Germans to invade us…why should it be…impossible for us to do anything of the same kind to him?’
That evening Lieutenant-Colonel Dudley Clarke set down his thoughts in brief notes on raiding parties carried by ship to the French coast and drawn from a special force.
Aware of the way 25,000 Boer farmers had been defeated only by ten times their number in the war of 1899–1902, during his boyhood in South Africa, Dudley Clarke was able to interest his chief, Sir John Dill, Chief of the Imperial General Staff, in the idea and it was put to the Prime Minister.
A few days later, on 8 June, the scheme was approved on two conditions: no unit was to be diverted from the essential defence of the British Isles; and the new force must make do with a minimum of arms.
Dudley Clarke was also instructed to mount a raid across the Channel ‘at the earliest possible moment’.
The War Office Section MO 9 came into being that afternoon and began steps to raise the special force of commandos named after those Boer farmers of the South African war.
Before the 1939–45 War was over, many soldiers and marines wore the commando shoulder flashes or rangers' badges but the green beret was not introduced until late in 1942.
The activities of MIR and others associated with clandestine operations were to take a separate, but not unrelated, course mainly from the activities of the Special Operations Executive (SOE).
Their paths were to cross quite frequently with commando raids, but Commando formations were uniformed military forces — as mentioned earlier — if not always treated as such by their enemies.
Before the commandos could begin their raiding, links had to be forged with the Navy.
Captain G.A.
Garnons-Williams RN, an enthusiastic supporter of the raiding idea, found some ‘crash’ air-sea rescue boats for Dudley Clarke's first raid, which was mounted on the night France surrendered, 23 June, with four landings along a 20-mile stretch of French coast around Boulogne.
The 115 raiders were drawn from the Independent Companies as No.11 Independent Company carrying half the British stock of Thompson sub-machine guns: 20 tommy-guns.
Dudley Clarke went on the raid as an observer; no doubt it appealed to his swash-buckling sense of adventure.
Faces blackened with grease paint, a cosmetic replaced in later years by burnt cork or mud daubs, the men crouched on the boat's decks, going inshore at three points.
At the fourth landing the boat almost ran into Boulogne harbour, despite earlier reconnaissance of the target beaches by her skipper, Lieutenant-Commander J.W.F. Milner-Gibson RN.
An enemy searchlight lit  the danger and the boat sheered off to beach further up the coast on sand dunes, ‘a dark outline showing against the sky’.
Led by Major Ronnie Tod, 30 men went ashore and had hardly been gone a few minutes when Dudley Clarke and the commander saw the dark outline of a boat coming in from the sea.
This spectre anchored some 100 yards away, a small mysterious vessel that prompted Dudley Clarke — as such uncertainties would concern future raiders — to move quietly to the bow and warn the men ashore.
A Very light flickered into the sky away to the south: other raiders were in action.
As a figure appeared on the beach — it was Ronnie Tod — a German cycle patrol rode up.
However, Ronnie Tod's one-man ambush failed when he dropped his tommy-gun magazine as he cocked the gun, and there was a burst of fire from the Germans.
The long silence that followed would become a familiar feature of night raids filled with uncertainty and pregnant with disaster.
But this night, after being ashore an hour or so, the raiders waded back out to the boat arm-pit deep in the rising tide.
By dawn they were eight  miles off shore under fighter aircraft's escort.
Dudley Clarke had been the only casualty, hit in the ear, which had been sewn back in place by a petty officer as the boat left the beach.
The other landings that night had varied success: two Germans killed south of Le Touquet; a seaplane stalked in its anchorage near Boulogne, but it took off — no doubt unaware of the intruders — before they reached it; and the other party saw nobody after landing on a waste of dunes.
Arriving back at Dover the raiders were cheered, and later the whole country was heartened by their exploits.
But having tippled some extra rum ration, the men on the boat entering Folkestone were threatened with arrest as deserters before their identity was established.
Three lessons came from this raid: the need for means to identify friend from foe, always difficult in night actions but particularly so for a small party on a hostile shore; the problems of coordinating secret operations with regular forces — friendly Spitfires had delayed the boats for an hour in mid-Channel on their outward voyage before establishing their true identity; the difficulty of pin-point navigation, the third point, was the most crucial of all.
Milner-Gibson had made nine solo landings in recces of the beaches during the three weeks before the raid, but on the night his boat's compass proved faulty and others lost their way.
Nevertheless the raid, like the one made earlier in June, had proved landings were possible.
No men had been lost, and a sentry's body might have been brought back to identify his unit had not overcrowded conditions aboard forced the raiders to tow the body, which sank.
MO 9 had plans to raise 10 Commandos, each with 10 50-man Troops, and called for volunteers for unspecified hazardous duties who must also be prepared to work and train for longer hours than regular formations.
These Commandos intended to mount successive small raids in lightening strikes, keeping the Germans off balance and fearful of more serious threats.
Before this force of 5,000 commandos could be raised, however, Churchill's enthusiasm for special forces was tempered by reality.
He had seen all the commando-like forces, including Storm-Troops and Leopard Units for guerrilla actions in the event of a German invasion, drawn from existing formations.
But these regiments, which included reservists and conscripts with some company commanders over 40, were unlikely to provide the aggression needed in a commando action.
On 22 June, when the Prime Minister was asking for a corps of at least 5,000 parachutists, the commando idea was moving in a number of directions.
Men of Commando were originally to be parachute troops, but the RAF had even greater difficulty in finding planes than the Royal Navy had in finding craft.
The proposal was therefore dropped, but the 500 men who had started their parachute training became the nucleus of 1 Airborne Division formed in November 1941.
However, some years would pass before selected commandos were trained as parachutists.
These changes of direction were confused by Admiral Sir Roger Keyes, who had much of the Churchillian spirit but no gift for cooperation with ministries.
He had been a World War I hero in the Gallipoli and Zeebrugge landings, and in 1940, aged 68, was the Member of Parliament for Portsmouth.
On his appointment as head of combined operations, he embarked on endless controversy over hypothetical command of raids by 5,000 men, although there were no more than 500 trained commandos and some 750 men in the Independent Companies.
Only one more raid was mounted in 1940 and that in July, when Lieutenant-General Alan Bourne of the Royal Marines was temporarily running Combined Operations Headquarters (the name used throughout this book for the directorate, although in fact having some variations of title) before Keyes's appointment.
This raid, on Guernsey in the Channel Islands, by some 100 men from 3 Commando and No. 11 Independent Company (sometimes referred to as No. 11 Commando) was well rehearsed, and after last-minute changes of plan, literally within half an hour of setting out, the raiders boarded two destroyers to transfer to motorboats refuelled from the parent ships they accompanied.
These crash boats made a great noise, and part of the plan was to fly Anson aircraft overhead as the run was made to the beach, this being timed to a nicety.
Nevertheless, the raid was later described by its leader, Colonel John Durnford-Slater, as a ‘very amateurish affair’.
Nothing was achieved and several men had to be left ashore as they were unable to swim to the boats, whose RNVR crews would not beach for fear of damage to the crafts' hulls.
Through the rest of that summer and autumn the Prime Minister's demands for major raids by 5,000 to 10,000 men could not be met because there were no craft to land them.
Proposals for two ‘invasion corps’ came to nothing; each needed 380 LCAs and 180 Landing Craft, Tank (LCTs), the first LCT having her trials in landing five or six tanks only that November.
Convoy protection and aircraft had to take priority over raiding forces' equipment, but, as the name ‘invasion corps’ suggests the British were considering ways of getting a more permanent foothold in Europe.
However, this conflict between preparation for an invasion and the immediate raiding of the enemy coasts was never clearly resolved; and a force of Royal Marines and Commandos was held on the Clyde forever preparing for landings against the possible need to capture an Atlantic island base should Gibraltar fall.
However.
this ‘Puma’ force — code-named as the largest cat — was never launched against the Canaries or the Azores.
The Royal Marine elements — a division without a ‘tail’ although the establishment list shows some support units — sailed to Dakar in September 1940 but did not land.
This and other abortive moves brought frustration and some despondency to the commandos who had been gathered by Keyes into large groups to train with their landing force from the Royal Navy.
During the winter of 1940–41, the days of what had become Keyes's private army were over when the War Office reasserted their authority and the command of the Special Service Brigade passed to Brigadier (later Major-General) J.C.
Haydon.
A small man whose charm belied his determination, he had proved his abilities in action in France, and — what was probably more important at this stage of the commandos' ill-fortunes — he knew his way around the Whitehall ministries.
The Commando idea was established but would continue to have its critics, including the colonels of regiments resenting the poaching — as they saw it — of some of their best men.
The reasons for the Special Forces not proving more effective in this desperate year of 1940, lay as much in the political problems and strategy as in shortages of equipment.
But many of their future commanders — John Durnford-Slater, Peter Young, Mike Calvert among them — were preparing their men for a new type of soldiering.
The Royal Marines had not landed at Dakar because, without adequate craft for an overwhelming initial assault, any piecemeal landing could have led to prolonged fighting with potential allies.
A proposed landing in Pantelleria was aborted when German dive-bombers arrived in Sicily.
The Canaries were no longer considered essential once Spanish political pressures eased on Gibraltar.
Whether or not the commandos might have landed in strength on the French coast, there seems little likelihood that they would have achieved.
any worthwhile military objective, and every possibility the force would have been destroyed.
To land a large, lightly armed force was dodging the realities of amphibious warfare when the difficulty of landing supporting weapons must be faced squarely.
On the other hand, the idea of small, general reconnaissance and sabotage raids was to prove practical and effective to a limited extent, as the next chapter illustrates.
Once the British had been driven from the European mainland, they had lost virtually all of the general intelligence that armies gather on their enemy's positions, his deployment, and his defences.
Regaining this knowledge involved a long and hazardous series of amphibious raids in which the clandestine activities of SOE and the Secret Intelligence Service (SIS), as well as the commandos, became involved.
EUROPE, JANUARY 1941 TO DECEMBER 1943
During these years a number of small and some large Allied raids were made against Norway, and the French Channel and Biscay coasts.
In March 1941, the first of the major raids landed unopposed in the Lofoten Islands (north Norway).
The following month a German army advanced into the Balkans and in three weeks occupied Yugoslavia and Greece, drawing British forces from North Africa into battles in Greece and Crete, which was captured by 1 June 1941 (see page 113).
On 22 June, 136 German divisions with 3,000 tanks invaded the USSR, the Germans believing that the quality of their war machine would defeat the Russian masses.
Moscow, 700 miles (1,000km) from the border, was almost reached but the first snows slowed the Germans who, at the end of November, froze 20 miles (30+km) west of Moscow, and by December the Russian front ran 2,000 miles (3,200km) from Leningrad to the Caucasus.
On 7 December 1941, the Japanese bombed Pearl Harbour and America entered the now global war.
The war in North Africa saw further Allied setbacks.
In Europe, the British mounted their first opposed raid against Vaagsö Island (central Norway) that December.
In the spring of 1942 they carried out the most effective sabotage raid of modern times, destroying the St Nazaire (French coast) battleship dock and preventing the Tirpitz — the most powerful battleship then afloat — from moving to this possible base for raids on American troop and weapon convoys.
That summer there was the Canadian raid on the French Channel port of Dieppe, with its consequent tragedies and subsequent lessons (see Chapter 5).
The British Isles became, in 1941–43, a giant aircraft-carrier punished by German raids but giving more than was received as the air war was intensified by 1943.
Amphibious raiding along the Channel coast and elsewhere became a coordinated intelligence gathering operation in preparation for the opening of a Second Front by the invasion of Europe, plans for which entailed amphibious training for large armies, pre-empting men and equipment from possible large raids.
GENERAL RECONNAISSANCE AND SABOTAGE
Stan Weatherall and ‘Darkie’ A. Harrison paddled their two-man canoe from Salen down the broad, rocky loch Sunart into the open sea on a clear day in February 1941.
Their civilian Folbot canoe had no added buoyancy of Mae-West lifebelts, no navigation aids, not even a spray cover as they crossed the sound from the Scottish mainland to land on the isle of Mull.
Anyone using the double-paddle of these canoes for the first time finds his (or her) chest expanded in a strain on shoulder muscles he never knew were there until he started canoeing.
With legs stretched out and with no space to flex a muscle — or so it seems to the beginner — a sneeze might unbalance the boat.
With practice, however, the canoe becomes an extension of the canoeist although his muscles never quite adjust to hours in its cramped confines.
Nor, as these raiders paddled towards an enemy shore, was there more than a canvas skin on its wooden frame between them and a hostile reception.
The men of No. 1 Troop, all volunteers, included Territorials (men who had been civilians doing part-time army training), some regulars, and reservists like Lance-Corporal Weatherall who were recalled to the colours.
Having served with the Duke of Wellington's Regiment in two campaigns on the north-west frontier of India, the Corporal was recalled briefly in 1938, went to France in 1939, and spent five days coming out over the Dunkirk beaches.
In the summer of 1940 he was volunteered for parachute training by friends who added his name to a list for this course.
But to stay with two friends, he and half a dozen of his regiment were recruited for sea raiding with 6 Commando ('No.6') on its formation in July 1940.
For some months this Commando, with their small arms, a few petrol bombs, and an old 4.7 inch gun, stood between the Germans and their possible foothold on the Kent coast near New Romney.
The invasion scare passed and the Troop went north to do independent training, as all Troops did at that time.
Toughening their endurance by frequent climbs to nearly 3,000 feet (900m) up the crags of Goat Fell on Arran they saw, when it was not raining — a rare occasion in west Scotland — Lieutenant Roger Courtney at sea, training his canoeists around the island's choppy waters where a short sharp sea comes up with little warning.
The broad Firth of Clyde runs north from the island, with Goat Fell on the east shore appearing to fall in a sheer drop into the sea, making ideal conditions for commando training.
Courtney's canoeists with ten Folbots (see diagram p. 25) were the first of what became the Special Boat Section, formed after their leader had given a practical demonstration of the canoe's military potential, a potential doubted by even the adventurous characters in Combined Operations headquarters until Courtney paddled out one summer night in 1940 to a carrier ship moored in the Clyde.
Stealing a gun cover undetected, he brought it ashore and presented it dripping wet to the ship's captain in a conference.
The gift  was accepted and plans made — although never fulfilled — to have some 30 canoeists with each Commando, and in July 1940 the first Special Boat Section was formed.
They among others, would gather intelligence on enemy strengths and fortifications.
Although descriptions of these defences on Atlantic and North Sea coastlines could in pal t be gleaned from aerial photographs, much lay hidden; as the Canadians were to find at Dieppe.
Through the winter of 1940–41, Lieutenant Courtney trained his Special Boat Section attached to 8 Commando, and with a second-in-command and 15 men he went to the Middle East in February 1941.
For Courtney this was a return to Africa, for he had been a big-game hunter and had once canoed down the Nile from Lake Victoria.
A big man in every sense of the word, with a bellow of a laugh, he displayed irrepressible confidence.
(His Section's Mediterranean operations, where his cheerful courage discomforted the Germans and Italians, are dealt with in later chapters.)
Through most of 1940 and 1941, a complex command system made raids from the United Kingdom difficult to organise, for each Army Command was responsible for raiding shores opposite their area in the United Kingdom, and the Navy had a final say on any seaborne raid.
Only Norway, the reserve of the C-in-C Home Fleet, escaped  this web of conflicting red tape.
Thus, while Corporal Weatherall and a growing force of commandos were on interminable training exercises, or standing by for operations that were cancelled before they got afloat, very few slipped the mesh of authority.
The only significant raid, apart from some SOE operations, was a sortie in the early spring of 1941 by some 500 men of 3 and 4 Commandos with 52 Royal Engineers and a like number of Free Norwegian forces.
They sailed in comparatively mild weather for the Lofoten Islands (see map p. 28) aboard two carrier ships with assault landing craft (LCAs) on their davits, and escorted by five destroyers although without air cover once in North Norwegian waters.
The ships were ex-Channel ferries, now Landing Ships, Infantry (LSIs) HMS Princess Beatrix and HMS Queen Emma .
The force met the submarine HMS Sunfish stationed as a navigation check for the assault force, and at 0400 hours on 4 March the ships were piloted into Stamsund, as at other landing points, by local seamen of the Free Norwegian Navy.
At least one landing craft commander was for ‘giving her the gun’ to speed the tense minutes as they approached the enemy shore, but Lieutenant-Colonel John Durnford-Slater (Commanding Officer of 3 Commando) made him maintain a steady speed.
The sequence of landing was planned to put the raiders ashore in a fighting formation, and although all went to plan at Stamsund, indiscipline among boats' crews would on other occasions cause difficulties for commandos landed late or ahead of their supporting Troops.
Even the fishing fleet came down the harbour as expected from intelligence reports, and might have choked the narrow 100 yards wide entrance if a burst of tracer from a destroyer had not turned them aside as they grasped the situation.
They hauled up their Norwegian colours, forbidden by the Germans whose only presence was an armed trawler, pulling away from a jetty and prepared to fight.
She was quickly set on fire by the destroyer HMS Somali and the LCAs came alongside the quay.
The town seemed deserted until a postman appeared and willingly explained that the only Germans there were Gestapo and a few businessmen.
The small party of Norwegians with each commando Troop acted as interpreters for this and other intelligence, leading to the Gestapo chief — a fat man in a dark suit — squealing his protest at capture within a quarter of an hour of the landing.
Men set off in a local bus commandeered to take them to the factories on the edge of the town.
The telephone exchange was occupied, Lieutenant Richard Wills using its land-line to the mainland to send a telegram to A. Hitler, Berlin: ‘You said in your last speech German troops would meet the English wherever they landed stop where are your troops?— Signature Wills 2-Lieut.’
Such direct communication, if not with Hitler, might have summoned German naval reinforcements, but no aircraft was available north of Trondheim, more than 400 miles and two flying hours to the south, because all the northern airfields early that spring were operational only for transport aircraft fitted with skis.
The commandos landed at three harbours besides Stamsund — Henningsvaer, Svolvar and Brettesnes — each on a different island in this compact group.
None of the landings was opposed except by the gallant action of the armed trawler Krebbs , and by midday the oil factories were burning.
Demolition charges had also been carefully set on machinery in the fish meal and other factories; these small charges of gun cotton being placed so that they destroyed equipment without the risk of causing needless casualties.
Electric installations were smashed with sledgehammers and then switched on melting connexions in complete destruction.
Some 800,000 gallons (3.5 million litres) of oil and petrol burned fiercely and 11 small ships, totalling more than 20,000 tons, were sunk.
They gathered in 315 volunteers for the Norwegian forces, 60 followers of the Norwegian traitor Quisling with Nazi sympathies, and 225 German prisoners.
The only commando casualty before the Force set sail for an uneventful passage home, was an officer accidentally shot in the foot.
They were not to learn of the German reaction for some nine months, when the commandos again visited the Lofoten Islands, but the  world heard for the first time of British commandos that night in German broadcasts: ‘Light naval forces destroyed several fishing boats and landed commandos in the Norwegian skerries where they took prisoner some Germans and Norwegians.’
The word was out, for until then the British had kept secret their special raiding forces.
Lofoten was chosen for this first large raid because it offered a chance to hit back at the enemy as well as such economic targets as the destruction of fish oil supplies, which might impair German manufacture of nitro-glycerine and would reduce supplies of vitamin A and B capsules issued to German troops.
And as an undefended or so-called ‘soft’ target it offered a chance of a much-needed success.
Lofoten apart, though, Keyes's private armies were to chafe at the bit of ministry reins throughout the summer of 1941, while remaining dependent on these masters for the very shoe-string of their existence as Commandos.
There were nevertheless plenty of suggestions for targets: St Nazaire was considered but dismissed because shoal waters were thought to make a sea approach impractical; Dieppe appeared too heavily defended; and many suggested moves to occupy distant islands were ruled out by the impossibility of maintaining garrisons.
In the last category was a proposal from Sir Stafford Cripps, British Ambassador in Moscow, for the occupation of the coal-mining and strategic island of  Spitzbergen (see map p. 28), but Allied sea power would not stretch to convoying supplies for a garrison so far from home waters.
Instead a raid was mounted.
Canadian troops trained with the British amphibious forces at Inverary (Argyll) and were then taken in SS Empress of Canada to land on the island, 600 miles from the North Pole, on 24 August 1941.
The eventual landing force was smaller than planned because naval air reconnaissance showed the Germans had not garrisoned the island.
The Canadians' ship then took 2,000 local Russian miners and their families to Archangel, returning nine days later on 2 September to take off the men of the Edmonton Regiment and Saskatoon Light Infantry who, with sappers and some Norwegians, had destroyed the mines.
The raiders' principal memory, however, is the smell of Eau de Cologne drunk by the miners who were allowed no spirits on the island.
By the time the Canadians were safely back in a British port, the ship had sailed 7,000 miles (13,000km) on the round trip.
Another commando raid that summer was mounted by 12 Commando; 16 men led by 2nd Lieutenant Pinkney landing near Ambleteuse where they made a general reconnaissance returning safely to England although a stoker on the naval craft was killed by enemy action, probably during the withdrawal.
In October 1941 Sir Roger Keyes was replaced by the 41-year old naval Commodore Lord Louis Mountbatten, cousin of King George VI.
Lord Mountbatten's orders from the Prime Minister made the invasion of Europe the main objective with ‘a programme of raids in ever-increasing intensity’.
After a service lifetime in the Royal Navy, the Commodore quickly established the essential liaison with the Chiefs-of-Staff, ministries, and others whom the Commandos depended on for weapons as well as shoestrings.
Within weeks Combined Operations headquarters were to take on a new vitality.
One final raid was made from plans conceived under the old management, 100 men from 9 Commando attempting to capture a gun battery near Houlgate.
Two Rob Roy canoes had been in ahead of the main raiding force on the night of 22/3 November, one pair of these canoeists were caught — described later — and the second missed their rendezvous, paddling back to England.
The main force came ashore the next night and followed a strict timetable.
This prevented them fully exploiting their initial landings as they had to start their withdrawal before an assault could be mounted on the naval guns installed behind Houlgate.
On their return to the beach, an hour's flashing of torches was needed to catch the attention of the landing craft crews who had withdrawn too far from the beach according to one report.
This pantomime aroused the defenders and  showed clearly the need for better ship-to-shore communications.
The organisation for all but very small raids was now formulated, with Lord Mountbatten as Chief of Combined Operations (CCO) having adequate staff to prepare outline plans for raids.
Any Commander-in-Chief in a theatre where raiding forces would be involved was asked to comment on the outline plan, which was then put to the Chiefs of Staff.
On their approval of the scheme, a force commander was appointed with responsibility for detailed planning and coordinating the army, navy, and air force units involved.
He also issued the detailed orders, arranged training, and led the raid.
Any extra equipment or special materials he required could be obtained through the agency of the headquarters' staff.
CCO was responsible for obtaining final approval of the force commander's plan from the Chiefs of Staff Committee of which he was a member, and the plans were always subject to the naval Commander-in-Chief's blessing for no major dispositions of ships were made without his say-so.
The organisation was more complex than may appear from this summary.
Liaison with the RAF Chiefs in various theatres, for instance, was made through their representatives on CCO's staff.
But the success of the organisation lay in the men who ran it as much as in the formal orders (set down in a minute of July 1942).
The Prime Minister gave Lord Mountbatten a free hand and he selected six brilliant senior officers who, like the Commodore — soon promoted Vice-Admiral — had a flair for cutting red tape and reconciling different services' points of view.
Also on the new team were two scientists, Professors J.D. Bernal and Solly Zuckerman, chosen for their original minds by the Chief Government Scientist.
They worked on the plans for future operations.
Later Geoffrey Pyke, whose snow vehicle is described in Chapter 9, joined COHQ on the recommendation of a Government minister.
Targets would now be more specific, equipment more deadly, and the whole Combined Operations' set-up run like a taut ship in the fashion of the destroyer HMS Kelly , which the CCO had sunk beneath him off Crete earlier that year.
For men like Stan Weatherall, whom we left experiencing his first long journey by canoe, this reorganisation swept away the frustrations of the summer of 1941.
He was recruited into the second Special Boat Section operating across the Channel from Dover, after the second-in-command of No. 1 Troop had called for volunteers — duties unspecified — as the Troop walked by his chair in the middle of a field.
This way there was no pressure to volunteer.
The SBS had been established in Dover to help naval forces attack shipping as well as to make beach reconnaissances.
In November 1941 they became 101 Troop of 6 Commando, with Lieutenant Smith in command, and were attached to the naval shore base HMS Lynx , from which they operated, with MTBs, submarines, or other carriers taking them to the area of their target beaches.
They were joined by their former Troop commander, Captain G.C.S. Montanaro (Royal Engineers).
Lieutenant Smith failed to return from one recce, and it was later learnt that he and his companion, Lance-Corporal C. Woodhouse, had capsized in heavy surf, losing their paddles.
They made their way inland, but Lieutenant Smith, without badges of rank, and Corporal Woodhouse, wearing sergeant's stripes, were taken prisoner.
Fortunately this confusion of ranks also foxed the Germans, for ‘Lieutenant Smith’ was a nom de guerre .
He survived four years as a prisoner of war and after the war returned to run the family business in the north of England.
A second canoe on this mission was paddled back to be safely picked up five miles from the English coast.
Although the two canoeists who were ashore had been barely 200 yards inland they had gathered sufficient information to confirm that LACs could land on the beach at Houlgate.
In December 1941, under the new management, Combined Operations headquarters promoted three major raids.
The first, planned for 9 December, was by the full 6 Commando and half of ‘No.12’.
But on the passage to Norway, an accidental explosion killed six men and wounded 11 others.
Although the loss would not have affected the landing, doubts about the Force's navigation caused the senior naval officer to call off the raid.
The second raid was a diversion for now that raiding was becoming more organised, full use could be made of feints and diversions to distract defenders from intended targets, and in a wider strategy the whole policy of raiding would involve a major distraction of the enemy towards an invasion of Norway, not France.
On Boxing Day, 26 December, 300 men of 12 Commando under Lieutenant-Colonel S.S. Harrison went ashore on the Lofoten Islands in a diversion raid.
They landed at 0600 hours, unopposed by a German garrison satiated on Christmas fare; the commando planners picking times for a strike force to land when the enemy were likely to be off-guard.
In white hooded overalls and trained for snow warfare, the Commando quickly occupied the two harbours on the westerly island of Moskenesöy, where they found the local Norwegians anxious they should stay in case there were German reprisals.
How much intimidation took place after the previous raid is hard to gauge, but in 1955 Charley Head, who had been signals officer with 3 Commando in March 1941, revisited the islands and learnt that no one was shot after the March raid, although some houses had been burnt down.
Nevertheless there was a fear of greater reprisals, and many hostages were shot in Europe, sometimes in the mistaken belief that commando actions were the work of local resistance fighters.
In December 1941 there were risks of Allied ships being bombed now that the Germans had improved their Norwegian airfields.
However.
the Arctic night, with no  sunrise from 10 December to 3 January in these latitudes, tempted Admiral Hamilton to keep the strike force of eight destroyers and the cruiser HMS Arethusa in support of a prolonged visit, until a German bomb fell close to the cruiser, forcing the decision to withdraw after two days' occupation.
While 12 Commando were creating their diversion, Vaagsö Island was the main commando target that Christmas (see map p. 28).
This first raid against a defended port was regarded by Lord Mountbatten as a ‘test pilot run’.
‘For nobody knows quite what is going to happen and you are the ones who are going to find out’, he told the raiders.
The way this raid was organised, the commando landing, and street battles make this a classic of fighting raids.
There were five assault groups (see diagram).
Group 1 was to land at Hollevik on the island's south shore, to clear a known defence point and villages a mile to a mile and a half from the town of South Vaagsö, and then move in support of Group 2, which was to land just south of the town and capture it.
Group 3 was to capture Maaloy, an island 500 yards (450m) long and only 200 yards (180m) wide lying not far from the town quays.
Group 4 was a floating reserve lying offshore in their landing craft until required to reinforce one of the other Groups.
This practice became common in the Pacific, but later British major assaults usually had a timetable for landing reserves.
The fifth Group at Vaagsö was to be carried by the destroyer HMS Oribi up the Ulvesund, part of the Indreled Channel, for a landing near Kapelnoes point north of the town, to cut the road in order to prevent reinforcements from North Vaagsö reaching South Vaagsö.
The southern town was thought to be defended by 150 men from the 181 Division, with a solitary tank and 100 men of a labour corps building defences.
There were known to be four coastal guns, mounted with anti-aircraft batteries, on Maaloy to defend the Ulvesund anchorage where convoys sheltered in bad weather or gathered before crossing more open waters not protected by outer islands.
A twin-tube torpedo battery covered the entrance to the fjord, and away to the north was a German mobile battery of 105mm guns at Halsor.
No German warships were thought to be in the immediate area and only some four squadrons of fighters and bombers — an estimated 37 planes — were flying from Herdia, Stavanger, and Trondheim.
Brigadier Charles Haydon was military commander, and with Admiral Burrough, commanding the naval force, he sailed in the 6-inch gun cruiser HMS Kenya .
Ashore the troops were commanded by Colonel John Durnford-Slater, the Commanding Officer  of 3 Commando, who did most of the detailed planning for the raiding force which was made up from the entire 3 Commando, reinforced by two Troops from ‘No.2’ with additional Royal Engineers from ‘No.6’, Royal Army Medical Corps (RAMC) personnel from ‘No.4’, intelligence officers from the War Office, and a Press Unit.
Photographers from this Unit were to take some of the finest action shots of the war.
Troop commanders and the men were briefed from a model with each house's position shown and other fine details except place names, so avoiding the possibility of literally fatal slips of the tongue.
Once aboard two LSIs, the raiders carried out successful rehearsals at Scapa Flow (north Scotland), despite the navy's understandable challenge to the carrier ships' small craft bobbing about in the night.
On Christmas Eve these two LSIs, HMS Prince Leopold and HMS Prince Charles , sailed for Shetland with a screen of four destroyers, taking a rough pounding in force 8 to 9 gales that put 14 feet of water in the forward part of Prince Charles .
At the Sollum Voe anchorage this 145 tons of sea water was pumped out and the ships patched up, causing a day's delay but also giving time for Christmas dinner and a night's sleep with everyone fully recovered from sea sickness, a malady with no respect for rank or courage.
Sailing on the night on 26 December — the day Colonel Harrison's men landed in the Lofoten Islands — the Vaagsö force met the submarine HMS Tuna on station as their navigation check at 0700 hours off Vaagsfjord and steamed up the fjord between spectacular snow-covered hills glinting in the dark.
Although reveille had been at 0400 hours, the landing would not be made until first light at 0850.
The LSIs anchored in a bay beyond the sight of and direct fire from the Maaloy batteries, giving the assault craft a run down the coast round a headland before heading for the beaches, while the cruiser bombarded Maaloy and destroyers engaged other targets.
Colonel John Durnford-Slater led in 200 men of Troops 1, 2, 3, and 4 (Group 2) from 3 Commando, and 100 yards from the beach he fired 10 Very lights, signalling the navy to stop their bombardment.
As he stepped ashore, three RAF Hampden bombers made a low-level attack, placing their smoke bombs in so close a screen for the landing that  phosphorus from a sheet of flame set fire to the Colonel's tunic.
One bomber, hit by fire from a German trawler went out of control and dropped a bomb among the landing craft, while the other bombers had to climb sharply in a stream of tracer to avoid the cliff behind the town.
One landing craft was set on fire by the bombs that fell short, and many commandos suffered terrible burns from the phosphorous.
Ammunition, grenades, and demolition explosives went off in a deadly firework display.
The wounded were treated by the Commando's calm Irish doctor, Captain Sam Corry RAMC, who remained unruffled by the turmoil, and the casualties were sent out to the ships.
This landing by Group 2 was deliberately made at the base of some sheer, snow-covered rocks 30 feet high, for no German machine-guns were likely to cover such an apparently impossible landing point, the enemy unaware the commandos had developed their techniques for such rough landings.
They got ashore dry shod — as they described those landings in which you do not get your feet wet — but in these harsh conditions, Lieutenant Arthur Komrower suffered severe back and leg injuries when he was crushed between a rock and the 10-ton assault craft that had been on fire.
More aircraft provided cover, with Coastal Command Blenheims dropping smoke to screen landings and fighter-bombers — again Blenheims and Beaufighters — putting a protective umbrella over the raiding force for the next seven hours by flying 400 miles (650km) from Wick, north Scotland, or 250 miles (400km) from Shetland.
Group 3, 105 men of Troops 5 and 6 under 3 Commando's second-in-command Major Jack Churchill, were waiting for the Maaloy batteries to open up as the craft ran towards the beach.
Major Churchill, affectionately known as ‘Mad Jack’, stood in the leading LCA playing ‘The march of the Cameron men’ on his bagpipes.
This Group were only 50 yards from the shore when the Kenya's bombardment lifted, her job well  done with the German guncrews keeping in their dugouts, and before the batteries could come into action Jack Churchill's men had overrun Maaloy.
Captain Peter Young came with his men through a gap in the wire cut by shells from Kenya , with nobody stepping on a mine, although these were expected.
One German clerk, rather foolishly perhaps, tried to disarm this Troop officer and was shot for his indiscretion; other Germans were captured and a few shot during the brisk action.
The 50 men of Group 1 had landed without opposition; eight of the Germans defending the strongpoint at Hellevik having gone to Vaagso for breakfast.
The villages were cleared and two wounded Germans made prisoner.
The leader of this Group, Lieutenant R. Clement, having signalled the colonel by way of HMS Kenya — communications by radio were always difficult in this or any other hilly country — was then told to move up the coast road and form a reserve for the Troops attacking the town.
By now, about 1030, they needed reinforcement, even though they had lodged a foothold from their beach headquarters in spite of meeting fiercer opposition than expected: some 50 men of a crack regiment were spending Christmas in the town.
South Vaagsö lies on a narrow strip of shoreline beneath a sheer rock face several hundred feet high, the town's unpainted wooden buildings straggling along the three-quarters of a mile of main road running parallel to and some 50 yards from the shoreline.
Down this road No.3 Troop were led by their Troop officer, a giant of a man, making a series of wild charges.
They had taken several houses when the Troop officer — Captain Johnny Giles — was working his way room by room through another.
He and his men had killed three Germans in this house when he burst into a back room and was probably killed by a fourth German hiding there, although he may have been hit from across the street.
Such is the confusion of street fighting that bullets can appear to come from anywhere and everywhere.
No.4 Troop had caught a section of German defenders early in the battle as they ran to their alarm posts, but other Germans, many of whom had seen action in Norway in 1940, tenaciously defended the strongpoints including the improvised fortifications of the Ulvesund Hotel.
Headquarters personnel were pressed into this defence, in Peter Young's words, ‘to give it a bit of depth’.
No.4 Troop followed Captain Algy Forrester as he charged on down the high street.
Along with Lieutenant Bill Lloyd he had perfected the techniques for getting ashore among rocks; but now Bill Lloyd was badly wounded, hit in the neck almost as soon as they began their grenade-tossing dash, firing tommy-guns from the hip.
Algy Forrester, something of a fire-eater, stormed on, reaching the hotel, now the centre of German resistance, where he was about to throw a grenade when a shot from the hotel knocked him down and he fell on his own grenade, which exploded to kill him.
No.4 Troop was stalled for only a moment.
Captain Martin Linge, a Norwegian intelligence officer with the Troop, kept up the momentum of the attack, leading a second assault on the hotel until he, too, was killed trying to force open a door.
During the fighting around the hotel, sergeant Johnny Dowling and Sergeant Cork of No.1 Troop went to find the tank known to be nearby, for had this been brought into action, its 12 tons or more  could have tipped the scales against the commandos.
Sergeant Cork made more than sure it would not enter the battle: setting off a large demolition charge, he was killed in the blast.
For a while No.4 Troop were held up, but Corporal ‘Knocker’ White took charge and was awarded the DCM for his part in the action.
The Colonel, from his open air headquarters on the beach, called over reinforcements from the Maaloy Group and Peter Young, with 18 men of his No.6 Troop, came across to the rock-shielded beach where Group 2 had landed some two hours before.
He was sent along the quayside to keep the attack moving, and Brigadier Haydon committed the floating reserve (Group 4) in a landing at the north end of the town.
No. 1 Troop had acquired a 3-inch (76mm) mortar which increased the Troop's firepower beyond its establishment.
The mortar men were not trained as Heavy Weapons Troops would be later in the war, but this did not prevent Sergeant Ramsey from getting off a bomb that appeared to go down the hotel chimney, reportedly causing a dozen or more casualties.
This was the turning-point at the hotel, and with grenades and tommy-gun fire Corporal White led the remains of No.4 Troop and a few Norwegians into the blazing building.
Resistance at this strongpoint was over.
The radios of the 1940s being comparatively delicate valve affairs prone to water damage, radio contact had been lost with the forward Troops, so the Colonel walked boldly down the road to see the position for himself.
A daring horseman, whose racing and pig-sticking had developed strong nerves in his robust frame, he scorned Charley Head's suggestion — and the signals officer was not battle-shy — of looking out for snipers.
The Colonel was in a hurry, realising how essential it was to keep the momentum of the attack rolling; otherwise the resistance might become coordinated into a strong, interlocked series of defence positions.
He reached the hotel unscathed, although the burns on his jacket showed where he had beaten out the phosphorous splashes with his leather gloves, and as he followed Peter Young there were, as he later described, ‘different sounds, from the various calibres of arms, artillery exchanges between Kenya and a coast defence battery somewhere down the fjord, anti-aircraft fire from the ships against attacking Messerschmitts, the demolitions, and the crackling roar of flames’.
There were also those smells of battle: the sharp tang of cordite, choking smoke, and the sickly whiff of death.
With the advantage of hindsight, we can take stock of the position at this point, but at the time the Colonel had only runners to keep him in touch with his headquarters and forward Troops, whose wirelesses had been knocked out.
He had, however, seen his demolition squads begin their work at a cod-meal (?) factory and had had its Quisling owner arrested.
Group 1, as we have seen, had cleared the south coast villages and were in positions on the south side of the town.
Group 3 had cleared Maaloy and sent a party of sappers, men of 6 Commando attached to ‘No.3’ for this raid, over to Mortenes on the east shore of the fjord, where they landed unopposed and destroyed a fish processing factory.
The demolition squad from No.6 Troop were blowing up the guns, four Belgian 75mm field pieces, their wheels shackled to turntables for anti-ship fire.
This squad also exploded a store of mines which the Germans had not laid behind the beach — an extraordinary piece of dilatoriness for them, although they were probably complacent, in part at least, because their propaganda had written off the British.
Group 4 — 65 men — were landing at the north end of the town, putting the defenders under pressure from two sides, while 30 men of Group 5 had landed from HMS Oribi at about 1000 hours.
This Section from 2 Commando had set up a road-block ambush, while the destroyer joined others in her flotilla in attacking an armed tug and other ships.
The German defences north of South Vaagsö had been bombed by three Blenheims an hour or so earlier, no doubt adding to the confusion at the German 181 Division's headquarters for they had no clear picture of events and a patrol sent down from the northern defences lost two men at the road-block.
These commandos then blew a  gap in the road and withdrew under covering fire from HMS Oribi and HMS Onslow , the former picking them up in her ship's boats as they came off the beach.
Far away from this foray, Blenheim bombers were heading for Herdia airport, which they attacked at midday, cratering its timbered runway, while others bombed Stavanger.
The Colonel's force (Group 2) was down to probably 100 men as their reinforcements arrived.
He came up to Peter Young's men who had advanced, after some losses, through a quayside warehouse and reached a yard (see diagram p. 32).
There, cramped between a store house ('D' on the diagram) and a woodpile ('C'), the party had to move to get space so that they could reorganise.
This meant capturing the red warehouse ('F') across a bare patch of snow and some 60 yards north of the woodpile.
A rifleman hit two men crouching near the Colonel, who later wrote that ‘this was the first time in warfare that I truly felt fear.
I didn't like it.’
Whenever there was a movement by the woodpile, the sniper fired, and soon he hit a third man.
Everyone fired back.
Sergeant George Herbert slipped into the storehouse and found some petrol.
The small party — Peter Young by now had about half the men he had brought from Maaloy — opened fire on the warehouse, the Colonel having already emptied his revolver in firing at a sniper's window, and they kept the German from the window long enough for George Herbert to splash a bucket of petrol over the wooden walls.
A couple of grenades then set a nearby house alight.
Meanwhile Lieutenant Denis O'Flaherty and Trooper Sherington made a determined effort to reach the warehouse ('F') with Peter Young, who saw three stick grenades flung towards him in quick succession; the first two missed and the third did not go off.
Both O'Flaherty and Sherington were severely wounded as they got into the warehouse, but with grim determination they staggered clear, leaving a few equally determined Germans in an inner room of the building.
There were a few moments' stalemate, then more petrol was thrown, this time into the warehouse, and two men with a bren gun were left to cover the building as Peter Young led his men on.
The Colonel went towards the road to press forward the attack down the main street, a grenade that fell between his feet putting a few splinters in his hand, after he had dived for cover, and seriously wounding his runner.
The next minute the grenade thrower appeared with his hands up.
John Durnford-Slater would have accepted this sailor's surrender, but a more angry commando shot the bomber dead.
The Colonel's cool compassion showed his command of the situation: no moment of fury distorted his fearless and level-headed view.
The commandos had been able to keep up their grenade-throwing sorties because civilian volunteers from the town carried sacks of grenades forward to the men in action.
With this help, No. 1 Troop had fought their way from building to building up the landward side of the road and were attacking a house when Sergeant Culling was hit in the face and killed by a percussion grenade exploding on impact.
Sergeant Ramsey's 3-inch mortar was again brought into action, and a direct hit on the building's roof with the third round was followed by a score of bombs through the resulting hole which set the place ablaze.
This ended the most severe part of the operation, although the air battles overhead continued to keep enemy bombers from the ships.
By now, 1345 hours, the Colonel had been up with the leading Troops for more than because two hours, and as the short Arctic day was drawing to a close he ordered the withdrawal to begin.
No.2 Troop led the way back down the road towards the beach headquarters, followed by No.6 with No.l as rearguard.
Many buildings along the road were burning fiercely and, as he counted 12 dead Germans around the house just destroyed by mortar fire, Colonel Durnford-Slater encouraged the men to run through the flames by leading the way.
Apparently they feared the burning timbers more than the bullets, but no doubt they were feeling some reaction after more than four hours in action: four hours of dodging snipers' bullets and bursting open doors that all too often concealed a rifleman who fired, while around the houses a grenade could be dropped from any window.
Throughout the fighting, the intelligence section had been searching houses and the German headquarters, and naval parties had boarded ships in similar searches — a dangerous task because several were killed as they rowed towards the quays in ships' whalers.
After an exchange of rifle shots with the crew of the Föhn , Lieutenant-Commander A.N.F. de Costabadic DSC got aboard this armed trawler.
Sam Corry and his medics carried the wounded who could not walk to the top of the rock above the landing beach, to which they were then lowered, down the rock face, on stretchers.
Moreover, between tending the wounded, the doctor managed to fend off a few shots at snipers.
Despite them the withdrawal went smoothly, with the Colonel, who had been the first man ashore, the last man off, just behind Charley Head, who, as signals officer, had kept up a stream of messages, 40 an hour at one point, that included reassuring but unproven ‘going well’ reports.
He later explained that he had not wished to distract the Colonel during the fighting with enquiries on its actual progress.
Back in Britain, the Norwegian government exiled there felt this raid had done nothing to ease Norway's plight; a problem for any raiders attacking an ally's occupied shore.
But against this destruction must be set some solid achievements, including the Press Unit's making as much as censorship would allow in a morale-boosting report.
German reaction after the raid was to later over-stretch their Atlantic Wall, with some 30,000 extra troops and material being deployed in Norway, which Hitler took to be ‘the zone of destiny in this war’.
There was also a small bonus, for among the documents captured — when the Lieutenant-Commander from CCO's planning headquarters boarded Föhn — was part of the German navy's master code which the Allies added to their information in breaking its secrets.
The raids against Norway continued through the next three years, 1942–44, and were mounted in other theatres as more raiding parties were trained.
The Vaagsö raid had proved that a landing was possible against a defended port, while Lord Mountbatten's test pilots, as he called them, had proved the mettle of his command.
A modest naval force, a dozen squadrons of aircraft, and 600 commandos with their Norwegian  allies, had favourably influenced the strategy of the war at comparatively minor cost — five aircraft were lost with their crews, and 19 other raiders killed and 52 wounded.
Some, like Denis O'Flaherty, who was in hospital for two years, would be a long time returning to the fight.
But the days of aimlessly wandering on enemy beaches were over and specific targets could be raided despite their defences: targets the scientists and planners calculated as most likely to influence the war.
Among these targets were small components whose size bore no relation to their great importance in the technology of war, and great installations considered indestructible by the air bombardment of those years.
Many of the smaller technological targets were in the province of SOE, but one, the new components in radar equipment of a German site some hundred yards from the top of a 300-foot cliff near Bruneval (see  map p. 28), was attacked by a small force of paratroops supported by a seaborne commando party covering the withdrawal.
Although the Germans had used a warning radar since before 1939, the Bruneval station included a new Würzburg set with its 20-foot (6m) dish aerial able to range guns and direct planes on to a single aircraft.
It was protected by 15 machine-gun posts along the cliff top and had, therefore, to be entered by the ‘back door’.
A hundred parachute troops from the 2nd Parachute Battalion made this entrance on 27 February 1942, fighting their way into the station and coming out with the vital gear dismantled by Flight-Sergeant Cox, a radar expert.
They withdrew down a gulley to the beach under fire that intensified as they remained below the cliffs, a sea mist shrouding their signals to the landing craft.
However, three LCA crews saw a Very light above the mist and came in with three motor gun boat escorts.
Each LCA had the added firepower of four brens manned by men from 12 Commando, and in their fight with the Germans on the cliff top the commandos kept the defenders at bay until 0330 hours — some two and a half hours after the paras had landed — when the last craft left the beach under heavy fire.
The equipment enabled scientists to develop ‘window’, a successful counter to radar.
After the War General Student who had commanded German airborne forces congratulated Lord Mountbatten on the raid as the ‘best example of the use of airborne forces with other forces’, and Lord Mountbatten considers this raid ‘the most 100% perfection of any raid I know’.
The CCO's position underwent a fundamental change in March 1942 when Lord Mountbatten ‘was made an Acting Vice-Admiral, an Honorary Lieutenant-General, an Honorary Air Marshal, with a seat on the Chiefs of Staff Committee itself, and was thus one of the four military leaders in charge of the higher direction of the War as a whole and in my case Combined Operations in particular’— to quote Lord Mountbatten.
He goes on to explain that this change was fundamental to the development of Combined Operations as he was then able to order the ships and craft, and requisition bases among the other resources controlled by the Minister of Defence (Winston Churchill).
The successes of December 1941 and February 1942 were crowned in March by the most profitable amphibious raid of modern times, in terms of effective damage with an economy of force.
The achieved aim was to destroy the dry-dock at St Nazaire, a success in no small part due to the bond between officers and men.
A hallmark of Commandos, such relationships avoided the discourtesies of familiarity lapsing into slackness in command.
Moreover, in 2 Commando which carried out this raid, there was, in its commanding officer's words ‘an extra scruple of endurance’ that turned the seemingly impossible into the possible.
Like almost all commando colonels, Colonel A.C. Newman was a man with technical as well as military ability: a civil engineer of cheerful but quiet character, seldom seen without his pipe.
He was 38 years old at the time of this raid.
His second-in-command — Major W.O.
Copland — was, at 44, getting on in years for commando work, but as a works manager in civilian life he had the experience of technical organisation needed for such ventures.
Indeed they required as much brain as brawn, and among the demolition parties at St Nazaire, drawn from eight different Commandos, were a curator of a fine arts museum, a member of the London Stock Exchange, a  Nottingham miner, an economist, and several regular soldiers.
These last included Sergeant Tom Durrant, Royal Engineers, one-time butcher's boy and, although only 23, a man with granite determination.
Earlier plans for a purely commando raid had been abandoned, as mentioned earlier, because St Nazaire stands on the Loire estuary with only one deep-water channel which was covered by coastal batteries in 1942.
The river's broad mud-flats were thought impassable.
However, Captain John Hughes Hallet of the Planning Staff turned these shallows to the raiders' advantage, because on the extra-high water of a spring tide it was possible that lightly laden ships and boats might scrape over these flats.
Aerial photographs showed there was no boom protecting the dry-dock gate (the caisson ‘E’ on diagram p. 41) nor were there any barbed-wire entanglements ashore on the quays.
The Captain also knew that mining the shallows was an unlikely precaution and technically difficult, thus leaving open a side entrance to the port.
When they were ashore, Lord Mountbatten suggested, the raiders ‘might do something different’.
This they did.
The destroyer HMS Campbeltown was given an explosive warhead to ram against the outer caisson.
As big as a block of flats, this steel gate was 167ft × 54ft × 35ft thick (about 50m × 15m × 10m).
Commandos would land from the destroyer and from coastal forces motorboats in small assault parties, demolition squads, and protection parties.
Their part in the plan was to demolish the lock gates ('L' and ‘G’) so making the submarine basin tidal, and preventing U-boats passing freely into their eight bomb-proof pens on the west side of this basin, where five additional pens were being built.
The raiders would also attack the inner (northern ‘B’) caisson, setting charges if possible inside its box sections.
Other installations would be demolished, including the gates' winding gear ('A' and ‘F’) which hauled the caissons aside to allow ships of up to 85,000 tons to enter the 1,148 feet (351m) dock.
Also to be destroyed were the pumps used to empty it, these being in a deeper chamber below the dock level.
The commando parties were to come ashore at three points: over the bows of Campbeltown ; on the Old Entrance quays; and on the Old Mole.
Their first objective would be to capture quick-firing 20mm and 40mm guns around these positions: secondly, they would hold perimeter bridges leading to the south and west sides of the submarine basin and the dry-dock while others gave close protection to the demolition parties.
These squads were armed only with automatic pistols as each man carried a 601b (27kg) rucksack of explosives and some had as much as 901b (40kg) loads.
The raid would truly be ‘the sauciest since Drake’.
The Elizabethan admiral was ‘war' and wakin'’ on that March weekend in 1942 when the navy's little ships — lightly built wooden craft designed for high-speed attacks rather than close-quarters work — stormed into St Nazaire with their landing parties.
The crews included many officers and men in for the duration, the ‘Hostilities only’(HO) personnel like Able Seaman William Savage who manned the forward 2-pounder pom-pom on the motor gun boat.
Although he had all the appearance of an old hand with his beard and sea-salt's pipe, he was a brewery worker by trade.
The little fleet's senior officer was Commander R.E.D.
Ryder RN, who had spent four days alone in the Atlantic after his Q-ship was sunk before she could bring her hidden guns into action.
A dedicated professional seaman, he practised his motor launches (MLs), the motor gun boat (MGB), and the modified motor torpedo boat (MTB 74) operating in close company, manoeuvres they did not normally execute and only had a few weeks to learn.
Indeed, MTB 74, with her torpedo tubes on the foredeck instead of amidships, was ready for sea only a few hours before the raid, her crew having changed one of her five engines.
Details on these craft are shown in the caption to the diagram on page 41, but MTB 74 was an unusual ship even among these fast midgets.
Her individualist skipper — Sub-Lieutenant R.C.M.V. Wynn RNVR — had devised an engineless torpedo with 2,200lb (over 450kg) of explosive to be launched at close range.
The torpedo then sank under a moored target and was fired by  a time fuse which allowed MTB 74 time to get clear.
The commandos rehearsed their demolition exercises to the point of boredom, believing they were merely on another training course.
But after a couple of weeks around Cardiff and Southampton docks — where there was a similar dry-dock to the battleship dock at St Nazaire — they could each carry out almost every demolition in under 10 minutes.
The raiding force were then assembled at Falmouth, and on the afternoon of 26 March, a Thursday, they sailed with the khaki uniforms of the soldiers out of sight below decks.
At sea the force rolled south-westward in a light breeze, making 13 knots (24kph) with the MTB and MGB towed by destroyers.
The crew of the explosive blockship HMS Campbeltown had been reduced to 75 hands; the four funnels she had carried as the USS Buchanan , old Buck , had been replaced by two raked-back stacks to resemble a German Möwe-class destroyer.
She rode light in the water despite the extra armour-plate around her bridge and forming fences amidships to protect her commando landing parties where they would crouch on her final run but she was carrying a minimum of fuel and water and her guns were gone except for a 12-pounder forward and oerlikons on the bridge wings.
Below decks were 24 Mark VII depth-charges each of 4001b (180kg) concreted into a steel box.
Placed abaft the column of her forward gun, the warhead would be protected from the impact of ramming the caisson as the bows crumpled, and the eight-hour delay chemical fuses would give the raiders time to get clear before the acid ate through copper discs.
Alternative two-and-a-half-hour fuses were available, but all who might know if these were also used were killed in the action.
During Thursday night the force changed course, and hoisted German colours.
Next morning they sighted U-593 and attacked her; about midday they came on a fleet of French trawlers but were satisfied they carried no German radio operators.
News from Plymouth of five Wolfe/Möwe destroyers in the estuary caused some concern, but these ships were sent to investigate what mines had been laid by the force — mistakenly thought to be sailing west when U-593 signalled her base.
There was little for the crews to do.
They smeared grease or paint to prevent the MLs' bridge windows glinting and on Campbeltown the commandos mounted their two 3-inch (76mm) mortars forward of the gun and the last rehearsal was held.
The success of their final run depended on a diversionary air raid.
But the possibility of French casualties, with cloud at 3,000 feet (1,000m) obscuring the docks, led to only four of the bombers dropping their loads while some 30 other Whitleys and 25 Wellingtons flew around above the clouds.
The activity was unusual enough to cause Captain Mecke, commanding the naval Flak Brigade's anti-aircraft guns, to guess ‘some devilry was afoot’ when the air raid petered out before midnight.
An hour before then, at 2300 hours, Lieutenant Nigel T.B.
Tibbetts RN set the fuses on Campbeltown's warhead.
An expert on explosives he had been responsible for the design and building of this 4½ tons charge.
Its fuses were expected to blow the lot about five o'clock next morning, Saturday, or at the latest by nine o'clock.
The ships had some 10 miles to go; the MLs had used their extra fuel and filled the spare tanks with seawater as they stole into the estuary in two columns, headed by MGB 314: These motorboats are difficult to handle at slow speed and Campbeltown was sluggish, but at speed she drew an extra foot aft and every inch counted as she came towards the mud.
They passed the old wreck of the SS Lancastria ,Campbeltown steering 050 degrees to offset the tide's strong northerly set, and reduced speed to 10 knots, the MGB's echo-sounder probing for some depth of water as the destroyer twice churned over mud-bars.
Two German boats away to port challenged them but could not report the intrusion as these harbour patrol boats had no wireless.
Bill Copland ordered action stations at midnight, when the German searchlights were going out as the anti-aircraft defences stood down.
Only the murmur of ships' engines and swish of bows cutting the tide could be heard across the calm sea.
In the port column heading for the Old Mole, an ML skipper caught the distinct smell of countryside, sweet traces of grass scents among the more pervasive exhaust fumes.
The clouds were parting and the moon showed dimly at first when the 12-pounder gun's crew of cooks and stewards closed up aboard the destroyer.
The commandos moved forward to man the 3-inch mortars.
The destroyer passed a disused tower in midstream, but already the ships had been spotted at 0115 hours and Mecke signalled:Achtung  Landegfahr  — Beware landings.
There was an unexplained delay of five or ten minutes — perhaps while the searchlight crews came back to their action stations on the great lights, including the five-foot beam on the west bank a mile or so downstream from the port, and the light commanding the river from the end of the Old Mole.
German radar at St Marc or lookouts at about this time reported 17 ships, so the coastal batteries were closed up for action against ships.
The columns of MLs led by the destroyer riding high out of the water were suddenly caught in the harsh glare of the west bank searchlight.
Other searchlights came on, but the German-looking silhouette of Campbeltown and some other confusions of identity enabled the intruders to bluff their way for another five minutes and about 2,000 yards (1,800m) nearer the harbour.
Ryder fired some German Very recognition signals but these were the wrong shade of red for that night, and at 0127 the defence opened fire in its full fury.
Campbeltown struck her German colours and hoisted her battle ensign: she had about a mile to go.
The 12-pounder exposed on a turntable mounting, the mortars and the oerlikons all fired at the flashes of German guns, as did the commandos in the MLs, firing brens in a pre-arranged fire-plan that helped conserve ammunition.
as if to escape from the great pool of light, the destroyer gathered speed, but it moved with her, red, green, and orange tracer streaming into her sides.
Occasionally there was the heavier judder as larger shells struck.
Forward on the MGB's exposed foredeck, Able Seaman Savage racked the Sperrbrecher with his 2-pounder pom-pom, knocking out this mine destroyer's 88mm (3.5in) gun and setting fire to its ready-use ammunition lockers on deck.
But the Sperrbrecher , unidentified before the raid although moored a few hundred yards from the east jetty (see diagram p. 41) was a strong ship.
Nevertheless, for some five minutes the British guns seemed to gain a temporary advantage.
Campbeltown took the brunt of the shot and shell, her captain — Lieutenant-Commander S. (Sam) H. Beattie RN — blinded by search-lights yet making last-minute corrections to her course when a rift in the smoke showed she was not heading for the caisson, still 700 yards upriver.
The coxswain and the quartermaster were killed at the wheel, and Nigel Tibbets took the helm.
MLs 7 and 8 drove ahead, firing at the Mole and dock-gate batteries.
At the last moment a heavy incendiary bomb — from an RAF plane — hit the foredeck of Campbeltown but the ship forged ahead, ripped over the anti-torpedo nets, and rammed the caisson.
Sam Beattie swung her stern to starboard as she hit, leaving clear the Old Entrance for the MLs' landing.
It was 0134 hours, just four minutes behind the planned time of impact.
The columns of MLs were now under heavy fire, the port group of MLs making for the Mole to land their commandos, the starboard group intending to slip under the stern of Campbeltown into the Old Entrance.
Something of the MLs' agony as they fought their way towards the quays can be seen in the diagram on page 41.
Most of them were so badly damaged that they sank or were forced to withdraw as shell splinters cut their steering lines and tracer set fire to fuel tanks, but they gave a good account of themselves because the port was defended by well-sited, quick-firing guns used for anti-aircraft or anti-ship fire.
Some of these guns were on the top of the submarine pens, others were on concrete towers as large as a couple of houses but far more strongly built.
The tower near the south caisson received more than a hundred hits from the British motor launches and other Royal Navy guns, but the strongpoint on the Old Mole, some 400 yards downstream from the Old Entrance, still commanded the river despite the raiders' fire.
The 20mm and 40mm quick-firing guns here were in or on concrete emplacements, and although the crew of the outer guns were knocked out for a time the  Germans got this battery firing again, and the searchlight on the Mole's tip was never put out.
A few commandos struggled ashore, among them Captain Michael Burn, who went alone three quarters of a mile across the docks to near the northern bridge where he did what he could to destroy an unmanned battery and was visited by Bill Copland doing a round of the northern positions.
Many of the commandos, though, died out on the river: Regimental Sergeant-Major A. Moss leading the tiny reserve of 2 Commando's assault troops was killed swimming in the river after giving his place on a life-raft to a young soldier; many were burnt in the pools of flaming petrol.
Despite the heavy fire and German infantry dropping grenades from the Mole, ML11 got Captain Bill Pritchard, Lieutenant Philip Walton, and Lieutenant W.H. (Tiger) Watson ashore with their squads.
Bill Pritchard hurrying them on towards their objectives around the south entrance bridge ('D') beyond the old town, although Tiger Watson wanted to clear the Mole first.
Two other MLs got men ashore under Campbeltown's stern and the MGB landed Charles Newman with his fighting headquarters — two tommy-gunners and a signaller — about the time Campbeltown rammed the lock.
Landing the headquarters at the Old Entrance was itself a miracle of seamanship among the blazing wrecks and heavy fire directed at the MGB.
The destroyer's forward gun crew and mortarmen were all dead or wounded, her bow a cauldron of smoke and thermite fumes, even though the incendiary bomb was put out before it set fire to Campbeltown's warhead of depth charges.
Her oerlikons blazed at the batteries on the harbour wall as Bill Copland calmly marshalled the assault parties.
Dressed for easy recognition in white blancoed webbing, with clean (at the start) faces, and with every second man carrying a blue-lensed pencil-beamed torch, the assault parties dropped their scaling-ladders over the bow and plunged ashore.
John Roderick's party attacked the guns off the starboard bow, the 12 men capturing the first gun's sandbagged emplacement in a grenade-throwing rush along the dock wall.
They knocked out the next emplacement, but then came to one of those house-like ack-ack towers.
Unable to get up its outside  flight of steps, they lobbed grenades on to the gun platform, killing the gun commander and men drawing ammunition inside the tower, before moving on along the harbour wall to take a 40mm gun position.
Then they returned to the destroyer.
Beyond this last position was a fourth gun and a searchlight which were also destroyed, although not by Roderick's men.
Possibly some men from an ML or maybe the boats' gunfire did this damage.
Within a couple of minutes of going over the destroyer's port side, Donald Roy's kilted Scotsmen were attacking the pumphouse 50 yards from the caisson ('H' on diagram p. 41).
The gun crews on its roof fled, and the commandos doubled on to the bridge ('G') across the Old Entrance lock into the submarine basin, holding this exposed position for half an hour under fire from 20mm guns on the roof of the submarine pens and other buildings on the west side of the basin.
For the demolition parties the days of scheming and planning were over: now they needed steady nerves and physical strength.
The five squads aboard Campbeltown had several targets.
Stuart Chant (5 Commando), with four sergeants, would destroy the pumping station.
Robert Burtenshaw (also from ‘No.5’), with six NCOs, had a reserve of explosives to place inside the southern caisson if the destroyer had failed to ram.
Christopher Smalley and four NCOs would demolish the winding-house for this caisson.
The other two squads had further to go in attacking similar installations around the northern or inner caisson.
All these men were encumbered with their heavy loads and had only automatic pistols.
Some were wounded before they left the destroyer, including Stuart Chant and Sergeant Chamberlain.
Many of these squads also carried sledge-hammers, axes, and incendiaries.
Carrying Chamberlain and with Stuart Chant limping, his team followed Donald Roy's assault, reaching the pump-house and ignoring the Germans who fled.
The commandos blew in its steel door, and, leaving Chamberlain, who could hardly help himself along, to guard it, they ran down the long stairway to the pumps 40 feet below.
Their torches barely penetrated the gloom, but they could have laid the charges by feel in complete darkness: all their training was paying off.
The charges, linked by two rings of cordtex, were set to fire and the squad ran for cover clear of the building.
Captain R.K. Montgomery RE — an old friend of Bill Pritchard and like him a coordinator of demolition squads in the raid — moved them further away.
The windows of the pump-house blew out with a roar of debris and crashing concrete blocks, one falling where they had first taken cover.
Inside the pump-house there was little more to do, but they smashed the transformer oil pipes with sledge-hammers and threw down some tar baby incendiaries.
Christopher Smalley's men had already destroyed the great wheels in the winding-house.
As these squads withdrew, Montgomery threw an incendiary into a shed, sending it up ‘in a colossal sheet of continuous flame’.
The three squads making for the northern caisson, including Bob Burtenshaw's men who were not needed at the southern caisson, were less fortunate.
Corran Purdon and four corporals, including ‘Johnny’ Johnson, a Gordon Highlander of 12 Commando who carried through his task although severely wounded before leaving the destroyer, made for the northern winding-house ('A' on diagram).
They were closely followed by Gerard Brett with a largely Irish squad from 12 Commando.
The giant Bob Burtenshaw, sporting a borrowed naval cap (Commander Beattie's), swung his walking-stick, his monocle firmly in place, unconcerned by the frenzy of gunfire as they came over the destroyer's bows.
He hummed softly ‘There'll always be an England’ and joked as he shifted the weight of his rucksack ‘as if on a walking holiday’.
Moving along a dockside with its crane-tracks, bollards, and railway lines is no jaunt in daylight; at night the going can be grim.
The tiny protection parties for these three squads were down to 10 men through casualties before landing, but they led the way, stifling small arms fire from near the burning Forge de l'Ouest, then clearing an enemy trench in a skirmish round a dockside crane.
Padding behind them were the demolition squads, Corran Purdon's men  held for a tense few moments in the open when every second might draw more fire as they smashed the northern winding-hut door ('A').
Inside they placed their charges and sledge-hammered the electric gear.
All was ready for demolition, but in going to report this, the burly Corporal Chung was wounded, the two parties on the caisson being under heavy fire.
Gerard Brett, wounded in both legs, had been dragged to the protection of a low wall before his team slipped across the caisson, killing two Germans who appeared out of the gloom on the east side.
The hatch trap-door into the caisson would not come open and fire was coming from all sides, including the north where three ships were moored beyond the caisson on the Penhouet Basin's south quay.
Burtenshaw took charge and 12 181b (8kg) charges were lowered against the outside (north) underwater face of the caisson, the cords tied to the guard rail.
Tarred timbers covered in grit — unlike the gates at Southampton — protected the caisson's sides, and the men took some cover behind these timbers' projections when the Penhouet ships opened accurate fire with their 20mm guns.
No doubt these gunners had seen Sergeant Carr's two further attempts to blow open the hatch.
Bob Burtenshaw, realising they must at least silence the ships lying inside the dry-dock, south of the caisson, took several men with him along the wall, firing their pistols down into a tanker undergoing a refit.
More effective was the rush by two of the protection squad firing their tommies as they ran down the ship's steep gangplank.
When Germans appeared on the west dockside, Bob Burtenshaw — still humming ‘There'll always be an England…’ ran at them firing his pistol, despite his wounds.
The Germans scattered, but the Lieutenant and a corporal were killed.
Sergeant Carr — a tall regular Royal Engineer — went back along the caisson, found the hatch still unopened, and decided the wreath of underwater charges at least must be blown.
Coming back from this explosion he checked the damage — in the tradition of his Corps — and heard the gurgle of water flowing into the dry-dock.
The machinery in the winding house was blown before the parties withdrew carrying Gerard Brett.
All the possible demolitions north and south of the dry-dock were now complete, but attempts to damage the submarine basin's southern lock had failed.
Bill Pritchard, whom we left going ashore at the Old Mole with his demolition control party and Philip Walton's demolition squad, protected by Tiger Watson's men, moved into the Old Town in commando fashion: each party, indeed each man, when alone, moved towards the target without waiting for support.
Bill Pritchard got within sight of the steel lattice bridge ('D') before heavy fire forced his corporals to take cover in a concrete hut.
Pritchard and one corporal then nipped back across the open roadway to drop a 10lb charge between two tugs moored in the basin, and their dash back to the hut, a mere 60 yards or less from the approaching enemy, was achieved without mishap.
They heard the muffled thud as the charge blew before they set off to see how others were faring on this southern lock.
The three corporals left in the hut were told ‘to do what you can’ for no one had appeared to blow the bridge.
Meanwhile Captain Bill Pritchard and his corporal — a Scots engineer apprentice, Mac, I.L.
Maclagan — jogged silently down the lock's east wall but found none of the expected demolitions at its gates.
They heard the tramp of boots but saw no one, although the enemy appears to have marched boldly but sometimes indiscreetly into the area.
There was no one at the pumping station in the Old Town, so the two of them headed back through the dockside streets to find out what was happening.
Rounding a corner Bill Pritchard ran into a German.
No shot.was fired before Mac killed the rifleman with a tommy-gun burst, but the captain had been wounded, and his last order, gasped through heavy breathing, ‘…report to HQ’ was followed by the lone corporal.
Threading his way past the echoing warehouses, boarded shop fronts, and silent cafes, he returned to the concrete hut, only to find there the body of Philip Walton.
Undeterred, Mac now made his way down the side of the now dangerous Old Town Place back to Colonel Newman's headquarters.
Watson's party, with some of Walton's squad, had fought a firefight around this place and had been forced northward between buildings on the basin wharf which was where their Colonel appeared.
Cheerful, and unaware of the failures at the southern lock, he urged on young Watson, who steeled himself for another attempt at breaking through the place .
However, before a further attack could be made they were told to withdraw, because the Colonel needed all his little force regrouped.
Next day the Germans found that the one-time schoolmaster and lieutenant of 2 Commando Philip Walton, and maybe one of the corporals from Pritchard's squad, had laid charges on the bridge, but this brave effort had been foiled by lethal fire at close range.
Regrouping at the Colonel's command post began around 0300 hours, 90 minutes after landing.
On coming ashore Charles Newman had set up his headquarters near the bridge ('G') across the lock leading from the Entrance.
Bumping into a German, the Colonel, with natural politeness, said ‘Sorry’ before the man surrendered and persuaded his mates to do the same.
The Colonel then made his rounds of the southern parties while Bill Copland, landing from the destroyer, visited those to the north.
But as they checked their tiny forces — a hundred or so ashore — the first German Stosstruppen , Thrust Troops, were moving into the docks over the bridges of the submarines' basin's southern lock ('D') at 0150 hours.
There was more to come: about 5,000 troops and seamen were in the area, including the crews of the five minesweepers and four harbour defence boats and the technicians of the naval Works Companies Nos 2 and 4.
The Stosstruppen of 703 and 705 naval flak battalions moved into the Old Town, Works Companies came towards the north caisson from both east and west.
Troop Sergeant-Major Haines — landed from ML 6 — reported to Newman and early in the fight lay out in the open with a 2-inch (51mm) mortar firing on the guns across the submarine basin.
When a ship shifted position to silence him, Sergeant-Major Haines drove it off with a bren gun!
The headquarters' 38-set (see Appendix 5) could not contact Ryder on the MGB and Newman did not at first realise how few men were ashore.
Donald Roy's assault party joined him and John Roderick's men came back, crossing a now silent Campbeltown's bow.
Chris Smalley had earlier come upon ML 2 alongside in the Entrance and scrambled aboard with his squad, but in trying to get her forward guns firing he was killed before she was afire and had to be abandoned about 0245 hours.
Other commandos may have got ashore for — as mentioned earlier — some German guns were silenced beyond John Roderick's objectives, but after landing no other commandos got away in the MLs.
Crouching behind some railway trucks the commandos formed a tiny perimeter facing the Old Mole's landward side and around the buildings just south of the Entrance.
They were being attacked on every side but the northward quay towards the destroyer.
Newman and Copland walked to the edge of the entrance, a grenade silencing one post a mere 25 yards away; over the water the searchlight of the Mole could be seen beamed on the river.
The entrance was an inferno of petrol fires as flames flared and flickered across the water, sending a black column of heavy smoke mixed with the MLs' white smoke-screens slowly rolling north-west on the still night air above the wrecked boats.
Most of the other searchlights were out now, and only the fires lit the quays and the gaunt dockside warehouses that echoed to the sharp burst of a tommy-gun's fire and the sharper answering rent of a German Schmeisser's more rapid fire.
The Colonel checked with Bill Copland whether they should call it a day: ‘Certainly not’ was-the Major's assured reply, for all felt the confidence of success.
Some two hours after landing they moved out of the perimeter in parties of 20 or so, with Michael Burn lopping in the van followed by Donald Roy with the strongly armed assault parties.
Behind these came the demolition squads.
Troop Sergeant Haines brought up the rear as the raiders moved towards the Old Entrance lock bridge ('G') but had first to swing north round the buildings on the east of the basin.
In the next few  minutes the small parties moved in quick spurts from the deep shadow of one warehouse to the next black patch of cover.
Donald Roy led the way when contact was lost with Mike Burn, for in these dark moments a dash for cover could plunge men into enemy defences.
One party supported another with covering fire as best they could.
There were unexplained hold-ups, enemy strongpoints catching the leaders in heavy fire perhaps, or a few moments' loss of direction as they probed forward.
Sergeant-Major Haines was sent forward at one point and with Donald Roy got the column moving.
Tiger Watson was wounded; Donald Roy killing his friend's attacker, for this was a personal battle of man against man in the shadows, even though at the same time there was the impersonal hammer from machine-guns and 20mm cannons firing from beyond the basin and its locks.
This more distant fire let up long enough, however, for the column to make its way beside the buildings on the east side of the basin.
The German gunners no doubt feared firing on their own men in these warehouses.
The Colonel at one point was firing his revolver over Donald Roy's shoulder, and reaching the place they could see the bridge ('D') 70 yards off.
‘Away you go lads’ sent the leading squad dashing for the bridge literally under a hail of fire, for the startled Germans were shooting too high.
Those minutes of fighting in the shadows had extended to an hour or more.
But once over the bridge they met the first vehicles of a German column and the Commando force were scattered.
They left the streets, making their way across gardens and by back ways into the town to hide in buildings.
Most were captured: a few, with the inevitable brutality of war, were killed needlessly — one young soldier was shot as he surrendered, another, with his head between kilted knees, died with a knot of Germans looking on.
Out on the river earlier in the battle, Commander Ryder had ordered the MGB back alongside Campbeltown ‘and gone ashore with Leading Seaman Pike — an expert in German signals, part of the bluff — to make sure the destroyer was locked into the southern caisson, but he did not know how the battle was going ashore.
He came away from the Old Entrance, having collected those of the destroyer's crew not taken off by ML 6, and as Micky Wynn came up with his special MTB, Robert Ryder told him to fire the torpedoes at the outer lock gate in the Old Entrance.
These time-fused torpedoes fired, Micky Wynn set off at 0230 for the sea down river, while Commander Ryder moved into midstream to check the position, coming between the wrecks — five MLs were now blazing hulks — to within 250 yards (230m) of the Mole's batteries as Able Seaman Savage and his mate, AB F.A.
Smith, fired into the outer emplacement, silencing its 20mm gun.
However, the Mole was still held by Germans, and moving back to the Old Entrance Bob Ryder saw that somebody — a party from an ML?
Germans?— had manned Campbeltown's oerlikons and was firing across the entrance.
The MGB's decks and meagre cabin spaces were covered with wounded, many being hit for a second and third time, and so the Commander decided the MGB must withdraw, although he was reluctant to leave.
There were six miles of gauntlet to run before reaching the open sea, and some damaged craft limped through this passage while others were still able to set off at some speed, making smoke cover with their special equipment.
Micky Wynn used all his 3,000hp to make over 40 knots (75kph) until, with a neat piece of boat handling, he stopped alongside two men on a Carley float life-raft.
This few seconds’ pause was all the German gunners needed to set MTB 74 on fire.
ML 6, caught in a searchlight, was also hit and afire, and survivors from the two craft drifted down river on rafts, many of them badly wounded — Micky Wynn had lost an eye and been rescued unconscious from the MTB's charthouse.
Later that Saturday afternoon, about 1400 hours, three of them, including Micky Wynn, were picked up by German patrol boats; a fourth man, Able Seaman Len Denison, swam to a concrete pile in the river.
They were the only survivors from the 36 aboard the MTB and ML 6.
ML 14 which had not landed her commandos because their leader and the boat's skipper were both badly wounded, was one  of the last boats to reach the Old Mole.
A little after 0530 hours she was 45 miles (72km) from the estuary, when she crossed the tracks of the Wolfe-Mowe destroyers, sent out earlier that night to sweep for mines that the Germans thought had been laid by the British force.
The first two passed the ML in the dark but Jaguar came to investigate, snapping on her searchlight as she closed on the ML in the start of an hour-long ship-to-ship fight.
The ships struck in a glancing blow that rolled some men off the ML's deck, and on the next pass the small destroyer came within 100 yards, firing two of her three 105mm (4.1in) guns and her 20mm guns into the ML.
Sergeant Tom Durrant, Royal Engineers and 1 Commando, was badly wounded in the first exchange of fire as the ML's commandos and naval crew brought their light weapons to bear on the German destroyer.
When the gunner on the after twin-Lewis was killed, Tom Durrant took over although he already had several serious wounds, and he collapsed still firing these guns at the German destroyer on her third or fourth attempt to approach the ML.
Before the wooden boat sank, however, her crew were taken off and treated with the utmost courtesy by Kapitän Leutnant F.K. Paul, who accepted the ML's surrender: a tribute he paid to a gallant foe, and evidence if this is needed that chivalry is the prerogative of individuals, not nations.
Tom Durrant died aboard the destroyer, honoured by his enemies as well as his friends.
As the MGB came out of the river, Able Seaman Bill Savage was found dead at his gun before the boat reached her destroyer escorts waiting at sea.
These had already had a brief clash with the German destroyers and now headed north with the MGB were MLs 5 and 15, but ML 15 had to be abandoned.
Four other MLs reached England — ML 8 made the passage on one engine and MLs 6, 12 and 13 had some damage and casualties.
About 1030 on Saturday morning, HMS Campbeltown's warhead blew up, bursting the caisson: the river poured into the dry dock.
There is no reason to believe any of the raiders were aboard at the time, although  two rumours have persisted through the years.
The French believed there were British officers aboard, and others think someone came back to fire the explosive, for there was more than an hour's delay on the set time.
However, the only unauthorised visitors appear to have been souvenir hunters and men foraging among the stores.
By 1030 all those with the knowledge to blow up the warhead were dead or prisoners.
There seems every likelihood that faulty fuses caused the delay.
Throughout the day the Germans were unusually jittery, and several French men and women were killed in mistake for commandos.
But by Sunday night order was restored, although at least one German officer was shot at while driving through the town — probably by Germans of another unit.
On Monday the docks were re-opened and the stevedores were at work when Micky Wynn's first torpedo exploded at 1600 hours; an hour later the second one went off.
French workmen fleeing from the dock were fired on because the Germans thought this was an organised rising, the explosions coming so long after the raid that they took them to be the work of the Free French Resistance Movement and threatened reprisals if the ‘revolt’ did not stop.
There is little doubt that some Frenchmen fired on Germans during the raid and afterwards, although on this occasion no hostages were shot.
Nevertheless, already 16 French were dead, including a child of five and a man of 76.
In addition to this price for their success, the Allies had lost 169 raiders killed and about 200 taken prisoner.
Comparisons in blood are an inadequate measure of courage or military achievement, but these raiders' losses were a far greater proportion of their force — 369 from 611 army and naval personnel — than were lost in the World War I blocking of Zeebrugge when 195 men were killed from a force of 1,784.
But whereas the submarine pens were re-opened within four days in 1918, after the St Nazaire raid this dry-dock was not repaired until the 1950s — one reason perhaps why the British were not popular with all the townsfolk for many years afterwards.
Large and small raids continued, with the SBS 101 Troop sending a canoe into Boulogne on the night of 11–12 April, three weeks after the St Nazaire raid.
Originally Stan Weatherall and Guardsman R. Sidlow were to accompany Captain Gerald Montanaro RE with Trooper Freddie Preece RAC, in two canoes.
But as the weather was rough, the Troop commander went with his paddler and the other canoe team stayed ashore.
Launched from ML 102, the two raiders had a mile or so to paddle on a compass course through choppy water into the harbour where, as the canoe surged on the swell alongside a large ship, they reached down underwater to fix their eight limpet mines.
Tightening the butterfly nuts on these magnet limpets broke the glass phials, so setting chemical time-fuses (see Appendix 3) before the raiders turned their canoe back to sea on a reciprocal course for the motor launch.
They barely reached it, for the seas had got up and the waterlogged canoe was foundering as they were hauled to safety.
A few days later the Troop were shown aerial photographs of five tugs towing the sinking ship towards a sandbank, where she settled with her cargo of 5,000 tons of copper.
The Germans are said to have shot 100 French hostages in reprisal for this sinking which they thought was the work of the Resistance.
Raiding was now growing apace with Lord Mountbatten's wish for ‘a raid every fortnight’ in addition to the smaller raids of the SBS and other units who were joining the ranks of the commandos.
On 21–22 April, 100 men of 4 Commando, with 50 Canadians, landed from six LCAs at the village of Hardelot (see map p. 28) in a reconnaissance in force.
Their leader Lord Lovat thought their safe return was due to‘the opposition being half-hearted or badly trained’ and not to any skill on the raiders' part.
Three sailors were killed nevertheless by the defenders.
In May, following these forays, Hitler had his first top-level meeting to discuss the western defences with the Todt Organisation, and plans were begun for the so-called Atlantic Wall, although there already existed a series of defended ports and the original defence arrangements set up when fleets of craft were being assembled for an invasion  of England.
The Wall itself never became a complete line of defences.
Among those who would join the commandos in probing these defences were the men of the Small Scale Raiding Force (SSRF), responsible jointly to Lord Mountbatten and SOE.
In the spring of 1942, Major Gus March-Phillips, Major J. Geoffrey Appleyard, who served with 7 Commando in the autumn of 1940, and Captain Graham Hayes had the SSRF in training at Wareham (Dorset), where they did a lot of boat work, especially in dories.
They trained to land in various numbers, although in later years some nine men made up the team in a powered dory.
With their SOE connexions, the SSRF found a dory more suitable than canoes when landing an agent who wanted to melt into the local scene rather than stagger ashore dripping wet from a canoe.
In collecting agents, however, canoes were quite suitable and Geoffrey Appleyard made several ‘collections’ from enemy beaches.
Once, landing from the submarine HMS Tigris, his fellow canoeist — a Free French soldier — lost his boat in rough water, but they managed to get back to the submarine.
The next night Geoffrey Appleyard went in alone, and after scouting round for the two agents he was to meet, he abandoned all caution, running up and down the beach shouting for them and waving his torch.
They appeared at last and he got them safely off in one canoe.
The Germans could not man every half-mile — never mind every yard — and campaign in Russia.
However, the ambiguities under the SOE cloak of secrecy.
had repercussions for all commandos, for they were strictly uniformed troops, even if they sometimes appeared off enemy coasts under flags of convenience.
Two of these raids, however, had special significance to our story.
On the night of 12/13 September 1942, Gus March-Phillips and Graham Hayes, with nine men, were landed in a Goatley boat (see Appendix 4) at St Honorinè near the Cherbourg peninsula.
Geoff Appleyard was in the MTB — he had an injured leg from a previous raid — when he heard the landing party ambush some seven Germans in a patrol before the raiders were in turn ambushed by a larger force.
They reached their boat, but the Germans were there before them and Gus March-Phillips was killed along with three others.
The flimsy canvas-sided boat sank, leaving Graham Hayes to swim along the coast.
With the help of several Frenchmen he eventually reached Spain, but this neutral country's police handed him back to the Gestapo.
This incident proved the danger to Special Forces when they sought sanctuary in a neutral country, for Graham Hayes was shot in a Paris prison in the summer of 1943.
Also in  1943, in July, Geoffrey Appleyard, who had gone on to help form the 2nd SAS Regiment in the Middle East, was reported missing presumed killed over Sicily where he was supervising an airdrop.
The second small raid of significance to the commando story came on 3–4 October 1942, when a few of the Small Scale Raiding Force and some men of 12 Commando landed on Sark in the Channel Islands.
They took several prisoners, two of whom were killed in a later skirmish.
There seems no doubt that the dead prisoners were handcuffed and this infuriated Hitler, who in October ordered that ‘all enemy troops taking part in the so-called Commando operations…in uniform or not…whether in battle or whilst escaping…will be destroyed to the last man’.
The valour of these raiders was recognised after the destruction of the docks at St Nazaire by the award of the Victoria Cross to Lieutenant-Commander S. H.
Beattie, Sergeant Tom Durrant, Lieutenant-Colonel Charles Newman, Commander R.E.D.
Ryder, and Able Seaman William Savage.
In the words of the citations for Sam Beattie's and ‘Red’ Ryder's awards, these recognised: not only the individual's valour but also that of a very gallant ship's company and the valour shown by many others of coastal forces.
In all, 4 DSOs, 17 DSCs, 11 MCs, 4 Conspicuous Gallantry Medals, 24 DSMs, 14 MMs, 51 Mentions-in-Despatches, and 4 Croix de Guerre were awarded for this raid alone.
One example may illustrate the nature of these awards: Michael Burn, who crossed the docks alone, had barely got ashore, being half-drowned by the weight of his equipment as he tried to swim to the dockside, and being rescued by Lance-Corporal Young.
Yet the commando captain shook off the discomfort of this experience and went on to reach his objective.
He was awarded the Military Cross.
After the previous year's visits to Lofoten and Vaagso, John Durnford-Slater and Peter Young had won decorations for their skill and bravery, and Gerald Montanaro and Trooper Preece were decorated.
Men of the Small Scale Raiding Force on one raid alone were led by five officers none of whom survived the war, who would all earn awards for gallantry, including a VC, a DSO, and six Military Crosses.
The valour is unquestioned, and although only the decorations of those officers and men mentioned in the unit histories of Appendix 7 are shown in this.
book, commandos would be — I believe — the first to accept that those who received awards usually owed a good deal to the support of their fellows, in spirit if not by arms.
Planning these raids had moved a long way in a few months, as explained in Chapter 10.
This was in large measure due to their senior commanders; men like Brigadier Charles Haydon, whose report of February 1941 had done much to shape the commandos from an unwieldy collection of Troops expected to act independently, to a cohesive force of raiders in units suited to their various roles — the SBS for recce, the complete Commando for raids in force.
There were no longer the possibilities for ship-based  guerrillas to flit along enemy coastlines, but now small parties could be landed and withdrawn in a fast-moving or underwater approach.
The traditional British verve for raiding had been restored after too many years under the shadow of the World War I failures at Gallipoli.
Not all early raids were successful and the plan to raid Bayonne failed through lack of information on beach conditions.
This raid would have cut all railway and road bridges in this area between France and Spain, on the same night that St Nazaire was raided, in the original plans.
But when the LSIs Princess Beatrix and Queen Emma with 1 and 6 Commandos had ‘crept along the north coast of Spain undetected’ in their disguise as Spanish merchantmen, the LCAs came in to find long and heavy Atlantic swells pounding a bar across the target beaches in the river Ardour estuary.
Many of the craft would have been lost and commandos were not hazarded in foolish risks, although often taking calculated chances.
They reembarked and returned to the UK after more than a month at sea.
SOME NAVAL ASPECTS OF AMPHIBIOUS WARFARE IN WORLD WAR II
Allied navies were equipped for hydrographic surveys by submarines and other ships measuring offshore currents and scouting the channels to a landfall.
But new techniques were needed to find landing points for assault craft and ships, for not only minor craft and major craft (LCTs etc) would be put ashore but also Landing Ships Tank (LSTs) of over 300 feet (90+m) weighing 4,080 short tons would beach.
Assault craft and ships on a beach too shallowly shelved might ground by the stern, leaving their bows in water too deep for vehicles or men to cross without risk of drowning, while vehicle-carrying craft on a steeply inclined beach might not ground firmly enough to off load their cargoes.
Once the landing points had been selected, the navies had to escort the assault troops' ships to their dropping zones, sweeping mine-free passages for both LSIs and assault craft.
These were marshalled into their landing sequence before the run inshore while a bombardment by naval and air forces covered the approach.
Pre-assault bombardments were made when surprise was unnecessary, as in most Pacific island assaults when the Japanese could not reinforce a garrison.
The American army engineer Underwater Demolition Teams (UDTs) and US Marine Corps recce squads worked near beaches under the cover of such bombardments often begun several days before a landing.
Naval tactics early in the war avoided such ship-to-fort confrontations; but by 1943 the accepted practice was to blast coast defences, stripping them of camouflage, if not destroying their guns in sea and air bombardments that were timed so navy shells did not cut the path of  strafing planes.
The majority of aircraft in both Europe and the Pacific amphibious assaults were land-based, but carrier aircraft played their part.
In support of the build-up of beachheads, naval ships, directed by observers ashore with assault forces, fired on shore targets.
Refuelling and re-ammunitioning these vessels and those protecting an anchorage involved a complex fleet-train of ships in the Pacific, sometimes operating nearly 2,000 miles (3,700+km) from its nearest land-base.
ASSAULT PILOTAGE
The Allied raiding forces would include many units with special skills, landing not only on the Channel coast of France but across the world from northern Norway to the South Pacific.
Belgians of 10 Commando would land in the Adriatic, US Marine Corps raiding battalions operated in the Pacific; and American Army Rangers landed alongside the commandos in Europe and spearheaded the Philippines landings.
All depended on the navy and sometimes on the air force to land them at least somewhere near their target beaches.
Lieutenant-Commander Nigel Clogstoun-Willmott RN, navigating officer of the force intended to raid Rhodes in the summer of 1941, thought of his uncle with the Australians, while planning the beach reconnaissance.
They had landed with the Anzacs at Gallipoli, when the battleships were deterred by fear of mines after HMS Irresistible and HMS Ocean were mined in the Dardanelles on 18 March 1915.
Other ships had also been lost in World War I while navigating other narrows where there is the added risk of going aground.
Indeed, more than half the Allied ships lost off Norway in 1940 foundered on shoals or rocks, as Nigel Clogstoun-Willmott knew from his service aboard a Q-ship in that campaign.
With sea-room a prerequisite of safe ship handling, naval training and other deep-water seamanship has always been more concerned, therefore, with keeping clear of land than with approaching beaches.
There would be precious little searoom off the beaches in amphibious landings, and putting a 4,000 ton assault ship ashore was at one time thought so hazardous that none was expected to survive.
Yet they did.
However, such risks could be taken only with very exact knowledge of the shore — where changes of the undersea bed are highly variable in comparison with the unchanging contours ashore.
In the Pacific, coral reefs were even less adequately charted than the beaches of North Africa or the fjords of Norway, but as the techniques of assault pilotage developed, more details of the natural hazards became clear.
A ship could nevertheless be navigated accurately, especially when up-to-date hydrographic data was available from offshore surveys by submarines.
The problem, therefore, was not one of technique, as much as training, for there were relatively few fully trained navigators in the Allied navies of 1940–41 and many training facilities were needed for air force navigators.
These constraints put out of the question any prospect of training fully fledged navigators for the thousands of landing craft crews.
At best they had a few lectures in coastal pilotage before joining the minor craft — those carried aboard ships.
Officers in the major craft — the LCTs and LCIs (see Appendix 4)— had a little more training but not very much: navigation is a science not learnt in a four-week course.
In European waters there were coastal pilot handbooks, but these cautioned the sailor away from rocky beaches, the forbidding  shores on which commandos expected to land.
Many charts gave details only to the low-water, while maps cut off their contours at the high-water mark.
Nigel Clogstoun-Willmott, caught up in something of the optimism in the British Imperial Headquarters at Cairo after General Wavell's sweeping desert victories of December 1940, was aware of these and many more problems as he completed a survey through the periscope of a mine-laying submarine off the island of Rhodes, which lies close to the Turkish coast (see map p. 116).
As the submarine nosed around the island's waters for three days, often making one and a half knots or less, there were a number of unanswered questions.
Was that apparently empty fisherman's hut an abandoned home or a gun emplacement?
Were there any hidden sand-bars a dozen yards from the beach, for a man could drown easily in the eight feet of water beyond them as in eighty?
In time, beach reconnaissance would become a scientific study of landing areas and their immediate hinterland — the littoral across which Nigel Clogstoun-Willmott's men would lead raiders and the van of invasions, guiding the landing craft crews with marker canoes and other devices that in part at least made up for these flotillas' limited experience of coastal navigation.
However, there was nothing over-scientific about the Commander's first beach reconnaissance.
Nor were some of the earlier beach  reconnaissances the most encouraging of precedents, although Clogstoun-Willmott did not know this at the time.
Another officer, Lieutenant-Commander Milner Gibson RN who led in crash boats on the raid near Boulogne in 1940, had made nine reconnaissances in the three weeks before that raid, going ashore alone probably in a dinghy.
An officer who had lived on Guernsey also made a reconnaissance of that island before Ronnie Tod and John Durnford-Slater visited it in their July raid the same year.
But in both cases the pre-raid recces were not much help on the night, for Milner-Gibson's compass failed and the German dispositions on Guernsey were changed by the time of the raid.
In preparing for his reconnaissance of Rhodes, the Commander had set himself an exacting routine of training, with long-distance swimming and other exercises hardening his physical endurance: habits of training his men would later find exhausting almost to the point of mutiny.
That January in 1941 the plans were entirely personal, however, because Nigel Clogstoun-Willmott had difficulty persuading the Force Commanders that there was anything to be gained from beach reconnaissance.
All too easily they feared, a recce might leave traces of the visit which, even if the lone navigator was not captured, could give away the intended landing point for an assault force.
Throughout these reconnaissances, therefore, the raiders went to extreme lengths — even possibly to self-destruction — to avoid being caught or their special gear falling into enemy hands, for its nature made clear the purpose of the visit.
However, Nigel Clogstoun-Willmott, swimming into the beaches at Rhodes, with his army compass covered in periscope grease and his water-proofed torch in its rubber sheaths of issue contraceptives, was unlikely to reveal his purpose.
He made this reconnaissance with Captain Roger Courtney, of the SBS, who had been in the Mediterranean for some months after training around Arran in Scotland.
They were introduced by the commanding officer of Layforce, Brigadier Laycock, other exploits of Roger Courtney are described later in Chapter 8.
The army Captain taught the Commander the knack of hoisting himself aboard a canoe over its stern, and how to vault astride one steadied by a paddler already aboard.
He learnt then and in later practice how to jump into a bobbing canoe, letting his feet give under him without capsizing the frail Folbot.
He became adept at launching himself over the canoe's side; first leaning back with legs outstretched athwart the cockpit, a quick flip of the body brought him face down towards the water before lowering himself onto it.
Although this may sound a simple piece of gymnastics it was no parlour trick at night with a sea running and the canoe's stability always in doubt.
The first action using any new technique is usually one of the most interesting, for the  simple principles can be seen without any complications of secondary purposes or complicated gear, and this is true of the first beach reconnaissance at Rhodes.
The army captain and the naval navigator practised swimming ashore at night, taking turns to act the part of a sentry while the other stalked around the acting guard until this could be done without the swimmer being detected.
A stone hurled at a raised arm splashing casually in the approach, or the noise of stones crunched underfoot, was sufficient reminder of more deadly missiles that would come the way of a careless visitor on an enemy beach.
In these practice runs the characters of the two canoeists contrasted: Nigel Clogstoun-Willmott, tall, good looking, and in his early thirties, meticulous over details with the mathematical approach of a navigator in facing the problems; Roger Courtney, as we have seen in training off Arran, a heavily built man, something of the adventurer with the flair for improvisation in a tight corner.
For all their mutual confidence in each other and their shared patience — although one suspects from the records that the navigator had more of this essential quality than the adventurer — each brought his own special talents to this technique of beach reconnaissance.
Nigel Clogstoun-Willmott has described it as an art ‘needing the patience of an animal’, and undoubtedly there would be times when physical strength and endurance were the key to survival, for survive they must to make any contribution from their efforts.
For men on beach reconnaissance had further to go than the saboteur or the raider bent on mere disruption: the reconnaissance report had to reach the main force.
In March 1941 the drill was very simple but in later years all manner of complexities were necessary.
Nevertheless, landing in heavily greased jerseys and long-john underwear, with a revolver in a supposedly waterproof packet and carrying the waterproofed torch and compass, was difficult enough after several days in the confined quarters of submarine HMS Triumph while she made a periscope survey of Rhodes' beaches, often having to dive below 60 feet (18m), because in these clear waters a submarine at shallower depth is plainly seen from the air.
On reconnaissance nights, the submarine had to use precious hours of moonless darkness while she charged her batteries before trimming down in the water with her saddle-tanks just awash, the slight swell breaking occasionally over the casing.
Ratings now steadied the canoe as it was put over the side, lying on the hydroplanes.
They took a soaking no doubt relieved in an attitude of ‘rather you than me, mate’ as they watched the canoeists jump and sit in one motion the way they had practised boarding.
Already aboard were a tommy-gun, grenades, a thermos of coffee laced with brandy — they would need this — and the infra-red signalling gear.
This ‘RG’ equipment (see Appendix 3) sent a beam of' invisible infra-red light from an Aldis-type lamp, the signal being visible only when the beam was on the little black box camera-sized receiver with a screen which, when the beam was intercepted, showed a green spot against speckle of' green pin-pricks of infra-red light from the stars.
Once cast off from the submarine they began the steady rhythm of paddling that took them along their course with a mile and a half to the beach, their sweat-raising stroke giving 3 knots — equal to a steady walking pace.
A hundred yards from the beach Nigel Clogstoun-Willmott followed the drill and went over the side.
The sharp cold, after his warm exertions, took his breath away for a moment as he hung on the stern of the canoe, but as soon as he had recovered his breath, the Commander struck out for the shore in a strong breaststroke that did not disturb the phosphorescence more than he could help, and barely ruffled the water.
As his feet touched the bottom he was thinking of the tanks the Allies had intended to land on the rocky promontory before him; clearly this was not possible, for now in the starlight he could see its rock face was impassable.
He swam back into the bay and along the coast some hundred yards before swimming in again.
The sand felt firm here under his feet and he dog-paddled while checking the depth before easing on shore to lie with his chin on pebbles at the water's edge, hearing the talk of sentries and just able to make out  two figures behind a wall beyond the beach.
In the surge of each wave he slithered forward until, for a moment, he felt the sentries' eyes turned towards him; he froze clenching his teeth to stop their chattering.
Several minutes rock still and the sentries no doubt mistook him for a part of the shore over which the seas were gently breaking.
The Italians moved off, and the Commander crossed the beach to a road.
Making four landings in this way at different points along the shore, Nigel Clogstoun-Willmott discovered a number of things.
There was a false beach 15 yards (13m) from the shore, the water on the shore side deep enough to drown a tank.
In the grounds of the hotel used as an Axis headquarters, he heard a sentry yawn but found no guns.
Shingle samples were stuffed under the navigator's jersey.
From these scientists could calculate whether a metal road was needed across the beach or if tanks could pass over it without help from engineers, and what size of wheeled vehicles could pass over the pebble bank.
Next time he came on one of these recces he would bring a bag for these trophies, but the chinagraph pencil had worked well in noting on his slate the depths of water and the position of that false beach.
Checking his watch he saw it was time to swim back to the canoe and his rendezvous with Roger Courtney, who had been paddling offshore for the last few hours, keeping the canoe head or stern towards the beach so that it was less likely to be seen.
The stimulus of the Commander's benzedrine tablets was wearing off as he swam out to sea after three hours' creeping and sliding around the beach, and now, his senses dulled by a chilling exhaustion, he felt the first pangs of doubt: would Roger Courtney see the flickering torch among the waves before an enemy patrol boat caught sight of it?
He summoned all his will power, forcing numbed fingers in his upstretched arm to flash again the morse ‘R’.
Out of the darkness came Roger Courtney with firm, fast paddle strokes bringing the canoe alongside the Commander.
The commando had been waiting with disciplined patience some 400 yards (365m) out.
Every time he lifted the cap of his luminous watch the hands seemed to have barely moved, but now he hauled Nigel Clogstoun-Willmott into the canoe and passed him the flask of coffee.
The swig merely prickled the swimmer's gums — beach reconnaissance teams usually spoke of ‘the swimmer’ as the man who went ashore and ‘the paddler’as the man staying with the canoe.
A gulp from the coffee thermos, however, brought the first faint warmth to his bones as they paddled into a thickening mist.
This cleared and the submarine picked up their infra-red signals, taking them back aboard before continuing her patrol.
They made landings on each of the following four nights, the last when Roger Courtney was the swimmer, being a near disaster.
Gripped with cramp at the water's edge he could not move, and the furious barking of a dog drew Nigel Clogstoun-Willmott inshore, his tommy-gun cocked.
The swimmer's great frame was contorted in agony, yet he struggled out to the canoe and with a supreme effort of will got aboard in a tortuous heave.
As they returned from these reconnaissances with a good deal of useful information, authority was pleased.
However, the invasion of Rhodes was cancelled when German troops came into the fighting in Greece.
Nigel Clogstoun-Willmott went back to his planning duties, although he did one more beach reconnaissance ahead of ships' detachments of Royal Marines landing on Kupho island (off Crete) in a modest raid that destroyed a radar station, and might have brought back code books had not their metal safe been lost as a ship's boat tilted in being hauled aboard a destroyer gathering speed.
Roger Courtney went back to the raiding of the SBS which we will follow in later Chapters.
The Combined Operations' planners were in Richmond Terrace near Whitehall, yet conveniently distant from service ministries.
Here in May 1942 — before the raid on Dieppe that August — plans were being made for the landings in North Africa that would put an American Task Force ashore on the Atlantic coast near Casablanca, a second force ashore at Oran in the Mediterranean, and a third further east at Algiers.
Nigel Clogstoun-Willmott was ordered home to  the United Kingdom that summer as beach reconnaissance was part of the Allied plans for these ‘Torch’ landings, but final approval for training the necessary teams was not cleared until 8 September, a mere eight weeks before the date for this invasion.
This illustrated the urgency of many commando and other wartime activities when the time needed to set up a special operation was almost impossibly short, but the official records do not show the efforts behind the scenes in preparing the ground.
The Commander, having decided the personnel he hoped might join him, contacted several, but needed official approval and Lord Mountbatten's support in recruiting Lieutenant Neville McHarg RN, a conscientious navigator and Lieut Norman Teacher RN to the teams.
In October, an increase in the number of landing points for Torch led to Roger Courtney's brother coming to assist with the training of the beach reconnaissance canoeists.
The equipment they had at Rhodes hardly justified the risks in getting ashore to use it, but the Commander had improved the original ideas and over the next two years a comprehensive yet simple range of tools would be devised for this survey work.
The training would also become increasingly complex, with landings from midget submarines late in 1943 and early in 1944, but in October 1942 the best that could be produced were canoes to get the swimmer inshore and a cumbersome rubberised canvas suit of the type used by charioteers riding human  torpedoes .
The canoes were improved in a seamanlike fashion with a canvas canopy buttoned round the paddlers and air bladders around the cockpit and sides (see p. 25 and Appendix 4).
But all their training that October was put to limited use, for after they had flown to Gibraltar, the Admiralty forbade any landings, the Flag Officer Gibraltar considering these would compromise security and warn the French of the invasion.
The teams of paddlers (some of them from the SBS) and the navigators therefore spent two weeks making periscope reconnaissances, drawing the profiles of the hinterland to target beaches.
Copies of these could be used by landing craft flotillas and at least one survey showed an intended landing point for trucks was backed by impassable cliffs — shades of Rhodes.
After these reconnaissances during October, a final reconnaissance was made a few days before the invasion, by the teams going inshore one night so that each navigator could show the paddlers their canoes' positions as navigational marks guiding in the assault waves on D-day.
(For convenience planners referred to D-day, or Z-day early in the war, as the day of a landing and H-hour as the time of landing.
The day after landing was then D+ 1, the minute after landing ‘H+ 1 minute’ and so on.)
Guiding in a main force became the second phase of assault pilotage, for having reconnoitred a beach some weeks or months before a landing, these teams had the most up-to-date knowledge of local conditions.
At the Torch and some other landings they also supplied navigators on the leading assault waves in the Mediterranean; men of the US Engineer Special Brigades which did a somewhat similar job in the Casablanca part of the operation.
During the final canoe-position recces for Torch, a sudden storm caught those of the eastern reconnaissance, and Lieutenant L.G. (Geoff) Lyne RN with Commando Thomas as paddler were in its teeth.
Fight as they did to keep the canoe on course they were driven westward of Castiglione (near Sidi Ferruch) when they should have been east of this port.
They strove to keep the canoe's bows heading into steep seas while they baled with tin mugs whenever there was a moment's let-up in the fury.
They had an hour to get back to the rendezvous with their submarine when the storm strengthened, tossing them high on one wave before they slithered off its back to meet the next great sea, all the time in danger of broaching-to across the waves that could then roll them over.
One great comber filled the canoe before she shook free from the cascading crests; now they could not expect to make much headway and had to fight even harder to avoid broaching-to.
They flashed signals more in hope than expectation of catching the submarine's attention before dawn broke and the wind abated, giving them their first chance to force free fingers locked around the paddle  handles in a muscle-spasm grip.
Two miles offshore they were seen by a French trawler and taken aboard, not before Geoff Lyne had time to slit the airbags, sinking the canoe with its tell-tale gear.
Others were on the edge of the storm and Nigel Clogstoun-Willmott had a wild ride with young Sub-Lieutenant White, who was having his first introduction to canoe reconnaissance.
The canoe of Edwards and Mangnall — 200 miles to the west of the Commander — found the only way to escape the playful attentions of porpoises was to stop paddling.
For another team, more dangerous company appeared when the local fishing fleet came out, and the paddlers bent over, face down in the canoe, keeping her stern-on to the newcomers by deft tweaks of the paddles as they drifted less than 30 yards from two boats.
These fishing fleets would continue to be a hazard for reconnaissance parties, and by the summer of 1943 there were often several German guards with each fleet to prevent the smuggling of people or information between the Allies and occupied territories.
On the night of 7 November the teams were again off the North African coast ready to flash their signal lights and RG infra-red beams along the limit lines on the flanks of target beaches.
In deteriorating weather the force commander aboard the transport USS Samuel Chase was considering whether to carry his craft inshore before launching them, and Lieutenant-Commander Nigel Clogstoun-Willmott's advice was sought.
He insisted the force keep to their plan, and aboard the leading assault craft he led the flotilla from confusion caused when the carriers, drifting on a current, launched the craft some way from the intended dropping zone.
The landing craft's compass was not properly ‘swung’, and using the north star for a back-bearing the Commander brought this LC Vehicle (LCV) on to the correct beach.
Among the five teams working that night was Stan Weatherall with Sub-Lieutenant Peter Harris RNVR, marking the limit of Arzew beach where the American Rangers would land.
His canoe was launched at 1900 hours on Saturday night, 7 November, and paddled the six miles (10km) inshore while their submarine, HMS Ursula, steamed further out to act 11 miles (18km) offshore as a beacon for the approaching troop convoys.
There was a fresh breeze and the canoe shipped water in a choppy sea as it was launched, forcing the paddlers to ditch all their gear except a tommy-gun, a Colt 45, and their signalling equipment.
The baler was washed forward into the bow so they baled with their berets, taking turns to paddle and resisting the temptation to lean forward and clout the porpoises darting at the bow.
They dropped their kedge anchor 200 yards offshore and settled down to await the first wave of assault craft.
In the next three hours they heard and saw nothing ashore before setting up the signal light and infrared beam at 0015 that Sunday morning: an hour or so later the first craft — carrying the Rangers — came past, some 10 minutes late.
As they had no receiver to check the RG gear, they also flashed a Z by red torch signalling the centre of Z beach.
The final wave of the initial assault, LC Mechanised carrying jeeps and tanks, went by at 0415, making a bow wave that flirted the canoe aside, and a quarter of an hour later this canoe team followed the craft ashore.
Anyone who has been alongside a ship when he or she is in a small boat knows the way she towers over you at a dockside.
At sea the ship can appear enormous, and even minor landing craft travelling at a brisk trot were a hazard to canoes, for the minor LC's blunt bow pushed out a small wall of water.
A tank landing ship (LST) bow's wave could be one or two feet high.
Ashore, Stan Weatherall and Peter Harris followed the general practice in a beach-head: lending a hand where they could.
They paddled out carrying some kedges for craft that would then tow themselves off to these anchors, and with nothing more to be done on Z Red beach they paddled round to Z Green.
Here they were ‘captured’ by Rangers who thought the canoeists were enemy torpedo riders — human torpedoes.
The confusion cleared up, the paddlers left the beach at 0625, nearly 12 hours after they had been launched from their submarine.
A tow to the SS Reina Del Pacifico was followed by a wash in the Chief Petty Officers' quarters, interrupted by two hits on the ship from a French battery, and when the canoeists came back on deck they found the canoe had been stripped by  souvenir hunters, who now began asking for autographs.
Other pilotage parties had seen mixed fortunes: Don Amer's help was spurned by one flotilla officer who managed later to put his cargo personnel ashore 1½ miles (over 2km) off their target.
However, the value of assault pilotage was recognised at Combined Operations headquarters.
Many other lessons were learnt from the Torch landings, which would never have succeeded against serious opposition.
The problems became clear in marshalling hundreds of landing craft as big as single-decker buses, but without any brakes, in a confined seaway.
They would need all the help they could get from beach surveys and marker canoes, so 50 Combined Operations Assault Pilotage Parties (COPPs) were proposed.
However, there were never the trained navigators nor Royal Engineer specialists available to recruit this number, and in all some 11 teams were trained.
Their organisation (see Appendix 2) was flexible so that any man could do most of the jobs.
All were trained canoeists and they were, in Commander Clogstoun-Willmott's words, to become ‘Rolls Royce equipped commandos’.
Before they reached this happy state, however, they were to carry through several operations and long hours of dangerous training from their base at the Hayling Island Sailing Club on an isolated spit of land called Sandy Point on Hayling Island (near Portsmouth, Hampshire).
Near there one night their training officer, Geoff Galwey, had one — probably of several — anxious moments while his swimmer, Major Scott-Bowden, was stuck fast in mud before an incoming tide, but the canoe floated the stuck swimmer and his paddler free when the tide rose.
The base was run in the manner expected from Nigel Clogstoun-Willmott, with no concessions to careless habits or moments of inattention which could cost lives on a beach.
In February 1943 two parties went to reconnoitre the Sicily beaches, after some frustration in Algiers.
Their senior officer, Lieutenant-Commander Norman Teacher RN, was only thirty years old and one of COPPs' greatest difficulties in the early days was persuading senior command staffs to listen to the young navigators.
The sometimes lethargic HQ at Algiers needed a prod from Lord Mountbatten before COPPs 3 and 4 were sent on to Malta for the submarine approach to their recce.
Here they met up with a team from the Combined Operations base in the Suez Canal Zone, with two canoe parties under Lieutenant Robert Smith RN.
These seven officers and ten or so ratings had done rudimentary training with gear they bought mostly in the Cairo bazaar, and they were most interested in the COPPist's equipment, which included some new suits designed by Siebe Gorman but not tested fully by the wearers.
The reconnaissance parties divided up their gear, to share out the better UK equipment, before COPP 3 sailed in HMS Unbending for a reconnaissance of the beaches between Sciaco and the river Belice, some 15 miles (24km) of coast on the south-west shores of Sicily.
A complete set of drills had been worked out by this time with, for example, five phases in recovering a swimmer after his recce.
First he swam out shining his torch for the paddler to see.
As there was always the chance that the swimmer's faint light might be missed and he might go beyond the canoe, in the next phase (two) he turned and shone his torch shorewards.
Having collected his swimmer in phase one or two, the paddler now set course for the submarine rendezvous, beaming the infra-red light seawards in phase three and then, in phase four shorewards when the submarine might have passed inshore of the canoe.
Should they not be picked up, the paddlers made for a second rendezvous (phase five) further offshore or headed back to the beach to lie up for the following night, when the submarine would come to a different rendezvous.
Each meeting-point was timed with as much leeway as moon and tide might allow — say an hour on occasions, although many submarine captains took bold risks in staying offshore beyond the agreed times when no recovery had been made, just in case the canoeists were late.
The tall and ever-cheerful Norman Teacher and his paddler Lieutenant Noel W. Cooper RNVR, were launched in a strong onshore wind but got away successfully from the submarine.
Three hours later she was back at the rendezvous but there was no sign of the canoe, only the sound of surf breaking on the beach two miles away.
The skipper was preparing to take her out to a second rendezvous arranged for that night when the lookouts saw the grey canoe with a lone paddler.
Noel Cooper was lifted aboard: he had seen nothing of Norman Teacher since the Lt-Cmdr swam off towards the shore.
The next night, the burley George Burbridge, a captain in the Canadian Army, took a canoe into the beach to look for Norman Teacher but there was no sign of him.
The team worked on several beaches that and the following two nights, recording the exact position of enemy strongpoints in places only 50 to 100 yards apart.
They checked the beach incline and its contours, looking for points where minor craft could beach.
They also checked possible ‘berths’ for major craft and LSTs, where more space was needed for a safe beaching and suitable ground on the beach for the LSTs' vehicles to deploy.
These berths might also be improved for the build-up phase, by bulldozing earth ramparts to speed the offloading of bulk stores carried by many LSTs.
The team checked the incline for some 200 yards out from the beach at one point.
On the fifth night they were dog-tired, having had little relaxing sleep in the cramped quarters of the submarine and spending several hours each day writing up their notes on  the previous night's recce.
Nevertheless George Burbridge and Noel Cooper went in once more: nothing was seen of them again.
No.4 COPP was to survey a beach on the north-west coast, and Neville McHarg with Lieutenant Sinclair paddled shorewards from HMS Safari .
A confusion of fishing fleets, sardine nets, and the glare of flares silhouetting the submarine as Allied bombers attacked a nearby port forced them to withdraw.
The next night, Captain Edward (Ted) Parsons RE and his paddler, Leading Seaman Irvine, prepared to land, Ted Parsons taking a ducking as he tried the first time to board the canoe in a nasty swell.
They righted the boat, however, and got away at the second attempt.
Ted Parsons had got ashore, but when lying rock-still he felt a gun behind his ear and was captured.
Irvine was caught next day as he paddled along the coast.
Bob Smith and David Brand from HMS United got inshore on their first night's recce to find a long and  uncharted sandbank off the south coast port of Gela, where the Rangers would land that summer.
The next night Bob Smith took soundings over the stern of the canoe while David Brand held her steady as she bucked in a rising wind while they fixed the exact position of this bank.
By midnight the weather was a deal worse and they caught the full force of the gale as they cleared the lee of the land, making their way towards the rendezvous.
United was not there — or at least not where Bob Smith expected her — and an SUE charge (see diagram p. 62) tossed over the side failed to attract any attention.
Going back inshore, a tough and.
wet hour's paddling, they rechecked their bearing from the landmark of Casa Bittaleni, forcing their way back out into fierce seas.
On this course David Brand's double paddle snapped.
A second charge over the side brought no more response than the first, and a rising moon showed up the wild seascape.
Three more hours of paddling and bailing, bailing and paddling, brought them to the second expected rendezvous, but in the great troughs and high seas the submarine lookouts could miss the torch signal or RG beam from a 16-foot (5m) canoe.
By daylight it was clear they had missed their rendezvous, and at about 0800 they set course for Malta, taking a back-bearing from Mount Etna.
The overcast sky was merged with spume as the salt spray stifled easy breathing and they were losing their battle with fatigue after 20 hours' paddling.
Consequently there was little they could do early that night when a mammoth sea caught them dangerously broached-to, but the buoyancy of Mae West life jackets wedged in the bow and stern kept the waterlogged canoe afloat till the storm eased around midnight — some 24 hours after it blew up.
David Brand's hip was weakening his strength as an old wound opened up after hours in the water, and now the canoe was little more than a tiny hulk.
Nevertheless, Bob Smith kept edging her towards Malta and at first light they saw the island over the long swells following the storm.
A patrolling MTB picked them up, and Bob Smith later launched the battered canoe to paddle her across the harbour to the submarine base.
HMS United was still at sea.
Her second canoe, with Archie Hart and Eric Folder, had made a rough-and-tumble landing in heavy surf near Gela.
Archie Hart's suit filled and perhaps incautiously he made a dash for the shelter of some dunes, where he hoped to drain it out.
Unfortunately he ran into barbed wire that twanged a warning which brought a sentry along the beach, and Archie Hart was captured.
Eric Folder was caught next day by two German guards in a fishing smack.
The other Middle East commandos fared worse: Lieutenants de Kock and Crossley RNVR vanished after being launched from HMS Unrivalled on their first raid.
Lieutenant Davis was caught ashore next night and his paddler, Able Seaman McGuire, was picked up by an armed fishing boat.
Despite these disasters all the submarines eventually returned to base, although HMS Safari had a lively homeward passage dodging searchlights, E-boats, and aircraft.
Their attention may have been aroused by Ted Parson's cover story, every man going on beach reconnaissance having one carefully rehearsed — as Nigel Clogstoun-Willmott had rehearsed Roger Courtney off Rhodes: for  the tenth time by one report!
Ted Parsons's story involved a submarine's wrecking, but no doubt the Germans — if not the Italians — took this with some hefty pinches of salt.
As for HMS United she had been on station at the rendezvous; but as it is barely possible to see a 10,000 tonner at 400 yards on a rough night there is little chance of seeing the recognition signals from a canoe when these torch or RG beams are a mere four feet (just over a metre) at arm's length above the waves.
A study of the failures at Sicily gave Nigel Clogstoun-Willmott three lines of thought: more training was essential — he had let Nos. 3 and 4 COPPs go out only with reluctance; more attention was needed in fitting the suits, for which these teams had not been adequately measured; and thirdly, the life-jackets they wore could not always be inflated in emergencies.
The bravery of men swimming ashore in these pioneer beach reconnaissances is beyond question, and knowing Norman Teacher as a friend, as well as being his CO, the Commander feels there is a strong probability that the young Lieutenant made the supreme sacrifice in swimming to his death rather than risking his capture, as others, too, may have done.
Having attended conferences with senior planning staff, they all had dangerous knowledge of the precise Allied intentions.
The development of COPPs forms part of the broader story told in later chapters, in which these teams' contribution to other major landings is shown.
(For a summary of the COPP history see Appendix No.7).
But in the late spring of 1943, Don Amer took No.6 COPP to the Med and was followed by Ralph Stanbury with No.5.
Between them, these teams made a successful survey of the Allied landing beaches near Syracuse, and the work of No.3 off Gela was handed to the Americans.
In the summer of 1943, the commander passed on his desk work at COHQ to Surgeon-Commander Murray Levick RN, an authority on endurance who was able to make major improvements in the COPPists' diet with more meat, fresh fruit, and other foods not readily available in the ration allowances for most units.
Nigel Clogstoun-Willmott could now concentrate on the preparations for the Normandy landings, although he was still not fully fit after the months of hard training he did with his men.
The extent of Allied naval support for Special Forces is exampled by the navigational specialists provided for COPPs, in addition to Lieutenant-Commander (Navigation) Nigel Clogstoun-Willmott.
Initially eight regular navy officers and one ex-merchant navy RN Reserve officer commanded COPPs: Lieutenants — Norman Teacher,(No. 3), A. Hughes (also No. 3), N. McHarg (No. 4), R. N. Stanbury (No. 5), Don Amer (RNR of No. 6), Geoff Hall (No. 7), Freddy Ponsonby (No. 8), Geoff Lynne, No. 9, and J. Townson (No. 10)) who commanded this COPP throughout its time in the Adriatic.
Other aspects of naval support are briefly shown in the Beach Pilotage School on the Kyles of Bute (Scotland) that greatly improved landing craft crews navigation.
While the cool courage of submarine crews in bringing canoe teams to beach areas cannot be over-emphasised.
The skippers of the LSIs (described for brevity as LC carrier ships) were equally skilful, Commander T. B. Brunton, RN, bringing HMS Princess Beatrix on one engine from Bayonne to Falmouth, safely returning her commandos.
The ‘PB’ was — in the Commander's words —‘the best seaboat…
I ever had’.
Other naval personnel became frogmen clearing obstacles including elements-C and diving to disarm Goliath beetle tanks off Normandy, later clearing river obstructions often under fire in north-west Europe.
Their senior officers believed in setting an example, Lord Mountbatten diving the one-man Welman submarine in a trial.
‘At 28ft the front window cracked and I had a job getting up again' he writes, the Prime Minister did not approve of such risks by senior officers, but the CCO felt his men expected such leadership.
The interchange of amphibious ideas was common among the Allies, and Lord Mountbatten sketched the LCI(L) for General Marshall who had 300 built.
THE FAR EAST, DECEMBER 1941 TO JULY 1942
Japanese forces, with four years’ battle experience in China, were expected by the Imperial Command to destroy the American fleet in Pearl Harbour (Hawaii) in the early Sunday morning of 7 December 1941.
This strike, which relied on diplomatic and military surprise, was to be followed by the occupation of the Philippines in 50 days, of Malaya in 100, and of the Dutch East Indies (Celebes, Borneo, and Java) by mid-summer.
Although the American fleet was destroyed, its aircraft carriers were at sea and unscathed.
Nevertheless, the Japanese, with relatively few elements of their three-million strong army, achieved more rapid success than they had expected: by 11 January 1942 they had occupied the Celebes; on 4 February the Allies on Amboina surrendered; on 15 February Singapore fell, and on 19–20 February Timor was invaded, the main force of its defenders surrendering a few days later.
All Allied regular forces had been withdrawn from Java and Sumatra, but guerrilla operations continued in Portuguese eastern Timor until early in 1943.
Here the neutral Portuguese were prevented from reinforcing their garrison by Japanese command of the sea and air.
During March, the Japanese landed on the north coast of New Guinea, an island of high mountains and jungle twice the size of the British Isles.
Over confident after their quick victories, the Japanese began an invasion of the Solomons and planned a landing at Port Moresby in south-east New Guinea.
Occupying Guadalcanal among other Solomon Islands, they were checked when the invasion fleet had to be recalled before reaching Port Moresby, for an American naval task force, despite heavy losses, turned back the Japanese fleet on 5 May in the battle of the Coral Sea 300 miles (550km) south of Guadalcanal.
The Japanese were not going to win a short war for control of oil and other natural resources in south-east Asia.
On Timor — for example— one of their 51 active divisions was deployed in 1942, only to be by-passed later in the Allied counterstrokes of 1942–43.
GUERRILLA WARFARE: AUSTRALIAN INDEPENDENT COMPANIES
Although getting to the right beach was the first logical step in amphibious raids — as the ISTD Centre had implied in their 1938 studies — the chronological development of these operations was less orderly.
When Captain J. Michael Calvert RE arrived with Colonel Mawhood and the schoolmaster explorer, Captain F. Spencer Chapman, in Australia in November 1940, this small military mission was to teach methods of training ‘a new variety of soldier’: the commando.
For the Australian army was among the first, if not the first, Allied service taking up the commando idea, even though they already had nearly four divisions overseas.
The plan was to use Independent Companies for raids in the Middle East, and a sixth centre, a remote  national park, a hundred miles south-east of Melbourne, was set up to train them.
This at A Mike Calvert's suggestion, was officially No.7 Centre so enemy agents might be confused in looking for No.6.
Men from these Companies would be the first commando soldiers to fight a prolonged guerrilla war, not in the Middle East but in defence of the approaches to their homeland.
The officers were selected from established units, with colonels putting forward men like Lieutenant Bernard J. Callinan who were chosen for their independence of mind as well as soldiering ability.
The Lieutenant had once leapt fully clothed into a river, demonstrating to a casual enquirer the purpose of a Royal Engineer's lifejacket as he continued building a bridge while swimming fully armed among the pontoons.
Such incidents could influence the future not only of individuals but, in this case, of a whole series of skirmishes and mini-battles on the island of Timor.
Officers and volunteer NCOs were trained at the centre for six weeks before joining the Independent Companies in which volunteer soldiers were trained for a further six weeks by their own officers.
By the winter of 1941–42, four Companies had completed these and other courses, and a further four completed their training in 1942.
Their brief histories are shown in Appendix 7.
The campaign of the 2/2 Independent Company on Timor island would become a classic guerrilla campaign.
Nine out of ten of the 2/2 Independent Company were from the dry country districts of Western Australia, used to living in the bush, butchering their own meat, and improvising motor repairs — skills they found essential in living off the country in Timor and during their first year or so as an Independent Company stationed 250 miles (400km) south of Darwin in the little town of Katherine with its corrugated buildings, its one hotel and two stores.
All these men were volunteers for world-wide service with the Second Australian Imperial Force, which provided the prefix 2 of the 2nd Company's number (the First AIF had served in World War I).
In December 1941, 2/2 Company sailed as part of Sparrow Force, 2,000 men in all mainly from the 2/40 Battalion going to reinforce the Dutch on western Timor, an  island seventeen times the area of England and Wales, about 300 miles (480+km) long and on average 40 miles (64km) wide.
Only 13 to 35 degrees south of the equator, it is mostly arid hills covered with scrub and rises to 10,000 feet (3,040m) in the mountainous central regions.
Around the coast and in river valleys there are stretches of tropical jungle with pythons and other snakes.
Sparrow Force landed at the island's north-west port of Koebang to protect its airfield, but within a few days the Independent Company, with some Dutch troops, was sent east along the coast to occupy Dili in the Portuguese half of the island (see map p. 77) where they landed on 17 December 1941.
The Company was 327 all ranks — for their war establishment, see Appendix 2 — with 60 tommy-guns between the three platoons.
However, the effective force was soon down to 50 men: their issue shorts exposed men to malaria mosquitoes, and as the quinine powder had to be taken rolled in a cigarette paper — an anti-malaria dose many men dodged — illness spread quickly.
By the time the Japanese landed at Koebang on 19 February 1942, the main elements of Sparrow Force were also ravaged by malaria.
They had only three or four NCOs who had seen action before, and 50 replacement troops had never fired a rifle before they reached Sparrow Force.
As the Australians retreated eastwards, attempting to form a defence perimeter, 630 Japanese paratroops were dropped to snipe among them, slowing their retreat and allowing the battle-hardened elements of the Japanese 38 Division — some 5,000 men — to outflank the Australians' withdrawal.
Although all but 78 paratroop snipers were killed, the Australians were forced to surrender within four days, leaving the 2/2 Independent Company and some Dutch troops to carry on the fight 160 miles (257km) to the east at Dili.
The Company's contacts with its parent force had been slight, and transmissions from their 109 wireless set (see Appendix 5) would not carry across the mountains and headlands to Koebang.
However, their independence was no hardship as they exchanged stores for local honey, eggs, and other native produce.
In January, one ship had visited Dili bringing four officers and some 50 reinforcements who apparently thought independence meant lack of discipline.
Under an armed guard on their first night ashore they learnt the truth: as guerrillas, their discipline must be more ruthless than in regular forces for there are no guard-rooms or time for punishment details.
In the Dili area that winter, there were 300 Europeans and 5,000 native villagers working on their sweet potato, pineapple, and peanut plots or in the larger and more ordered government plantations on higher ground where crops of rice, maize, and coffee grew.
Among the Europeans lived an elderly German whose papers were found with instructions to buy a plot of land on the south of the island ‘overlooking the Timor Sea’.
This was required, so the instructions read, for other than commercial reasons: a submarine refuelling point, perhaps.
There had been a number of Japanese businessmen in the town whose interests appear also to have been ‘other than commercial’.
In this way, Axis governments anticipated a Pacific war that had been studied by only a few individuals in the Allies' interest.
The Dutch were discussing plans to evacuate their nationals when Bernard Callinan had a dinner one night at their headquarters.
In the party was the British consul: the Australian David Ross.
They had gone to bed after enjoying those mountains of rice and bowls of curried concoctions, no doubt, that were a feature of expatriates' meals in the east, when shouts and running feet stirred Bernard Callinan from his sleep.
The thump of a shell hitting the far end of the barrack building brought him wide awake.
It was 2310 hours on 19 February 1942.
In minutes he was dressed and looking for his signallers at the Dutch HQ, for as second in command of the Company he must warn headquarters and the platoons in their hill positions above the town, as well as contacting Sparrow Force, whom he did not know were under attack the same night.
Dodging the shell bursts' debris as branches fell from the large wahrazin trees above shallow trenches by the headquarters, Bernard Callinan could not make out what craft was shelling  them, but through the mist he could hear the rumble of small boats' engines.
Enemy searchlights probed in from the sea, going out before a renewed burst of shelling and heavy machine-gun fire added to civilian casualties in the town.
The Company's precautions in placing their platoons above the town now paid off.
Lieutenant Gerry Mackenzie reported by telephone — the civilian network remained open long after the Japanese invasion — that he could see lights in the estuary of the Comoro river and a patrol went out for a quick recce.
They confirmed there was a landing before the platoon moved down from the hill and astride the road west of Dili, where a Bren gun team caught a marching column of Japanese.
These troops, clearly oblivious to danger, were at first thought to be a Dutch contingent, and had come so close that the Bren gunner could fire only two magazines before grenades knocked out his weapon.
In the next four hours Gerry Mackenzie's men stood off Japanese attacks, sometimes using the bayonet to keep the enemy from the airfield, but the platoon had to withdraw before daylight, destroying the airstrip installations as they left.
Although wireless networks could not be linked in the mountains and that night fog obscured lamp signals, the platoons regrouped at pre-arranged rendezvous.
This arrangement is typical of the forethought that would go into all the Company's future operations, and was a major factor in their survival.
They had also spent the previous six weeks familiarising themselves with the country, getting to know especially the lie of the rivers, which would become torrents after the heavy rain that fell in the afternoon and at night during many months of the year, while the same river beds higher up the hills could be dry at times.
Bernard Callinan came out of Dili with the Dutch headquarters between two files of their native troops and reached the Company positions at Three Spurs above the port (see map p. 77).
Cutting across country in the morning light he saw the Japanese transports moored peacefully in Dili harbour.
Requisitioning the Portuguese governor's 1925 Chevrolet, he drove to the Company headquarters at Cailaco where it was safe from immediate attack in the event of this landing that the CO — Major A. Spence — had anticipated.
Unaware of events at  Koepang , the Major now decided to withdraw the Company to the south coast and maintain its role protecting Sparrow Force's eastern flank.
All the stores that could not be moved by native porters or the gallant Timor ponies were destroyed on 22 February and the Company moved south into the mountains, from where they were able to watch an area of 300 square miles (over 770km 2), patrolling for negative reports as often as they made enemy sightings.
By knowing where the enemy was not established, the platoons could be better deployed watching where the Japanese had bases.
An attempt to contact Sparrow Force was made by Bernard Callinan, with a Dutch native soldier, whose experience as a schoolmaster and whose knowledge of Portuguese, English and Malay were invaluable in translating the  polyglot languages of the different people they met on the westward journey.
After a couple of days on horseback they reached Memo on the Dutch/Portuguese border.
Here rumours were rife.
The Japanese were within eight miles (13km) of the border at this point on 3 March.
Crossing into Dutch Timor next day, they moved over the dry coral rocks and through occasional dells of trees around clear springs before reaching a Roman Catholic mission church where the priests told them of Sparrow Force's defeat.
They also collected some weapons recovered from parishioners and — more important in this mounted guerrilla warfare — they collected several saddles.
The first Japanese pincer movement against the Company was made later that week.
Captain R.R. (Bill) Baldwin's platoon had a patrol out under Corporal Palmer when the Japanese launched their first attack (see map p. 77) and the platoons withdrew through enemy patrolled country, laying ambushes in the scrub.
The first Japanese they killed was a ‘richly dressed gent on horseback’ who was followed to his Valhalla by two other officers shot by Bill  Baldwin, an ex-shooter of kangaroos.
The right prong of this drive was met by Captain G.G. Laidlaw's platoon withdrawing in good order on Liquissia, but the left pincer made quicker progress towards Railaco and three of Lieutenant T.G. Nisbet's Section were killed above Bazartete the enemy moving skilfully around ambushes.
These troops of the Japanese 38 Division, being specially trained for amphibious assault, were not to waste their talents in chasing guerrilla bands, and their sudden departure surprised — not to say, relieved — the Australians, who considered these were the best troops they had fought.
In time, Bernard Callinan has recorded, the Australians also ‘came to admire the soldierly qualities of other (Japanese) units’.
After the main Sparrow Force surrendered, the role of the Company was truly independent.
Concentrated in the area of Hatu-Lia and Cailaco, the patrols could see from these hill positions across the wide Nanura Plains, covered in 6 feet to 8 feet (2–3m) high buffalo grass, to the Dutch border.
Food was short; they had no sugar, and the large denominations of Dutch guilder coin in the Company's cash box were too valuable to exchange for a basket of minute potatoes or two bottles of milk.
Nevertheless, three meals, often consisting of scraps or little more, were served each day.
The guerrillas were helped, however, by an educated native who discovered that Bernard Callinan was a Roman Catholic and was persuaded that others in the Company were of the same faith.
Throughout Portuguese Timor the church was still preaching the faith, and although priests were questioned there was little brutality in the early days of this occupation.
Yet guerrillas fighting in ambush one moment could within the hour be kneeling in church, and the story of these operations, as with all guerrilla campaigns, evolved around the Independent Company's relationships with the indigenous population.
During that spring and summer the Australians enjoyed a good deal of help from the locals.
Each man, NCO, and officer had his personal bearer, a criado who carried his pack, blankets, and other gear except his weapons.
This enabled the patrols, usually led by a corporal, to move across considerable areas.
But during late March when they were hemmed in, there were many rumours unsettling the less resolute, even though their officers kept them occupied, leaving little time for worry.
Maintaining an offensive spirit was a different matter, and the return of Corporal Palmer and his patrol was the boost in confidence the men needed.
The Corporal had led his men westwards clear of the advancing Japanese, then south and back east from across the Dutch Timor border in a week's march back to Cailaco; proving that the Japanese could be outwitted.
However, some natives at this time became unreliable guides and could give away a patrol's position.
The move south was now imperative in an attempt to contact Allied ships, and platoon areas for future operations were picked by the dubious but only available criteria: those towns in bold type on Bernard Callinan's map were chosen as platoon centres.
Attempts to contact Australia 400 miles (over 640km) to the south were unsuccessful, but the 1 09-set picked up a Dutch broadcast which was translated for the Company by a passing Dutch soldier: it announced the surrender of all their forces in the East Indies.
The native troops were shattered by this, but many Dutchmen and some natives fought on, others joined the increasing numbers of hostile bands roaming the country.
Or — like a few men of Sparrow Force whom Corporal Palmer had found near the coast living off the Company's abandoned-in-transit Christmas parcels — they wandered aimlessly until captured, or killed by native factions.
Some Portuguese gave the Company invaluable help, and Senhor de Sousa Santos, the Portuguese administrator of the southern province, would save the whole Company through his work in civil administration and respect among the local population.
But early that spring, these adventures seemed unlikely if not impossible: the men had little quinine, their boots and clothes were worn thin, and when attack was unlikely they went around barefoot.
Men with malaria now had to go on patrol.
Yet in spite of these difficulties the Company turned down any chance of surrender ‘and would be treated as brigands’ according to the message Donald Ross brought to Hatu-Lia on 13 March — three weeks after the Japanese landed.
The same week a Portuguese manager was taken into custody from a Japanese plantation where Bill Baldwin found a powerful multi-band radio receiver.
The manager had been held by the Portuguese, but when Bill Baldwin took charge of him the local population, including the Chinese, knew that the Australians intended to continue the war preferring to he the hunters rather than the hunted.
With the platoons now established inland from the coast, some way to watch Dili and possibly raid the airstrip was planned.
A Section was camped in a knoll at the end of a spur near Nasuta and they built an observation point which was approached by a crawl through thickets before climbing a tree to a branch chair — the comfort of its armrests had more to do with the watcher keeping absolutely still than with his ease.
This post was used for several weeks before the men were recalled, despite their plans for a raid ‘fixing charges to the noses of planes’.
The Japanese almost certainly knew the Australians were in the area, for a young Chinaman had served food to officers passing through Railaco, and he was later to be ‘shot at sight’ after his Japanese contacts were discovered.
The Dili watchers came back to the Company headquarters to find the 2/2 was now linked to Brigadier Veale's 200 survivors of Sparrow Force with a base at Mape, in the hills (see map p. 77).
They had also established contact with 40 men under Major Chisholm who were organising a base for patrols from Memo, but contact had not yet been made with Australia, the powerful radio stations on the mainland's north coast drowning out signals from Timor.
However, Signalman Lovelace of Sparrow Force was to build a remarkably powerful transmitter, even though he had neither electrical testing nor other meters.
This ‘Winnie the War Winner’ was made from two 109-sets, parts from the plantation manager's receiver collected by Bill Baldwin, and bits and bobs laid out in a contraption of wires and valves around a room 10 feet square (3m&sup2;).
Batteries were charged by native power turning a four-foot wooden wheel geared to a car's generator, a minor miracle of improvisation designed by Sousa Santos.
Through this  contact with Australia the nature of the guerrilla operations changed to a role foreseen by Collin Gubbins and Major Holland in 1938: acting in concert with the plans for an army's main campaign.
The 2/2 Independent Company could now fulfil this role because they had remained a cohesive force, not just as a result of their training and leadership but in no small measure because these were men used to living in dry country and capable of fending for themselves in the basic departments of survival.
Most of them would go for four or five months before any change of clothing reached them, not perhaps such a hardship as, without a change of clothes, Bernard Callinan found his irritating prickly-heat rash disappeared.
But more enervating diseases took their toll, and a man with the malaria shakes every afternoon is not at his best when aiming a rifle.
Now, however, some relief was at hand: contact with Australia would lead to new supplies, mail from home the greatest morale booster, and air support.
The RAAF using delayed action and other bombs on occasions delayed and confused Japanese column coming into the hills.
The Australian patrols laid ambushes in the way Mike Calvert had taught them: pinprick harassment frustrated the Japanese until every misfortune was blamed on the guerrillas.
Such  harassment did not always need a fighting patrol's strength: Lieutenant J.A.
Rose with three men ambushed a couple of trucks one evening, killing 12 men before melting back into the shadows of the scrub.
Hit and run were the tactics, the Australians preferring to kill five or six Japanese than risk casualties to themselves by tarrying longer to kill more enemy in one skirmish.
The Japanese reaction to these ambushes often showed their high standard in the martial arts.
Four Australians, for example, above a road to Three Spurs and halfway Up a steep hillside, once knocked out most of the men in the first of two trucks passing below the patrol.
But before the firing from the bren, the tommy-gun, and two rifles could be switched to the second troop transport, its men were in action.
Without any fuss they were setting up a machine-gun while a party came straight up the hill towards the ambush positions.
The Australian bren gunner might have been caught as he moved smartly back up the steep hill had not ‘two natives appeared from nowhere’ and carried his gun at a quick trot over the hill.
These actions and the cycle of patrols, with the same Sections covering many miles of territory in repeated visits, led the Japanese to believe that there were several hundred Australians in the hills immediately above the Glano valley.
Yet there were never more than 23.
These had to be redeployed under Japanese pressure in late April because Mape HQ set a 60-mile (95 + km) base line — from Memo, through Cailaco, Atsabe and Maubisse to Remexio overlooking Dili — from which patrols could go' forward into occupied territory.
This jumping-off line gave some order to the patrolling, and behind it the many administrative essentials could be organised.
Stores were distributed in pony treks that carried not only ammunition and food but also mail and the force's own newspaper.
There was a paymaster providing ready money to pay natives, and a signals officer controlling the flow of reports back to Australia and the incoming news of airdrops or bombing raids: essential organisation, for even the most independent force needed supplies, and these had to travel over hundreds of miles of mountain tracks before reaching some platoon areas.
When the Japanese base was established at Ermera during the early summer, its 20-mile supply route led through country familiar to the Australians, the road running south from Dili, and despite the Japanese posts guarding the convoys, Australian ambushes made it a hazardous supply run.
As soon as a post's routine was established it would be attacked: Sergeant James and two sappers lay for two days watching a post before deciding that breakfast-time was the right moment for such an attack.
Next day a sharp breakfast-burst of fire killed 12 Japanese before the patrol dispersed in the scrub.
When the Japanese counter-attacked on other occasions they made a great hullabaloo, often shouting to each other as they came forward.
Although the Australians thought this was purely a morale-boosting ploy, in thick cover over difficult terrain or at night, the commandos would use a similar tactic with good reason — as no doubt the Japanese did — in distinguishing friend from foe.
When they wished, the Japanese could make silent attacks.
The Independent Company's constant patrolling —‘pigi, pigi’ as the natives called it, for whenever asked, an Australian was always going (pigi) somewhere — was extended eastward and the first contacts made with the Portuguese on the east coast during May.
Not all patrols escaped the attention of Japanese counter-measure, however, but the Australians' skilful use of field craft — the infantry phrase for individuals' movement in action — saved many losses.
Using the numerous hollows and small rises unnoticed to untrained soldiers on a bare hillside, Turton and his men once lay hidden in this deadground while the Japanese moving to encircle them passed by, leaving the Australian patrol to come off the hill at nightfall.
On other occasions a guerrilla could snake along such cover on his stomach, his legs pressed flat, knees to the ground as he wriggled closer to enemy positions, or — like one Corporal — he squirmed away from possible capture.
The corporal lay that afternoon among hot stones on an exposed and open slope, his skin scorched by the stones; nevertheless, he stayed flat to the ground and escaped being captured or shot.
Despite their expertise in such field craft, though, there was a limit to the area the Australians could control, and they had to send more men south to protect their supply line from the coast.
To distract the Japanese attention from the weakening hold of the Independent Company on the western side of the island, Laidlaw's platoon mounted a raid on Dili, reaching the hills near the town undetected.
On the night of 15–16 May, the leading Section of this fighting patrol, their faces blackened from native cooking-pot soot, crept up to the wire around the port.
They found no sentries before moving into the town along the storm drains, a convenient cover from rifle fire and running either side of the main road.
Passing lamp-lit windows through which they could see sleeping Japanese soldiers and men talking in small groups, they had gone as far as a machine-gun post among the buildings — probably part of the anti-aircraft defences-when a Japanese soldier came up.
He was within three yards of Laidlaw when the Lieutenant shot him.
Pandemonium!
Every Australian weapon was firing and their grenades, lobbed through open doors and windows, were bursting among the men struggling to find their weapons.
Down on the beach a covering party under Lieutenant Nisbet added to the Japanese confusion, for they rushed reinforcements to the shore, no doubt expecting this raid was made from the sea.
Certain they had bottled up the Australian patrol, the Japanese searched the town house by house next day, but Laidlaw and his men were long gone.
A column of 400 Japanese followed them a few days later and reached Remexio, but there were no Australians in the town.
Laidlaw's raid, however, had other repercussions, for the Japanese built more extensive defences around Dili and manned them day and night; a use of men and resources that in eight or so weeks would be desperately needed on Guadalcanal, or later that year in defences against other Allied landings.
The Australians by now renamed Lancer Force, had a hospital and training base at Ainaro in addition to the HQ at Mape.
Through this facility, since ‘base’ might suggest the steady jobs associated with most camps behind a front line, men of 19 units were given some training in Independent Company's skills.
Postal clerks and refrigeration engineers became passable guerrillas, giving them the added confidence they needed when men from this camp faced Japanese attack.
Others joined the constant patrolling, giving rise through deliberate and other rumours to the Japanese belief in a steady flow of reinforcements from overseas.
The successful training of these men suggests that no extraordinary qualities were needed for commando work in the field, only the right spirit and sound training.
On Timor by late May, however, there was the  comforting knowledge that the most seriously wounded could be evacuated by sea-plane through Suai and that others could be cared for in the Ainaro hospital — a different picture from the days of doubt and dismay some eight weeks earlier.
Brigadier Veale was flown out on 23 May and Major A. Spence took command of Lancer Force, Bernard Callinan being promoted major in command of 2/2.
With the 23 May air-flight went muster rolls giving relatives at home their first news of survivors in the Force.
Operations continued, with the many paradoxes of guerrilla warfare: both sides used the civilian telephone network; several Australians attended Sousa Santos's wedding anniversary celebrations.
On the telephone, they used rhyming slang in case they were overheard; at the celebrations, the fine crystal glass and good company belied the hazards of patrolling a few dozen miles away.
Going around the Sections posts could take a fortnight, for many of them were beyond the ‘60-mile line’.
By June, new wireless sets had arrived, although the first consignment in one of the few supply errors, had no acid for their heavy ‘wet’(distilled water) batteries.
These radios and other stores were brought in by the small steamer Kuru , which was fitted with a device in her stack to prevent the tell-tale streamer of fumes; these she released in occasional puffs.
She anchored off the south coast beach at Beco for a couple of hours while the stores — quinine, mepacrine (atabrin), boots, ammunition, and rations, were rafted ashore.
But what the Allies could do, the Japanese could also achieve at that time; only in later months would American sea and airpower prevent the Japanese reinforcing their island garrisons.
They had already sent in a force of specially trained jungle fighters to hunt the guerrillas.
A hundred of these were ambushed by Corporal Aitken, unfortunately ahead of the platoon or his bag might have been greater.
Nevertheless he shot the ‘Singapore Tiger’, an arrogant character who had been seen several times before and was strutting ahead of his large patrol when the Corporal's bullet killed him.
By now, though, the Japanese were getting wary of ambush, and following their usual high standard of training they had sentries hidden in the bushes rather than marching to and fro as ready bait for a commando knife.
In the middle of the summer the Japanese had plans to develop the island with aircraft bases after the American counter-stroke of 7 August landed on Guadalcanal, more than 2,000 miles (3,000+km) to the east of Timor.
There is reason to think they were also feeling the loss of their carriers that June at the battle of Midway, and were looking for more land bases for aircraft.
But in Timor, much depended on the containment, if not defeat, of the guerrillas.
On 10 August the Japanese bombed most Portuguese towns on the island to discourage support for the Australians.
The HQ at Mape was bombed, although this did not seriously disrupt the defence plan as four columns of Japanese, some 2,500 troops in all, drove inland (see map p. 77).
The two columns from Dili, with 600 to 700 in each, would be met by Laidlaw and Bill Baldwin's platoon.
At Ainaro, as many men as could be collected were put under Gerry Mackenzie's command — there was nothing ‘base’ about these wallahs.
Their task was to watch and delay any drive from the south, where the Japanese had landed at Beco, the ‘port’ of entry in previous weeks for Australian supplies.
Away to the west towards Memo, Lieutenant D. St. A. Dexter, supported by Turton, blocked the enemy's eastward push that had overrun Dutch positions, but with the difficult hill country between them and Mape, they were unlikely to link up with the other columns.
In this fighting, the Australian plan was to be bold while steadily withdrawing eastward, even though once boxed into a small corner of the island they would lose their precious mobility.
The tactics for keeping off the ropes, so to speak, had been explained to every platoon commander the previous June, and they knew ‘every mile towards the east was a serious loss’.
The most serious setback in their fortunes, however, was a marked change in the attitude of the natives, who rose against the Australians in two widely separated areas.
Natives also stalked Australian patrols and then stood up, giving the Japanese  mortars the range and location of ambushes.
While the Australians had been winning their mini-battles, including the fight above the Glano valley, the natives considered them supermen.
But with the tide of war now running against the Allies, many of the natives decided to join the winning side, just as they had in Dutch Timor the previous winter.
In a land where survival was so nakedly a prime instinct, food supplies were the key that opened local hearts if not minds.
The Japanese, holding the Glano valley, had this authority, for most of the hill tribes' food was normally traded from its fertile plots.
It was a handicap becoming increasingly clear to the Australians, and Bernard Callinan was later to put a surplus of food as the prerequisite for guerrillas' friendly relations with a local population.
(Without it or without secure supply lines, guerrillas might last a fortnight or so before their own food resources ran out, for there are strict limits to the weight of rations they can expect to carry with them.)
Retreating over the Ramelau Range, the Australians were attacked on 14 August by natives.
High on this ridge top, only 10 to 15 feet (2–3m) wide, the weary soldiers felt an earth tremor as the mountain shook.
They drove off the hostile bands and shortened their lines of communication, now running back to Ainaro, to where the headquarters had moved.
Five days later the platoons were preparing to strike at the nearest Japanese column when this swung clear of the counter-punch.
The enemy's withdrawal was probably due to lack of supplies, for they also had to bring food into the mountains.
The Australians were recovering again from the brink of disaster, although a ruthless reprisal raid by Portuguese against the natives who had helped the Japanese was storing up trouble for the future.
Reinforcements for the Australians arrived when 2/4 Independent Company landed, but their destroyer transport — HMAS Voyager — ran irretrievably aground and was strafed by Japanese planes, although without injury to the Australians.
The stores brought ashore were then loaded on pack teams of 30 to 40 horses with native handlers and a couple of Australians as guards.
Moving across country, they were attacked by Japanese planes and sometimes by infantry patrols, but although several horses and their loads were lost in these skirmishes, the native grooms and their Australian escorts usually escaped into the scrub.
Communication is a two-edged weapon, however, and Lancer Force began to receive some ill-conceived directions for section attacks and platoon operations that were dreamt up by mainland staff with no comprehension that a force without artillery, and facing an enemy superiority of ten-to-one, is likely to be obliterated in conventional infantry attacks.
Realising that the Australians were not so foolish as to engage in pitched battles, whatever their masters decreed, the Japanese sent a picked force of guerrilla fighters to take up the chase where the major columns left off.
One of their companies reached Ainaro, questioned the local priests and some natives, but did them no harm.
This unit had been caught in several skirmishes, losing their CO and second-in-command along with a third of their strength, yet they were seen doing physical training after a short rest in the town — a measure of their quality.
A major force of 5,000 Japanese were moved into Aileu and a second visit to Ainaro by men of another Japanese unit (which, is not clear) was full of brutality: the priests were killed; some houses were burnt down.
Although the officers of these contrasting units might be held responsible for both the good and the bad behaviour, there is a touch of the ‘kind’ and the ‘nasty’treatment often meted out to prisoners in the hope of gaining information.
On the second visit, a few days after the first, the Japanese used natives in their ravages of the town, much to the disgust of local tribes.
On 1 October there were further signs of Japanese influence over native affairs when eight Portuguese men and women were killed by tribesmen in Aileu.
From there, the enemy could patrol against the Australians while developments took place along the east coast with an airstrip at Fuiloro, where in 1934 (!) some so-called agricultural specialists had taken soil samples for a Japanese company.
The guerrilla role changed once again, for  there was little they could do against well defended airstrips when the natives gave away patrols before they were within striking distance of Japanese posts.
Moreover, the Japanese themselves were more wary, allowing no one— native, Portuguese, or disguised guerrilla — to approach their positions.
The Independent Companies were therefore forced into a more passive role which nevertheless made a contribution to the main forces' campaigns.
Information not seen in aerial photographs of jungle fringes was fed back to Australia and enabled the United States and RAAF planes from the Northern Territory of Australia to bomb with a greater chance of finding targets.
And knowledge of the naval routines of Japanese occupied ports enabled US submarines from Fremantle to attack shipping again with greater chance of success.
In watching the Japanese build-up, a typical platoon deployment was made by a platoon of 2/4, with their forward posts having a wide view of Lete-Foho.
The platoon headquarters were in a deserted village surrounded by a native rock and rubble wall 8 to 10 feet (3m) high with only two narrow entrances that led into the village with its three large circular huts, each 30 feet (10m) in diameter with conical roofs about 20 feet (7m) high.
Between the huts were stone platforms holding Lulic poles carrying sacrificial buffaloes' horns.
A native singing ceremony had been performed to clear bad spirits away before the Australians took up the positions.
As this village was inaccessible, the enemy patrols were unlikely to reach it undetected, but if they did the platoon headquarters was sufficiently mobile for the captain, sergeant, and their two runners/signalmen to withdraw quickly over the hill, taking their radio with them — a different proposition to moving a 109-set, for now the guerrillas had dry battery radios (see Appendix No. 5) designed by Lieutenant Barcham, a New Zealander, for use by the Independent Companies.
However, the platoon cook no doubt would have left his clobber behind, while the batman who acted as bodyguard (striker) and the two snipers would have protected the withdrawal of the vital radio.
The three 16-man Sections (see Appendix 2) were deployed further down the hill each sending out patrols of four or so men to scout the surrounding countryside.
Information they gathered was sent back to platoon headquarters by runner and radioed from the village to Company headquarters.
Not all positions were as healthy as others, for 4,700 feet (1,400m) up Tata-Mailau mountain a Section post was established that needed a fresh 16 men every week, the cold — Tata-Mailau is 9,000 feet (nearly 3,000 metres) high — bringing on the malaria latent in almost every man of the Companies.
At most observation posts, though, the Sections could work for several weeks without relief.
The platoons were losing much of their mobility in these static patrols, and the Japanese developments along the eastern seaboard reduced the opportunities to bring in supplies.
Although the old post above Dili was still used from time to time, this port was no longer important as transports off-loaded Japanese air force and other supplies at Bancau stretching the areas to be watched by several hundred square miles.
Supply lines were therefore extended across the hills and imperilled at sea, despite the Independent Companies' landward reconnaissance of likely landing points for the RAN supply ships.
Some vital supplies were lost when natives attacked pack-horse trains.
They were helped by one-time Allies of the Australians: long-term Portuguese prisoners who had escaped from custody during the summer and now wandered the island in groups of six or more.
Such disruption led, by December, to the men of the Independent Companies spending as much if not more time securing their lines of supply, administering the areas of their platoon bases, and fighting hostile natives than were spent watching the Japanese.
Some six men were, however, employed in training loyal natives whose chiefs wanted fighting men who could fire rifles, but these forces were of doubtful value.
There was no doubt that maintaining several hundred Australians on Timor was now counter-productive; and in December the 2/2 Independent Company were taken off the island, after nearly 11 months of constant movement, if not always  in action.
The Company made a 60-mile withdrawal to the beach at Betano and were picked up with Portuguese and Dutch civilians evacuated at the same time, the relief ships being bombed during their approach for this night landing.
Although 2/4 remained on the island for several more weeks, they were constantly embroiled in unsatisfactory skirmishes with natives supported by Japanese machine-gun teams.
Food was short, and resupplying the Company put the ships at even greater risk than in the previous month: as a result the platoons were taken out on 9–10 January 1943, leaving only a small party under Lieutenant Henry Flood to gather information.
This ‘S’ Party was scattered by a Japanese attack but regrouped before February, when they were taken off by an American submarine.
There remained only ‘Z’ Special Force, an undercover operation on the island run by Captains Broadhurst and Wylie, former members of the Malay police force, who organised native lookouts and a radio reporting system which at one time had 25 radio stations on the island, demonstrating how a few guerrillas may succeed in adverse local conditions where a larger force cannot survive.
The Independent Companies had never taken a prisoner, although this was not from want of trying.
They did kill an estimated 1,500 Japanese for the loss of only 40 of their own men; a sharp contrast to the 166,500 Allied losses (mostly prisoners) in Malaya, Hong Kong, and in the Dutch East Indies, where the Japanese lost only 15,000 men in the campaigns of the 1940–41 winter.
The few hundred Australians on Timor had also contributed to the Japanese conviction that the island was to be re-occupied by the Allies, and the enemy reinforced his garrison with men of the 48 Division in the autumn of 1942 when these forces might have been employed to better effect against the Allies on New Guinea and elsewhere.
Few commando guerrillas, therefore, can claim to have had as great an influence over their main forces' campaign as these Independent Companies, for in the Allied advances of 1943 many garrisons could be by-passed and the Japanese on Timor did not quit the island until a month after the armistice in 1945.
The success of these Australian guerrilla companies, with their high standard of individual field craft, their sound leadership deploying platoons with forethought for their mobility, and above all the men's ability to live off the country while fighting a war of high mobility, had made their campaign in Timor one of the most important of small force operations in World War II.
DIEPPE, AUGUST 1942
Dieppe, with its narrow streets and harbour set between chalk cliffs 150 feet (50m) high, was the intended target of a commando and RM Division raid, as soon as sufficient craft were available for the simultaneous landing of a division.
This raid in force against a defended port was essential to test the Allies' amphibious techniques.
COHQ's plan avoiding a frontal assault was changed when direction of the raid passed to the Army's UK Home Forces Command, after a political decision was made to replace the marines with Canadian forces.
Later the planned intensive bombardment was foregone — against the advice of Lord Mountbatten and others.
Bad weather led to the cancellation of the raid planned for 7 July.
Despite security risks — even though no written minutes were kept — the raid was remounted in August, with commandos replacing paras for the flank forces when two LSIs became available and as weather conditions for air-drops differ from those for seaborne landings.
The experience at Dieppe, in the words of their official history, ‘undoubtedly led Canadian soldiers to view the question of their employment more soberly’.
Others, who unlike the Combined Operations staff, had expected a second front in Europe that summer, saw what forces would be needed to invade Europe.
Many major lessons were learnt and Lord Mountbatten has written ‘the successful landing in Normandy was won on the beaches of Dieppe’.