

Background
Borrowing or buying on credit tends to he seen in quite a different light from other consumer transactions.
Many consumers are against it: about three out of ten say it's never a good thing, and most others see it as an occasional necessity rather than as having positive advantages (see Appendix I, Main survey).
Lenders face a different type of control from those which rule producers and retailers generally: rules such as licensing (which implies a more-than-usual need to separate sheep from goats); specially detailed legislative attention to advertising and contracts; at least a legal presumption that above a certain level ‘prices’ of borrowed money are unlawful.
This somewhat cautious approach to credit is rooted very deeply in our past.
Debt has been proverbially frowned on: ‘He that borrows must pay again with shame or loss’; ‘He that goes a-borrowing goes a-sorrowing’; ‘Out of debt, out of danger’; ‘Better go to bed supperless than rise in debt’; ‘Let him that sleeps too sound borrow the debtor's pillow’; and, but only grudgingly, ‘Debt is better than death’.
This last proverb sums up a traditional view of debt as a last-resort means of affording necessities, when the alternative would be immediate hardship, perhaps disaster.
At the same time, there has been ready consumer acceptance of two types of credit which have tended to be seen as quite different.
People have expected to pay later for much of what they have bought, seeing this as ‘bills’ rather than as debts.
In the past, people might settle up annually with fishmongers, blacksmiths, dressmakers, and so forth.
Today it is the quarterly bills for gas, electricity and telephone.
And borrowing for house purchase has always been accepted as very respectable.
A rationalisation of this approach might be that late payment of bills involved no interest charges, and that house purchase secured an asset which with luck would keep its value.
The regulatory approach to credit has generally reflected the more guarded view.
In particular the conviction that any charge for interest is morally wrong was modified only very gradually, and only in part; though low rates of interest came to be accepted as a necessity, high rates were still thought wrong.
Originally, loans that carried interest were illegal virtually  throughout Western society.
When interest was first allowed, it was limited by law — in England, from 1545 to 1854, first at ten per cent, later at five per cent .
(Interest rate ceilings have persisted until now in some other countries, including Canada, the United States, Belgium and France.)
From the eighteenth century, borrowers also gained growing legal protection over ways in which lenders could enforce payment (especially with the starting of county courts in 1846 and the Debtors Act 1869); and over the conditions and paperwork for loans (especially with the Pawnbrokers Acts of 1800 and 1872, and the 1882 Bills of Sale Act, and perhaps above all the Money-Lenders Act 1900).
By the early years of this century,pawnbrokers — the first lenders to have been controlled in detail — were licensed, and the way in which they did their business was regulated.
Moneylenders were registered; subject to some conditions over the way they did business; they were able to advertise in only a very restricted way (for example, they were not allowed to mention interest rates or repayment schedules); and courts could re-open their loans, setting new terms, if they charged excessive interest and the original terms were ‘harsh and unconscionable’.
The conditions under which loans were made on security of goods remaining the property of the borrowers were strictly regulated by the Bills of Sale Acts.
Lenders were exempt from this legislation if their basic business was banking, insurance, or primarily unconnected with lending; friendly societies and building societies were subject to other laws; various other lenders falling outside a commonsense view of what constituted a moneylender were given exemption by the Board of Trade.
Lenders in general could recover unpaid debts through enforcement of a county court judgment allowing seizure and sale of goods; debtors who defied a court order to pay could be imprisoned.
So, early this century, the regulatory position might be briefly summarised as protecting the minority of people driven into debt to make ends meet; on the assumption that they faced not only hardship in itself but also particular risk of exploitation by unscrupulous lenders.
Credit taken by the general run of consumers — those not in an extremity of financial need — was not specially regulated.
Banks, besides their main concern with commercial and industrial lending, made some overdraft loans at relatively low rates of interest to (relatively affluent and thus secure) private customers.
And of course the building society mortgage was already the key to urban working-class home ownership.
Hire purchase had only relatively recently begun to blur what had been a fairly clear distinction between the highest interest which  characterised the debts of the needy and the non-existent or low interest attached to other credit.
It is possible to see in the parallel gulf between detailed legal control over lending to the needy, and very little control over other credit, the survival of the very long-standing and deep-rooted mistrust of usury (alongside social concern about the way that high rates of interest could turn poverty into destitution).
This link between an ethical (as well as social) concern about interest and particularly strict regulation of consumer credit transactions involving interest is still something to bear in mind today.
As hire purchase was judged to be a system of hiring with an option to buy (by eventually paying off the full credit price), HP escaped the controls of the Moneylenders Acts.
After a great expansion of HP in the 1920s, particularly for cars and for electrical goods, and then various repossession problems which may have been highlighted by the depression of the thirties, the Hire-Purchase Act 1938 introduced various controls.
These were modified and extended later, particularly by the Advertisements (Hire Purchase) Act 1957 and the Hire-purchase Act 1964.
Credit law by the 1960s
By the 1960s, law affecting credit was complex, because of the way that different types of credit had, as it were, each spawned their own pieces of legislation.
Moneylenders were particularly strictly regulated.
As well as needing a licence, they were for example allowed to advertise only in a very restricted way, were not allowed to employ people to canvass for loans, had to include an interest rate in loan contracts, and risked having the terms of a loan altered by a court if they were judged ‘harsh and unconscionable’— interest over 48 per cent a year was taken to be excessive unless there was some evidence to the contrary.
Hire purchase, credit sale and conditional sale advertising had to give a comprehensive picture of costs (if it mentioned any financial terms), and any interest rate it quoted had to approximate to a true annual rate of interest, but the formula used was different from the one in the Moneylenders Acts.
Contracts for these types of credit had to include a certain amount of cost information, though not the amount of the finance charge, nor an interest rate.
The layout and type size of contracts was regulated, for legibility.
Termination of the agreement by the HP finance company if the consumer stopped paying was allowed only if he had disregarded a default notice allowing him at least a week to pay up.
Repossession of the goods, if payment stopped after at least one  third of the credit price had been paid, was allowed only by court order.
Instead, courts would in practice normally set a new payments schedule, allowing repossession (or perhaps some form of money sanction instead) if the new schedule was not kept up.
With credit sale, the lender had no right of repossession.
With HP or conditional sale, but not credit sale, there were some further legal conditions.
For example, an HP buyer could make much the same sort of claim against his finance company over faulty goods as the Sale of Goods Act would have allowed against a shop.
And if an HP buyer returned the goods and terminated his agreement, what he had to pay was subject to regulation.
With doorstep sales , the buyer had a right to cancel an HP or credit sale contract, recovering any payment already made, within four days of receiving a second copy of the agreement.
This did not apply to credit sale agreements for under £30.
Bank loans, and loans made by the bigger finance houses or by bodies such as insurance companies, were not in general subject to credit legislation.
Nor were hire purchase, conditional or credit sale transactions involving over £2,000.
Credit sale was exempt if there were less than five instalments, and was generally subject to less regulation.
Most forms of shop credit were not clearly covered by the legislation.
Terms control and tax relief
Some forms of credit, but not others, were either subject to direct government restriction on lending (terms control) or encouraged by tax relief.
Terms control was originally introduced in the 1939–45 war primarily to stop excessive additions to the price of goods masquerading as ‘credit charges’.
The controls, which laid down a minimum deposit for certain goods, restricted the amount of the finance charge which could be made and prohibited finance charges altogether for others, lingered on for a few years afterwards as part of what was still more or less a strictly managed war-time economy.
They were lifted in 1954, but re-imposed in 1955 with the new aim of reducing demand for consumer durables, by setting  minimum deposits and maximum repayment periods for certain goods, and stayed in force almost continuously, though with frequent modifications.
They covered furniture and furnishings, electrical goods and appliances (including TV rentals) and cars, motorcycles and caravans.
Credit for less than nine months (for example, mail order and much shop credit) and loans used to buy such goods but not specifically earmarked for them were not covered.
Until 1969, interest on bank loans as well as on mortgages was  eligible for income tax and surtax relief.
And by the 1960s a type of credit sale had evolved to meet the Inland Revenue's requirements for tax relief eligibility.
But in 1969 tax relief for private loans was abolished, except for buying or improving homes.
(Tax relief for other loans was allowed again between 1971 and 1974.)
Enforcement
There was no real system of enforcing credit law.
Enforcement, such as it was, consisted largely of the rights of borrowers (or, in practice much more often, lenders) to sue in the courts; and the rights of borrowers, if sued, to claim that the law had been breached by lenders.
Although credit law included for example criminal sanctions against dishonest moneylenders, there was no general means of ensuring that such sanctions were imposed when needed.
Although by law hire purchase advertising had to be ‘accurate’, there was no reporting process to make this more effective than a formality (except for the efforts of individual weights and measures inspectors who became concerned about credit provision when their duties were extended by the Trade Descriptions Act 1968 to cover a very wide range of consumer affairs).
The Department of Trade and Industry (as it had become) was responsible for giving exemption from the Moneylenders Acts, could intervene if HP companies were misbehaving, and operated the terms controls decided on by the Treasury.
But it was by no means responsible overall for enforcing credit law, or regulating its provision.
The Crowther report
Current credit law stems most directly from the 1971 report of the Crowther Committee, appointed in 1968 to consider and make recommendations about the law and practice relating to consumer credit.
Looking back nearly a decade later, many might feel that the principle emerging from the Committee's recommendations as most important for consumers was that consumer credit, whatever its apparent form, should be subject to one single system of regulation.
Certainly the Committee rejected — as unrealistic, inconsistent and often excessively technical — the previous complex of various different laws affecting different lenders and different types of transaction in different ways.
At the time, however, the Committee — judging that a vital influence over the confused development of credit law had been the strong preoccupation of English law with exactly who owns what — set out two ‘fundamental points’ as the basis for its legislative proposals, which might be paraphrased in layman's language like this:
HP-style credit is really money lent to buy things — and credit agreements which left the lenders any rights to take possession of things bought under them should be seen as if those things had been bought on mortgage (‘chattel mortgages’);
separate legal rules applying differently to different types of credit transaction should be replaced by a single set of rules covering equally all forms of ‘security interest’(how lenders try to secure what is owed to them, for example, by a right to repossess what is bought with the borrowed money).
This led the Committee to propose two separate new statutes.
A Lending and Security Act would set the framework of law regarding security in personal property, whether consumer or commercial transactions were involved; in particular, it would cover what lenders could do to recover their money if borrowers defaulted, and how their security interest in any goods involved would be recorded and safeguarded.
A separate Consumer Sale and Loan Act was to be a consumer protection statute regulating credit advertising and consumer credit transactions.
Both Acts were to give uniform treatment to the many different forms of credit arrangement.
There was to be a Consumer Credit Commissioner with wide powers and many responsibilities, including administration of a comprehensive licensing system.
In the end, a single statute was passed — the Consumer Credit Act 1974 — which primarily filled the bill of Crowther's Consumer Sale and Loan Act.
Although some aspects of the proposed Lending and Security Act were included in this, Crowther's fundamental unifying concept of the ‘chattel mortgage’ was not.
And the Director General of Fair Trading was given the powers to exercise most of the functions earmarked by Crowther for the Credit Commissioner.
Consumer Credit Act 1974
The White Paper outlining the Bill which formed the basis of the Consumer Credit Act had this conclusion:
When finally enacted in 1974, after a change of government but with all-party support, the Consumer Credit Act followed the Crowther recommendations about consumer protection credit legislation very closely.
The old complex of varying types of credit law  are , in the new Act, superseded by a single legal framework covering all types of consumer credit almost uniformly.
The principles of the Act were simple.
But in practice many of its detailed requirements are complex.
Indeed, the business of turning some of the Act's most central provisions into the regulations needed to implement them has proved so exceedingly complex that some crucial regulations, more than six years later, are still in draft.
The detail of the Act and regulations made under it will be discussed later, in chapter 6, in the light of what the main body of this report will show about how consumers think of and use credit.
Here, however, is perhaps the place to consider the Act as a whole, in the context of the historical background already described and the general trend of attention to consumers' interests at the time.
An important stated purpose of the Act was to give a legal framework for credit which was compatible with present-day commercial realities, and flexible enough to suit rather than restrict future developments in the credit industry — instead of the old framework, inflexibly moulded to outdated patterns of credit use.
Yet the Act's regulation of credit firms and transactions is minutely detailed, and often stringent.
The counterpart of the protection which it gives consumers is the mass of restrictions and requirements which it imposes on those who provide credit.
This is firmly in the long-standing tradition which sees someone getting credit — and notably credit carrying interest — as needing special protection.
It would still be reasonable to suspect that someone prepared to borrow money at high rates of interest was likely to be particularly vulnerable, even if there is now little surviving residue of the old suspicion or disapproval of interest-bearing credit on ethical grounds.
On the other hand, this close and detailed regulation of credit also fits closely into the general pattern of consumer protection of its time.
A flood of consumer legislation passed at much the same time included the Trade Descriptions Act 1968, the fair Trading Act 1973, the Supply of Goods (Implied Terms) Act 1973 and the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977.
There was also detailed new regulation of particular consumer products, both under the Consumer protection Act and regarding their sale or advertising.
Such detailed concern with consumer regulation and protection at both national and local levels put an unmistakable stamp  on the 1970s — and the Consumer Credit Act is very much a monument to that approach.
This brief look at the context of current consumer credit regulation suggests to us two lessons which seem important to any consideration of consumer credit now.
First, any traditional mistrust of credit as such which may have inclined people towards its close regulation must be dissociated from a practical concern about genuine risks of abuse, exploitation or harmful confusion.
Secondly, and by much the same token, we would condemn any suggestion that there is merit in regulation almost for its own sake: our justification for regulation can be only some real need to prevent what is unfair or damaging.
Types of credit
The Consumer Credit Act uses three pairs of labels to define different types of consumer credit agreement.
The definitions affect some aspects of the legal treatment of different forms of credit.
Fixed-sum versus running-account : an obvious distinction between credit for a fixed amount of money (such as HP, fixed loans of money) and credit, perhaps up to a fixed ceiling, which may fluctuate up and down depending on what the borrower draws or pays in (such as shop budget accounts, credit cards, bank overdrafts).
Restricted-use versus unrestricted-use : credit is either advanced for one particular restricted use which the lender can control (anything from an HP agreement for a particular purpose).
credit card or trading check which can be used only in specific shops); or it is unrestricted, where the borrower gets a loan of money which he could in practice use for whatever he wants (even if he has in fact arranged to use it for some particular purpose).
Debtor-creditor-supplier versus debtor-creditor : the first category involves the supplier in the transaction (for instance, HP, trading checks, credit cards, shop accounts, and even personal loans where the money is to be used for a particular purchase and the supplier of that purchase is involved in the loan agreement); the second doesn't involve suppliers of potential or actual purchases in any way (for instance , bank overdrafts, most personal loans).
The Crowther Committee called these categories ‘connected’ and ‘unconnected’loans, and that shorter though more arcane form of words is still widely used.
The Act adds a credit token classification: where cash, goods or services are advanced to people who produce a credit card, trading check or similar credit token.
Any single credit transaction will fall into at least three of these categories.
For example, hire purchase will generally be fixed-sum, restricted-use, debtor-creditor-supplier; credit card use will generally be running-account, restricted-use, debtor-creditor-supplier, and additionally involve a credit token.
But occasionally, a credit transaction may fall partly into both sides of one of the pairs of classifications.
For example, the typical credit card agreement allows the holder to draw cash from the issuing bank (unrestricted-use, debtor-creditor), as well as using it for restricted-use, debtor-creditor-supplier transactions.
Such agreements are called multiple agreements .
Although these definitions are important to any attempt to compare different types of credit agreement in logic or law, they are of course a very far cry from how any consumer would define different types of credit.
from the consumer's point of view practical matters like repayment schedules are more striking.
So here is a brief consumer's-eye digest of the main credit types.
Bank overdraft Flexible borrowing up to a certain ceiling for people with bank accounts, usually without security, and paid off over a few months, but can be extended over several years; interest, calculated each day on how much the account is overdrawn that day, fluctuates in line with bank base rates (usually about two per cent higher).
Bank current account loan or ordinary loan Cash loan usually for specific purpose (like buying expensive durables or cars) for people with bank accounts, usually without security (unless it's a large sum or borrowed for a long time); usually fixed, regular payments over two or three (occasionally up to seven) years; interest on what is owed fluctuates in line with but rather higher than bank base rate.
Bank personal loan Similar to current account loan, but interest rate fixed at start, and even more likely to be earmarked for a particular purchase.
Finance company personal loan Rather like bank personal loan, for say £300 to £3,000, but often not specifying a particular purchase and arranged by post (or through ‘money shop’) with finance company; interest rate usually fixed at start.
Bank credit card (Access, Barclaycard, Trustcard) Flexible credit facility up to an agreed limit averaging £400), for cash loans or credit purchases from the 100,000-plus shops etc. taking the cards; must pay at least(say) five per cent of what you owe each month, but can choose to pay more; no interest if you pay in full within 25 days of monthly statement (except for cash drawings), interest on rest of debt changes periodically if bank base rate changes much.
American Express and Diners Club (sometimes called ‘travel and entertainment’ cards) an  chiefly different in that you have to pay what you owe in full each month, and no formal limit is set on how much credit you can get.
Second mortgage Usually not so much a loan in itself as using the value of a home (over and above the value of any company loan), usually large and now mainly for home improvements, for up to, say, seven years; with fixed monthly repayments.
Moneylender Cash loan usually between £30 and £1,000 from a local firm (or broker who fixes it with a finance company), usually without security and for a fixed period (anything from days to years); may be paid in fixed instalments or lump sum; interest rate fixed at start.
Credit union Savings and loan clubs of people with common bond (for example, tenants' association, factory employees), cash loaned for particular purpose, not usually more than a few hundred pounds (but could be £4,000); usually fixed weekly repayments; interest paid on what is still owed at rate fixed at start.
HP (hire purchase)The term used by shoppers and many shops to describe both true hire purchase (where the shopper is in effect hiring the goods, with an option to buy at virtually no extra cost when he has paid all the instalments, and the lender has some rights to repossess the goods as securing against default), and the more common credit sale.
Usually the shop sells the goods, a finance company pays the shop, and the buyer pays back the finance house, usually in month instalments up to two-and-a-half years; interest rate fixed at start.
Shop monthly account Credit from a particular shop, sometimes to an agreed limit (say, £200), until monthly statement which you have to pay in full; no interest (except in some shops if you pay late).
Shop budget account Credit facility from a particular shop, up to a certain ceiling which is a multiple (say, twenty times) of fixed monthly payments (say £5); interest, at rate which may occasionally be changed, charged on what is owed.
Shop option account Flexible credit facility very similar to credit card, but restricted to one shop or chain of shops and does not permit cash loans.
Often with special shop credit card .
Fuel board Credit for specific appliance, fixed instalment payments, usually quarterly (with fuel bills) over two or two-and-a-half years; interest rate fixed at start.
Trading check Document giving credit up to fixed total (often £30) at certain shops; each purchase is deducted from check, leaving smaller credit balance; fixed instalments including interest set at start on full value of check usually collected weekly (often in 21 or 22 weeks).
Voucher Similar to trading check, but usually for more extensive specific purchase from specific shop; fixed payments including interest  fixed at start, maybe collected weekly over one to three years.
Mail order Usually big catalogue of clothes and other goods sold almost entirely on credit; fixed instalments collected weekly, often in 20 or 40 weeks, by local part-time agent who gets, say, ten per cent commission; credit price same as cash price.
Tallyman (itinerant credit trader, credit draper or clothing club) Doorstep credit for clothes or textiles costing up to about £30, fixed instalments collected weekly, often in 20 weeks, interest fixed at start.
The pawnbroker is now such a rare source of credit that pawnbroking will not be discussed in this report.
Mortgages for home-buying are considered to be outside our terms of reference.
But it should be noted in passing that new mortgages for home-buying run at about the same level as the total volume of other types of new credit extended and outstanding mortgage debt is far greater than the total of all other forms of consumer credit put together.
TV rental is strictly speaking a form of credit, and is now the dominant way of getting television sets.
But the ways in which we have been asked to look at consumer credit use are hardly relevant to TV rental.
The great majority of consumers get their fuel on credit, in that they pay monthly or quarterly in arrears, though of course the cost of this credit is not charged separately to them as interest.
The amount of credit outstanding for fuel is now approaching £1,000 million; that is to say, for every £1 that consumers owe for other purchases they owe perhaps 10p for fuel.
This was the subject of a full NCC report to the Secretary of State for Prices and Consumer Protection 1976 (Paying for Fuel .
NCC/ HMSO, 1976).
Rather than discuss it again in this report, we shall briefly recall the main points of those of its conclusions relating specifically to credit:
fuel debts should, like other debts, be collected through the courts, rather than under threat of disconnection;
people should not be compelled to pay for fuel in arrears — that is, they should be allowed prepayment meters if they want them; and easy-payment schemes should be boosted.
Use of credit
There are two main measures of how consumers use credit.
One is the volume of lending recorded by the lenders themselves.
The other is collection of information from consumers, using sample surveys.
This chapter uses the first measure to give an outline indication of how big a part credit, overall, plays in consumer spending, and how that has changed over time.
The second measure, showing how credit use varies among different types of consumer and what factors relate to that use, is discussed in much more detail in the next chapter.
Volume of instalment credit
The payment of interest on consumer credit now represents some £2,500 million a year, making this a vital area of consumer concern.
Since 1966, the volume of new fixed-sum and other retail credit has certainly increased.
The figures below show this (the basis of the official statistics changed early in 1977; since then charges made for credit have been excluded, and some new categories of lender included; the changes in money terms more or less balanced each other):
However, during the same period, the total volume of consumer spending has also increased — largely because of inflation but also partly because of some increase in the volume of purchases.
The  following set of figures shows new fixed-sum and other retail credit as a percentage of the total volume of spending on clothing and shoes, durables (including electrical goods and furniture) and cars and motorcycles, which account for the great bulk of this type of credit:
In 1971 terms control was abolished, and — as can be seen from these figures — there was a sharp dip in credit use when control was re-imposed at the end of 1973.
This makes it difficult to tell whether HP and other retail credit, as a part of consumers' overall spending, is now increasing or declining.
But, within the decade, it seems clear that any long-term trend is outweighed by temporary fluctuations in the economy and the availability of credit; though in the short term there has been quite a sharp increase in credit use at the close of the decade.
Within this more or less static total, catalogue mail order credit has been expanding fairly fast.
Mail order is used predominantly for clothing, but also for leather goods, sports goods, small electrical appliances and the like.
Mail order houses' share of total consumer spending on such goods has been increasing at such a rate that, within two or three years, it is likely to be double its 1970 level.
The great bulk of this (nearly 90 per cent) is on credit terms.
The above figures do not include bank loans, or bank credit cards.
In the last decade, as we have seen, conventional retail credit has kept more or less in line with changes in the volume of consumer spending; there may even have been a slight decline.
But at the same time, bank  lending to private individuals, and credit card use, has increased.
In 1979 (November) bank loans outstanding to individual customers, not for house purchase, totalled over £5,000 million, including what had been advanced on bank credit cards.
This compares with about £560 million in 1970, when bank credit cards had barely started.
Bank loans and, particularly, credit cards may account for a much greater volume of spending than the total debt outstanding on them might suggest.
For example, the £750 million outstanding on credit cards might represent only a few weeks' purchases.
With some of the debt paid off each month, and more credit extended, in the year as a whole credit cards might finance several billion pounds' worth of shopping.
This marks a contrast with HP and other retail credit, where the ‘life’ of each loan is on average roughly a year: for example, the £7,281 million extended on new agreements during 1979 (see p. 23) left a total debt outstanding at the end of that year of £7,818 million.
Making some allowance for this repeat-use factor with credit cards, and remembering that with retail credit there is often a deposit of up to one-fifth or one-third, it seems likely that credit now finances roughly one-third of total consumer spending (excluding food, drink, housing and fuel).
This should not be taken to imply that consumer spending really depends on credit.
Overall, consumers save more than they borrow, though in the last year or so borrowing has accelerated more than saving.
Even when mortgage debt is added to all other consumer debt, to give a total of £50,000 to £55,000 million outstanding in 1978, this was comfortably topped by private individuals' deposits with banks and building societies alone, which amounted then to some £60,000 million.
Taking all forms of consumer borrowing and saving in 1979 into account, private individuals saved some £21,000 million, against the £20,000 million or so they borrowed.
What is important, of course, is the way that while some individuals save more than average, others borrow more than average.
How credit use has changed
In 1969 the Crowther Committee commissioned a National Opinion Poll survey on credit use.
This was repeated in 1977 for the Office of Fair Trading (Consumer Credit Survey 1977 .
NOP/OET, 1979).
The 1979 survey by Social and Community Planning Research commissioned by the National Consumer Council for this report adds some more recent information, although its primary purpose has been to explore the background of consumers' knowledge and attitudes about credit.
A report on this survey is attached as Appendix 1 (some material in the text  is derived directly from the computer print-out of the survey analysis, as well as from this report).
These three surveys will be described here as the 1969 Crowther survey, the 1977 OET survey and the 1979 NCC survey.
The figures below show how credit use has changed over the period covered by these three surveys.
These figures, as might have been expected, show a dramatic increase in the use of mail order.
The increase in the use of HP, though less marked, is important as HP is used for expensive purchases which are unlikely to crop up as often as the smaller ones financed by other types of credit.
In the 1979 survey more people said they had used HP at least sometime in the past than any other type of credit.
There have also been very striking increases in the use of credit cards (virtually unknown in 1969) and bank loans.
Who uses what credit
Exactly who uses the various types of credit most has an important bearing on the main subject of this report.
The detail is given in Tables 1 to 6 of Appendix I, but some general points are worth noting here.
Income seems more closely related to whether or not people have ever used any form of credit than any other characteristic: the higher someone's income (at least up to a certain level), the more likely they are to have used at least some sort of credit sometime.
People on higher incomes may use quite a wide range of credit sources, but are less likely than average to buy on mail order, much less likely to use HP, and very much more likely to use bank credit cards, bank loans and overdrafts.
Young people,as a group, also use a wide range of credit sources, and are slightly more likely than other age groups to use bank credit cards or to get bank loans.
It is people in the middle age group who have used HP most.
Men tend to use bank credit cards, bank loans or overdrafts more than women do.
They have used finance company personal loans more than women have in the past, but women now use them as much.
It is women who are the regular mail order users.
(The great increase in mail order use has coincided with the increase in women going out to work.
And it is women of working age who use it most.)
Women also use trading checks more often than men.
As might be expected, possession of a bank account is a virtually indispensable passport to bank credit card use.
And those with bank accounts are more likely than others — though not exclusively — to get bank loans.
As the figures on page 59 show, bank accounts are still more commonly held by people in higher socio-economic groups than those in lower ones.
People who have gone on to higher education are less likely than others to have used HP or credit from fuel boards.
They are much less likely to be using mail order.
They are more likely to use ordinary store accounts and bank credit cards.
If they borrow money, they are much more likely than early school-leavers to do so from a bank.
Although numbers in our main sample were hardly sufficient to show differences between people of different ethnic groups , West Indians and Asians both seemed to use credit at about the average level.
The discussion groups (made up of people who used or at least wanted to use credit) suggest that while Asians may be relatively well informed about credit and particularly likely to use bank loans, West Indians are likely to use on-the-spot credit sources such as hire purchase.
Low income and credit use
As we have said, people on low incomes are less likely than average to use any form of credit.
W those with incomes below £40 a week, only 21 per cent were paying off credit transactions currently, compared with 45 per cent with incomes between £40 and £79 a week, 58 per cent between £80 and £124 a week, and 57 per cent over £125.
For the few people on low incomes who do have credit, paying it off tends to soak up more of their budget than for people with higher  incomes.
The figures in Appendix I, Table 4 suggest that paying off credit agreements typically absorbs roughly twice as high a proportion of income for someone in the lowest income group as it does for people in higher income groups.
When poorer people do use credit, mail order is the key source for them.
The only other types of credit they use more than very occasionally are trading checks or tallymen, and HP.
Appendix III shows the almost circular relationship between not having a bank account and using relatively costly forms of credit.
Older people , especially pensioners — more likely anyway to be relatively poor — also depend a lot on mail order, but may buy durables through electricity or gas boards, paying on instalments with their quarterly bills.
Age is the most important single influence over whether people are using credit currently — even more important than income.
Whereas two out of three people aged between 18 and 34 are paying off some current credit commitment, fewer than one in five pensioners are.
Heavy credit use
There is not much in the way of a half-way house between people who do not use credit at all and those who use it frequently.
Those who do use it generally make at least three or four substantial purchases on credit each year (Appendix I, Table 7).
As might be expected, credit cards and mail order are used most frequently, but each transaction is generally relatively small.
Hire purchase and bank or finance company loans, if used, are most likely to be used only once in the year — but for relatively large sums.
Nearly half the people using credit are currently paying off more than one transaction with the same comPany (Appendix I, Table 3).
This is particularly common with mail order, but virtually never happens with money loans from any source.
Generally the people with the heaviest credit commitments do have more than one credit agreement (not necessarily with the same firm) going at the same time.
Of those with current agreements, the 16 per cent or so with three or more running together have roughly twice as costly weekly or monthly payments to make as those with only one.
Whether a particular level of credit payments should be seen as high or not obviously depends on the consumer's income.
For someone on a low income, weekly credit payments of £5 might be a heavy burden — though virtually imperceptible for someone on a high income.
As a very rough indicator, instalments totalling over one-tenth of income might stand out as a heavy current credit commitment.
Using that indicator, it seems that about ten per cent of the people in each income group have  heavy credit commitments.
However, the fact that fewer people in low income groups use credit at all means that, of those who do, a higher proportion are likely to be heavy credit users.
Leaving income aside, the people with the heaviest credit commitment tend to be young.
The heavy expense of furnishing a home and then supplying the needs of a young family is difficult to meet straight out of income: but a long working life should give reasonable expectations of these young couples being able to pay off what they owe.’
People who do want to use credit
The 1969 Crowther survey showed that 26 per cent of consumers had never used any of the main forms of credit.
The 1977 OFT survey showed that this proportion had declined to 20 per cent.
The 1979 NCC survey gave only 15 per cent who had never used credit.
All three surveys showed that pensioners and people with low incomes were less likely to have used credit than others.
Many people who do use credit would prefer not to.
In our main 1979 survey, we asked people which of four statements came closest to describing their own feelings about credit.
Only six per cent said that it was ‘a sensible way of buying (it helps you manage your money, improve your living standards or beat inflation)’.
Another 20 per cent said that it was ‘a convenient way of buying (you can get things how and when you want them, instead of having to wait, save or carry lots of cash)’.
The commonest response, from 43 per cent, was that it was ‘occasionally necessary (for expensive but essential things you don't have the cash for)’: given the possibility that they could have said ‘sensible’ or ‘convenient-instead of ‘necessary’, this suggests a rather more grudging acceptance.
But 29 per cent said that credit was ‘never a good thing (you should save up or buy only what you have the cash for)’.
Half of those who had never used credit were in this ‘never good’ group.
But nearly half of those who had used it in the past, though not using it currently, rated it as never good.
And one in eight current credit users also said that using credit was never good (Appendix I, Table 11).
In general, professional/ managerial and skilled manual grades were less often ‘anti-credit’ than were the lower grade manual and non-manual groups; young people were less often anti than old.
In our main survey, people were also asked where they would go for a loan, if they had to borrow money.
Although the interviewer stressed that this was a hypothetical situation, in which they would really need to borrow money, 26 per cent spontaneously said that they would on no account even consider borrowing money.
Again, it was mainly older  people and those who were not using credit who said this.
A potential result of such strong attitudes against credit is that when financial pressures mount to the point where they override a reluctance to borrow, the reluctant borrower may want to borrow covertly — that is, borrow from an informal-seeming local lender rather than from a recognised lending institution such as a bank.
This possibility is discussed later.
Table 22 of Appendix 1 shows that when people have recently bought a major item for cash rather than credit, half did so either because they never use credit or because they prefer not to if they can avoid it.
About half the remainder had firm reasons for preferring cash to credit at least in this instance — because it was cheaper, or because it would avoid a chain of later bills, for example.
So, all told, roughly three-quarters or more of recent cash buyers had a clear preference for cash.
And there was virtually no sign of people paying cash when they would really have preferred to buy on credit.
By contrast, only about one-third of those recently buying on credit gave reasons which could be regarded as positively favourable.
Mostly, they bought on credit because they did not have the cash, or because it would take them too long to save it up.
What credit is used for
In general, credit is very rarely used for food.
Credit for housing and fuel is not discussed in this report.
As Table 17 of Appendix I shows, people's most recent significant credit purchases are as follows:
As people were asked particularly about non-routine purchases, out of the run of their normal budgeting, and as many people also buy small items of clothing — for cash or credit — within their routine shopping, the figure for clothes as a proportion of credit shopping is no doubt an understatement.
Taking all recent purchases into account, credit now finances about two-thirds of cars and over half of domestic appliances, TVs, stereos etc. bought; nearly half of all home improvements, furniture and home furnishings; and one-third or more of hobby items or jewellery, clothes, toys or presents.
(see Appendix I, Tables 16 and 17.)
Compared with the figures on page 26 cars are particularly likely to be financed by loans from banks or finance companies; clothes, presents and luxury goods to be bought on mail order, and rarely financed by HP or loans; and, as might be expected, domestic appliances to be bought using fuel board credit (see Appendix I, Table 17).
Reflecting this, something approaching half of personal loans from banks or finance companies were used to buy things costing more than £500, and only six per cent to buy things costing under £100.
But most mail order purchases cost under £30.
Purchases with credit cards and shop accounts were distributed fairly evenly through all price ranges up to about £500, but HP (in the widest, popular sense) was used most for things costing between about £ 1 00 and £500 (see Appendix I, Table 17).
If mail order is excluded, much the same proportions of people patronised the various types of shopping centre, and types of shop, for their most recent non-routine purchase, regardless of whether they were buying on credit or buying for cash.
But local department stores or specialist shops which were not part of a chain were used less by credit buyers than cash buyers, whereas fuel board showrooms were used more.
However, some quite large variations emerged when the figures were analysed for the different types of credit used (see Appendix I, Table 18).
Perhaps because such a high proportion of bank or other loans are devoted to car-buying, they turned up less often than other types of credit as a means of financing things bought from shops — much less often in the case of shop chains.
Credit cards and shop accounts financed a relatively large proportion of credit purchases from chain department stores, local stores and local speciality shops, and credit cards seemed the only generally-used source of credit in discount shops.HP-type credit was in contrast the only generally-used means of financing things bought from fuel boards.
Credit problems for particular people
As has been shown, analysis of NCTs main 1979 survey results  demonstrates that in general poorer people, less well educated people, those in lower social classes, old people and women rather than men are less well informed about credit, and more likely to use a type of credit out of habit or convenience rather than as a matter of rational choice.
In general, when they do use credit they are more likely than others to use types carrying a high rate of charge, though they are also relatively heavy users of mail order (which carries no rate of charge for credit, though at the cost of prices which have tended to be higher than shop prices).
When they do use credit, the instalment payments tend to be a heavier burden for poorer people, in terms of the proportion of their income which they have to devote to them.
The most serious problems over credit use — sometimes an extreme manifestation of one of the general problems, such as the relationship between ignorance, high-cost credit use, and over-commitment; sometimes something quite distinct — are too rare to show up in a quantifiable way in a sample survey such as ours.
The reports we commissioned on group discussions and depth interviews with people who might have been particularly vulnerable to the risk of serious credit problems (Appendix II), and on the experience of clients of the Birmingham Money Advice Centre (Appendix III), were designed to throw some light on such problems.
The detail of these two Appendices is indeed so full of problems as to make them rather grim reading.
But some general themes can be extracted here.
Credit and difficulty in making ends meet
People who have extreme difficulty in making ends meet may see credit as their only way out.
Then, credit is seen as a necessity (Appendix II; section 1): ‘You buy on credit to make ends meet….’, ‘none of us would have things if it wasn't for catalogues’, ‘…when you want to replace anything you are forced to use HP because you don't have the cash’.
When a family budget is already overstrained, the recurring extra load of credit commitments can break it.
The buyer knows he can afford the first weekly payment, say: but a month later there's the rent to pay, or a bigger fuel bill than expected, and there simply isn't enough income to cover all demands.
The experience of Mrs West (Appendix III) illustrates this graphically.
A widow in her early 40s with a family of four, she was tired of going without and so used credit to buy furniture and clothes for her children.
The credit instalments came to £13.50, leaving a total household income of £37.60 for rent, fuel, food and all other expenses.
She didn't have enough money set aside for the simultaneous cost of rent, an unexpectedly high fuel bill and Christmas expenses, so borrowed money to pay: loan instalments added another  £12.05 to her weekly outgoings.
That, with the rent, now leaves £16.78 for food, fuel and all her other household expenses — because of her credit and loan obligations, simply not enough.
The group discussions reported on in Appendix II excluded pensioners and the very poorest households.
As Appendix II, and indeed the main survey results, make clear, it is not necessarily low income which makes credit at the same time both an obvious refuge and an unduly heavy burden — though in the main survey we found that in general people on low incomes were more likely to say that they were worried about money than people on high incomes.
In any income range, people can find it difficult to make ends meet — especially with steep inflation.
What is clear is that when people do resort to credit to make ends meet, their anxieties increase.
Detailed cross-tabulations of our main survey results (not included in Appendix I) showed that people who said they worried about money fairly often or very often on average had a markedly higher credit commitment than people who said they did not worry about money.
And people who had bought their most recent non-routine purchase on credit — especially on HP or mail order — tended to worry more about money than people who had bought for cash.
As Appendix II suggests, these anxieties may tend to narrow people's choice of type of credit, so that they stick to — possibly unduly expensive — forms that they are familiar with, rather than trying to find some cheaper type.
Most people, even with the added burden of credit commitments, manage to remain solvent.
For them, the cost is this anxiety, and the fact that (because of the rate of charge on their credit obligations, which commonly is high) they are poorer, in terms of what they can buy, than they would otherwise have been.
A minority cannot cope.
The desperate situation of the woman in fear of the loan man's visits (Appendix II, section 5) is an example: already summoned to court, and breaking open the meters to pay him, she said ‘You just don't get out of the human jungle once you sink into that depth of debt’.
Credit and racial minorities
The group discussions showed that Asians tended to be well informed about credit — at least as well as white people generally — and to have no real difficulties in using it.
In these groups, the Asians were all men.
But, while the main survey showed that men in general tended to be better informed about credit than women, that difference was too small to suggest that Asian women would have given a very different impression if they had been included in the groups.
The small number of Asians interviewed in the main survey did not stand out as different from  the rest of the sample.
The National Consumer Credit Association told us that members had found Asians particularly reliable customers.
By contrast, the group discussions showed that West Indians are very badly informed about comparative credit costs.
When they did use credit, it tended to be HP (again borne out by the small number of West Indians interviewed for the main survey), and they knew a fair amount about their rights in an HP transaction, though they felt that the language of the agreements should be simpler to understand.
However, when they had used HP, they had often got into trouble over it, usually because they hadn't kept up the payments.
The only way in which they — like most of those in the group discussions — judged credit costs was the size of the instalments (‘just work it out weekly, didn't ask the full cost’).
It can of course be no more than speculation to consider whether this total concern with instalment size makes people less likely to keep up conscientiously with the payments than they would be if they had a clear idea of their total commitment.
But in any event, in the way shown above, this concentration on squeezing the largest possible instalment payments into the confines of a weekly budget based on weekly pay-packets leaves the deep pitfall that people then have no leeway to cope with unexpected or higher-than-usual expenses which crop up 12m.
Several West Indians said that they liked the ‘lay-away’ system, where they put a deposit on something which the shop then keeps until — perhaps paying instalments — they have settled the full price.
A particular reason for liking this was the absence of interest charges, but it also has the obvious attraction of flexibility — there's no need to pay an instalment if money is short that week.
So it seems unfortunate that they report that relatively few shops are prepared to work this system.
All the London West Indians and Bradford Asians, and some of the London Asians, in the group discussions had been involved in a ‘partner’ system (Appendix III, section 3).
This is a small-scale or unofficial credit union where people group together to help each other with major purchases, though we heard that the current rate of inflation has made it difficult for such groups to attract support.
This form of self-help obviously squares up well with the close-knit group contacts of a minority community; moreover, West Indians have been prominent in the credit union movement in this country (largely because credit unions are an important source of credit in the West Indies).
We came across no evidence of racial discrimination in credit granting.
Credit and women
We found some signs that women may have more problems over credit use than men.
In the detailed cross-tabulations for our main survey (not always included in Appendix I), we found that women were much more likely to say they did not know what sort of interest rate to expect, and to say they did not understand interest rates well.
They were much less likely to say there were laws or regulations protecting people who take out credit agreements, and much more likely not to know whether any action could be taken over some credit agreement which they had signed but later felt was unfair.
Taking into account the fact that they made fewer comments about individual types of credit than men, women's comments were more likely to be that they did not know how a type of credit worked than men's; and less likely to say that it was easy to understand and use.
They were also less likely to label any type of credit as expensive, or encouraging overspending (which perhaps implies a more unquestioning and trusting attitude than men's).
They were less likely than men to mention the possibility of getting cash discounts as a reason for paying cash rather than using credit.
The group discussions reported in Appendix II showed that single women with children (divorced, separated or widowed) may have particular difficulty getting low-cost credit, often because they themselves are not working: so they get higher-cost credit instead (the reasons for this are explored further in chapter 5).
The experience of the Birmingham Money Advice Centre (Appendix III) underlines this, showing how credit applications may be turned down even from single parents with jobs and well-kept bank accounts.
And it also shows the special circumstances which tend to tie women into the sort of close personal relationship with a weekly credit caller which can mean they are using a relatively costly form of credit almost automatically — see chapter 5.
The main survey showed that women were anyway much more likely than men to say they would prefer weekly payments to monthly — a factor which, as we have seen, tends to narrow someone's choice to the exclusion of some relatively low-cost types of credit.
So there are three factors which may stop women getting as good value from credit as men: less awareness of credit costs, and of their rights; credit-worthiness indicators (such as employment and housing status) which tend to be associated with unreliable payers and to be more common with women than with men; and perhaps occasional outright discrimination.
The first factor suggests that women may deserve special attention in those information programmes which are discussed in chapter 4.
The second issue — the risk that some good payers will be lumped in with  bad payers, and treated like them, simply because they share some background characteristics with them — is discussed in chapter 5, under ‘Credit scoring’.
But in this connection it is worth noting here that we found women even more likely than men to say they would prefer to pay extra for credit insurance, against the risk of inability to repay: credit insurance is discussed in the section immediately following this.
The Sex Discrimination Act lays down that, compared with men, women must be able to get credit ‘of the like quality, in the like manner and on the like terms’.
If women are refused credit because of some credit-worthiness factor (say, not having a full-time job) which applies more often to them than to men, that is lawful only if that credit-worthiness factor can be shown to be a justifiable reason for withholding credit regardless of the sex of the applicant.
But that line is a difficult one to draw, and some traders or lenders may inadvertently draw it in the wrong place.
For example, the Welsh Consumer Council's small survey of shops in Wales (see chapter 5) found several which as a matter of policy asked married women for guarantors if they wanted credit.
In so far as this amounts to treating women less favourably than men, because they are women, it is unlawful.
Wider distribution of the clear and helpful guidance notes which the Equal Opportunities Commission has published for traders (Credit where credit's due ) could be a valuable antidote to this discriminatory tendency — perhaps accidental — where it does exist.
Credit and family crisis
The experience of the Birmingham Money Advice Centre (Appendix III) is that even imprudent or reckless credit use rarely on its own produces serious debt problems.
Surveys for the Crowther Committee showed that illness was the most frequently stated reason for default, followed closely by unemployment.
The Centre's experience is that this is still the case, and the importance of some sudden reversal in family fortunes as a cause of debt was underlined by our own interviews (Appendix 11, section 5).
The reversal need not be great: as Appendix III puts it, some people's budgets are ‘in a delicate balance…. and even a minor fluctuation (eg. a new child benefit book not being issued on time, the late arrival of a supplementary benefit giro cheque, a child needing a new pair of shoes) can tip the scales against them.’
In the main survey, only one per cent of those who had recently bought on credit had difficulty making payments — because of illness, unemployment, or other unforeseen financial demands.
This tallies with the figure which was quite widely quoted to us by lenders of something in  the region of one per cent of credit transactions turning into bad debts (less with some lenders, more with others).
The discussion groups (Appendix II, section 5) show how easily a change for the worse in someone's circumstances can lead to debt troubles: the man in hospital after an accident at work, who then had a breakdown, while overdue credit instalments mounted up to over £100 and led to a court summons; the family who owed £30 a week on furniture and carpet instalments for their new flat — eventually taken to court after a series of lost jobs; or (Appendix III) the previously secure young widow whose money troubles started when her husband died — although an understanding bank wrote off the outstanding balance on a car loan, a furniture firm refused to accept the reduced instalments which were all that she could afford.
Marriage breakdown can be followed by debt problems.
The increasing incidence of separation and divorce makes this a growing difficulty — and a difficulty which sadly has no solution.
Sympathetic recognition by lenders of the extra financial burdens often imposed by the breakdown of a marriage would be particularly welcome at such a time of stress.
And an extended payments schedule might well recover the debt more surely than strict enforcement — which might instead precipitate financial collapse.
Employment problems are now perhaps even more of a threat to credit payments than illness — granted that long illness is relatively uncommon among people of credit-using age.
Moreover, the nature of sickness benefit from the state and from many employers means that people who are off work ill for less than a few months may not be worse off financially, anyway.
But when people lose their jobs, they now stand a worse than fifty-fifty chance of being out of work for more than three months (in July 1978, 53 per cent of those who were registered as unemployed had been out of work for longer than three months).
And unemployment generally brings a sharp fall in income.
With nearly one in thirteen workers unemployed in Autumn 1980 (and economic forecasts predicting considerably higher rates), the risk is very real.
Short-time work and temporary lay-off has affected a significant minority of those working in manufacturing industries, and this too could make it hard for people to keep up with credit payments.
The problem will be aggravated by the way that people have recently been using credit more heavily than usual to finance what they buy (see figures earlier in this chapter).
In our main 1979 survey, 11 per cent of credit buyers said that their contracts had included some form of insurance against being unable to pay, while 19 per cent did not know (Appendix I, Table 35).
By contrast, nearly two-thirds of American users of fixed-sum instalment credit, at least where the original sum owed is over $200, have bought insurance, generally paying extra — only a few consider the extra cost expensive, and the great majority of shoppers there (94 per cent of those who offered an opinion) regard credit insurance as a good thing.
In our survey, we asked people whether they would prefer to pay extra for insurance against sickness and unemployment.
Sixty-five per cent said they would like to pay extra for this, 26 per cent said they would not, the rest had no strong preference either way.
In evidence to us, the Finance Houses Association and Consumer Credit Trade Association both said they would like to see more use of credit insurance here; the Birmingham Money Advice Centre suggested that it should even be compulsory above a certain level of commitment, say £100.
But the Consumer Credit Trade Association was concerned about the cost of insurance, as an extra burden for consumers.
We were told that typically it could increase the level of instalments by about seven per cent— say, 35p on top of a £5 instalment.
We think that even that extra price would be good value for many consumers, in terms both of peace of mind and of security against the real risk of serious money troubles.
There is of course no reason why individual lenders should not make insurance compulsory for their clients: its cost would have to be revealed to the customer, and it would have to be added into the calculated APR.
However, American experience — and common sense — suggests that this in itself would deter most lenders from making insurance compulsory.
On a six-month contract at 30 per cent, the seven per cent increase in the size of the individual instalments would push the APR up to nearly 65 per cent , for example : easily enough to look excessively expensive in comparison with the competition.
As a consequence, few individual American lenders do make insurance a mandatory part of the contract.
If insurance is voluntary, it will not need to be included in the APR calculation.
We believe that the advantages of insurance are so great that we hope that lenders will try to persuade their customers to take it, voluntarily.
So, for example, we think that it would be reasonable if credit notices setting out instalment terms on a particular purchase included something on these lines:
CREDIT INSURANCE…
SAVES YOU WORRY ABOUT SICKNESS OR EVEN UNEMPLOYMENT.
EXTRA COST 14p EACH WEEK.
THIS WILL BE ADDED TO YOUR INSTALMENTS  AUTOMATICALLY UNLESS YOU ASK US TO CANCEL THE INSURANCE IN YOUR CASE (YOU HAVE THE RIGHT TO DO THIS).
In the same way, we think that credit agreements could usefully include a strike-out clause, arranging credit insurance and adding its cost to the instalments automatically unless it is struck out.
Of course, any such clause would have to make clear the customer's right to strike it out.
We are well aware that in the United States fears have frequently been expressed that lenders may be evading the Truth in Lending law by making insurance virtually compulsory without actually making it mandatory using such forceful persuasion that borrowers hardly realise they have the option of not getting it.
The Director General of Fair Trading's existing powers should be sufficient to prevent that happening here.
But — so long as it was made clear that this was a genuine option, and entirely voluntary — we are in favour of lenders in this country at least recommending insurance and pointing out its advantages.
We should prefer this to making credit insurance generally mandatory on several grounds.
First, we would prefer to leave people as free from regulation as possible in their choice of credit arrangements, as a matter of general principle.
Secondly, many people who take out credit arrangements would with good reason judge themselves to be relatively free from the risk of unemployment, or loss of earnings through illness — or at least would be ready and able to weather their financial difficulties in the event.
There seems no reason why they should have to pay extra for credit, to get a benefit they would judge unnecessary.
Thirdly, mandatory insurance might well make it easier for premiums to become uncompetitively high.
Lenders themselves, just as borrowers do, have a lot to gain from insurance against the risk of unemployment or illness, in that this should reduce their own bad-debt or late-payment costs (and so perhaps reduce interest rates too).
The reward to them from credit insurance would be the security which this would give against payment problems.
So it would be lenders who would gain from credit insurance (and, in particular, from an efficient low-cost insurance scheme which would not seem to their customers to innate their credit payments unduly).
As existing insurance institutions might not be keen to underwrite such a scheme without expecting their own profit from it, we think that the credit institutions themselves should explore the possibility of joining together to back a mutual non-profit credit insurance fund.
It should be noted in passing that the precedent for this — the credit union  movement's international mutual insurance fund, which insures only against death (paying off loans, and paying up to double a union member's savings) at no added cost to borrower or saver — is now one of the biggest in the world.
We see one specially strong advantage in an industry-wide self-financing insurance scheme of this sort.
The absence of a profit element, coupled with a single rating or premium structure based solely on actuarial assessment of risk, should virtually guarantee fairness.
So, for example, if the Director General of Fair Trading was considering whether or not a lender's use of a persuasive clause such as that suggested on page 39 constituted fair trading practice, we think that he might well recommend that use of such a clause should be conditional on use of the industry-wide non-profit insurance scheme.
What credit does
The cost of credit varies over time.
But at any given moment, the ‘pecking order’ is broadly the same.
The examples given below are for the summer of 1979, when interest rates were lower than while this report was being written (with a bank base rate of 14 per cent in summer 1979, compared with 17 per cent in spring 1980).
We decided not to give more recent figures, for two reasons.
The first, a matter of convenience and cost, was that for these figures we were able to rely in part on a large survey of lending rates published last year by Consumers' Association (Which?
September 1979), in addition to our own discussions at that time with representatives of the lenders; repeating the exercise seemed unduly costly for the sake of up-to-the minute figures.
The second, more important, reason for giving summer 1979's figures is that interest rates are (at the time of writing) higher than they have ever been.
Rather than take the pessimistic view that they will remain at least this high in future, we hope that the (slightly) lower figures we have given instead may prove more representative of interest rate levels in the longer run.
The rates shown are typical for each type.
To have quoted a range of rates (often varying quite widely around these typical figures) would of course have been more comprehensive, but less helpful because of the way that the extremes of the ranges would have blurred the comparison between types.
The interest rates are calculated in the way required by the Consumer Credit Act and do not take into account any tax relief that could be gained for a home improvements loan.
The different types of credit are listed in the same order as on page 26, for comparison.
These rates are typical, or broadly average.
But there are some points to note specially.
Rates may vary a lot around these averages with hire purchase (could be up to 40 per cent), shop accounts (say, between 0 and 31 per cent ), finance company loans (up to 50 per cent ), finance company second mortgages (could be over 40 per cent ).
Theoretically and at face value, catalogue mail order credit is free.
But the Crowther Committee and Consumers' Association reported that where mail order prices could be compared directly with prices in the shops, they appeared to be between 5 and 15 per cent higher.
Many people shopping by mail order are ‘agents’ and get ten per cent commission on their orders; this obviously offsets any higher price they are paying, so that for them mail order credit is truly free.
But other customers buying at higher prices than in shops are paying for their credit.
Using the Consumer Credit Act formula for interest rates as a means of interpreting these higher prices as the cost of mail order credit gives ‘rates of charge’ varying between 13.2 per cent(for someone buying over 40 weeks and paying five per cent higher than in the shops) and 102.8 per cent (for someone buying over 20 weeks and paying 15 per cent higher prices than in the shops).
Of course, this extra cost may be counterbalanced not merely by the convenience of mail order but also by a saving on fares.
This ‘hidden interest rate’ may also add to the rates shown above for shop accounts, trading checks and tallymen: the rates shown for them are based solely on interest charged by them.
The rate shown for trading checks assumes that the whole value of the check is spent at once.
If — as is common — it is not, the effective rate will be higher.
Take as an example someone who buys a £30 trading check, to be paid off in 21 weekly instalments of £1.60.
If they use the whole check immediately, the true rate of interest which the credit costs them is 72.5 per cent.
But if, say, they use £ 10-worth of it right away, £10-worth three weeks later, and save the final £10-worth until they've paid off the check ‘so that I don't owe anyone’, the true rate of interest works out at about 400 per cent.
No figure is given for moneylenders.
When they work as agents for finance companies, their rates may be broadly similar though slightly higher.
If they work also as weekly credit callers giving cash loans to the same customers who buy goods from them, their rates for money loans may be just the same as their rates for credit on goods.
The main survey, which did not give any signs of unduly high interest rates, suggests that one example which we did find in the group discussions is as rare as it is wicked: terms for a £100 loan as high as £10 a week over 15 weeks — which works out at over 1,500 per cent.
Credit unions are by law not allowed to charge more than 12.6 per cent interest on loans to their members.
This slightly understates the true cost of credit union lending for their members, as credit unions can work only if their members save as well as borrow, and the interest paid to members on savings with the unions (though at the moment tax-free) may be rather below the interest they could get from other institutions.
Although it is of course difficult to generalise, and some credit unions pay higher rates on savings than others, this difference in the return on savings might be up to around four per cent or so.
Making an allowance for this, and taking into account the proportion of members' savings actually loaned out, would put the effective cost of credit union loans at the time of this comparison at around 17.5 per cent: still as cheap as the very cheapest commercial alternative then, and much cheaper than most.
Inflation and credit costs
All these rates are nominal, in the sense that they assume inflation does not exist.
From the customer's point of view, buying now on credit does save any increase in price that would take place between now and (say) whenever he finishes paying off the loan.
The true place of inflation in calculating the cost of credit is as part of a triangle which has as its other sides the interest to be gained from instalment savings and the interest to be paid for instalment credit — both of which are broadly related to inflation rates anyway.
It is almost always a fallacy to think that buying now on credit beats inflation.
Even in times of rapid inflation, interest rates are generally so much higher than the rate of price inflation that saving up to buy later normally works out better value for money.
For example, when price inflation was running at about 12 per cent last summer, buying on HP would have meant monthly payments about 10 per cent higher than those needed to save up and buy the same thing later.
Very recently, however, the VAT increase from 8 per cent to 15 per cent has made price inflation unusually steep.
Though interest rates have also been very high  indeed, the support which North Sea oil has given sterling has perhaps tended to stop them rising so high as they might otherwise have done.
The following example shows the effect of this unusual combination of special circumstances.
Say that someone is considering buying something which (in early 1980) cost £100.
He reckons that with inflation running at 19 per cent a year it will cost £141.61 in two years' time.
first, he considers saving up for it, by putting £20 into a building society two-year term share (paying 11¾ per cent) and setting aside the rest in a building society monthly subscription share account (paying 12¼ per cent ).
The monthly payments would work out at £4.34 each.
Next, he looks around for credit terms paying a one-fifth deposit of £20, and the rest in 24 monthly instalments.
With HP at say 35 per cent, the instalments would be £4.49 a month still more than saving.
But a bank personal loan charging 21½ per cent would mean instalments of only £4.06 a month actually less than saving up.
Indeed, in this example the customer would be better off buying now with any credit arrangement charging under 30 per cent a year.
So when price inflation is extraordinarily high, but interest rates lag behind, customers who can get the cheaper forms of credit such at bank loans (and that usually means relatively richer people) may actually be able to beat inflation by borrowing: for them, it is a question of buying now and paying less later.
But people who use more costly forms of credit such as HP, finance company loans, or trading vouchers (generally, the relatively poorer) are still — even in these exceptional circumstances — paying more than saving up would cost them.
The reason for raising here the complexities of inflation, and savings as an alternative, is that as can be seen from Appendix 1.
Tables 9a and 9c — some consumers do now believe that inflation is relevant to their credit decisions.
especially if they consider saving up to buy as an alternative.
So some factual background will help to put consumers' beliefs into proper perspective.
This effect of inflation on credit costs suggests two problems to us.
First, insofar as price inflation (and the expectation of price inflation) does prompt even users of costlier forms of credit to buy now on credit — as a means of avoiding the price rises they would face if they saved up instead, it is misleading them.
Their credit ‘defence’ against inflation is in fact rather more like an inflationary ‘fifth column’.
By putting their money as well as their trust into credit, they are in the long run paying more, not less.
So in real terms, their attempt to buy off inflation through borrowing makes them poorer than they would otherwise have been.
The second problem is that the effects of inflation make the relationship between calculated rates of charge for credit and its real-life costs already difficult enough to grasp — virtually incomprehensible.
How consumers gauge the cost of credit
In a competitive market-place, there are three main reasons why consumers should know the cost of what they buy.
Obviously, all individual consumers need that information for their own budgeting, and for making personal decisions about shopping priorities.
They need it to shop around, to get the best price for what they have decided to buy.
And that leads to the third, less obvious, reason: the market-place itself, to work efficiently, needs consumers who know how prices compare, and who act on that knowledge buying at the right price, not buying if the price is too high for this to have an influence on prices, through traders who set attractive prices competing successfully against traders who set inflated prices, it is by no means necessary for all consumers to be actively price-conscious.
In the case of credit, it has been suggested that even if barely one in three consumers is aware of credit costs, and even if only a few of them use the information to shop around actively, lenders might compete with lower rates as a result.
There are in practice four possible consumer measures of the cost of credit.
The first is a simple, unscaled and more or less subjective feeling of whether it is expensive or cheap.
The second is some sort of percentage rate of interest.
The third is its add-on cost: if the cash price is £100 and the total HP price is £120, the add-on cost is £20.
The fourth is the amount of the instalment: say £4.18 a month.
because the second, third and fourth measures involve precise numbers rather than a vague expression of feeling, it's tempting to see them as more useful and accurate.
But there are pitfalls in this temptation, which need some reconnaissance before discussion of how consumers themselves actually judge the cost of credit (see table at the top of p. 46).
Obviously, a sensible consumer should not be surprised that, given the same number of weeks to pay, an increase in any one measure of cost is paralleled by increases in the other two measures.
But the scale of the increase might come as a surprise: on the 21-week agreement 10p a week extra pushing up the rate of charge from 26. 1 per cent to 72.5 per cent for example, or on the 15-week agreement 1 p a week extra almost doubling the rate.
And, as soon as the consumer has to juggle with changes in the   period of the agreement as well, he also has to juggle with some paradoxes.
If he was offered a 16-week repayment period for instance, instead of the 15-week ones, with £1.99 instalments (‘Gosh, that's under £2 a week!’), he might be frankly incredulous when told that the rate of charge, instead of 6.6 per cent with the over-£2 instalments, was now 44.4 per cent .
Bearing in mind the broadly similar repayment period, he might also be surprised that a £1.40 weekly instalment (over 25 weeks) carried a rate over three times as high as a £1.50 one (over 21 weeks) in spite of seeming to save him 10p every week.
The answer to these doubts is that not one of these three measures is adequate on its own, and that all three should be taken together to give a proper guide to costs.
Even then, other factors which might automatically underlie a consumer's subjective judgement about credit costliness could confuse the calculations of APR still further.
Say, for example, a nearby shop offers something with a normal cost price of £50 on 21-week terms, at 31 per cent APR; but a town-centre shop (50p bus ride each way) advertises it at 21.3 per cent APR.
Adding in the cost of the bus fare would jack up the APR to 33.7 per cent— more expensive than the local shop.
On the information given (which is, for example, all that might be given in an intermediate credit advertisement under the Consumer Credit (Advertisements) Regulations 1980) the only way that the shopper, without access to a computer, can decide between these alternative APRs is subjectively.
A computer is the only way he could weigh up the effect of the bus fare factor.
But in terms of add-on cost the calculation is simple.
Again, in the trading check example above there is the matter of weekly collection: allowing for that puts the 66 per cent rate of charge  on 21-week repayment in a different light — expensive, certainly, but not extortionate.
Allowing 10 minutes per client for collection each week, assuming the collector gets rather less than average industrial earnings and himself copes with all the paperwork involved during those 10 minutes, and assuming that the trading check firm pays the shops where the check has been used (less its commission — perhaps 12½ per cent) about a month after writing the check, the actual return to the lender would work out at only 7 per cent — that is to say , less than the firm's own borrowing costs would be, even without making any allowance for either bad debts and late payments or office overheads.
Obviously in practice the lenders must look for better returns than this (for example by working their collectors harder or perhaps paying them less), which of course only serves to emphasise that their rates of charge are far from profiteering.
However, the fact that people are being charged a rate that fairly reflects the lender's costs does not necessarily mean that this type of credit is a good buy for them.
It is a good buy only if people particularly want the unusual service (in this case, weekly collection of small instalments) which makes those costs high, and have decided that this costly extra is — for them — worth the price.
Moreover, a point to bear in mind is that for many users of weekly collection credit it is not just one transaction (with a relatively small money cost, in spite of its high APR) but is instead virtually continuous indebtedness, with one transaction following closely on the heels of another.
In this case, the high APR does have real value as a true measure of what their credit costs, over the year.
Institutional knowledge
Most people do have some idea of whether or not one type of credit is ‘expensive’, compared to other types of credit.
In the main survey, people were asked to say which types of credit they thought matched 12 different statements of attitude (see Appendix I, Tables 12a and 13b).
One directly concerned cost: ‘It's an expensive way of buying’.
Two others at least implied some aspects of value for money: ‘You feel you'd never finish paying’ and ‘You get poor value for money’.
The attitude directly involving costliness —‘It's an expensive way of buying’— was one of the labels which people most often applied to various types of credit.
Making allowances for variations in people's familiarity with each type of credit (judged by how often they applied any labels to each type), some types of credit were labelled as expensive much more than other types.
This is how six main types of credit were ranked:
Whether or not people had actually used a particular type of credit made a little difference to their overall attitude to its costliness.
Hire purchase users were slightly less likely than average to label it as expensive, or giving poor value for money.
Previous (though not current) mail order users would rate it more expensive than others.
People using bank loans now gave them more favourable cost ratings than others.
Taken together, people's answers to these three questions indicate that they judge HP to be the most costly common form of credit, and that they judge credit cards, store accounts and check trading to be relatively cheap — with the important qualification that (presumably taking quality of goods into account) mail order and check trading, though not expensive, are often thought likely to give poor value for money.
Comparing these subjective judgements with actual costs might suggest that people are wrong about, for example check trading being cheap.
In reality it carries a relatively very high APR.
Yet the amounts of money involved are small — the 66 per cent APR represents a charge for credit of only about 10p to 20p a week, on the amount commonly  borrowed.
If a correct subjective attitude to credit costs is taken to embrace all the factors relating to credit terms, and not just APR, then it would be difficult to quarrel with the general accuracy of this overall ranking (except perhaps that bank loans have been labelled ‘expensive’ more often than their true cost would deserve).
Within this overall ranking, there were some variations.
Women were even more likely than men to label HP — more than other types of credit as expensive.
However,young adults were less likely (than the very high overall average) to label HP as expensive, more likely to label bank loans as expensive.
Older people tended to have more adverse opinions on credit — especially HP and bank loans.
But heavy users of credit were much less likely to label it as expensive.
The earlier OFT/ NOP surveys, although the results were not analysed in the same way to allow for differences in whether or not people gave any reaction to each credit form, and though the questions asked were different, gave a broadly similar perspective.
But it is interesting that, since the time of the first 1969 survey, the proportion of people rating HP as expensive has grown.
Yet another way in which people may judge the costliness of different types of credit is how reasonable they think any credit terms are that they have recently been using.
In general, most people reckon that the cost of credit they have been using is more or less as they had planned.
In our 1979 survey, more people than average reckoned that HP had worked out more expensive than they had planned, though differences were not large.
By contrast, purchases bought with credit cards and shop accounts turned out to be less expensive than planned for more people than average.
This could be because, in flexibility of choice, these two credit types are closer to using cash; 17 per cent of cash buyers said they had spent less than expected, compared with only 6 per cent with other types of credit (see Appendix 1, Table 25).
Over three-quarters of credit users reckon that its cost has been reasonable (see Appendix I, Table 24), and less than one in ten say it has been at all unreasonable.
Moreover, these proportions are much the same regardless of what type of credit has been used.
The significance of this, of course, is that whatever people may think credit actually costs, and however accurate or inaccurate their notions about how rates of interest and so forth compare, this widespread satisfaction with the cost of any credit actually used — and its uniformity, from one type to another — shows that borrowers themselves do not have any great misgivings that they are being charged too much.
However, people who confessed that they did not understand interest rates at all well (see  below) were more likely than average to find that the total cost of their most recent credit transaction had been more than they had planned.
Interest rates
The 1969 and 1977 surveys asked people if they supported the idea that a real rate of interest should have to be disclosed.
They explained it first in these terms:
A real rate of interest, which would be calculated as an annual rate per cent, takes into account the following facts:— the period of the loan may not be for a full year: interest is only charged on the actual amount borrowed (eg not including any deposit paid);— if regular repayments are being made, the full amount of the loan is not outstanding over the full year.
In both surveys, the great majority of people said that they favoured the plan.
Support was particularly strong among people in higher socio-economic groups, among young people, and among credit card users.
Leaving aside any suspicion that people might tend to agree with any suggestion put to them that they should have more information, how helpful can this information be in practice?
In our 1979 survey people were asked how well they understood interest rates (Appendix 1, Tables 49b and c).
They answered:
very well 5%
fairly well 33%
not very well 34%
not at all well 27%
People who most often claimed to understand interest rates well were, in order: professional/managerial people, men (as opposed to women), and people currently using a lot of credit.
The people who most often admitted that they understood them not well were, in order (worst first): unskilled workers, women, pensioners and skilled manual workers.
Genuine understanding implies at least some practical knowledge of what level of interest rates are likely to be charged for loans.
On this reckoning even people's generally low opinion of their ability to understand interest rates — 61 per cent feeling they do not understand them — underestimates the true extent of their difficulties.
As Appendix I shows (Table 48a), people were asked where they would choose to borrow money.
They were then asked what sort of interest rate they would expect to pay there (Table 49b).
So people answering these questions were, first, at least potential borrowers (people who wouldn't  want to borrow money didn't have to answer it).
Secondly, they were talking about types of lender that they knew well enough at least to find approachable.
Forty-five per cent of this group said that they could not even make a guess at the likely interest rate.
These included higher-than-average proportions of women, pensioners, people in lower socio-economic groups, people not at the moment using credit (although prepared to) and — as might be expected — people admitting to a poor understanding of interest rates.
Five per cent more gave no specific figure — just something like ‘the going rate’, or ‘bank rate’.
Other people's answers (see Appendix 1, section 8 for detailed discussion) were concentrated between 10 and 15 per cent— two-thirds of all answers fell in that bracket, and the overall average answer was 13 per cent .
What shows that this was generally an unthinking answer, uninformed by any real understanding of interest rates, is that people were just as likely to give this answer whether they thought it would be a percentage of the amount they borrowed, a percentage per year, or even a percentage per month.
(Even in response to prompting, only one person in the entire sample said that this was an effective annual percentage rate of charge — and he was a bank manager.)
Insofar as there was any factual basis for people's answers, it seems likely that for many it was MLR or bank base rate, which were between 12½ and 14 per cent at the time of the survey, and which are of course frequently mentioned in the press and on TV.
This general vagueness about interest rates is not incompatible with people's otherwise generally sound institutional knowledge of the costliness of different types of credit.
It is simply that interest rates have not been an important part of their own calculations of credit costliness (nor, indeed, have they been at all prominent in credit advertising).
As Table 33 of Appendix 1 shows, when people were asked what factors they judged important in deciding on a particular type of credit they had chosen recently, the rate of interest was judged least important among the five factors suggested (the others were cost of credit, convenience, amount of payment, and length of time over which payments are spread).
Only 5 per cent said interest rate was the most important factor, and even when their second and third choice factors were added in, only 19 per cent gave any importance to interest rates.
Interest rate was never judged the most important factor (nor was total cost of credit) with things costing up to £100, and with these even adding in people's second and third choice factors showed that interest rates only had some importance for about 12 per cent of shoppers.
Truth in lending: US experience of APR
Judging by American experience, there is no doubt that, as annual percentage rates come to be widely quoted in conformity with the new Consumer Credit Act regulations, people will become more familiar with them.
Lenders in the US have had to disclose an APR (broadly similar to ours, but calculated in a slightly different way) since 1969.
Surveys just before this Truth in Lending Act, just after, and again in 1977, have shown a steady growth in the proportion of American consumers whose estimates of the APRs being charged on the credit they use are at least reasonably close to actual market rates.
Whereas before the legislation only about one in seven users of fixed-sum credit had an approximately accurate idea of its APR, by 1970 over one in three did, and by 1977 just over half did.
This is an important and relatively rapid change.
Familiarity increased most quickly, and is now highest, with well-educated people.
Although less well-educated people, poor people and black people in the States are still markedly less familiar with APRs, at least one in three of them have now learned to estimate reasonably accurately what the APR is on their own credit arrangements.
Just as in this country, people in the US also say that they want information about APRs to be disclosed for credit transactions.
In the 1977 US survey, people were asked to give the order of importance that they attached to various different types of disclosure information about credit terms, and more (62 per cent) mentioned APRs first than even the size of their monthly payment (which was judged the next most important).
So knowledge of APRs has increased to the point where most Americans can now say roughly what the APR is on credit they use.
And people say that the APR is the most important piece of information about credit terms for them.
It would be reasonable to expect from this that over a few years, our APR disclosure regulations broadly similar to the US Truth in Lending Law — will raise people's knowledge of APRs well above the present level, and confirm them in their belief that disclosure of APRs is important.
However, the American evidence suggests that this growing familiarity with APRs has been rather an abstract affair.
The official report on the 1977 survey, for the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, concluded from analysis of the awareness and experience of some 2,500 shoppers that ‘the ability to use percentage rates to calculate dollar finance charges remains relatively uncommon,.
This is because when people try to translate an APR into what a loan will actually cost them they generally still seem to assume that an APR of, say, 10 per cent on a $100 loan would mean a credit cost of $10 — regardless of the period of the loan.
Although (by the US reckoning) this would be approximately true for a two-year loan, it would overstate the add-on dollar credit cost of a six-month loan by nearly five times.
So in practical terms of helping shoppers to make sound buying choices, the value of increased familiarity with APRs is somewhat curtailed by the way that people generally seem to equate it with the add-on cost of the credit.
This rather defeats its theoretical purpose of putting different types of loan over different periods of time on to an identical basis for comparison.
There is even the new risk that undue stress on the ‘truth’ of APRs may give people the wrong idea about the actual money cost of their credit, so that if, for example, they compare six-month credit with two-year credit they may think the shorter loan five times as costly — in comparison with the longer one — as it really is.
The 1977 US survey also shows that most people give APRs a lower place in their actual shopping than in the more abstract terms of what they say is important with regard to disclosure.
Though 62 per cent put APR first in importance for disclosure, only 22 per cent put it first in importance among credit terms they actually consider when they are buying.
However, and no doubt as a consequence of several years' experience of the fruits of Truth in Lending Law, this proportion is still very much higher than the 5 per cent in this country who count APR as most important.
How credit costs are used in practice
In our 1979 survey, these were the proportions of people rating each of five factors as the most important in their most recent decision to use a particular type of credit (Appendix 1, Table 33a):
convenience
40%
size of each instalment
19%
length of repayment period
16%
total cost of credit
6%
interest rate
5%
Thirteen per cent said that none of these factors made any difference, or said they didn't know.
As Appendix 1, Table 33a shows, convenience predominates even more in people's decision to use mail order or credit card.
But one of the cost factors, particularly the amount of each instalment, is as likely to be rated important by people deciding to use hire purchase.
And people stressing a cost factor as important were relatively likely to say they had had at least some choice between different credit arrangements, whereas people stressing convenience  were relatively likely to say there had been only one possibility (though differences were small).
When people's second and third most important factors are added in too, these are the proportions giving at least some importance to each factor:
size of each instalment
62%
convenience
61%
length of repayment period
59%
total cost of credit
30%
interest rate
19%
So, although only a minority of people deciding about credit reckon that its cost is of primary importance, insofar as they do consider the cost of credit they are very much more likely to be swayed by the amount of each instalment and the length of the repayment period than by other cost factors.
But of course it should be noted that most people are conditioned by many years of experience in which traders have tended to gloss over interest rates.
What is perhaps most remarkable about the US experience is the relatively few years which have been needed to reverse the trend of this conditioning, and at least increase people's familiarity with typical APR levels.
To recap then, there are two ways in which some awareness of credit costs may influence people's shopping: their subjective impression of comparative costliness, which tends to be reasonably realistic; and their objective awareness of interest rates and so forth, which tends to be sketchy, and — given American experience — even with increasing familiarity after implementation of Consumer Credit Act quotations and advertising regulations is likely to remain divorced from their actual understanding of the cost of individual credit transactions.
The 1977 US survey quoted above concluded from the experience of those interviewed that ‘heightened consumer awareness has apparently not been accompanied by an increase in (shopping around for credit) by consumers’.
Moreover, credit cost as a factor in buying choice — dwarfed as it is by convenience — is in practice most likely to focus on the amount of each instalment payment.
We do not wish to make too much of these points.
If for example someone has to choose between two £100 credit arrangements, both involving say about one year's monthly instalments, then any difference in APR between the two competing alternatives is a convenient guide to comparative costs.
And in any event, once people get used to the general  run of APRs, a high APR will be a valuable warning signal for them — marking credit types or credit transactions which need special caution.
But when consumers have a choice which includes widely different types of credit arrangements, it may often be more sensible for them to give more weight to the total cost of credit or the amount of each instalment.
The place where APR can stand on its own is as a comparative cost index of different types of credit.
One specific educational measure suggested to us by the National Federation of Credit Unions and the Co-operative Bank (and banks generally would be interested in seeing the idea explored further) was that the government should regularly publish the interest rates charged by different lenders, in comparative tables.
There are of course difficulties in compiling any such table.
Within any one type of credit, individual lenders may charge quite different rates, for example.
And even when the same lender is involved, different types of business may carry different rates (it is common, for example, for rates of charge to be higher on HP for older cars than on HP for new ones).
But these difficulties are not overwhelming obstacles.
As it is, commercial organisations manage to publish at least outline tabulations of borrowing costs (for example,Money Which?,
Money Maid .
So we should like to see an authoritative source of comparative APRs: both typical rates and the extremes of the range of rates, for different types of credit and (where this makes a significant difference) different types of purchase financed by the same type of credit.
We think it important that such a tabulation should include all types of revolving credit, as well as fixed-sum instalment credit.
It should be made clear that the value of this information for consumers would be chiefly as a yardstick against which they could measure the rates offered to them by lenders of the same type , or for credit of the same type.
We recognise that the costs of this would not be negligible, but believe that they would be insignificant in terms of cost-effectiveness.
It would be an important step towards APR taking its place as a familiar comparative yardstick of credit costliness for the general run of consumers, and proving its value as a useful warning signal for high-cost credit deals.
The existing tabulations of APR are too limited (both in what they include, and in who reads them) for this.
And of course, quotations of APR by individual traders would be very much more valuable if people could set them against a background of what is typical than if they stood alone, in isolation.
However, there is obvious scope for experiment and trial.
So we recommend a one-year experiment in which the Office of Fair Trading gathers typical APRs in the way we have suggested, and publishes the tabulated results monthly as a press release.
Cost and credit: is choice real or automatic?
It is clear that even a good working knowledge of credit costs helps consumers only if that knowledge affects their shopping decisions.
Our main 1979 survey was designed largely to throw light on this relationship between people's knowledge about credit and how they make actual shopping decisions — the first major study to explore this in this country, and more searching in this respect than even the valuable American studies carried out recently for the National Commission on Consumer Finance and the Federal Reserve Board.
The opportunities for using knowledge to shop around successfully for good-value credit involve both choosing between different types of credit (bank loan versus H P, say) and choosing between different terms or arrangements even within the same credit type.
Previously, the 1969 and 1977 NOP surveys had broached this problem, with a question asking people whether they had considered using some form of credit but had not actually done so — and exploring their reasons.
In 1977 (more or less as in 1969) only 12 per cent had considered this, and only a very small proportion of these had done anything about trying to get some type of credit not actually used in the end by them.
In general, this was nut normally part of a shopping-around process which led to selection of a particularly advantageous form of credit.
When people did not use a form of credit they had considered, usually it was because they either did not buy at all, or paid cash instead.
The reasons people gave for not using the form of credit (very few were actually refused it, by lenders) were rarely concerned specifically with cost — they were generally things like ‘changed my mind’ or ‘thought of a better method’.
But some people did say that high interest rates were a reason for not using credit cards, personal loans from finance companies, HP or second mortgages for home improvements.
Interestingly, the main form of credit considered but not used in 1977 was a bank personal loan, with HP, credit cards and bank overdrafts following.
This marks a change since 1969, when HP and mail order were the forms of credit most often considered but not used.
As in the 1977 NOP survey, our 1979 survey showed that very few people buying on credit had considered any type of credit other than the one they had actually used.
Nearly one in three credit buyers said that the type of credit they used had been a standing arrangement, and so something they used virtually automatically.
Another one in three said that there had been no choice of credit terms available.
So only about one in three people buying on credit feel they have had a real option of choosing between different types of credit arrangement.
And far fewer have actually taken up that option.
The proportion who had considered  any type of credit other than the one they used was only 6 per cent of this sample.
This is a much smaller proportion than the 18 per cent of credit buyers who said ‘yes’ when asked if they had considered different kinds of credit or credit terms.
It is probably a more accurate reflection of the truth, because of the likelihood that at least some of those who said ‘yes’ did so because they thought that the answer was expected of them.
The main type of credit considered but not used was a bank personal loan — confirming the trend suggested by the 1977 survey.
Moreover, the detailed cross-tabulations (not in the Appendix) showed that people who had ended up using bank loans were more likely than other borrowers to have considered some other forms of credit too — usually HP.
A point which may be relevant to this was that virtually all those who had made a positive choice of credit type did have bank accounts — a factor which clearly brings bank loans into the range of credit possibilities for people.
The reason that people do not generally look into alternative credit terms in any detail certainly is not that they feel pushed willy-nilly into one particular type of credit.
On the one hand, only three per cent of credit buyers said that there had been any difficulty getting the sort of terms they wanted — more or less regardless of what type-of credit they actually used, or of their socio-economic background.
On the other hand, the great majority reckoned that they themselves had taken the decision to use a particular type of credit (regardless of whether or not they had seriously considered any other type too).
Only one in ten said that it had been suggested to them by a salesman, agent or someone at the shop; about three-quarters said instead that they personally had thought of it, and most of the rest that it had been suggested by their wife or husband.
However, three powerful forces — habit, convenience, and ignorance or diffidence about alternatives — propel most people into this decision, rather than any conscious evaluation of what is best for them.
Obviously, it is never easy to disentangle the process leading up to a particular credit transaction from the general buying process.
Sometimes the decision to buy itself leads directly to one particular type of credit.
Some 95 per cent of mail order transactions involve credit, and buying from a tallyman or doorstep credit trader virtually by definition means buying on weekly instalments.
But convenience is rated as the most important factor in deciding on a particular type of credit by the great majority.
Once someone has used a particular credit type, they are very likely to buy other things in the same way.
One in three credit buyers have still been paying off some previous transaction with the same lender when  they have arranged their most recent significant credit purchase.
Nearly two-thirds have used the same type of credit more than once in the last two years.
As might be expected, repeated use is far more common with credit cards and mail order than with HP and money loans.
Both may be used as a shopping method (selected for its convenience) rather than as a type of credit.
The numbers using trading checks in our sample were too small to draw any conclusions from, but the National Consumer Credit Federation (representing mainly small to medium-sized check traders, but some large firms too) told us that some 80 to 95 per cent of their business is with previous customers, usually long-standing.
As the group discussions showed (Appendix II), asking for credit can create many anxieties for people, at least those lowest on the social or economic ladder.
These anxieties strengthen the importance of habit: people stick to credit types they know from experience, rather than risk the worry and difficulties of dealing with the unknown.
Experience at the Birmingham Money Advice Centre (see Appendix III) shows that — at least for the generally poor people who go to the Centre with money problems — mail order, check traders and other weekly callers such as tallymen are woven so closely into the fabric of daily (or rather weekly) life as to be more than just a possible buying choice.
The decision — or, as we have seen, more commonly non-decision — to use a particular type of credit is of course only part of the process.
There is also the question of whether to buy on credit or to pay cash.
In our main 1979 survey, people were asked without prompting to say why they had recently bought on credit rather than paid cash.
Appendix I, Table 22 shows their answers in detail.
The two essential points are that fewer than one in three had considered paying cash as a real alternative; and that half said they bought on credit because they didn't have the cash, while about another quarter gave answers (like ‘needed it right away’) which boil down to much the same.
So, as with choice among different types of credit arrangement, choice between credit and cash is a matter of practical reality for only a minority of consumers.
Who are these ‘choosers’?
As we have seen, they are much more likely than average to have bank accounts.
This is no doubt partly a reflection of the way in which people with bank accounts do have a wider range of credit options open to them than people without.
But it is also true that having a bank account marks higher rather than lower socio-economic groups.
So — regarding whether or not someone chooses among credit types, or between credit and cash — having a bank account may partly be seen as shorthand for a collection of other characteristics to do with income and social background which  may be influential in themselves.
The Committee of London Clearing Bankers told us that in recent years the banks have been opening an increasing number of accounts for customers in the middle to lower income groups.
Figures they gave us from surveys carried out for the Inter-Bank Research Organisation by the British Market Research Bureau confirmed this, but showed that people in social classes A, B and C1 are still twice as likely to have a bank account as people in social classes D and E, and that the higher someone's income the greater is the likelihood of their having a bank account.
Yet another way in which not having a bank account makes people more likely to fall into the non-chooser group, the automatic users of one or other type of credit, is that people without bank accounts are likely to be paid weekly, in cash.
Indeed, eight out of ten manual workers are paid weekly in cash.
This marks a strong contrast with other countries such as Denmark, France, the Netherlands and the United States, where the great majority of workers now have their salaries paid direct into bank accounts, usually monthly (fortnightly in Denmark).
Weekly cash wages payment is likely to rule out credit cards, bank loans and overdrafts, The forms of credit which it encourages are those involving weekly instalments: mail order, trading checks, tallymen and weekly credit callers.
In our main 1979 survey, people were asked  whether they would prefer weekly or monthly instalment payments.
Of those who cared, most said they would prefer monthly.
However, over one in five said they would prefer weekly.
Mostly, these were people in lower socio-economic groups; but it is worth noting that even in these groups people with high credit commitments, or people who said that if they had to arrange a loan it would be for a relatively large sum of money, generally said they would prefer monthly repayments.
This preference, no doubt imposed by how people are paid as well as induced by their own wishes and experience, would on its own direct some people to the weekly-payment types of credit.
But another factor adds to the push.
People with bank accounts often like to pay credit instalments by bank standing order — half the people in our main survey said they preferred this payment method.
However, others — minorities, but none the less important for that — prefer different payment methods.
Nearly one in three said they would prefer to take or post instalments themselves, each time.
One in eight said they would prefer to have the instalments collected individually.
Those preferring to have them collected, or to take or send them individually, were mostly older people, and people in lower socio-economic groups, and people who — when they were talking about being so short of money that they would have to arrange a loan — thought in terms of a relatively small amount of money.
So various factors propel people without bank accounts, particularly poorer or older people, towards the types of credit which involve weekly payments, probably collected by an agent.
This generally means mail order, trading checks, and weekly credit traders.
As we have seen (on pp. 46–7), the cost of weekly collection is high — making APR on the small sums of credit usually involved much higher than for monthly-payment types of credit.
But the circumstances which propel people into using weekly-payment types of credit make the cost, for them, virtually immaterial.
People paid weekly, and on weekly budgets (probably tight), virtually have to think of weekly instalments if they want credit, regardless of the costs which are potentially high (whether directly with trading checks or credit traders, or indirectly through rather higher prices with mail order).
Credit unions, which would be cheaper but still allow weekly payments, are ruled out for the great majority — simply because there isn't yet one they could join.
And monthly-payment forms of credit, also generally cheaper, tend to rule themselves out for the reasons given above.
Regulations under the Consumer Credit Act will of course ensure that accurate cost information is available for all forms of credit.
But, as we have seen, although people in this country rarely have a realistic idea  of the APR, they already have a reasonable idea of which forms of credit are relatively costly, and which are more reasonable.
When they decide on a particular form of credit, their decision commonly has nothing to do with cost: it is simply that that form of credit is almost automatically part of the buying process that they're used to.
And even when they do make a specific choice, non-cost factors are generally more important to them than cost factors.
Judging from American experience, general disclosure of APRs in line with Consumer Credit Act regulations will indeed make many more people aware of the sort of APR that they can expect with a particular type of credit.
But, again judging from the US experience, this awareness will not make people much more conscious of the actual money cost of different forms of credit than they are already, nor encourage shopping around for cheaper credit.
So it does not seem realistic to look to credit cost disclosure regulations, and the wider awareness of APRs that these will bring, to change people's credit buying habits much (though even a small change could be enough to influence lenders to offer more attractively competitive rates).
While mail order, trading checks and weekly credit callers or tallymen continue to be the forms of credit which most obviously meet the needs of those used to weekly budgeting, and to being paid weekly in cash, they are likely to continue to be the obvious choice for many such people — regardless of truth-in-lending regulations.
But there are two ways in which the informed use of lower-cost credit may be encouraged by processes beyond regulation.
The growth of self-help credit unions, much helped by the Credit Unions Act 1979, may in future give a lower-cost credit option to many more of the weekly-paid, especially as they allow personal weekly payments of instalments.
On the one hand, more credit unions will mean, simply, that more people have access to them.
On the other hand, the nature of the ‘common bond’ on which they are based is such that members and potential members of a credit union can become aware of the cost advantages in the normal course of their day-to-day contact with friends, neighbours or workmates.
This means that newcomers to the union would have confidence about using it, and not feel so anxious about it as a new and untried form of credit as they might if it was instead an advertised credit institution.
Credit unions will be discussed more in the next chapter.
Secondly we have already noted that banks are opening more accounts for lower-paid people, alongside the trend towards payment of wages through bank accounts rather than in cash.
Each year, about half-a-million workers are switching from cash to payment through a bank account.
Our survey shows that people with bank accounts are much  more likely than others to shop around for credit, and to use lower-cost forms of credit.
So there is some hope that the gradual trend to wider bank use will be coupled with a trend to more informed and selective credit use.
At the least, new account holders will now have a low-cost credit option — bank loans or overdrafts — which they did not have before.
The potential benefits of this will be discussed in the next chapter.
The moment of purchase: how people could use credit cost information
In our 1979 main survey, we asked a series of important questions to discover how people were influenced by the disclosure of either APR or the total credit cost, or both, when we asked them to choose between rival credit terms.
This is shown in detail in Appendix 1, section 9.
The total sample was divided into six groups, and each group was asked to choose out of five repayment arrangements for a particular loan; then, given more information about the terms of the loan, they were given the opportunity of changing their choice.
To exclude the influence of how people might feel about different types of lender or types of credit, the information was confined to the terms of the loan — so that in effect people were choosing between rival credit terms possibly within a single credit type.
The only influence on their choice could have been differences in the credit terms.
All the groups faced one of two basic choices: either the loan carried much higher APR as the repayment period grew longer; or it carried much lower APR as the repayment period grew longer.
In both cases, the difference between shortest and longest repayment period involved a change from about 10 per cent to 50 per cent APR.
In order that the hypothetical choice of loans offered to them would have at least some roots in people's own experience, the size of the loan was in each case matched to the size of loan which people said they would consider taking out in practice.
That is to say, people who had said that they might consider taking out a loan of up to £400 but not more were given a set of credit terms for a £100 loan; people who might consider taking out a loan of over £400, but not less, were given a set of credit options for a £1,000 loan.
People who said they wouldn't borrow money were excluded from this study.
In the first case, this is how the choice appeared for people considering a £1,000 loan once they had all the information (both ‘total repayment’ and ‘APR’were explained):
(Although the repayment amounts, per month and total, were scaled down for people considering smaller loans, the numbers of months and APRs were identical.)
When people know only the number of payments and the amount of each instalment, their choice of repayment period has to be guided by the relationship between two conflicting factors.
On the one hand, people look for a low instalment amount (which of course tends to mean a relatively long repayment period); on the other, they look for a short repayment period (which tends to mean a relatively high instalment amount).
In the survey, people had said which of the two factors was more important to them.
Most (70 per cent) said they would prefer the shortest possible repayment period, even if it meant large instalment payments.
This was especially so with people who were likely to borrow large sums of money, if they borrowed at all.
Those who said they would prefer the smallest possible instalments, spread over a long period, were most commonly people in lower socio-economic groups, people with current credit commitments, and people with whom the amount they said they would borrow (if they borrowed money) was relatively small.
In fact, the repayment periods chosen by those considering small loan option averaged about 12 months, while repayment periods chosen by those considering options for large loans averaged about 20 months.
Moreover, answers for small loans were concentrated very much at the short-repayment-period end of the scale, while answers for large loans  were spread more evenly across the whole range of options from 6 to 36 months.
This must of course be partly because inflation has made even £100 too small a sum to need spreading over many instalment repayments.
But it also suggests that the tendency people have to favour quick repayment is stronger even than suggested by the majority stated preference (for quick repayment versus small instalments).
But an element of rationing can override this tendency: when people know that their budgets will stand only a certain level of instalment payment, that forces them into longer repayment schedules than they would otherwise choose.
This interpretation squares up with the survey's finding that people were most likely to apply the critical comment ‘you feel you'd never finish paying’ to the two types of credit which, though not in themselves necessitating long repayment schedules, tend to be associated with the larger loans which would impose long schedules on a ‘rationed’consumer.
The figures in Appendix I confirm the influence of people's desire to pay off quickly.
They also show that when people do not know either the APR or the total credit cost, they cannot always sniff out the better-value end of the repayment period scale (in terms of much lower APR) simply from the level of the instalment payments offered.
With the second set of options (long repayment period = low APR), the average repayment period chosen was if anything shorter than with the first (short repayment period = low APR).
How does disclosure of APR and total credit cost alter this relatively simple pattern of preferences for short repayment periods, stretched out longer when people have to bring the size of individual instalments down to meet budgeting exigencies?
What the detail in Appendix I boils down to is that, in general, seeing how total costs or APRs compare does not make most people change their minds.
But it does shift some people's choices quite sharply in the direction of lower total cost or lower APR.
This is of course encouraging, in terms of the potential effects of disclosure regulations under the Consumer Credit Act.
But there are various snags.
First, the proportion of people who remained unmoved by disclosure of credit costs and interest rates — on average, more than two-thirds of the sample — was large.
For those who did stick to their first choice, the most important consideration seems to have been simply how much they wanted — or could afford — to pay back each month.
Moreover, about eight per cent of those who changed their minds with additional disclosure changed in the Wrong' direction: they made a blind or confused choice rather than a rational decision.
Blind choosers must, by the rules of chance, be just as likely to make an accidentally correct  choice.
So it should be assumed that a similar number of those who changed in the ‘right’ direction were similarly ill-informed about their new choice, and just happened to end up in the ‘right’group by chance.
Also, about ten per cent of those who changed their minds became ‘don't knows’.
So, all in all, only about three-quarters of those who changed their minds with additional information can be said to have genuinely interpreted that information, and made a rational choice.
In spite of this, we are left with perhaps one in five who appear to have made sensible revisions of their choice, given total cost of credit and/or APR information.
Again, though, there are some points to watch even with this minority of ‘rational choosers’.
People who had said — during another part of the interview — that they preferred the smallest possible individual instalments turned out to be just as likely to switch to a shorter repayment schedule (given lower APR and credit costs) as people who had said they preferred the shortest possible repayment schedule.
Given the general anxiety to avoid long-term indebtedness, a stated preference for small instalments — even at the expense of a long repayment period — must often be interpreted as recognition of tight budget limits that rule out larger instalments.
For people in this position, choice of a shorter repayment schedule in response to APR/credit cost disclosure would in practice be mere wishful thinking.
Also, the detailed cross-tabulations (not in the Appendix) showed that when APR and/or total credit cost was lower for shorter repayment periods, people who had originally chosen the very longest possible repayment period tended to switch — if they switched at all— to a repayment period right at the other end of the scale.
This meant they would be at least doubling their monthly instalment payments.
This was so, whether they were considering a £100 or a £1,000 loan.
For much the same reason as suggested in the last paragraph, this seems a course of action which in practice would be ruled out for many of them by financial constraints: so again, for many, just wishful thinking.
As Table 55c of Appendix I shows, although differences between groups were very small, it was often women more than men, older people more than younger people, and those with lower rather than higher educational levels who most often changed to a different choice after they were given the extra information about APR and/ or total credit cost.
This goes against the general trend of the rest of the survey (which suggests that these groups are less well informed and less accurately informed about credit).
So there must be doubt about the extent to which their revised choice marks a genuine readiness to profit from extra information about credit costs, rather than mere uncertainty.
Perhaps more serious is the lesson to be learned from people's answers when they were considering loan options where APR was lowest for the longest repayment periods (as in the second table, on p. 63).
When people were shown APR to start with, and then additionally shown the total cost of credit, they more often switched to a shorter repayment period (if they switched at all— and differences were very small anyway).
It is easy to sympathise with their dilemma.
First, they see various loan options where the APR dropped from 49 per cent for six-month repayment periods to only 10 per cent for 36-month periods.
This is obviously a strong incentive to go for long periods.
But then they see that, for all the options except one, the total cost of credit is identical.
This might well give them the impression that each of those options is equally good value.
So back they switch, to shorter repayment periods — which mean not merely higher monthly instalments but in this case very much higher APRs as well.
The interpretation which perhaps makes most sense of people's answers is that their decisions seem to be based first on a desire to pay off quickly, and second (in modification of this) on how high an instalment they can afford — rather than on interest rates or total cost.
In this experiment as in the other loan choice questions, people must have gathered that both APR and total credit cost mattered because of the way they were being questioned about them.
So, in a sense, it gives forewarning (though no more than that) of one problem which may emerge when the disclosure regulations make them increasingly familiar with APR and the cost of credit.
The way people reacted to APR is perfectly reasonable — many picked the long-period loans that carried low APR rates.
But the way that some people then reacted to the total credit cost figures is surely rather dampening.
Those who changed back to shorter repayment periods, because in this example they carry the same total credit cost as longer ones, show what must be the widely-held feeling that,regardless of loan period , the lower the total cost of credit the better.
As was noted above, it has been this neglect of the loan period factor (and consequent confusion between APR and actual money cost of credit) which has in practice proved an obstacle to Americans using their growing awareness of APRs to shop more discriminatingly for credit.
And of course, the options people were given in our survey gave a more extreme range of APRs than is likely in real life.
In practice, that is with a less marked difference between a low APR for a long loan and a higher APR for a short one, the total credit cost would actually be considerably lower for the shorter — but higher — APR option.
So the pulling power of the low credit cost figures for short loans, even when the APR is very high, would be even stronger.
Of course, the real crux of the matter is the question of how well people are able to balance against one another several different sets of figures relating to credit cost.
The survey results tabulated in section 9 of Appendix 1 suggest that even the minority who do try and balance the figures in this way (that is, the one in five who are at least theoretical ‘rational choosers’) may sometimes be swayed by an entirely random factor — the order in which they become aware of the various different sets of cost figures.
If this factor did not influence people, then the average repayment period chosen by people once they had been shown both APR and total cost as well as instalment amount would not vary very much between the different sets of respondents (that is, those shown just the instalment amounts first, those shown APR too, and those shown total credit cost too).
But in fact the average repayment period chosen varied markedly.
The following table shows how the repayment period varied for each of the four main samples, once people knew all the cost information, depending on what order they had been shown each set of cost figures.
In the table, the figures to compare with one another are those across each row.
The comparison shows that the order in which the various cost details were revealed influences people's choice almost as much as the cost details themselves.
So, the detail of the survey results points up several ways in which the readiness of perhaps one in five borrowers to take account of total credit cost and APR, when considering loan options, is likely to be undermined, thwarted, or occasionally even entirely misapplied, in practice.
But there are further grounds for doubting that — even given  full disclosure — more than a small minority of this one in five will be able to make practical use of their alertness to APR and credit cost information.
First, as shown in the previous section, factors which have little to do with cost — such as habit, convenience, being paid weekly will continue to dictate many people's choice of credit.
Secondly, it almost goes without saying that in real life people will not be presented at the point of sale with a neat, comparative ranking of (say) five different credit options, with one end of the scale of choice giving much better value than the other.
Again as shown previously, very few people make any attempt to find out about more than one single credit possibility.
And the American survey evidence suggests that, although disclosure should bring greater familiarity with APRs and so forth, it is unlikely to strengthen the present very tenuous link between understanding of credit costs and practical use of this understanding to shop more wisely.
Thirdly, even if people were inclined to shop around actively for credit, the practices of lenders themselves are likely to set at least some limits to their ability to do this.
This question is the subject of the next chapter.
In this discussion, we have left the most important point until last.
The reason for setting out these reservations at such length is not that we have any doubts about the value to consumers of credit cost information.
On the contrary: we see the cost disclosure regulations which have now been made under the Consumer Credit Act (see chapter 5) as highly important.
But pressing the case for disclosure of APR has been such a long, hard battle that there is an obvious temptation to feel that — now the battle has been won — we can all sit back and sigh with relief.
That is not so.
APR is not the instant answer to credit choice problems.
But instead — and with careful guidance — it should eventually take its place alongside other measures of credit cost as a useful tool for comparison, and as a warning signal where credit cost is really high.
Knowledge of credit types
People's ability to choose between different types of credit may also be limited by their knowledge of what is available.
First, people can choose only among those forms of credit which they know of.
As can be seen from Table 8 of Appendix I, our 1979 survey con firms what the earlier NOP/ OFT surveys found out about this: people don't have a wide knowledge of credit types
When they were asked about any credit arrangements which they  knew people like them could use to buy things, these were the proportions which named each of the following:
Ten per cent could not think of any form.
Asked to name sources of credit out of the blue, people might well simply leave out or forget about some sources which in practice they could use, if they were offered that type of credit when they were buying.
Indeed, cross-tabulation showed that some mail order, credit sale, check trading and fuel board credit users forgot to mention these types of credit in answering this question.
But the list might give some idea of the maximum proportions of people who might think of some other form of credit as a potential alternative, when actually offered any particular type of credit.
Thus, though more than 20 per cent of people are in fact likely to use mail order, it is very unlikely that mail order would ever occur to more than 20 per cent of people as a potential source of credit when they were (say) standing in front of a shop window looking at something they would like to buy.
(People may well not think of mail order as a form of credit at all.)
So the horizon of credit options is for most people circumscribed simply by their limited awareness of what's on the market for them.
Obviously they cannot weigh up the comparative cost of some type of credit which is beyond their ken.
It is no surprise to find, too, that some people's credit horizon is much more limited than others'.
Pensioners were anyway much less likely than others to have used many sources of credit, though the types of credit for which their awareness was relatively high were moneylenders, mail order, shop accounts and tallymen.
Unskilled manual workers were also considerably less likely than average to know of a wide selection of credit sources; sources which came higher up their  list than average were moneylenders, mail order, tallymen, loans from finance companies, electricity or gas board schemes, and HP.
It was people in higher socio-economic groups, of high education, and particularly those with bank accounts who named the widest selection of credit sources.
The second point is also related to people's varying backgrounds.
To summarise, again, survey evidence from Appendix 1, people who had been educated to a higher level, who were more highly paid, or were in a higher social group, seemed more readily able than average to use APR or credit cost information in choosing among loan options.
It should be added (see Appendix II) that the discussion groups suggest that Asian borrowers may be particularly well informed about credit cost comparisons, while West Indian borrowers may be relatively badly informed.
Information and education: the central need
The themes of this chapter have been clear enough.
Habit and convenience dominate most people's choice of credit type and their choice within that type.
Although people's institutional knowledge of the comparative costliness of different types of credit is fairly accurate (in terms, say, of knowing that banks are a cheaper source of loans than HP firms), they have little idea of the actual cost of credit, and of how this varies from type to type or firm to firm.
People only rarely make a positive choice, weighing up one credit arrangement against another.
When they do, credit cost is not an important part of the choice for most of them.
Even when it is, it is most often seen in terms of the size of individual instalment payments, and the length of the repayment period.
Fewer people say that the total cost of credit or the interest rate is important to their choice.
The idea of APR will be difficult for people to grasp.
At the moment, very few indeed have a reasonable idea of what sort of interest rate might be charged.
The American experience makes it reasonable to expect that, as the effects of the new advertisements and quotations regulations take hold, awareness of typical APRs will slowly climb so that in maybe seven or eight years' time most people do have a reasonable idea of them.
However, American experience also suggests that this awareness may remain rather abstract: relatively few people become able to translate differences in APR into differences in the money cost of credit.
Our own experiments with people's ability to juggle credit-cost options give no reason to expect different results here.
In any event, if great prominence came to be given to APR, many people could be misled about the comparative value of competing credit  arrangements; partly because our calculations show that small and sometimes insignificant differences in what the buyer actually has to pay for credit can make for huge and therefore misleadingly imposing differences in APR; partly because it will tend to make longer-term borrowing look more attractive than shorter-term borrowing even when(given that the great majority of people prefer to pay off their debts as quickly as possible) this may not be best for people.
In all of this, older people, less well educated people, people without bank accounts, those in lower socio-economic groups, West Indians (probably not Asians), and to some extent women rather than men tend to be less well informed than average, and to make even less rational choices when they buy credit.
For many of these people, anxiety about money and about arranging credit can powerfully reinforce the general tendency to stick to credit arrangements they are familiar with, and avoid searching out new and perhaps better-value alternatives.
In particular, the group discussions we held show that at the extremes of poverty and limited awareness, credit can become too heavy a burden for the family budget and even for emotional stability.
But, far short of this point, the various circumstances combine to make poorer people tend to use relatively costly forms of credit.
Finally, the importance of illness and unemployment as factors which can push credit users into serious debt problems is clear.
There are several conclusions to be drawn from all this.
First, it seems clear that although the wide range of credit types which are available should let people easily find and use their best-value choice, lack of knowledge and the very widespread practice of tacking a particular credit arrangement almost automatically on to a particular shopping transaction combine to make rational choice of credit relatively rare.
Real choice is most likely for a small minority of shoppers who tend to be better educated and richer than average.
The extent to which the Consumer Credit Regulations for Advertisements, Quotations and Total Charge for Credit can be expected to help will be discussed in the next two chapters.
But credit cost information is already available, though largely unused and not well understood.
One central missing factor has been education — and increasing the amount of credit cost information which is available will if anything increase the need for education.
The Office of Fair Trading has recognised this need.
However, many people have urged on us the importance of information programmes for improving people's knowledge of credit choice and cost — including the Birmingham Money Advice Centre (which sees it as particularly important for young people, and for social workers), the  Finance Houses Association, the Consumer Credit Trade Association and the Institute of Trading Standards Administration.
The obvious problem with information about credit is that, the more people need it (that is, the groups shown above as most ill-informed about credit, and most likely to use unnecessarily high-cost credit) the more difficult it is to make sure it reaches them.
So, while we heartily approve of such examples as money management (including credit use) as an O-level subject, and encouragement to include money management and credit use in liberal-studies teaching for the over-16s, this will hardly help those who leave school early and who would profit most from wiser choice of credit.
The education package for schools announced by the Minister of State for Consumer Affairs in March 1980 is a particularly welcome initiative, directed as it is to those who are likely to leave school soon.
We hope that progress will be made on the difficult task of working this material into the education of the less academically inclined pupils who would benefit most from money management education.
Again, the extent to which — say — OFT pamphlets can help such people once they have left school is limited.
A typical print-order for an OFT credit booklet would be in the region of 150,000 — that is to say, one credit booklet for more than 200 people of credit-using age.
The very small proportion of shoppers who would therefore use such a booklet seem to us unlikely to include many who are at the moment most ignorant about credit and its cost, and therefore most need the information in it.
In our main survey, only seven per cent told us that they had had classes about household budgeting or managing money while they were at school — and rather less than half of even this small minority said that they had been taught anything about buying on credit, or borrowing money.
As credit is now so central to people's lives — financing as it does something approaching half of what they buy, other than day-to-day necessities — and as choice of credit arrangements is increasingly diverse and complex, people by the time they leave school should be equipped to deal sensibly with it.
That is to say, credit should figure far more prominently in education than it has done in the past.
That is of course an obvious and easy conclusion for us to reach.
But it is far from obvious and easy to work out how this target can be met.
Moreover we are not qualified to suggest any solutions to this problem — that must be a job for educationists.
We take considerable heart from the knowledge that — despite the strain on educational resources — many teachers are showing their awareness of the importance of money management education to the future lives of their pupils by active efforts  to integrate it into curricula.
The growth of money management education committees and associations within local education authorities is evidence of this; we have been told of encouraging credit education initiatives in the North West, North East, South Wales and Scotland and no doubt there are other similar examples elsewhere.
There is already some national back-up for schools credit education.
The London Clearing Banks' Education Service and the Finance Houses Association, for example, both provide valuable teaching material and collaborate with teachers on money management education; the Bank Education Service maintains contact with more than 5,000 schools and colleges.
Recognising the value of this support from the credit industry, we believe however that still more could be gained from a new body set up to promote money management education, both in schools and outside.
Mere was a proposal that the financial institutions should jointly fund a ‘Money Management Association’, which might have taken on and developed the educational work done by the voluntary National Savings Committee.
This would however have involved a fairly cumbersome organisation, with regional committees and large numbers of volunteers trained to talk about money management to schoolchildren.
We do not wish to revive that proposal.
What we have in mind is instead a much smaller team which could give a national focus to the work of local or regional money management education associations, help to harmonise educational material with the needs of school curricula, spot gaps in research knowledge and seek ways of filling these, and follow its concern through into the adult world — tackling the credit information gap from both sides, by looking for ways both to spread knowledge (for instance through the media, not forgetting — see chapter 3 — those catching the attention of women) and to make credit use itself easier to understand.
It could also explore the circumstances under which people get into difficulties over credit use, and ways of eliminating them.
This agenda suggests an agency supported jointly by the financial institutions, and working very closely with them and with their educational wings.
It must be remembered that an important objective for the financial institutions is to sell their services, and this aim may not always coincide exactly with the interests of those learning how best to buy those services (and, sometimes, learning when it is best not to buy them).
The diverse interests of the different institutions, in a body bringing them together, should in itself serve as some partial insurance against too much ‘selling pressure’.
But it will be important to make sure that the constitution of this agency, and its terms of reference, set out  how it will harness the skills and resources of the financial institutions while keeping its direction firmly and independently in the hands of educationists.
Moreover, we look to the way in which its work would be laced into the work of local education authorities and the Schools Council, and the close collaboration with the Office of Fair Trading and the Department of Trade which it would no doubt enjoy, to make sure that consumer needs came first
A particular type of credit and money-management education is that needed for the people who unfortunately have to pick up the pieces when consumers get into difficulties over credit use: consumer and community advisers, citizens' advice bureaux staff, social workers, even probation officers.
Certainly, OFT leaflets can help a lot here.
It was suggested to us that consumers would benefit from a proliferation of specialised money advice centres, on the lines of the one in Birmingham.
There may well be room for one or two such centres in other places, but in our view the success of the centre in Birmingham owes a very great deal to the almost evangelical enthusiasm of those who run it.
We see similar success elsewhere only as a product of similar crusading zeal, and that would have to emerge spontaneously, on the spot.
Instead, the National Consumer Council's previous work on consumer aid and advice convinces us that advice about money and credit problems — just like other types of advice — is best available as part of a general advice service, from non-specialist advice bureaux such as CABx.
However, we think that the specialist experience of the Birmingham Centre would be most valuable to advice bureaux and individual workers who have to help consumers with their problems, and so we would like to see wider use of the Birmingham Centre's experience in training programmes for general advisers, and perhaps in a back-up service for them.
This could fit in well with the growing concern with money management now being shown by the National Association of Citizens' Advice Bureaux (NACAB).
Following a successful money advice service on the Birmingham lines which has been set up within the New Cross CAB in London, NACAB has started a pilot scheme for training CAB workers in money management matters by correspondence course.
The Welsh Consumer Council is actively supporting the development of a similar money advice service within the CAB which serves Ely, a very large council estate on the outskirts of Cardiff.
The Welsh Consumer Council's collaboration with the Ely CAB includes funding of research visits to the Birmingham Money Advice Centre and the New Cross CAB.
Lenders and credit use
The pattern of credit use, by consumers as a whole and by each individual consumer, is not decided simply by the inclination of consumers.
Obviously, granters of credit have strong influence.
First of all, the trading policies of credit granters will tend to have an overall influence over credit use.
To take an obvious example, if banks lend only to their current account customers, then non-customers (tending to be demographically distinct from customers in various ways) will have to use other credit sources.
A less obvious example might be some relationship between, say, size of shop and type of credit available through that shop.
If big shops tended to offer a wider range of credit facilities than small ones, then people shopping in the urban centres where big shops are round would have a wider choice of credit types than people shopping in small rural centres.
Secondly, it is of course up to the individual credit granter to decide whether or not to enter into a transaction requested by an individual customer.
The way in which credit granters make this decision will affect not just how that individual uses credit but through its effect on similar individuals in the same circumstances may also affect general patterns of credit use.
This section of the report will discuss these two types of influence separately.
But first, it is worth briefly summarising the evidence which our surveys have given about problems over credit use — as far as the relationship between borrower and lender is concerned.
Problems with credit.
The most obvious fact is that real problems are rare.
In the main survey (Appendix 1, comments on Table 24; and more detailed cross-tabulations not included in Appendix), only three per cent of those who had recently bought on credit had had any problems with their credit arrangement, after buying (nearly half the problems were difficulties over paying, and problems which people thought were the fault of the credit firm were very rare indeed).
We also asked people if they had ever had any problems over credit use, apart from the most recent purchase.
Although six per cent said they had, half said the difficulty had been over five years ago.
When people thought that the difficulty had been the  credit firm's fault, about half said that the company had made some mistake — such as claiming that arrears were owed, when in fact payments were up to date; about half said they had been refused some type of credit which they had applied for.
In all, this incidence of reported problems cannot be said to suggest much more than the occasional misunderstanding, difficulty or other problem which must mark a small proportion of virtually every type of consumer transaction.
Credit buyers were also asked to rate their satisfaction with the credit arrangement they had used on a five-point scale (see Table 24 of Appendix I).
Only two per cent said that they were at all dissatisfied with the arrangement: to put this in perspective, about ten per cent of buyers (credit or cash) were prepared to admit to being dissatisfied in some way with the goods they had bought.
So again, there is no evidence whatsoever of substantial discontent with the credit arrangement which people use.
Within this overall picture of general satisfaction, it should be noted that — among the main types of credit — fewer people were very satisfied with HP arrangements than with credit cards, shop accounts and mail order; money loans fell between the two.
Aspects of people's attitudes to the cost of different types of credit have already been discussed (in the previous chapter).
Here, it is worth drawing attention to some points other than cost which emerge from the analysis of people's attitudes to different types of credit (Appendix I, Tables 12a, 12b, 12c and comments on them).
The particular point of interest (Table 12b) is the extent of any difference between the attitudes of people who are not using or have not used a type of credit, and the attitudes of those who have: when the attitudes of non-users are different, this may suggest either a misapprehension, or sometimes some genuine difference — in either case, perhaps worth further exploration.
In general, users were more likely to express opinions about a type of credit than non-users — so both positive and negative attitudes tended to emerge more strongly.
But even allowing for this, current users of credit cards were much more likely than non-users to say they are easy to understand and use, convenient and make shopping simple; and more likely to say that they encourage people to spend too much.
Current users of bank loans were much more likely than non-users to say that they are convenient for expensive goods, and more likely to say they are easy to understand and use and make shopping simple.
Users of mail order were much more likely than non-users to say it is convenient for people who are not well off, easy to understand and use, and makes shopping simple.
And users of hire purchase were unusual, in being little more favourable in their attitudes to it than non-users.
In general(see Appendix I, Table 12c) women and men did not  differ much in their attitudes to different types of credit, but women had more favourable options of mail order.
Old people were more likely than others to have unfavourable views (when they expressed any view at all) about each type of credit — especially HP and bank loans.
Younger people's views were more likely to be favourable, especially with credit cards, mail order and store accounts.
Manual socio-economic grades were more likely to have favourable views of HP and mail order than people in non-manual grades, and were particularly likely not to know how bank loans or credit cards worked.
They were also less likely to favour shop accounts.
How trading policies affect credit use
A fundamental influence on credit use is the desire, greater or less, of financial institutions and retailers to lend to people.
It is largely in the last decade that banks have modified their traditional role of borrowing from individuals to lend to industry, and have started lending massively to individuals themselves too.
And it is really in the last decade that credit cards have been sold as a major source of credit; and that American banks have tried to sell people loans here.
Clearly, developments of this sort deeply affect credit use.
However, we do not propose even to consider any question of either restraining or promoting such developments, at least from this point of-view.
Coercion of lenders — either to lend or not to lend — can have no justification in a freely competitive market.
But it should be noted in passing that comparison of varying loan rates in different states of the US with varying degrees of restriction which those states put on entry into the lending market has tended to confirm in practice what might be expected in theory — that a wide range of different sources of credit tends to mean relatively low average loan rates.
(The more lenders there are competing for the same customers, the hard for each has to work to attract a given number of customers — and an obvious way of attracting customers is by cutting rates.)
So in general consumers should welcome new entrants to the credit market, not just because it widens their choice, but because it should tend to lower the cost of credit by sharpening competition.
Doorstep credit
Although it would be no more appropriate to seek to impose change on them, some lender practices deserve comment because of the way they influence the pattern of credit availability and use.
They are worth bearing in mind as at least a partial explanation of some aspects of credit use, so as to avoid the risk of misinterpreting those aspects as a purely a  matter of individual consumer choice.
Tallymen and check traders, and perhaps to some extent local moneylenders (sometimes in practice the same individuals), exercise — on a very much smaller scale — an influence opposite to the one which will be described below under ‘Banks’.
The way in which they sell their credit tends to make it a prominent and a more or less permanent part of the budget of their customers — that is, of generally poorer people, particularly in the North.
The report on the experience of the Birmingham Money Advice Centre (Appendix III) describes how the weekly credit caller can become deeply ingrained in a poorer family's circumstances, perhaps even being passed down from mother to daughter.
And it shows the easy but potentially dangerous slide from manageable credit purchases into a vicious circle of cash loans and increasing indebtedness — all with the same credit caller.
There are really two points here, which need to be disentangled and considered separately.
The first point is the persistence of this type of credit.
The National Consumer Credit Federation representing check traders (though not the largest firm, Provident) told us that the basic work of small to medium-sized firms is lending small amounts to long-standing customers.
They said that 90 to 95 per cent of their business is with previous customers, and that most of their new business is with people strongly recommended by existing customers.
Given this pattern of repeat business, and of agents who have a collection round which week after week includes the same customers, it is typical for customers to start another check when they have paid off the one before.
In general, this works smoothly for their customers.
The Birmingham Money Advice Centre pointed out to us that the sort of people who use this type of weekly credit would otherwise often be unable to get credit at all, and stressed the danger of making business difficult for lenders who might be relatively expensive but the only available credit resource for some people.
And the traders themselves told us that, by calling weekly and establishing a personal relationship with their customers, they can rely on collecting debts from people who might not reliably send off payments, say to an H P firm.
We understand from the Office of Fair Trading and the Consumer Credit Sub-Committee of the Institute of Trading Standards Administration that — although there is clearly opportunity for it within the close-knit personal relationship between the check trader and the customer — exploitation of customers seems very rare.
Also, as noted in chapter 4, the price of this type of credit, though high in APR terms, is very reasonable when the cost of collecting very small sums of money every week is taken into  account (provided that the check is spent quickly).
The same positive arguments can be put forward for other types of weekly-collection credit.
However, the repetitive nature of this type of credit is in itself a barrier against its users weighing up the advantages of credit which does not involve weekly collection — and perhaps against them considering cash as an alternative.
When people are used to, say, £1 of their limited housekeeping money going each Friday to nice Mr Jones when he calls, it must be very difficult for them even to consider diverting that money into a different spending channel which would instead involve them — rather than Mr Jones — in all the work of paying it in.
And, as Appendix III shows, there's the additional incentive, for many people, in keeping in with Mr Jones in case times get hard and they have to appeal to him for a loan to tide them over.
Our main 1979 survey suggested that weekly-collection credit users do not shop around for bargains as much as others.
The numbers involved (in detailed cross-tabulations not reproduced in Appendix I) were too small for us to be sure about this.
But it echoes an example given us by the Consumer Credit Association (an amalgamation of the Retail Credit Federation and National Personal Finance Association, representing some 900 companies involved in personal loans and retail credit).
They told us that many customers would be ready to pay £30 more for a washing machine, say, to get it from someone who would have the payments collected weekly from their homes, simply because that fitted into the pattern of their normal use of credit.
Certainly, in the group discussions (Appendix II, section 3), we found that people used this type of credit because of the ‘service of someone coming to the house to collect’ even when they were aware of the high cost involved.
So this pattern, which becomes a matter of long-standing habit, may involve paying higher prices for goods, as well as for the credit service itself.
The inference to be drawn from all this will by now be plain enough.
Weekly-collection credit (and to some extent this might include catalogue mail order) is an attractive buying habit for people — especially poorer people, paid weekly.
But their dependence on it may cut people off from even considering other buying methods.
This illustrates the line to be drawn between credit which people genuinely choose for themselves from a range of options, and credit which they use and go on using almost automatically — credit which is therefore not entirely subject to the healthy influence of open competition and free consumer choice.
The second point is concerned with the potential slide from weekly-collection credit for goods to weekly-collection cash loans.
This type of  borrowing is often explained more by the trading practices of the lenders than by the wishes or choice of the borrowers.
Appendix III shows how an eventual loan of cash from the weekly credit caller, at a moment of financial hardship, can change a poor family's difficulties over making ends meet into sheer impossibility.
And it shows how a new and larger loan made to clear past debts or consolidate several separate debts into one can do the same.
Naturally, the trade associations involved — and, we have no doubt, the very great bulk of their members firmly set themselves against this type of lending.
Lending money to someone who is unlikely to be able to pay back all their obligations is like betting on a probable loser: hardly a sensible way for a prudent lender to do business.
But it is here that the long-standing personal relationship between borrower and lender allows scope for abuse.
As shown in Appendix III, even if a tenant owes money to the local authority for rent, and to the fuel boards for heat and light, it will be the weekly credit caller who gets paid first.
So an unscrupulous lender can make a cash loan which will be used to pay rent arrears, say — knowing that repayments on the loan will make a rent of fuel bill crisis even more likely in future.
As he calls every week — and is likely to be well known to the neighbours too — he will get his money even if the local authority and fuel boards don't get theirs.
Follow-on credit
A variation on this theme is follow-on credit.
When a loan is partly paid off, the lender may make a second loan, for the same amount as the original sum.
The borrower gets the amount of this loan, minus the unpaid balance of the original one, as cash in hand, and then pays off the full number of instalments needed to pay off the full sum.
Depending on the details of the transaction, this adds to the interest rate being paid by the borrower.
Here is an example:
In practice, the terms of the follow-on may be much less reasonable than this.
And although the APR quoted in the above follow-on  example is an accurate expression of the cost of the loan, there is a sense in which what the consumer is borrowing is only that £15.87 cash in hand.
Of course she really owes the whole of the second £30 to the lender; but from the point of view of her budgeting, she is paying £33 in instalments for under £16 in her hand.
That inaccurate but understandable calculation would make the APR more than 5,000 per cent— at least a measure of how very little use following-on is to her.
In any event, it seems clear that the follow-on loan is generally bad for consumers, as it restricts their potential credit choice by binding them even more firmly into one type of weekly-collection credit.
The Institute of Trading Standards Administration, which told us that some of its members are finding follow-on credit a problem in some places, suggested to us that, by regulation, follow-on agreements should count as one single agreement.
This would mean that follow-on credit transactions which individually amounted to less than £30 but together amounted to more would become regulated agreements, under the Consumer Credit Act.
As may already have become clear, we would generally prefer to avoid suggesting regulation as a means of improvement if other means would serve as well.
In this case, we feel that the regulation would be difficult to enforce, because of the relatively intimate circumstances in which such transactions are made: successful enforcement would depend a lot on alerting users of this type of credit to the disadvantages of following-on and the ways in which regulation could help.
We think that the educational effort which would be needed for this would be more usefully directed simply to warning people against follow-on credit.
We think it would also be useful if the Director General of Fair Trading made it clear to traders that advocating follow-on credit is unfair, and expect (from what they told us) that the National Consumer Credit Federation and Consumer Credit Association would support him in persuading traders to abandon the practice.
None of what has been said should be taken to imply criticism of weekly credit in itself.
As we have said, it exactly matches the needs of people who budget weekly, are probably paid weekly, and would find it difficult to cope with credit where paying in was left up to them.
Typically, its costs are a fair expression of the expenses carried by the lender.
But any approach to seeking more economic choice of credit by consumers (probably from a wide range of competing options) has to recognise the recurring weekly caller's collection round as an obstacle.
because of the way it tends to bind many poorer consumers into using just one type of credit (considerably more costly than non-collection types) more or less as a matter of course.
Credit in rural areas
A sample survey carried out for the NCC in 1978 showed that most country-dwellers go to town or out-of-town shopping centres to buy things like furniture or clothes.
Hardly any use village or local shops instead.
So a small-scale inquiry was carried out by the Welsh Consumer Council in connection with our report, to survey the availability of credit to Welsh rural shoppers in the centres they would use.
A few shops selling furniture and electrical goods did not offer credit at all, and the more recent credit developments such as budget accounts seemed rare.
But credit was available in a fair proportion of shops.
So although (as with most shopping) country-dwellers may not have such a wide choice of credit arrangements as town-dwellers, there is no sign that the shopping centres they use are credit ‘deserts’.
Banks
Our 1979 survey showed that bank loans were almost entirely, and credit cards entirely, restricted to people with bank accounts (detailed cross-tabulations, not included in Appendix I).
The significance of this in the context of this section is simply as a reminder that those groups who tend not to use bank loans and credit cards — generally older people in the lower income and socio-economic groups, and women as opposed to men — probably have not consciously chosen not to.
More likely, they do not have the option as they do not have a bank account.
Appendix III adds some colour to this.
It is easy to understand the feeling of many working-class people that banks, with their imposing buildings and staff as well as their restricted opening hours, are simply not for them.
Yet Appendix II (section 3) shows that many people feel that bank loans would be cheaper for them than HP or finance company loans, and better with the manager ‘a real person’ they could go to if there was some difficulty over repayments.
But people feel banks are too unapproachable: as one of our interviewees put it, ‘they are not for people who live on council estates’.
The gradual extension of banking — coupled with the trend to monthly rather than weekly pay — to those in lower socio-economic groups who have not previously had bank accounts could help here, in time.
Moreover, if banks wish to attract more borrowers, they might well consider how they can soften the rather forbidding image which we found they have for so many people.
The Payment of Wages Act allows employers to make it a condition of employment that new employees should be paid through a bank, but prohibits them from doing this with existing employees (though of course individual existing employees can agree voluntarily to accept bank-account payment).
If a number of employees insist on cash payment, an employer cannot simply scrap his old cash-payment system, and so gains far less from instituting bank payment than if he can simply switch to bank payment as the general rule.
So the insistence of some employees on cash payment tends to slow down the trend to cheque or transfer payment, and therefore to that wider use of bank accounts which we see as bringing considerable advantages to consumers in money management and cheaper credit availability.
There are of course some real disadvantages in the switch from weekly to monthly pay, and the switch from cash to a bank account which tends to accompany this.
The different pace of budgeting monthly rather than weekly can be difficult to get used to.
Ready cash is always there (at least, until it has been spent); by contrast, cash in a bank is available only when the bank is open, and when the customer can get to it.
At least at first, the jump from the Friday pay-packet to the monthly pay-cheque can create what seems like two or three weeks of cash starvation.
In general, the wider (and often cheaper) choice of credit types which is opened up by monthly-paid bank accounts seems to us to be, on its own, a big enough advantage to outweigh what is really the temporary awkwardness of change to a new set of habits.
Moreover, there are already other pressures towards monthly budgeting (such as monthly rent or fuel payments); these pressures are likely to set up more financial strain for people who get their pay weekly and spend it on a weekly basis than for people who get paid monthly.
And when people in our main survey were asked how they would like to repay a loan (Appendix 1, Tables 47a and 47b and comments on those tables), the great majority said they would prefer monthly repayments, or at least would not mind; only one in five said they would prefer weekly repayments.
Indeed 35 per cent of people currently repaying on a weekly basis said that they would prefer monthly repayments (against only nine per cent of those currently paying monthly who said that they would prefer weekly repayments).
In spite of all this, we do not think that anyone who has chosen to work in a job where he is paid weekly should have monthly payment imposed on him against his will.
This means that we do not propose any fundamental change in the Payment of Wages Act.
We do suggest one small change, to allow an employee's payment method to be changed at  the discretion of his employer, if at the time that he entered that employment, he had agreed to accept that change at some future time (not necessarily specified).
This would preserve people's ability to take payment method into account when choosing their jobs, and maintain the present guarantee for existing workers that their payment method cannot be changed against their will.
But it would let firms who want to move eventually to monthly or bank payment of wages plan ahead more surely.
We also propose to the TUC that they should consider the experience of trade unions in some other countries.
By pressing actively for the payment of wages monthly instead of weekly, they have supported and contributed to the great growth or worker banking in those countries, where it has been seen as a first step to other ‘staff status’ privileges.
Trade union involvement can of course help to alleviate some of the difficulties suggested above.
The ‘cash starvation’ problem, for example, can be tackled through negotiation on payment levels and timing during what could be a transition period of several months.
Unions should be particularly well placed to advise employers on information programmes designed to alert those used to weekly budgeting to the best ways of profiting from a change to monthly pay-and sometimes might well undertake such programmes themselves.
Again, unions in conjunction with employers are likely to be able to find answers to the access-to-cash problem.
For example, workers on an industrial estate who might be isolated from normal banking outlets can be served by special purpose banking facilities in their own plants say, a weekly cheque-cashing point.
So we recommend that the TUC encourages affiliated unions to include the change to monthly payment of wages in future pay negotiations.
Banks with special opportunities
in discussing payment of wages into bank accounts, we do of course include accounts with the co-operative Bank, Girobank and Trustee Savings Banks.
Indeed these three banks have special opportunities for widening the credit horizon of people who do not at the moment have bank accounts.
The Co-operative Bank, with lending points at several hundred ordinary Co-op shops, and now a credit card which can be used in some of the larger ones, is trying to expand its consumer lending business.
The Bank told us that it does not reject applicants for loans unless it has some firm reason (such as serious doubt about ability to repay).
There is no doubt that many of its customers have used loans in cases where they  would previously have use (more costly) HP a 1977 survey showed that 59 per cent of the loans it made were for motor vehicle purchase.
Moreover, the great majority of new Co-op Bank customers are people who have not had any bank account before.
As many Co-ops will cash Co-op bank cheques, people can get cash during shop hours instead of being restricted to bank hours.
This is an obvious advantage for some people who are new to bank accounts.
However, the scale of the Bank's operations makes it improbable that even a substantial increase in its consumer lending would make a very great impact on credit options available to people in lower socio-economic groups.
If all the Co-op Bank's available unlent deposits could be channelled into consumer lending (which seems far-fetched) this would add something under five per cent to the total volume of non-housing bank lending to private individuals — a very welcome increase, but less than revolutionary.
Girobank also makes loans, with the attraction for people who might be put off by the image of conventional banks that the transaction is entirely postal.
There is again the advantage for some people new to banking that the hours during which post offices are open to cash cheques are more generous than bank hours.
But closing on Saturday afternoons is perhaps a slight drawback, compared with the Co-op.
But work door previously by the National Consumer Council's suggests that although many people are reluctant to face a personal interview, the great majority of people in lower socio-economic groups prefer face-to-face contact to filling in forms or writing letters.
In any event, Girobank has only a broadly similar number of private customers to those with the Co-op Bank, and if anything perhaps rather less money available for lending to them.
So again, although Girobank loans do add to the consumer's potential credit armoury, they are only a small addition.
The Trustee Savings Banks are in the process of changing from savings institutions into fully-fledged banks.
They have a particularly broad base of ‘semi-customers’ the eight million people with TSB savings accounts, about one in four of whom have already opened current accounts.
The great majority of these are in lower socio-economic groups.
The TSBs have told us that their lending, started only in 1977, is increasing rapidly (within a quota which has been set by the Treasury).
They will have very much more money available to lend than either the Co-op Bank or Girobank.
They are eager to lend: as their advertising has said, ‘We like to say YES to loans’.
Moreover, as they  used to have introductory arrangements with finance houses for customers who wanted credit before 1977, it is probable that much of their lending will be not merely a potential new alternative to but an actual (lower-cost) replacement of HP.
So, although TSB lending is still very limited, it could become a substantial force in consumer credit.
To put this potential in perspective, TSBs have some £5,000 million deposits, all the London clearing banks put together some £33,000 million.
Over the next seven years, as some £1,000 million of this is released from the Fund for the Bank of Savings (a national fund in which TSB deposits have hitherto been placed, taking them out of TSB control), the TSB's predominantly working-class customers should gain relatively easy access to an attractively-priced new source of credit.
Indeed, we should like to see Fund for the Bank of Savings funds released to the TSBs earlier than planned, to speed this.
Credit unions
Credit unions perhaps meet most neatly the needs of people who now face difficulty in getting value from credit, or whose budgeting habits or experience sets narrow (and probably expensive) limits to their credit horizons.
They can give the familiarity and the regular weekly person-to-person payment of the weekly credit caller or the mail order agent, with a measure of flexibility over payment difficulties which even an understanding commercial lender might find taxing.
They can advertise themselves in the truest and most direct way possible: the experience of friends, colleagues or neighbours who make up the union.
And — an important factor this, in view of the way that we found some commercial lenders now tend to make repetitive and cumulative borrowing almost an end in itself, rather than simply the means of funding one desired purchase — the union has no interest in persuading its members to borrow.
Finally, there is no denying the attraction to us of something which relies on people helping themselves, instead of having help imposed from outside.
The Credit Unions Act 1979 has eased the growth of the credit union movement.
The NCC will continue to advocate the advantages of credit unions, to employers' organisations, trade unions, and others who can help to make the movement grow.
The decision to lend: how this affects credit use
The way in which individual credit granters decide whether or not to lend to people who ask for loans or credit affects the general pattern of credit use.
Also, how potential credit users imagine that granters will  behave — not necessarily the same thing as how they actually will behave — has an effect.
Our main survey (Appendix 1, text preceding Table 24) showed that very few people had had any difficulty getting the type of credit they had decided on.
Only three per cent reported any difficulty.
There was no consistent type of difficulty — problems included cost of credit, for example, as well as not being able to get the type or terms of agreement that were wanted.
Only two people in this group said that the difficulty had been that they were refused credit.
Additionally, a very few people had failed to get what they wanted from one source, so had used some other source instead.
Only five per cent of those who bought for cash said they had even considered credit as an alternative.
And additional cross-tabulations not included in Appendix I showed that two per cent of those buying for cash said that this was because they thought they probably wouldn't be able to get credit.
Generally, these cash buyers seemed to have made a fair assessment of their chances, in that they were unemployed or already had great difficulty matching small incomes to their outgoings.
Later in the interview, people were asked whether they'd ever had any kind of problem or difficulty over any credit arrangements.
Only one in 17 said they had.
Half of the reported difficulties had been at least five years earlier, and only one in three had involved any question of difficulty over getting credit.
So, among people generally, there is very little overt difficulty in getting some form of credit, at least as reported by people themselves.
However, when people were asked to say whether or not they thought any of a range of 12 comments applied to six main types of credit, their answers added an important qualification to this.
One of the comments was that the form of credit was ‘difficult to arrange’.
The percentages of people applying this comment to each of the six credit types were as follows:
Of all 12 possible comments, this was the one most frequently applied to bank loans.
The way in which bank managers exercise their individual discretion over loan applications (often in a personal  interview) seems to be a daunting prospect to many people often, perhaps, correctly.
Very few people think mail order would he difficult to arrange.
But taking into account how often people applied any or the other comments to each type of credit — a rough guide to people's overall familiarity with its image the apparent differences between the first five credit types on the list virtually disappear.
The reason HP is rated ‘difficult to arrange’ by more people than other credit types is not that people think it would be more difficult to arrange, but that people generally were quicker to apply any comments to it presumably because it has a more prominent image for them.
Taking this factor into account suggests that among potential users — that is, among those applying comments fairly freely to each credit type perhaps around one in ten think shop accounts, trading checks, credit cards and HP would be difficult to arrange.
But clearly very many more potential users think that bank loans would be difficult.
And a significant point is that at least one in three actual users of bank loans say this perhaps underlining the suggestion made above that this may be a correct interpretation of the bank manager's part in the lending decision.
It is interesting to note that detailed cross-tabulations of the main survey data (not included in Appendix 1) showed that in general people who consider credit to be ‘occasionally necessary’(rather than either convenient or sensible, or never a good thing) were more likely to say that any of the types would be difficult to arrange.
This suggests that the feeling of difficulty may be strongest with people whose incomes are stretched so tightly that they have to use credit for some needed purchases which they could not afford otherwise.
Again, the detailed survey cross-tabulations showed that, when they did have comments to make, old people, unskilled manual workers and — particularly, though hardly surprisingly — people without bank accounts were all specially likely to say that bank loans would be difficult to arrange.
But more than half of those in the 18–35 age group felt this, too.
The only other significant variation among different groups which the cross-tabulations not included in the Appendix showed up was that people without bank accounts were more likely than people with them to say that credit cards would be difficult to arrange.
What all this suggests is that people themselves may anticipate that a particular type of credit would be difficult for them to arrange, and therefore simply do not apply for it.
If they are right, this spares them the refusal which would have otherwise shown up in the main survey as  reported difficulty in getting credit.
(But of course, if they're wrong it deprives them of one or more credit options which might have actually suited them well.)
The group discussions (Appendix II), which concentrated on people who it has been suggested might face difficulty getting credit because their backgrounds might not find favour with lenders, again showed very little sign that even ‘problem’ customers are often refused credit which they try to get.
As suggested, this may often be because the borrower anticipated refusal, so does not even apply.
In many fields, avoidance is a natural way of preventing disappointment, frustration or even shock.
For example, one group was drawn from a London housing estate where a high proportion of tenants have been taken to court over debt, so that it could easily get a bad name among local traders.
But people in this group, often unemployed or single parents on low incomes, had not even been trying to get most forms of credit because of their own feeling that their personal circumstances would rule them out as applicants.
By not putting the matter to the test they may well have spared themselves refusal.
Of course, whether people are refused credit because of their probable inability to repay, or whether they do not apply for it because they expect refusal on the same grounds, the results are the same.
In principle, the lender's objective to steer clear of doubtful risks brings consumers generally a double reward.
Credit costs are lower than they would be if they had to provide for more bad or difficult debts.
And individual consumers are spared the burden of debt problems.
But in practice there are three difficulties.
The first is that some 600,000 debt cases (that is, all types of unpaid debt, including rent and fuel bills as well as unmet credit obligations) have had to be settled in court each year: that's one for every 30 families or so.
Over quarter of a million of these are HP and other credit cases.
The work of the courts is touched on in the next chapter.
Here, the significance is simply the bare fact that so very many people do get into serious debt trouble.
Partly, this underlines the problems discussed in the last chapter — the factors which can tip a reliable payer into arrears.
Partly, no doubt, the figures include at least some wilful or at least entirely feckless credit misusers.
But also, they include cases where lenders have extended credit when it would have been wiser not to.
In our depth interviews, for example(Appendix II, section 5), there was the man in trouble with the court already who could therefore not get HP — and who bought the settee he wanted with a trading check instead (even costlier to repay), though he doubted his ability to pay it off and was still making payments through the court; and the woman  with so many debts to pay off, afraid of the ‘loan man's’ visit because she finds it so hard to say no to his offers.
And they include cases where a more sympathetic attitude from the lender would be more helpful.
The great majority of lenders say that they see the courts as an unfruitful last resort, and would prefer to make some special arrangements (smaller but regular payments, say) as soon as a customer gets into difficulties.
But some are more litigious — like the furniture firm threatening legal action instead of accepting the reduced payments which a young widow offered them when her husband died (Appendix III).
The second difficulty is the inevitable paradox that lenders with the strictest criteria can afford to offer cheaper credit than those whose looser criteria demand higher rates to pay either for a larger proportion of bad debt or (more often) for costlier instalment collection procedures.
As a result, the people whose financial position makes it easiest to pay bills actually get the lowest-cost credit.
The people in tighter financial circumstances get higher cost credit — with the extra cost of credit obviously adding to the tightness of their circumstances.
The third difficulty is that the criteria which a lender uses to differentiate between borrowers he is prepared to accept and borrowers he judges too risky may, as it were, throw out the sheep with the goats.
In this way people who would not in fact have been risky themselves, because of personal or background circumstances which they share with genuine bad payers, join those bad payers in a ‘credit ghetto’ where credit — if they can get it at all— costs too much.
The estate in Bradford where people told us they could not get credit because it had a reputation for housing defaulters (see Appendix II, section 5) is an example of a physical credit ghetto, and depth-interview respondents in Finsbury (London) told us that their experience suggested that ‘it has a bad name for credit’.
But there are non-physical ghettoes, too: the circumstances shared by many single parents, for example.
In practice, as we have seen above, it may be people's own anticipation of lender distaste for these circumstances, rather than decision by the lenders themselves, which dumps people in this credit ghetto.
Assessing credit-worthiness
In general, what lenders told us about their procedures for deciding for or against a loan (or other credit advance) impressed on us the care with which they try to avoid turning away potential sound customers, After all, making their own requirements too strict would limit their business too narrowly.But it would be too much to expect foolproof results from either method: personal assessment based on experience; or the more objective actuarial credit-scoring system.
Credit rating: the subjective approach
The Finance Houses Association, representing the biggest finance houses, told us that many of their members would say that a personal interview in an applicant's own home, allowing the personal judgment of an experienced assessor, and an element of ‘gut-feeling’ would be the ideal.
(Bank loans, of course, are often subject to a personal interview, at the bank rather than at home.)
But for finance houses, as for other main lenders, home interviews as a matter of regular routine would be prohibitively expensive (though some, as a check on the performance of their normal more remote assessment process, do carry out a sample of home interviews — say, one in twenty).
So it is at the opposite end of the scale — with the small sums lent by weekly credit collectors — that the personal interview in the home is the rule.
The National Consumer Credit Federation, representing check traders, told us that the agent going from door to door, usually with long experience of working for the firm, had quite a lot of discretion over whether or not to lend, though with small firms the bosses like to keep in touch themselves, often going on collection rounds so as to see customers, and certainly weighing up doubtful cases themselves.
this solid background of personal local knowledge, and the way in which their main volume of repeat business is topped up by firm personal recommendations, means that their lending decisions can generally be based on a truly accurate perception of the customer's ability and will to repay.
But shades of personal experience with one or more previous transactions may colour the lender's attitudes in a way that bars whole groups from credit — even though individuals within those groups might be perfectly reliable payers.
For example, one check trader told us, ‘The Irish are bad customers, they're too easy-going’.
A past President of the National Consumer Credit Federation reported the way in which he had once been collecting himself, and in one building found his way blocked by three tearaways playing threateningly with knives.
Understandably, he decided there and then to write off the two weekly instalments he was due to collect from a customer there, and never to lend again in that place.
This sort of personal experience adds a potent deterrent effect to more objective considerations which may already be swaying lenders against a particular group or class of potential customers.
High-rise blocks, for example, are obviously time-consuming and therefore daunting for weekly collectors.
An area with a reputation for muggings, such as some parts of Liverpool, may make weekly collectors reluctant to work there because of the cost of taking along a ‘couple of hefty chaps’ in protection.
In this way, new requests for credit may run up against a powerful  and undeniably sensible combination of background knowledge and personal experience which rules them out, even when the applicant whose personal circumstances ring these alarm bells would have been a satisfactory payer.
After all, at this end of the market where incomes are low and where applicants for credit may well have been turned down by other types of lender, lenders may feel that they have to discriminate particularly carefully to be sure of recovering their money.
Indeed, the Consumer Credit Association (representing predominantly weekly collection small credit traders and moneylenders) told us that their members may turn down about half of all the applications they get.
given the circumstances and difficulties outlined above, it must be certain that the refusals will include perfectly good payers, simply because they are stamped with the same circumstantial warning signs as the bad payers.
Credit scoring
With larger lenders, the assessment of credit-worthiness is becoming increasingly objective.
The Consumer Credit Trade Association told us that in the experience of the smaller finance houses, chain stores and larger retailers who are members, this is clearly reducing payment problems (thus making credit cheaper for their customers than it might otherwise be).
The ultimate in objectivity is credit scoring.
With this system, the historical record of a firm's credit transactions is analysed to show the relative importance — to distinguishing between good and bad payers — of various factors which might be included in a credit proposal form.
these factors can be assigned weightings, in line with their relative importance, so that a potential customer's answers to each question on the proposal form can be given a numerical score.
This approach, a very recent development for credit in this country (though of course it has been accepted for many years as the basis of car insurance ratings), started in America.
It has been criticised there on the grounds that any decision on lending which is based on how many characteristics an applicant shares with good or bad payers cannot directly reflect the reality of whether or not that individual will be a good payer.
Its critics claim that any assessment based on arbitrary demographic characteristics rules out a substantial number of people who would have been accepted on the basis of their individual performance, and is therefore unfair to them.
What must be true is that no system of predicting good and bad risks — computer credit scoring, personal interview, previous payment history, or any combination of these — can be infallible.
Simply because it does give a numerical score, rather than the subjective impression given by an interview, credit  scoring may give a spurious and therefore dangerous impression of accuracy.
But most non-scoring credit decision systems are based on a similar idea — an attempt to predict the future, based on how an individual seems to fit into a pattern of past good and bad credit risks.
Insofar as good credit scoring systems weigh up an individual's characteristics and background in a way which truly and accurately does reflect wide experience of similar characteristics and background, these systems can discriminate between good and bad risks more reliably than non-scoring systems which make a more partial and subjective stab at the same target.
So the Federal Reserve board, which carries the main responsibility for general oversight over credit legislation, judges that credit scoring is the most accurate way of discriminating between good and bad payers.
Often, credit scoring development for British firms is carried out by American consultants (particularly Fair, Issaacs of California).
What generally happens in practice is that an applicant whose total score is above a certain level would normally get credit automatically.
Below another, lower, level, the applicant would normally be refused (although in some firms this refusal might have to be confirmed by a credit assessor, checking the proposal form for any special circumstances).
In the grey area between the two ‘pass’ and ‘fail’limits, the decision might depend on personal assessment.
The proposal form might include, say, a dozen questions to be scored.
Possible scores might be as follows:
Clearly, given quite a number of different characteristics which are being scored, no single characteristic will brand a potential borrower as unreliable.
But it is easy to see that, for example, a young mother who had recently been left by her husband, and gone back to a (very good) job, would pile up several different low scores, all linked to the fact that she had just become a single parent.
Using the hypothetical examples above, for instance, this is how it might work out: skilled employment (4) the top possible score: employment duration — she has just gone back to work (1); housing — she has had to move to a smaller flat(l) so hasn't been there long (0); she does have a bank account (4); but is separated (0); and quite young (2).
So, with these questions, she scores a total of 12 points, out of a possible maximum of 31.
This would probably take her below the pass limit, although all these various low-scoring characteristics are simply symptoms of the single factor that she has recently been left by her husband.
Even the Prime Minister, in her first year as a tenant in No. 10 Downing Street, might score only 18 out of 31 — again rather a dubious credit risk on this rating system.
Partly because of this kind of situation, it is generally accepted in the United States that conventional credit scoring systems do not reliably discriminate between good and bad payers either among people on very low incomes or among people in the 18 to 25 age group.
But there has been no suggestion that from this point of view credit scoring is less satisfactory than individual assessment.
(It should be noted in passing that the Sex Discrimination and Race Relations Acts are of little relevance here.
If for example women were turned down more often than men because their employment history was shorter, they were not in a skilled job, and they did not have a bank account, this would not constitute discrimination against women — as the conditions, only part of an overall scoring system, would not be absolute.
The lower scores women might get because of such characteristics would not amount to an absolute condition or requirement which the women failed to meet [for that, refusal would have to be automatic if, say, someone did not have a bank account].
Moreover, even if an absolute condition of that sort discriminated against women, it would be permissible if it were objectively justifiable  in the circumstances — if, say, people without bank accounts were clearly unreliable payers.
Indeed, even a trader who withheld credit from women simply because they are women could be within the law if he could show that women were unreliable payers.
But in any case the Consumer Credit Trade Association told us that their members if anything tended to consider women to be more reliable payers than men.)
The fact that credit scoring is so relatively new to this country, but is likely to be used more and more in future, suggests that the time is particularly ripe for agreeing guidelines on scoring techniques.
These should be built into a code of practice to meet standards and objectives drawn up by the Director General of Fair Trading, and this code should be made binding on members by the relevant trade associations.
In our view, four essential elements in a code of good credit scoring practice would be:
a very large-sample analysis of a firm's previous good-and-bad-debt experience as the basis of any credit scoring system designed for that firm;
warning, on application forms, that the decision to lend would take account of whether the applicant's description of his background and circumstances matched the background and circumstances of typically good or typically bad payers — and an invitation to applicants, in view of this, to say whether and in what way their own background and circumstances might be unfavourably misleading about their ability to pay;
at least some latitude, within the system, for personal judgement about individual special circumstances — we were for example impressed by what Debenhams told us about their practice of offering all applicants who were refused credit the opportunity of a review of their proposal by a senior manager,;
readiness by any firm instituting or using a credit scoring system to have its fairness and concordance with published good practice recommendations reviewed impartially — say, by the Office of Fair Trading.
One small potential problem area in lending decisions is that credit granters checking the housing background of applicants may consult rates lists.
But, within a family, it is much less common for a woman to be listed as ratepayer than a man.
So this check can be a misleading way of vetting the accuracy of what women applying for credit have said about their housing.
Credit reference bureaux
Credit granters told us that they rarely checked information about employment because they found that many people regarded this as an invasion of privacy.
Their most important check is on whether someone has been a bad payer in the past.
This normally involves either the United Association for the Protection of Trade (UAPT), a non-profit organisation keeping records for its 12,000 members, or Credit Data (CD), a commercial firm.
Each deals with several million credit inquiries a year.
Both keep records of bankruptcies and judgements summonses filed in address order, covering the whole country (UAPT's nationwide register, opened in 1978, consisting of computer printed microfiche; CD's on filing cards).
these records, taken virtually direct on a cost-covering subscription basis from the Lord Chancellor's office, are kept in one place, allowing immediate reference by telephone or Telex, CD's record cards include any information which CD has on debt collection, but, like UAPT's central register, are basically ‘black’ information on payment problems.
UAPT duplicates this on card files indexed by name rather than address (except for London, which if fled in address order like the national register) in 42 area branch offices.
But the area office files also carry ‘white’ information, in the form of the date and the sum involved in any potential transaction when they have been consulted on behalf of the member; also the customer's occupation, and an outline of any transaction actually made with the customer (though members may not report this to UAPT; so the note of sums involved in potential transactions which have been the subject of previous inquiries tend to be taken as indications of credit arrangements which have actually been entered in)
From time to time, people condemn the use of this sort of filing system as prying interference into individual privacy.
but the fact that, in an open court of law, someone has been shown to have failed to meet their credit obligations without sound reason must have a bearing on whether or not it is sensible to lend to them again — both from their own personal point of view (whether or not they will find the payments an unduly heavy burden) and from the pint of view of consumers generally, whose credit costs must rise if the level of bad debt rises.
However, there are some conceivable risks of abuse.
Perhaps the most obvious is wilful and corrupt exploitation of debtors by dishonest employees of the credit reference bureau.
On the on hand, a bad debtor might conspire with an employee to remove or conceal evidence of his record, on the other an employee with a grudge might blacken someone's record.
On visits to both bureaux, we felt that  their working practices eliminate any reasonable possibility of this happening.
A straightforward mistake might have just a serious an effect.
Because of the copying methods used, there seemed to us no more likelihood of this happening within the bureaux themselves than in the recording procedures originally used in the law courts.
So perhaps the sort of thing that might happen is what we found wholly by chance, in the personal interviews which we conducted with people who had been the subject of judgement summonses (Appendix II, section 5).
One of these couldn't read or rite.
So, although she was aware of getting ‘red’ letters, she never realised that she had been taken to court.
Our interview with her was the first news she had ever had that she had been the subject of a judgement summons.
Because of the breakdown in her system of communication, she didn't have the opportunity of avoiding entering the ‘black list’ that anyone would tend to assume she would have had.
There may be a very small possibility for error in the practice of selecting information from the files for transmission to clients.
For example, only a few clients of Credit Data say that they require every single item of information on file about any credit applicant.
These firms were at the time of out visit listed over each block of filing cabinets.
With others, the operator may, for example, simply brief details of debtor's name, date of judgement, and amount of money involved.
This practice must make for speed and efficiency — and therefore economy — from the point of view of the consumer (who ultimately pays the bill).
But any form of ‘editing’ the file card in this way must introduce some small risk of giving an impression that is slightly awry, and we would prefer the UAPT practice of invariably giving the ‘black’information entirely unabridged, although recognising the savings in time and therefore the cost that the CD procedure must allow.
Another risk is that when information is filed under address a consumer may be refused credit not because of his own record but because the record of some other person who lived at that address.
This particular danger in the case of some immigrant groups where the surname (Singh, say) recurs frequently, and where members of the group live close together.
With UAPT's area files, only information about the named subject of the inquiry and their spouse, and information about someone recorded as living under a closely comparable name very close by, is passed.
With their central register filed in address order, information about any person living at the relevant address is passed regardless of their name.
Credit Data told us that their policy was that only information about people under the same name should be passed where there was any possibility of multiple  occupancy at a given address, but we felt that at least at the time of our visit this policy might not be clearly understood by the operators themselves, who might give information about people with other names at the given address, too.
The risk with other-name information is obvious: a lender knowing that Mr Brown and Mr Robinson have dreadful debt records but that apparently Mr Smith at the same address does not, might suspect that all three are aliases for the same person, or at best members of the same disreputable household, and so may refuse Mr Smith credit — even if in real life all three are quite unconnected.
We found (Appendix II, section 5) that on one London estate where we held group discussions several people lived at addresses which they said had been blacklisted in this way, because of bad payers who had lived there before them; as a consequence, they felt they were being made to suffer from the bad reputation of the previous tenants.
This is a small point, at least in the context of the many millions of inquiries which the bureaux handle each year.
And the bureaux themselves are well aware of the potential problem.
Indeed, UAPT have considered, as an identifying factor which would virtually avoid the problem, filing date of birth (following the example of a Dutch computer-based credit reference bureau); but the reluctance of many people to give this information in this country is an obstacle.
On the whole, we would prefer the CD policy, of same-name information only from a given address, to be followed generally, and recommend this.
The voters' register check which the bureaux can do for their clients would then work as a safety-net to catch fraudulent aliases.
Failing that, it should at least be standard practice to carry out the voters' register check to show whether or not the information concerns a different person, if different-name information is passed: and we recognise that this alternative might be cheaper.
Under the Consumer Credit Act, people refused credit because of information passed by a credit reference bureau have valuable rights of self-protection.
The credit granter, when asked, must say whether or not a bureau was used, and — if it was — give its name and address.
On the consumer's request, and payment of 25p, the bureau then sends the consumer a plain-English version of what — if anything — is on the file about him.
Broadly speaking, the bureau has to remove or correct any entry which then turns out to be incorrect.
If the entry isn't changed to the consumer's satisfaction, the bureau has to add to the file (and pass on to future inquirers) the consumer's own version of the story.
Any disagreements are settled by the Director General of Fair Trading.
Moreover, the bureau has to inform the consumer of all these rights.
Queries from consumers have in practice been rare, and very few indeed of these (fewer than one in one-thousand enquiries) reveal mistakes.
The US Fair Credit Reporting Act goes somewhat further than this.
First, if a credit granter refuses credit, he has to name any bureau used without being asked by the consumer.
We discussed with UAPT, CD, and with lenders, the possibility that in this country credit proposal forms might automatically note that a credit reference bureau might be used, and give its name and address.
UAPT and, particularly, CD were in favour of this, and lenders would not object; indeed, the Finance Houses Association told us that some of their members already include this information on proposal forms.
We believe that if this practice became general, consumers would become better aware both of the advantages to them of establishing a ‘good’ credit record and of their potential part in putting right any rare mistakes in their credit record.
Secondly, US bureaux, on request, have to tell consumers about who has recently had information from their files.
If a correction is made, consumers have the right to demand that it is notified to people who have had information during the previous six months.
The added documentation which bureaux might need to comply with such a requirement in this country could be costly, and the requirement seems to carry little practical value: if a credit granter suddenly gets information relating to an inquiry made some months earlier, which is almost certainly no longer active, it won't do the consumer any good.
Whereas if the consumer is still hoping to get credit from that source, he would anyway re-apply after having the information put right, so the correction would almost certainly reach the credit granter in the helpful context of an active proposal — under our existing law.
So this US requirement does not seem worthwhile here.
If someone has a judgment summons filed against them, but subsequently pays the debt, they can get a Certificate of satisfaction by applying to the court in which judgment was given originally, and paying 50p.
When they do, this information reaches the credit reference bureaux via the Central Registry of County Court Judgments.
It is then added to their file, so that inquirers know that they are no longer in debt.
But in practice, few people bother to go through with this.
So their file shows them as remaining in debt, even when they are no longer.
Credit Data have suggested that getting a Certificate or Satisfaction should become mandatory.
The accuracy which this would add to credit reference files is obviously attractive.
But there are two problems: who should tell the courts that a debt has been discharged?
And who should pay?
The present situation shows that debtors themselves cannot be relied upon to tell courts when their debts are paid.
On the other hand, creditors who have secured judgment summonses against debtors show by the fact they have done this that they are relatively familiar with court processes.
If they were given the duty to inform the courts when debts were paid, they would not be deterred from fulfilling it (as many debtors would) by ignorance or even fear of the courts.
So we consider that creditors should be given this duty.
However, there seems no reason why creditors should pay for the costs of the Certificate.
And even if it were possible, making debtors pay 50p to prove that they had paid off their debts seems rather harshly discouraging for them — it would virtually boil down to imposing a line on them not because they had been debtors but because they had now paid their debts in full.
Building the cost into the first part of the proceedings, so that the cost was recovered as part of the original action, would hardly be practicable.
But of course the cost of improving the accuracy of credit reference files in this way would have to be met somehow.
As complete accuracy is so fundamental to the fairness of credit reference reporting, we think the cost of securing this accuracy should be seen as an integral part of the business of credit reporting.
So, like UAPT and CD with whom we have discussed this, we think Certificates of Satisfaction should be registered automatically and thence filed with the bureaux.
We think the obligation for doing this should be laid on creditors, but think the cost involved in securing this improvement to their accuracy should be met by the bureaux themselves, as an addition to the fee which they already pay for getting material from the Central Registry.
and as part of the cost of their trade in people's reputations.
Section 147 (2) of the Consumer Credit Act does provide for regulations which could virtually cover all the points we have raised here.
Refusal to lend
Some people think that if a lender refuses a credit application, the applicant has a right to know why (not just the right to ask whether a credit reference bureau has been used, and if so what is on their file with that bureau).
It is clear that traders must continue to enjoy their right to decide on whether or not to do business with someone (and on what terms); and equally clear that there can be no universal consumer right to credit.
Documentation of reasons for credit refusal would threaten these principles.
If the reasons given were genuine and clear, it would be easy for unscrupulous shoppers (in a later application) to apply in terms which avoided the pitfall.
So requiring reasons for refusal could be a rogue's charter.
Perhaps more important, the point of requiring reasons for refusal would surely be so that— in cases of unfair refusal — these could be used as a basis for putting matters right.
But, as we have seen, there is no evidence that unfair credit refusal is so widespread as to justify an elaborate system for redress (and statutory bodies already exist which have the duty to hunt down cases of real discrimination on grounds of sex or race).
And the sort of reason which a trader might give (‘We assign numerical values to all the factors given in application forms, on the basis of past experience of credit-worthiness, and in your case these values fell below the limit we require for credit applicants.
But no one factor was responsible’) would be unlikely to have the clarity which legal action to seek redress or retribution would need.
As we have said, the great majority of traders understand that they are the losers if they refuse to do business with a good payer.
However, it would be useful to include in credit transactions a formal reminder to lender and customer that the decision to lend is not a matter of chance or prejudice, and (as it generally does) reflects the objective facts of the applicant's ability and willingness to pay.
We believe that a way forward through the practical difficulties rehearsed above might be a simple requirement that a lender refusing a credit application (or requiring special conditions) should state the reason in whatever terms he wished; and that this requirement should be coupled to a requirement that (as a condition of their Consumer Credit Act licence) lenders should each make a statement of their lending practice to the Director General of Fair Trading.
This statement would be available on request to customers from the lender or through the Consumer Credit Public Register which already covers licences and licence applications.
These twin requirements would not be burdensome for lenders.
They would not give fairly rejected applicants a charter to cause trouble.
But they would help to reduce still further that small minority of cases where a customer is turned away when he would not have been, given careful objective reflection; or where the customer mistakenly feels aggrieved at what is in truth a fair decision.
pressures to borrow: credit cards and loans
The way that weekly credit callers can encourage existing customers to borrow again, and the results of this, were discussed in a previous section.
A similar thing may happen with other credit types.
For example, finance houses granting credit may send their customers brochures describing other credit services offered by them, and inviting them to apply.
And the whole point of credit cards and  other forms of revolving credit is that they don't come to an end.
This puts a new burden on the credit user:the need to decide not to use a form of credit, or stop using it, instead of the need to decide to use it.
There is another way of looking at this issue.
With ‘old-fashioned’ fixed-sum instalment credit, a consumer considering a purchase has to choose between doing without, finding the cash, and going through what could be the rather daunting business of arranging credit for that particular item.
With revolving credit, or even fixed-sum credit when there is some form of continuing relationship between lender and borrower, the choice again includes doing without and finding the cash; but the credit option is now virtually just a matter of signing a sales slip.
Indeed, the literature which credit card firms may send their customers each month actually encourages more active use of their cards.
This is no doubt why much the commonest comment made about credit cards in the main 1979 survey (by nearly half those questioned) was that they encourage you to spend too much; it was also the commonest comment made about stores accounts.
The fact that people using credit cards were actually even more likely to say this about them suggests that many credit card users might well be happier if they were not quite so easy to use.
That is to say, given people's general reluctance to owe money, it may be that the ‘old’ balance of choice between not buying.
buying for cash, and (maybe with some complication or difficulty) arranging credit would meet consumers' needs better than the ‘new’ choice between not buying, buying for cash.
and readily extending some existing credit arrangement.
Our main survey showed that at the moment credit card users are in general relatively well informed about credit, and also relatively rich and well educated.
So perhaps they are less vulnerable to the dangers of buying now without counting the cost of paying later.
but the rapid expansion of credit card trading will make it important to keep a close eye on this potential problem in future.
Moreover, as people come to use more than one credit card, the problem may be aggravated.
The long-stop defence against overspending on a credit card is the credit limit set on its use.
If, say, £400 seems the prudent limit for a particular borrower, but that borrower gets two or more separate cards with the same credit limit, he can use at least twice the amount of credit which has been judged ‘safe’ for him.
It is true that ‘travel and entertainment’ cards, such as American Express, set no credit limit without finding that this leads to excessive bad debt problems.
But the credit-worthiness requirements which they set for new customers are relatively stringent.
Multiple use of easier-to-get conventional credit cards could have  the effect of removing the present credit limit long-stop defence against overspending, without replacing it by the specially stringent customer vetting process which unlimited credit surely needs.
In our view, this effect of multiple credit card use could be a serious adverse result of increasing credit card use.
So we recommend an inquiry — in three to five years' time into the extent to which card users (in particular, users of more than one credit card) are using their cards to spend more than they judge prudent.
Again, the way in which personal loans are now solicited by big advertisements in the most popular newspapers (‘Direct, through the post.
A Bank Loan of £300 to £3,000’ or ‘£200-£2,000 IN 7 DAYS (Fast loans without security)’) including a proposal form which people can send without even having to bother about putting a stamp on their envelope, makes relatively costly finance company loans particularly accessible.
A member of the Finance Houses Association put it to us that the development of consumer credit might be seen as having three phases: first, loans granted to buy tangible assets; secondly, loans for intangibles such as holidays; and finally, loans simply as loans.
Many consumers would deny that this third phase could ever attract them.
But one large finance house which circulates new customers with literature promoting other loan possibilities reported that one in five pursue the offer no indication that the ‘loans as loans’ stage is with us yet, but a tribute to the power of the advertising which could bring it closer.
Importance of salesman or agent
Finally, an important point to note is that the person who actually deals with the customer, at the point of sale, may have a strong influence over or even control the credit transaction.
We have already noted that agents are often given considerable discretion by lenders.
But it may go further than this.
Car sales are a special case.
Finance companies give commission to car dealers, and usually a dealer will have a continuing relationship with one credit firm.
This can affect a customer's credit use.
First, the dealers' commission means that the more credit a car buyer takes on, the greater the dealer's profit.
This must affect the balance between paying cash and buying on credit, in the eyes of the customer (who is most unlikely to know about the dealer's commission).
Secondly, the relationship with the credit firm means that, if the customer wants credit, then he is likely to get it from that particular firm.
This is also true with other three-cornered credit transactions, besides car sales.
We consider that shoppers need to be made fully aware that a seller's commission might make the advice they get in a shop or garage  at least potentially biased.
So we recommend that where the seller of goods, or other agent arranging credit, will be paid commission by a lender, this fact, and the rate and amount of commission, should be made clear to the customer.
Ideally, this information should be given in advance.
But we recognise that any regulation requiring this would be very difficult to enforce.
So we recommend that advance notification of commission should come to be accepted as good trading practice.
Regulation should require that the rate and amount of any commission should be clearly set out in the credit agreement which the customer signs.
In this connection it is significant that the main 1979 survey showed that, if people themselves have not decided to start with which type of credit arrangement they were going to use (in their most recent major credit transaction) the most common source of suggestion for them was someone in the shop.
And the salesman or agent was cited as the most common source of information about the terms of their credit agreement — more than twice as often, for example, as the contract itself.
The importance of this is that word-of-mouth information from shop assistants, salesmen and agents seems more influential for consumers than what is written into credit notices and contracts — but of course much less easy to regulate.