

News UP date
EIGHT-IN-ONE-TOOL FOR PAINTERS
The 8-in-1 Painter's tool is claimed by Harris, the paintbrush people, to be the ‘Swiss Army Penknife’ of the decorating world.
It has eight different decorating uses: it can be used to strip wallpaper, remove old paint from woodwork, or excess paint from windows.
It will effectively clean paint roller sleeves, hammer in or extract mails or tacks, remove grout, putty, etc, and it can also be used as a filling knife, and as an emergency screwdriver.
Actually, it is very effective as a screwdriver, as it is used at right angles to the screw, and therefore provided great leverage.
Half of these uses are not found on other tools, and its sheer usefulness, combined with its simplicity and effectiveness, is bound to strike a chord with any decorator.
The Harris 8-in-1 Tool is available at around £4.50 from Do it All good d-i-y stores.
BRUSHES FOR WATER-BASED PAINTS
The new Waterbase brush from Hamilton Acorn is the first specifically designed for water-based paints — gloss and satin, plus woodstains and varnish.
The Waterbase brush has a special mix of synthetic filaments designed for optimum paint pick-up.
Water-based paints dry quickly, and can get ‘caught’ in the rough edges of natural bristle, but glide off the smooth sides of Waterbase's filaments to give a faster and better quality finish.
It also has the advantages that it will not absorb the water in the paint, and is easy to clean after use — simply wash out in water.
The filaments are firmly set in epoxy resin to ensure minimal loss, and the ferrule is made of stainless steel, so it will not rust or discolour, providing a hard-wearing, quality paintbrush.
The sizes available are 1in, 1½in, 2in, 3in, and 4in, and prices range from around £1.99 to £7.19.,.
PALM-GRIP SANDER
A powerful palm-grip sander, model 4011 from Black & Decker, produces a fine finish, and removes material efficiently.
It is unusual for an orbital sander to do both these tasks, and the difference with the 4011 is in the orbit rate.
This is increased fro the normal 12,000opm (orbits per minute) to 13,500opm, for faster material removal without compromising the finish.
The 4011 also has an efficient dust extraction system, with both dust bag and dust spout (for connection to a vacuum cleaner).
The tool is also lightweight, compact, and has very low vibration levels, making it comfortable to use even for long periods.
List price of the 4011 is £94.,.
TIME CONTROLLERS HAVE ELECTRONIC PROGRAMMING
Market leader in time controllers for many years, Smith's Industries has introduced two new electronic time controllers — the ETU07 seven-day time controller, with up to 49 ON/OFF cycles per week available; and the unique ETU02, shown here, which offers both programmed and random switching.
This dual facility makes the ETU02 ideal for both control and home security applications.
In programme mode, the ETU02 acts like a normal 24-hour electronic time controller.
Up to four ON and OFF time settings can be programmed.
The time controller will remember the programme even after being switched into ‘random mode’, or being manually over-ridden.
In ‘random mode’, the time controller will switch an appliance on and off at random intervals during the four ON periods already set for the programme mode.
The random switching pattern is ideal for use when a property is unoccupied.
Both are available from Homebase, Do It All, and local electrical and hardware stores; the ETU07 retails for around £25.50 and the ETU02 for around £23.50.,.
£50 WORTH OF VOUCHERS FOR 100 LUCKY READERS
If you're buying a Black & Decker power tool from B&Q, Do It All or Great Mills, you will notice that they are running a special promotion at the moment — buy one of seven selected power tools, or a WM536 Workmate, and you can get a book of vouchers worth £50, to save money on various d-i-y products.
Savings include such things as £10 off Blue Seal 5, 7 or 8-tread, or three-way stepladders; £5 off an Acorn Pastemate table; £2 off Swish Superlux or Duo corded curtain tracks, and a variety of other selected products, 21 in total DIY id offering 100 of these £50 voucher booklets to readers; just send your name and address on a postcard to:
,.
The first 100 letters out of the bag on 6 July 1992 will receive a voucher book.
If you don't receive one, don't forget — all you have to do is buy a selected Black & Decker power tool from one of the above-mentioned stores, and you can send off for one, too.
PATHS
Up the garden path!
Straight or curved; practical or whimsical; raised, stepped, level or sunken; built with concrete, cobbles, flagstones or crazy paving: you can make almost any type of path to suit the character of your garden.
We supply the hard facts so you can do-it-yourself.
Before you start to lay a garden path, you should give some thought to the style and the materials you are going to use, as well as their cost.
For instance, a straight concrete path which cuts a swathe through the centre of a neatly laid-out rose garden would totally spoil the effect; it would be better in this case to use bricks and make the path wind around the flower beds.
A straight, wide concrete strip is more practical for a vegetable garden, where the plants are grown in straight rows, and you need to be able to manoeuvre a wheelbarrow around the sea.
The flat unjointed surface is easier to brush clean than a brick or pavior surface, with its hundreds of joints, in which soil and other spillages would collect.
PLANNING THE ROUTE
In order to plan the route of the path, you should first make a plan of the whole garden, as a badly positioned path can spoil the appearance of the garden, however carefully the ground on either side is laid out.
By deciding on the size and position of the flower beds first, you will be able to determine the best route for the path, and its shape.
Level paths are ideal for vegetable gardens, but a path which follows the contours of the land improves the general appearance of an informal flower garden.
There is rarely a drainage problem with paths, as there sometimes is with patios.
The path simply sheds water to either side; but where a path which follows the contours goes down into a dip, you'll have to ensure that ponding doesn't occur, and it may be necessary to form a small land drain to lead the water away to a less waterlogged area.
A formal land drain consists of short clay pipes laid in, and covered with gravel, but for the simple removal of water from a low area of a path, you would only need to dig a trench, and put about 150mm of gravel into it to lead the water away.
Most of it would disperse as it found its way through the gravel, and it may not be necessary to form a soakaway at the end of the drain.
Lay paths below the level of adjoining lawns, to make mowing easier, and contain flower bed soil with a stand-up edging, to prevent soil continually washing down on to the path.
FOUNDATIONS
Whatever type of path you intend to lay, you will have to give it a proper foundation if it is to last for any length of time.
As with all building foundations, you first have to remove all the top soil and vegetation down to firm ground.
You will not be at a level a good deal lower than the surrounding ground, so you will have to lay a hardcore base to build up the foundations to suit the path material and method of laying.
It is usual to install wooden boards, supported by pegs, to mark the shape of the path, and to hold the hardcore and, perhaps, concrete in place.
If you are to lay bricks or paviors in sand, then a more permanent edging has to be provided to hold the sand in place, otherwise rain would soon wash it out from under the bricks, and destroy the path.
Bricks or special edging slabs are set into concrete to provide an appropriate finish.
When the edging to the path is complete, the hardcore is rolled or vibrated to consolidate it and provide a firm base for the surface material.
It is usual to ‘blind’ the hardcore with sand, to fill all the holes and make a level base.
Concrete for paths can be laid directly on to the hardcore, as some of it will fill the open surface, binding the hardcore together.
Where bricks are bedded in sand, the hardcore blinding has to be well vibrated, or the bedding sand will disappear into the hardcore when the bricks are vibrated.
If you are going to have a gravel path, you have the choice of either vibrating sand into the hardcore to form a firm surface for the gravel, or of laying the gravel directly on to the hardcore, and letting it fill any spaces it can get into.
CHOOSING MATERIALS
Once you've laid the base, what are you going to put on it?
There's a wide range of materials suitable for making garden paths, so apart from cost, which is the most obvious consideration, you'll need to decide which material will be easy to handle, and also suit your type of garden.
Concrete may seem a straightforward material to use; you just spread it, level it, and 24 hours later, the path can be walked  on.
Unfortunately, concrete is very heavy, and if you buy it, ready mixed, the driver won't bring his vehicle off the road, so you'll have to barrow the material to the site of the path yourself.
You could, of course, have the cement, sand and gravel delivered, and hire a mixer, but you would still find it hard work shovelling it all in and out.
Laying bricks or paviors on a bed of sand is probably the easiest way of making a garden path.
Having laid the foundations, you simply cover them with a layer of sand about 50mm deep, and level this off, using a straight-edge cut out at the ends to just under the depth of the bricks, say about 90mm.
The board then rests on the edging, is pulled along to scrape the sand level.
The bricks are laid on the sand to whatever pattern you fancy.
Then sand is brushed over them, and they are vibrated down level with the edging.
Don't hire the heaviest plate vibrator you can get, thinking that it will speed things up by settling the bricks in one pass.
It may, but it may also break some of the bricks.
This especially applies to paviors, some of which are thinner than bricks, and may be therefore quite brittle.
Vibration drives the bricks into the sand, which works its way up the joints to meet the surface sand, which is driven down the joints.
This locks the bricks into a solid mass that can be walked on as soon as it's finished, providing a surface over which you can barrow more bricks.
You can start vibrating them as soon as your have laid a few metres.
To continue, just lay a plank to kneel on, so that you don't disturb the last rows of bricks.
Don't forget that anything laid in sand always needs a solid edging.
CRAZY PAVING
Crazy paving can also be laid on sand, but it is not vibrated, as the joints are too large.
As the paving is all made from broken paving slabs and, therefore, all the same thickness, you simply lay it on the levelled sand bed.
Try to keep the joints as even as possible, as it makes the finish look better.
Points to remember are: a wide joint looks wider when it is filled, and a narrow joint is harder to fill.
Pointing is tedious, so don't break the pieces too small, but don't use them too big either, or you might as well lay proper slabs.
If you have a patio, you may want to lay slabs so that the path matches it.
Once the foundation has been laid, you can lay the slabs on sand if you wish, provided that you have made a edge restraint.
This isn't really a satisfactory method, as the slabs can't be vibrated and, because of their size, they are also difficult to lay on a full bed of level sand.
To prevent water getting into the sand and spoiling the bed, you could leave open joints, and point them as you do crazy paving.
A better method of laying the slabs is to bed them on five little heaps of cement and sand: a 1:6 mix would be ample.
Just tap the slabs down in the cement, using a mallet or piece of wood, until they're level.
Don't hit them too hard — gentle tapping will produce the desired result.
This bedding is suitable for walking on, or pushing a wheelbarrow over, but it isn't suitable for drives, as cars are too heavy for it.
GRAVEL PATHS
A nice crunchy gravel path might suit your garden, but it will involve you in a little more maintenance than most other types of path.
You should lay the same type of foundation as you would for any other path, but you can cheat if you want to by simply removing the top soil and vegetation, then fixing wooden side restraints.
The gravel can be laid directly on to the firm ground, but constant walking in wet weather will pound the gravel into the softened earth and you will, after a year or two, have to lay a fresh load to build up the path again.
The best method is to lay the normal foundations with side edging standing about 50 to 75mm above the proposed level of the gravel.
Some of the gravel, but not a lot, will be pounded into the hardcore.
The high sides will help prevent the gravel being kicked into the garden, so it will be some years before you need to top it up.
However, gravel does stick to muddy boots, and weeds seem to be able to grow through it, even where there is not real soil to support them.
Spraying with weed killer may become an annual ritual, and you will from time to time have to rake the surface over to keep it even and within its boundary.
CONCRETE
If you want to lay concrete, you can improve its appearance by giving it a surface treatment, such as drawing a stiff broom over it when the initial set has taken place, which gives a fine-lined texture.
Another treatment is to wait until the initial set has taken place, and then, using water and a brush, clean off all the fine material, to expose the larger aggregate.
This is suitable for sloping paths that are likely to become slippery in winter.
You can also use a piece of round rod to mark the smooth concrete into a pattern that looks like crazy paving.
Concrete can also be used as a base on which to lay paving slabs on five dabs of cement and sand, or you can bed crazy paving on it.
Mortar joints with a dryish mix.
You an also bed the crazy paving or slabs directly on to the surface of wet concrete, but you will have problems in achieving a completely level finish, because when you tap one piece down level it will force one of the previously laid pieces upward.
You'll have to wait until the concrete has become fairly firm, then lay your slabs.
Concrete or clay cobbles will easily form tight curves
Ideal for a rustic pathway through tumbling foliage: Marshalls' Heritage Antique paving in Burnt Brick colour looks like old handmade bricks
Different textures define areas of the garden: the pathway is formed from large pebbles set in concrete but circular concrete stepping stones give foot comfort!
Right: Pathway round a lawn is set into grass, low enough to allow a mower to pass over it
Above: Different sizes of paving laid in staggered pattern, with joints filled with stone chippings, give informal effect
Left: Quarried stone blocks with gravel infill form a natural stepped path by the side of a rockery, repeating the materials used
Left and below: If you like the effect of gravel, but don't want it sticking to your boots on wet days, lay ‘stepping stones’ or brick, paving, etc, in concrete at regular intervals.
Create patterns with different materials and colours.
Above: Buff coloured paving slabs bordered by brick, used as edging and walling for contrast with path
Above: Emphasise your path by using a different shape and colour for the edging.
Speckled paving slab with a non-slip textured finish is Quartzite, from Countryside
Right: Simple, straight path is given direction with a 45° herringbone pattern in paviors
Far right: Enjoy the fruit of your labours!
Raised path leads to a picturesque seat, which gives a focal point to the garden, and a well-deserved rest for you
All pictures on this page taken at Chelsea Flower Show
SPOTLIGHT ON
PATH DESIGNS
You might think that laying a simple path through the garden doesn't require much thought, but time spent doing a little planning never goes amiss.
Paths, walls and patios form the ‘backbone’ of any garden plan, and if you get the materials and shape right, the rest of the garden will look better for it.
Planning a path on paper before you build gives an idea of the shapes and patterns you can create with the materials available to you — and it's easier to correct mistakes on paper than on the real thing!
(Artwork from Build it with Marshalls and Countryside brochure).
STEPS ACROSS THE LAWN
If you don't want to divide your lawn with a path, put stepping stones across it.
Cut shapes from turf, and set below grass level, on a bed of sand, or five dabs of mortar on blinded hardcore, so lawn mower can cut over them
PAVING PATTERNS
There's a wide variety of colours and patterns available in paving, so browse through catalogues and see what local suppliers have on offer.
Make a simple plan of the area and trace or copy shapes of paving to the same scale.
Use shapes from brochures such as Marshalls' or Countryside's: eg this is part of a pattern from Countryside's hexagonal paving seeing how different colours could be used on a path, using half-size slabs at edges.
ROUND THE BEND WITH PAVIORS AND COBBLES
Creating curves in paths isn't too difficult if you use bricks, paviors or cobbles, as they are small enough to cut easily, or to lay in a tight curve.
Paving slabs can be laid with right angled corners, or in staggered patterns, but this is difficult when bordering a lawn, for instance Rectangular pavers can be cut to form bends in paths, without affecting the pattern, except with stretcher bond.
Small cobbles will form just about any pattern you want: tight curves, circles, squares, etc — modern ones are flatter and kinder to your feet
Marshalls' multi-size setts are small enough to set round curves
MAKE A FOCAL POINT
A path doesn't have to be just straight or curved.
Break it to go round a planting bed, make a circle on which to stand a large plant pot or statue, or to give a paved area around a rotary clothes dryer.
Paved teracette uses Marshalls setts or cobbles.
JOBBING NOTEBOOK
REPLACING A DAMAGED FIREBACK
The continual heating and cooling of a fireback can lead to eventual cracking.
Minor cracks can be repaired with special heat-resistant mortar such as that supplied by Purimachos.
But serious breaks mean the fireback should be removed and replaced.
Take very careful measurements before buying your replacement through a builders' merchant or fireplace specialist.
1
Having removed the fireback and the associated rubble, set the bottom half of the new unit squarely in the opening, bedding it on fire-resistant mortar.
Check for level with a spirit level
2
Slip a sheet of corrugated cardboard behind the fireback before final positioning.
This will burn away, leaving an expansion gap
3
Fill behind the fireback with a dryish mix of mortar, adding vermiculite as an insulator.
It is best to use lime rather than cement for this type of infill
4
Now add the top of the fireback, bedding it on top of the lower half with a layer of fire cement
5
Seal all joints with fire cement, then fill in the remaining gap behind the top section of the fireback using more of the insulating mortar
6
Complete the job by producing a sloping flaunching using fire-resisting mortar.
Take this surface up until it links with the flue back
Further details of specialist cements and mortars from ,.
REPAIRING A CONCRETE PATH
Ideally, concrete paths should be divided into 3m bays to reduce the risk of cracking due to slight ground movement.
If you do have to deal with cracks, repair as follows:
1
Use a club hammer and steel chisel to open up a crack until it is about 25mm wide
2
Brush out all loose debris and treat exposed soil with a weed killer
3
Coat the edges of the crack with neat pva building adhesive.
This will ensure the new mortar gets a firm grip
4
Add pva adhesive to the mixing water for the repair mortar, 1 part adhesive to 5 parts water.
Keep the mix on the dry side so it doesn't stain the concrete surface.
Press well down, finishing off with a small trowel
5
For larger areas of damage where soil is exposed, ram rubble into any soft areas, taking it at least 25mm below the path surface
6
Treat the edges with pva adhesive, then use a float to level the mortar with the surrounding concrete
LAYING COBBLES
To fix cobbles securely, they should be laid on a prepared bed of concrete.
Make an edging from 75mm (3in) wide timber (oiled hardboard is useful for forming curves).
1
Lay a bed of mortar over a base of gravel or fine hardcore.
Use a moist mixture of one part cement to four parts sand, and smooth surface with a metal float.
2
Dip the cobbles in water, then press them into the mortar.
To ensure an even finish, place a board over them and tap it to level the cobbles.
Remove edging when the mortar is dry.
REPAIRING A ROTTING WINDOW SILL
If the damaged area is small, wood hardener and repair paste can be used to replace cut-away rotten timber.
But with larger areas it is best to cut out a regular shape and put in new timber.
Angled edges, as illustrated, makes fitting easier — and offer a larger surface area for adhesive.
1
Assess the area of damage, then cut out a wedge shape.
A jig saw is the ideal tool for this job
2
Chisel away the damaged timber, keeping the remaining surfaces vertical so you can accurately mark the replacement timber
3
Cut a new piece of timber, and mark on it the shape of piece required.
When cutting, err on the large size, then pare back for an accurate fit, leaving the new timber about 3mm proud of the rest of the sill
4
Apply waterproof adhesive liberally to both surfaces, then nail the new piece in place.
Use oval nails and punch them well below the surface
5
Now plane away surplus wood, finishing with a drum sander, working only with the run of the grain.
Coat with clear preservative, then prime the new timber before painting the whole of the sill.
The same treatment can be used for repairing wood frames
Special wood hardener/preservatives, and high performance wood fillers, are made by Langlow, Ronseal and Cuprinol.
MENDING A CHAIR RUNG
If an attractive chair gets damaged, don't throw it out.
Restoration need not be difficult — as the repair of this chair with broken rungs will show.
1
Use a brace with a bit of matching size to bore out the stubs of the broken rungs
2
Cut new rungs from suitably sized dowel rod.
Apply woodworking adhesive to both hole rim and dowel end so adhesive is carried into the joint
3
Work out an order of assembly, building up one side of the frame at a time.
Be sure to wipe away surplus adhesive
4
Use only a soft-face mallet to tap joints together to avoid bruising the wood
5
You can hold the frame tightly together using strips cut from an old cycle inner tube and used as large elastic bands.
Then, when adhesive has set, apply matching wood stain to the new rungs
6
Apply two coats of varnish to rungs, then an extra coat to the whole chair.
For a natural worn look, lightly rub down the varnish when hard with fine steel wool.
Dust off, then wax polish
PUTTING A SHELF IN AN ALCOVE
A small alcove offers the ideal place for extra shelving, and you can use the two side walls as supports.
Where you have a fairly long shelf, it is wise to add a horizontal back support.
Always advisable when books are to be stored.
1
Mark on one side wall the position of your first shelf bracket.
Use a short spirit level to ensure it is horizontal before marking through pre-drilled holes in the support
2
Use a masonry drill to drill holes in the wall, and add wall plugs of the appropriate size
3
With the first support up, cut the horizontal back support so it will fit snugly between the side pieces.
Hold it in place with a longer spirit level (if you have one) to check it for horizontal.
Mark the position, and the position of the other short support.
Drill, plug and add the support pieces
4
Now your shelf should sit neatly in place, resting firmly on all three supported sides.
5
If you plan to store some heavy books, locate lighter items towards the centre and the heavier things near the ends
LAYING SHEET VINYL FLOORCOVERING
A modern sheet vinyl offers the ideal surface for areas which need regular cleaning — such as kitchens or family eating area.
Where possible, cover the main floor area in one sheet, or make joins well away from main traffic areas.
Store the vinyl in a warm room during cold months of the year.
It will become more pliable and easier to cut and fit.
1
Where possible, use old sheet floorcovering as a pattern for new.
This simplifies fitting around awkward shapes.
2
Lay the vinyl in place with surplus curling up the wall.
Make easing cuts at external and internal corners.
Err on the short side and cut a little further as necessary
3
At the edges, make a series of short marks on the vinyl where skirting board and sheet will meet.
Then use a straight-edge as a guide to join the marks.
Cut with a pair of scissors
4
Check that the sheet fits neatly to the wall without curling
5
Where two pieces have to meet, overlap the sheets and cut through both with a craft knife.
Remove the waste pieces
6
Spread vinyl flooring adhesive under all seams and edges and press the sheeting down firmly
7
The finished floor
SECURING AN EXTERNAL DOOR
For maximum security, external doors need the protection of a high-security five or seven-lever mortise deadlock — meeting the British standard 3621 for thief-resistant locks.
Before fitting, check that your stiles (the vertical sections of the door frame) at least 45mm thick (preferably 50mm), and at least 75mm wide.
Remember as well that a hardwood frame is much more robust than a softwood equivalent.
The effectiveness of even the best quality locks will be reduced if a door frame is flimsy.
A jemmy would simply destroy the frame.
FITTING A MORTISE LOCK
The Chubb 3G114 high-security five-lever mortise deadlock illustrated here is ideal for securing main and secondary entrance timber doors.
To fit one you'll need: screwdriver, bradawl, mallet, ½in (13mm) chisel, hand brace with ¾in (19mm) wood bit, and padsaw.
1
Hold the lock against the door and mark the outline of the lock in the required position.
Continue the lines around to the side edge of the door and mark the position of the mortise in the centre of the door edge.
2
Drill a row of 19mm (¾in) holes to the depth of the lock case.
(Mark the drill with chalk or wrap tape around the shank to indicate when the correct depth is reached.)
Cut out the mortise in the door edge with chisel and mallet.
3
Push the lock casing fully home into the mortise.
Hold the faceplate in position and mark its outline on the door edge.
Carefully chisel a recess inside the pencil line to the thickness of the faceplate, so that the lock will be completely recessed when fitted.
4
Hold the lock against the door in line with the recess.
Push the bradawl centrally through the keyhole.
Drill a hole the same diameter as the keyhole in the lock case.
Cut the lower part of the keyhole shape with a padsaw.
Make it slightly larger than the key.
5
Push the lock case into the mortise and screw it to the door.
Place the key in the lock and check that it works from both sides.
Remove the key and fix the keyhole covers (escutcheons) to the door.
6
Replace the key in the lock and turn.
Close the door and mark the area for the deadbolt.
Open the door; hold the striker plate against the door frame in line with the deadbolt mark, and pencil in the outline.
Drill and chisel the mortise and recess (as previously) deep enough for the striker plate.
Screw on the striker plate.
Again check the lock for correct operation from both sides of the door
FITTING A CYLINDER RIM LOCK
The Chubb 4L73 and 4L74 (illustrated here) cylinder rim locks incorporate a number of high security features including super-tough cylinder, rugged staple, automatic deadlocking (to prevent the bolt being forced back with a thin card or screwdriver), a lockable handle and concealed fixing screws.
The 4L73 (not illustrated) is for narrow-stile doors.
Tools needed include screwdriver, bradawl, small round file, hand brace and 1¼in bit, hand drill, hacksaw and chisel.
1
Mark the required position of the lock on the inside face of the door.
Mark the centres of all holes, then drill and bore, starting with the smallest
2
Fit the accessory door pull (if used) and push the cylinder into the hole from outside the door
3
Secure the fixing plate to the inside of the door
4
Position the lock over the fixing plate so that the cylinder connecting bar engages fully.
If necessary, shorten the connecting bar and screws to suit the door thickness.
The key should turn smoothly in the lock
5
Secure the cylinder and screw the lock body to the fixing plate and edge of the door
6
Align the staple with the lock case and mark an outline on the door frame.
If necessary, chisel a recess to ensure that the gap between latch and staple is correct.
Screw the staple to the door frame and check that the lock operates correctly
A word of warning: when boring the hole through the door, stop immediately the bit breaks through, then finish boring from the other side.
Failure to do this can result in a very nasty torn hole.
MAKING A LAMPSHADE
It is often difficult to match a covered lampshade to your own furnishing fabrics, in which case it would pay to buy a frame, then cover it yourself.
You will find a selection of frames available in many craft shops and some d-i-y outlets.
1
First wind white binding tape around all bare frame wires.
Make it secure and tight, and sew in place at the finish
2
Wrap your chosen fabric around the frame and pin it to the frame uprights
3
Smooth out all wrinkles so the fabric hugs the frame
4
Now sew the fabric to the frame top and bottom
5
Trim off surplus material and add fringes top and bottom to taste.
For the size of frame illustrated, and smaller, use nothing larger than a 60 watt bulb
FINISHING PICTURE FRAMES
Fancy picture framing can be expensive.
But finishing materials are now available which can enable you to create your own attractive frames.
Here are a few ideas.
Further information, and the materials referred to, can be obtained from Liberon at the address given below.
LIMING THE GRAIN
1
To get a striking effect on open-grained woods like oak, first stain with a Concentrated Basic Colour dye
2
After staining, apply Liming Wax liberally with 0000 grade steel wool, working with the grain
3
After five minutes, apply Clear Black Bison Wax Paste using 0000 steel wool to remove excess liming and leave a waxes finish.
Allow to dry overnight, then buff with a soft cloth.
GILDED FINISHES
4
You can get a rich effect without using gold leaf by using Fontenay or Gesso base, followed by Gilt Varnish or Cream, or both.
Use Red Base for gold-coloured gilt or Black for pewter or silver
5
Apply Gilt Varnish with a soft brush…
6
…or Gilt cream with a small round gilding brush.
There are eight shades of Varnish or Cream which can be mixed or applied one on top of another
7
A spirit-based Sanding Sealer can be applied to new or stripped wood, or after it has been stained.
After the first coat, sand with 240 grit garnet finishing paper.
After the second with grade 0000 steel wool
8
Any finish can then be applied.
Here, Black Bison Staining Wax Paste is applied with steel wool for a fine finish
9
Small scratches and gaps in mitred joints can be disguised with a Touch-up pen, available in 12 wood and four bright colours.
Frame filler, available in 24 colours, can be used for more obvious gaps and dents
ERECTING A SCAFFOLD
For many jobs on the outside of your home, a simple tubular scaffold is invaluable.
It provides a safe working platform for both you and the equipment needed.
Kits may be borrowed from local hire shops, or you may prefer to share the cost with a number of neighbours or friends.
1
The scaffold must stand on a firm and solid base.
It is unwise to erect one on a grassed area unless you use scaffold boards to spread the load
2
Sections are easily slotted into place — tube into socket
3
Then outriggers can be added to greatly increase the stability of the tower
4
Diagonal braces are also used to add stability and hold the tower in shape
5
Then further H sections are added to increase the height
6
Always climb from inside the tower to prevent it toppling.
And use part of the platform to stand on while you continue building
7
The completed tower.
When ordering, check the maximum platform height advised for a freestanding unit.
For example, one with minimum base dimensions of 3.2m including stabilisers should not go higher than 9.5m outdoors.
Above this height the tower must be secured to a rigid structure
CONVERTING ONE ROOM FOR TWO
There are times when one large room could be better utilised as two smaller ones — such as separating a dining area from a lounge.
One way of tackling the conversion is to build a stud partition wall.
The basic framework can be of 75 x 50mm rough sawn timber, clad either side with sheet plasterboard.
1
Nail a sole plate to the floor.
And in this case we had to align the timber so that a sheet of plasterboard would line up with the projecting wall
2
Nail the head plate in place, using a plumb line to check that sole plate and head plate align.
The accuracy of the whole wall depends upon this
3
Mark for vertical intermediate studs at 400mm centres
4
Cut the studs so that they are a snug push-fit between head and sole plate, then secure them by skew-nailing (driving nails in at an angle)
5
Check that each stud is vertical before final nailing
6
Fit noggins (cross-pieces) at 1200mm centres plus, in our case, extra noggins to form frames for small windows
7
Using taper-edge plasterboards, nail them in place with special plasterboard nails.
Position them no closer than 12mm from the edge of the boards, and drive the nails so they just dimple the surface of the board but don't cut it
8
Now, working from the uncovered side of the wall, mark the corners of the proposed  windows and drill holes to mark the positions on the plasterboard sheets.
Using the holes as a guide, use a padsaw or key hole saw to cut openings
9
Remove the cut pieces and use a rasp to level the cut plasterboard with the timber framing
10
Repeat the cladding and cutting on the other side of the wall
11
Joint filler is then used to seal gaps and cover nail heads, and is very lightly sanded when dry
12
A strip of jointing compound is then applied to each joint, into which a paper tape is pressed
13
A further coat of filler is then applied, then feathered to blend it into the surrounding board
14
Then a final coat of dry wall top coat produces a perfectly smooth wall surface.
The wall is now ready for decorating, and windows can be glazed.
A reeded glass with flutes running vertically looks attractive
LAYING CRAZY PAVING
Broken paving is one of the cheapest materials for path and patio work, and it can often be bought from local authorities who have re-paving projects in hand.
Pieces which are too large can be broken by laying the slab on a bed sand, then topping smartly with a club hammer.
Then, before work starts, sort out your pieces, keeping those with one good straight edge for the  extremities of the area.
1
Clear away topsoil and make up a simple formwork of timber supported by pegs set on the outside.
The depth needs to allow for about 75mm of rammed rubble or ballast and about 18mm of mortar, plus slab thickness
2
Tip in the rubble or ballast and tamp down to form a firm base, leaving sufficient depth for mortar and slabs
3
Make up a mortar mix of 1 part masonry cement to 4½ parts of soft sand, keeping the mix dryish so it won't slump when slabs are placed upon it
4
Position the pieces leaving gaps of about 18mm between each.
Tap into place with the handle of a club hammer
5
Check for level as work progresses, using the top of the formwork as a guide
6
Make up a dry mortar mix with a minimum of water, then fill the joints.
The mortar should be dry enough to brush off the paving without staining the slabs.
Use the trowel to outline the edges of each piece of stone while the mortar is still soft
REPAIRS TO A DIAPHRAGM BALL VALVE
If you are fortunate enough to have a modern plastic ball valve, servicing is simple and no special tools are required.
First cut off the water supply to the cistern, then proceed as follows:
1
Remove the float after first checking its exact position on the float arm.
This determines the level of the water in the cistern so it needs to go back to the same notch
2
Remove the large knurled nut situated at the end of the valve body.
Sometimes this needs the help of a large spanner, but should normally be finger-tight only
3
East out the old diaphragm, then remove the fine nozzle now visible and check that it is clear.
Use a piece of fine wire to clear only obstruction and replace the nozzle
4
Get a new diaphragm of the same size and pattern and insert it, making sure it is seated correctly.
Replace retaining nut and arm — then the plastic ball float
SECURITY
Locking up time
Burglary, along with other crimes, is on the increase, yet many home owners don't bother to improve security because they don't think it's worth it.
But we can all do a lot to prevent it.
Complacency on the part of the home owner is the most disturbing factor in domestic security.
People seem to think either that a burglary won't happen to them, or that there's nothing they can do to stop a really determined thief.
Yet it's estimated that in about 90% of house burglaries, the thief entered with very little effort.
So it's often sheer neglect on the part of the home owner that allows the thief to gain entry, and make off with your treasured possessions.
CRIME PATTERNS
There are enormous variations both in the patterns of domestic crime, and in the methods used by burglars to gain entry into houses.
The young offender frequently selects properties in his own neighbourhood.
Being small, slim and nimble, he can squeeze through the smallest of open windows.
He takes whatever appeals to him, often ignoring valuables.
The professional criminal and his accomplices are determined characters: they live off crime, and take as much as they can carry away.
But even they can be thwarted by strong security measures.
They have no wish to focus neighbourly attention on their criminal activities, so if they can't get into one house, they'll try somewhere else.
The householder who wants to make his or her home more secure has no scientific formula to work from: domestic security is simply a matter of good old-fashioned common sense.
However, there are several factors that have to be taken into consideration:
The area where you live:For instance, the house situated on the fringe of a deprived inner-city area has a higher risk factor than one in a peaceful rural district.
Types of property:A middle-terraced dwelling has to be less vulnerable than a secluded detached house.
The amount of time the property is left unoccupied:Insurance companies recognise that if you are retired, the house is less likely to be burgled than one where the occupants are out at work all day.
What you have to steal:If you have an expensive car sitting in the driveway, or inadvertently let slip in the pub about your latest classy hi-fi, you could be drawing attention to your house as being potentially worth breaking into.
Previous page: Greet visitors or intruders with a passive infra-red light, which comes on when it senses body heat at night.
Top: Moss Security's MS 135 halogen floodlight is a powerful light, illuminating a large area.
Below: Low cost coach-style security light from Smiths Industries
Left: Era's sash lock simply locks with the push of a button, but needs key to unlock.
From a wide range of window locks
Right: Now you can have your curtains drawn automatically when you're on holiday, with Harrison Drape's Powertrack, which can be used with any corded track or pole
WHY MY HOUSE?
The victims of a burglary are often puzzled as to why the thief chose their home in preference to others.
The reason is often simple: their home was the one with the milk bottles left on the step, or a newspaper sticking out of the letter box!
Thieves are experts in weighing up a house.
They can tell who is at home and who is out at work.
But they don't make the mistake of breaking in right away.
They walk past a couple of times, to see what neighbours are about.
Then they walk up the drive and knock on the front door.
When there's no answer, they quickly go round to the rear.
Always be suspicious of any strangers at your or your neighbour's door.
Don't put opportunity and temptation in the way of thieves.
When leaving the house, double-check that all opening windows (even the small ones) are firmly closed and locked.
One of the most important aspects of domestic security, yet one that receives the least attention, is that of key security.
Intruders frequently find the spare keys all neatly hanging on a keyboard: front door, back door, garage and car keys.
They then use the keys to let themselves out, taking the car with them!
Never leave keys for intruders to find and use.
Apart from your loss of property, you then have the added problem of changing every lock in the house.
Open drives provide unrestricted access to the rear of a property.
Often a wrought iron gate, strategically sited, say between house and garage, can prevent thieves walking openly to the rear.
It's even better if it's a high gate, kept locked, and blocks the only entry to the rear, so a thief would have to climb over it.
And what about extension flat roofs?
Is there a handy dustbin or a down-spout that will assist the thief to climb on to the roof?
Once on the roof, is there any chance of the neighbours spotting him?
Of course, he's unlikely to be seen at night anyway.
Are the windows overlooking the roof secure, or easy to force open?
Will the criminal have to climb down from the roof (in which case he can't take a lot with him), or can he go downstairs and let himself out of the house?
Above: Smith's Security Autodialler alarm system plugs into telephone and relays alarm message to six numbers
Left: Intruder alarm gives audible warning of unauthorised entry.
It fits neatly inside Monarch's door stile, and is programmed with your personal code.
Right: Simple but effective, the SAS wheelclamp immobilises car or trailer to prevent theft
TOOLS
Have you ever calculated the value of the tools, implements, cycles, etc that are kept in your garage or shed?
The danger of their being stolen if often not   appreciated, and stolen tools are seldom recovered.
Joiners of yesteryear had their names stamped on their wooden planes and saw handles.
Mark your tools the same way, and add your post code.
If it's difficult to make the tool shed secure, think about buying army surplus steel lockers or ammunition boxes to lock your tools in, and if necessary bolt the containers to the floor.
Don't let prowling thieves see what you keep in the shed — put curtains at the windows.
And remember that stolen tools may offer an ideal method of forced entry.
Left & below: Multipoint locking is standard with all Swedhouse's triple-glazed windows, and laminated glass is an option.
Handle-operated brakes with security catch allow childproof locking when open
EXTERNAL DOORS
There are few domestic burglaries that don't include entry or exit through an external door.
In the vast majority of burglaries, the thief either forces a door to gain entry or, having entered through a window, leaves the house by opening the front or rear door from the inside.
It's rare for bulky or heavy items — such as televisions, stereo systems, and microwave ovens — to be passed out through a window.
They are usually boldly carried out through the door.
So when going out, all doors must be firmly deadlocked.
By restricting the criminal's means of exit, you reduce the amount of property he is likely to steal.
Another point: the intruder who has been denied a quick escape route is unlikely to remain in the house for very long (it's one of the first things he sizes up after breaking in).
Right: Mazda's modern-styled Approach Light picks up movement in a wide detection zone, and has an economical five minute switch off delay
Left: Plug-in 24 hour slimline timer, model 1311, from Superswitch, allows up to 48 on/off switching operations per day.
Simply plugs into socket and controls any appliance which can be plugged into 13amp socket, to make it look as if a house is occupied.
Manual override provided
External doors must be of robust construction, and fitted with deadlocks.
Secluded rear doors are especially vulnerable: they are often forced open with a simple well-aimed kick.
Examine your doors as a burglar would, and apply a little pressure top and bottom.
Do the doors feel weak?
Could they withstand further pressure?
Is the door frame substantial?
Is there a glass panel you could break to reach through and release the cylinder rimlock?
Could you reach through a cat-flap to withdraw the door bolts and turn a key left in the lock?
If a would-be burglar was standing outside your front or rear door, how many neighbours could see him?
Consider reducing any dense shrubbery and tall hedging that offers concealment.
A patio door could be the weak link in your domestic security chain.
It's the older designs with low-grade locks that are most at risk: these should be reinforced with special key-operated patio door bolts.
The biggest danger, however, comes from within: a key carelessly left in the lock.
ALARM PITFALLS
House owners who are considering having an intruder alarm system installed should obtain specifications and costings from at least three installers.
All too often, alarms are bought and installed in haste.
The old adage ‘you only get what you pay for’ doesn't always apply — never assume that the system costing £800 is going to be twice as effective at the one costing £400.
Be on your guard if your receive unsolicited visits from alarm company representatives who claim they work in close co-operation with the police.
If in doubt, contact the police Crime Prevention Officer, who will be pleased to give advice on all aspects of alarm protection.
Look out for companies who haven't been around for long: they could be out of business just as soon.
If you've bought an alarm from a reputable company, they'll still be around to put things right if a fault develops.
Before having an alarm installed, make careful inquiries about how long the   company's been in business.
Visit their premises.
Do they look viable, or do they occupy run-down property?
If you're not sure about them, you'll be better off paying a bit more for the security of a larger firm such as British Telecom or the Electricity Board.
Right: Identify callers before opening the door to them with Friedland's Password doorphone.
Basically a simple intercom system which directly replaces an existing door bell system, the inside and outside units can be installed from 3 to 50m apart, using two core-bell wire to connect them.
A push button or optional pull cord allow conversations between the units, which can be powered by batteries or with a chime transformer.
Especially useful for the elderly, young, or those living on their own
Left: Wireless intruder alarm system from Response can be fitted in under an hour, is simple to operate, easy to add to, and can be taken with you when you move home.
Remote control includes panic button.
Left: Compact but powerful, Homeguard's Trimalert combined high-intensity halogen floodlight and PIR unit fits unobtrusively to front of your house; 150 watt halogen tube is equivalent to 500 watt floodlight
REPLACEMENT WINDOWS & LOCKS
One means of enhancing the appearance of your home, and at the same time greatly improving security, is to replace old and badly fitting softwood framed windows with upvc or hardwood double glazed units.
Double glazing gives a higher degree of security than a single pane of glass, but is of course more expensive.
Double glazing may discourage intrusion, but claims that it is burglar-proof are rather exaggerated.
How many units would remain intact when a criminal hurled a house brick at the glass?
This isn't a common practice, however, because of the noise, and it's unlikely to be done at night.
Windows at risk can be glazed using laminated glass.
This will withstand even a determined attack, as the plastic film will hold even when the glass is cracked.
Give a great deal of thought to the position and size of opening windows, both with regard to security and, more importantly, to ensure a quick means of escape in case of fire, especially at night when doors are likely to be well secured.
Make sure all locked windows have a key somewhere nearby, in case the occupant of the room needs to escape.
The least expensive yet most effective security products on the market are key operated window locks.
They should be fitted to all accessible opening windows, however small.
Larger windows require two locks — top and bottom.
They are very simple to fit.
Window locks can prevent the quick, easy and, above all, silent entry of a burglar, and as such are doubly beneficial at night.
Right: Code mark your property to deter thieves.
A sticker in the window will let them know it's now worth it!
WINDOWS
Looking into windows
Unless you've taken good care of your windows over the years, they are probably looking a little peaky — and may be downright poorly.
If yours are past their best, we offer help by taking a look at what's available in replacement windows.
Window replacement is big business these days: we're all constantly bombarded with television advertisements and leaflets pushed through our letter boxes, offering a wide range of different products, and it can be a bit bewildering knowing where to start.
THE SCOPE OF THE PROBLEM
Before you take the plunge, start by taking a close look at what you've got.
Things may not be as bad as they seem, and some thorough maintenance work may give your existing windows a new lease of life and save you a lot of money.
It may be worth replacing putty; squaring up and rehanging sagging casements and toplights completely if the frames themselves are sound.
Major window suppliers such as Boulton & Paul, Crittalls and John Carr will supply these in a wide range of standard sizes; or you may also be able to get a local joinery firm to make them up for you.
By restoring your existing windows, you won't have to worry about the effect that changing your window style will have on the look of your house.
See SIMPLE WINDOW REPAIRS at the end of the feature for some more details.
OUT WITH THE OLD
If you really can't save your existing windows, then wholesale replacement is the only alternative.
It's at this point that you have to start making choices, and you have several options.
The first is to fit windows of a similar type and style to those you are replacing.
Wood, steel and aluminium frames are widely available from builder's merchants and timber yards in a range of traditional standard patterns and sizes, and you can either do the work yourself or call in a local builder to do it for you.
This is the cheaper option, but it may leave you stuck with single glazing and a recurrence of your existing maintenance problems in a few years time.
Your second option is to go for replacement windows that combine the latest design and constructional techniques with materials that promise minimal maintenance, and which include the bonus of having sealed-unit double glazing and built-in weatherstripping.
The only difficulty you might face is in getting the right look — windows that match the style of your house.
But manufacturers have come a long way from the aluminium-framed picture windows that disfigured so many homes in the early days of the replacement window boom, and a wide range of window styles is now available.
Choosing this road is likely to cost a lot more than the first option.
You can reckon on spending several thousand pounds for a typical house — especially if you call in a firm to fit the windows — but you will at least ensure that your windows are the best that money can buy.
That's the theory, anyway.
Before talking about the types of window you can choose, let's look briefly at the question of double glazing.
Attractive solid brass handles from Hoppe provide high level of security for tilt'n'turn windows.
Locking model features standard cylinder mechanism with key, or pushbutton lock.
SINGLE OR DOUBLE GLAZING?
Double glazing means having two layers of glass in your windows instead of one.
The second layer can be added as a separate, usually movable, pane inside your existing window (known as secondary glazing), or can be provided by fitting a twin-wall sealed glazing unit in place of the usual single pane.
All replacement window specialists offer the option of sealed double glazed units, but many  off-the-shelf replacement windows from timber merchants and the like can only be single-glazed.
Right: Monarch's new black frame colour option can be used on its own, or with white to create a ‘mock Tudor’ effect
Below: High-security multi-point locking system, and stained glass are two options from Monarch
Double glazing offers four advantages over single glazing.
The first is the elimination of cold down-draughts near windows, allowing you to make better use of your living space in winter.
The second is a reduction of almost 50% in the heat lost through your window area, resulting in overall savings in your heating bills of around 10%.
Third, there will be far less condensation on the glass, because the inner pane is not in contact with the cold outside air, and so is much warmer than single glazing.
Finally, you will get slightly improved sound insulation as well— although for best results you need an air gap bigger than the 20mm maximum usually found in sealed units, and you may want to consider having secondary acoustic double glazing as well .
Above: From Crosby's high-performance Alpha range, available in hardwood or softwood, this single sash window rotates fully for easy cleaning, and comes with a wide range of options, including ventilator and decorative swept head.
Stormproof hinges, factory-fitted weatherstripping and gold ironmongery are standard
With all these advantages, there is clearly little point in planning to install replacement windows without including double glazing as an essential ingredient.
The cost is not high, especially when you consider that you would have to buy glass anyway.
Standard sealed units cost about twice the price of an equivalent-sized pane of pane of plain glass, and there will probably be no difference in the frame price.
Now let's look at the various frame materials that are available.
Right: Even new windows won't disguise an ugly view.
Give yourself some privacy, without hiding from the world outside, with Harrison Drape's gold Cheltenham café poles, hung with split-level curtains.
From a range of problem-solving fittings
Left: Whether it's for a d-i-y tailor-made conservatory, or an awkward one-off window, Fairmitre's range of made-to-measure, high-quality windows can be made in any style, in a range of timbers
Below: An elegant semi-circular feature window can now be added to Boulton & Paul's high-performance sliding sash windows, which tilt for easy cleaning
WHAT'S ON THE MARKET
Replacement windows are made in timber, aluminium, steel and plastic (unplasticised polyvinyl chloride, or upvc for short).
These materials are sometimes used in combination — aluminium windows may be set up in timber sub-frame, for example, and upvc windows usually have steel reinforcement inside their box sections for extra strength.
Timber windows are made either from preservative-treated softwood or a rot-resistant hardwood such as mahogany, and many have high-performance specifications that include integral weather-stripping and sealed unit double glazing.
Their main advantages are: wood is an excellent insulator; the windows come in an wide range of standard sizes (and non-standard ones are easy for a joiner to make up if necessary); they are, generally speaking, the cheapest type of replacement window to buy; and you can paint or stain them to any colour you want.
Set against these points is the familiar maintenance problem: softwood windows need regular decoration to keep rot at bay, and even hardwoods require regular treatment with preservative and stain to keep then in good condition.
Aluminium windows are still the most common (and popular) type of replacement window.
They are usually fitted into a timber sub-frame (hardwood, in preference to softwood, as there's little point in fitting an indestructible window in a frame that could rot in ten years).
They come with either a silvery anodised finish, or a factory-applied colour coating in a limited range of colours.
Their advantages are: they are generally made to measure, so awkward sizes aren't a problem; they need minimal maintenance; and they usually have integral weatherstripping.
Their drawbacks are that the frames are prone to serious condensation, unless a thermal break is incorporated in their construction, and anodised types may suffer surface corrosion in industrial or coastal areas (although very few of these are sold these days).
They are usually much more expensive than timber types, and also tend to be aesthetically unsuited to many older-style properties.
Right: Available in a variety of options, including factory-glazed, and hardwood or softwood, Magnet Trade's sliding sash windows can have double-glazed units with sashes wrapped around glazing and held by special bolts, or Georgian-style with traditional rebate, single glazed only
Steel windows are often forgotten when new windows are being considered, but may be the perfect replacement for houses originally built with them.
They are factory-galvanised these days to prevent corrosion, and many are also available with factory-applied coloured finishes that need no decorating.
Their main advantages are that they are relatively cheap, come in a wide range of sizes and styles, and can be built directly into the brickwork without the need for a sub-frame.
But they do have some disadvantages too.
The frames tend to suffer badly from condensation, they can generally be fitted only with very slim sealed units, and some cannot be double-glazed at all.
They seldom incorporate weatherstripping, and ordinary galvanised types need regular checks to ensure that any damage doesn't lead to rust.
Above: Wickes made-to-measure and ready-made range of timber frames come with locking stays and fasteners, and clear, obscure or leaded glass options
Below: John Carr's Comfort Energy Saving windows, with swept top sash, can be double glazed with square-topped units
Plastic windows are the most recent arrival on the replacement window scene, although they have been widely used on the Continent for many years.
They usually incorporate internal steel members for extra strength, and because of the relatively large cross-section of the various stiles and rails, they make an appropriate replacement for many existing timber windows.
Their main advantages are: the frame members are very good insulators, so condensation is not a problem; they can be fixed directly to masonry; they need virtually no maintenance; and they come in a wide range of styles.
Some colours and wood grain effects are beginning to find their way on to the market, though most upvc windows are white.
They are usually made to measure, so matching awkward sizes is easy.
Their two main disadvantages are that they can discolour with time unless an ultra-violet light stabiliser is incorporated in the plastic, and it's difficult to fit security devices to them (so make sure good locks are fitted as standard).
They are, generally speaking, the most expensive type.
THE RIGHT LOOK
As already mentioned, choosing replacement windows that suit your house is one of the most important points to consider.
Thankfully, there is now a wide range of window styles available in the various materials, enabling you to choose windows with conventional casements and top lights, or with top-hung, horizontally-pivoting and tilt-and-turn panes.
You can also get double-glazed vertical sliding sashes, so matching the style of your existing windows should not be a problem.
Whichever type of window you choose, ensure that it has at least one casement or sash that can be easily opened to provide an exit in case of emergency.
The type of glass also comes in the ‘looks’ category.
Most replacement windows are fitted with clear glass, but you can also have obscured, patterned or coloured glass if you want — usually to special order.
Equally important for vulnerable areas is the availability of safety glass — toughened or laminated: toughened glass — resists some impact, and shatters into harmless fragments when broken; laminated glass is much more difficult to break, and is held together by clear plastic film between the layers of glass, so won't   disintegrate.
The most recent development is the growing use of solar control and low-emissivity glass, which helps to retain heat in the winter and to prevent unnecessary solar gain in summer, often giving the equivalent effect of triple glazing when it's used in conjunction with double glazing.
You can also choose sealed units that give your windows the small-paned Georgian look, or the appearance of leaded lights in square and diamond formats, with none of the cleaning problems — the glazing bars and lead strips are set in the gap between the outer panes (as long as you don't go for a large picture window with this effect — it can look just plain silly!).
WHAT ABOUT FITTING
There are literally thousands of firms offering a supply-and-fit replacement window service these days, and choosing the best one for your home can be difficult, especially if your requirements are at all unusual.
Personal recommendation is still the safest method of selection, but you can rely on members of the Glass and Glazing Federation (GGF) to abide by the federation's code of practice.
Clients of GGF member firms are also protected by an indemnity fund in the event of the firm going out of business before your installation is carried out.
You can get a list of member firms by writing to the GGF at .
If you want to save money and fit replacement windows yourself, some firms — including superstores like Wickes — now offer a supply-only service.
In some cases the firm will do all the measuring up; others rely on the customer to do it.
SIMPLE WINDOW REPAIRS
There are several simple repairs you can carry out to keep your existing windows in good working order, and so save yourself a massive bill for replacements for at least another year or so.
Easing sticking windows:
Windows bind for two main reasons.
The first is a build-up of paint on the window and its frame, caused by years of redecoration.
Her the answer is simple: strip off the paint from window and frame, back to bare wood, then repaint from scratch.
You can use a hot air gun for this, or a chemical paint stripper, but both tend to strip off more paint than you might want.
Often the quickest solution is to sand off the excess paint, using a foam sanding block with medium-grade wet-and-dry abrasive paper.
Then prime and undercoat the bare wood and put on one top coat to finish the job.
On old windows, wear a simple dust mask to avoid inhaling dust containing lead.
The other cause of binding is the wood swelling because it is wet.
If the top or bottom edge of the window isn't painted, moisture is absorbed in wet weather, and the wood swells up.
This happens most often in the damp winter months, and often vanishes in summer.
What you have to do in this case is to strip off the paint from the binding edge, then plane off a little wood before repainting — including the vulnerable top and bottom edges of the window.
Sash windows:
Sliding sash windows can suffer from the same binding problems as hinged casements, and the cures are broadly similar.
The other cause of trouble is broken sash cords, and here life gets a little trickier, since to replace them you have to remove the sashes form the frame first.
Stopping rattles:
The simplest way of tackling draughty, rattling hinged windows is to fit self-adhesive foam draught strip around all the rebates into which the casements close.
For sashes, you need to use the brush-strip type of draught excluder along the vertical edges (fitted inside for the lower sash, outside for the upper one), so the windows can still slide easily.
You can still use foam at the top and bottom.
Finally, draught-proof the point where the sashes meet by pinning on a length of plastic or metal spring strip excluder to cover the gap.
Tackling rot and rust:
Rot is one of the biggest enemies of all types of wooden windows, especially if they're poorly maintained.
Joints open up, and crumbling putty allows water to seep in around the panes, eventually rotting the glazing bars and frame members.
The rot is often concealed beneath an apparently sound paint film, so it's a good idea to prospect for it by pushing the blade of a sharp penknife into suspect areas.
If this goes in easily by more than a few millimetres, rot is probably present, and you'll have to strip off the paint so you can repair it.
If you use a hot air gun, take care not to play the air-steam on the glass, or it will crack.
The best way of patching small areas of rot is with a proprietary rot repair kit, such as those made by Ronseal, Cuprinol and Langlow.
First cut away the damaged wood, then brush the special hardener on to all remaining soft fibres.
Then patch the surface with the special filler provided (one-part types are easier to use than the two-part systems, where you have to mix a special catalyst with the filler paste).
Leave it to harden fully, then sand off any excess and repaint.
If you have steel windows, tackle rust spots before they can spread.
The text book cure is to sand or wire-brush the rusty areas until you expose bare metal, then apply a rust treatment, followed by primer, undercoat and top-coat, as for wood.
However, it's much quicker and easier to use an all-in-one paint like Hammerite which you brush on straight over the rust.
Chemicals in the paint render the rust inert and help to discourage further outbreaks.
You also get a good decorative finish.
Replacing putty:
As already mentioned, crumbling putty can let in water in wet weather, and also encourages rot in the frames.
So if yours is looking poorly, hack it out and replace it.
Make sure the frame is dry, and prime bare wood before applying new putty.
Also remember to paint over the putty, at least a couple of millimetres on to the glass, so that water can't get in behind the putty to rot the wood.
OFFERS
SPECIAL OFFERS
WEATHERVANES
ONLY £12.95 EACH
Add a touch of fun to your garden, as well as the ability to see which way the wind is blowing from the comfort of your armchair, with these attractive weathervanes.
Fixed to your garden shed roof, or a convenient post, they'll come in useful when those cold north winds blow in the autumn or spring, and you need to rush out and protect your tender plantings.
But they'll also give you hours of pleasure just by being there.
Made in the UK from weather-resistant black heavy-duty plastic, in three traditional designs, the weathervanes come complete with all accessories — even the screws are supplied.
They revolve freely on their stainless steel spindle, with your chosen character pointing out the direction from which the wind is blowing.
Choose from three designs: Cockerel, Owl or Blacksmith.
Use reference code WVC, WVO, or WVB , as appropriate.
Prices include postage and packing to UK addresses.
CK NON-RETURN VALVE
ONLY £16.95
The new water bye-laws which came into force in January 1989 are still not widely known.
Bye-laws 17, 18, and 22 deal with back-siphoning: wherever a cold water supply is connected to a flexible hose, the law insists that the tap or outlet is fitted with a non-return valve to prevent contaminating liquids being sucked back in the mains system by any loss of pressure.
It doesn't take much imagination to realise the very serious risks if, for instance, a modern week-killer solution contaminated drinking water supplies.
Most modern household appliances, such as washing machines and dishwashers, are already fitted with non-return devices.
As a householder you should pay particular attention to outdoor threaded bib-taps which are usually used for garden hoses and sprinklers.
Unless you already have a non-return valve fitted (and only the very newest installations will have this built in), a double-check and drain valve is needed to comply with the law.
The double-check valve on offer this month is from CK Tools: it has swivel action, and is made from rust-proof solid brass.
It comes complete with all fittings for usual tap-threads, and all you need is a wrench to tighten it in position.
The CK non-return valve is Water Research Council listed, and the patented, lock-swivel fitting patents removal, plus giving a kink-free movement for your hose.
You can pay up to £20 for similar valves, but we are offering the CK non-return valve for only £16.95, including VAT and carriage — a small price for such a sensible permanent accessory.
Use reference CK on the order form.
WOLFCRAFT MASTER TABLE
ONLY £39.95
The Master Table by Wolfcraft is a portable and versatile work table with five main functions.
It is strongly made from galvanised steel with a torsionally rigid frame.
The table top measures 400 x 500mm, with an overall height of 310mm.
It is supplied with a sturdy, non-slip stand, complete with four clamping jaws with wing nuts, a sturdy parallel guide, transparent protective guard, cleaving insert, and machine and switch clamps.
You can use the Master-Table as a saw bench for standard circular saws with maximum cutting depth of 65mm; as a sawbench for all standard jigsaws; as a router table in conjunction with parallel and curved milling guides; as a sharpening or grinding centre; and as a complete workbench with vice.
The Master Table has a list price of £80.84, but we are offering it for only  £39.985 , including VAT, postage and packing, saving you £40!
Use code WMT on the order form.
RESIDUAL CURRENT ADAPTOR OFFER
ONLY £18.95
If you use any mains electrical appliance or tool outdoors, or where there is a possibility of water spillage, you could be putting yourself at risk.
Frayed or cut wires, for instance, can kill by electrocution.
We have arranged a special offer with one of the UK's leader manufacturers for their RCD adaptor.
The Input Shoctector works by monitoring the current flowing in the ‘live’ and ‘neutral’wires, and is activated by any leakage of current to earth — perhaps through you!
It almost instantaneously cuts off the power, and can prevent a tragedy occurring.
The Shoctector simply plugs into any standard ‘square’ pin socket.
You then plug your appliance into the adaptor — absolutely no wiring or electrical know-how is needed.
The Shoctector has an easily accessible Test/Reset button to give you additional peace of mind each time you use it.
It is made to BS1363 and 4293.
You can pay up to £24.95 for RCD adaptors in the shops, but we supply the Input Shoctector for only £18.95, including VAT, postage and packing.
Use reference PRCD on the order form.
NEWS UP date
SMALL ROOF WINDOW AVOIDS MAJOR MODIFICATIONS
The Orion 41 has been introduced by Ubbink into its range of top-hung roof windows in response to a demand for a small roof window that can be installed without major ‘surgery’ to the roof timbers.
The new unit, which requires a clear opening of only 464×524mm (about 18×21in), and comes complete with integral flashings, is therefore quick and simple to install.
Being top-hung, there is no encroachment into the roof space to consider, as there is with centre-pivoting roof windows.
The window is double-glazed, the up-stand insulated, and each window has a restraining device and safety catch as standard, and is for use in tiles and thick slates.,.
PAST PATTERNS REVIVED
If you are restoring an old house, you will be interested in the Forgeries range of reproduction ironmongery.
The Hampshire-based iron-work firm has just extended its range of hammer-and-anvil pieces to include a selection of castings using original patterns.
Typical are those cast-iron Victorian acorn-headed coat hooks which have been revived from moulds a century old.
Forgeries ,.
PIPE HEATING TO PREVENT BURST PIPES
Insulating the loft and pipework against the cold is the standard way to prevent burst pipes, but trace heating specialists, Jimi-Heat of Watford, disagree with this.
While insulation will reduce heat loss, it will not necessarily prevent burst pipes.
They suggest trace heating, which consists of a flexible, cut-to-length heater tape, through which an electric current is passed.
Fixed along the length of pipe, underneath the insulation, the tape generates enough warmth to prevent the pipes from freezing over.
Antifreeze, the name of this trace heating tape, is controlled by pre-set thermostats, and is only activated when the temperature drops to near freezing, or below, making it economical and cost-effective.,.
WOOD CLEANER AND COLOUR RESTORER
A marine wood cleaner and colour restorer, called Netol, has been introduced into the UK from Scandinavia.
It is applied with a brush, sponge or pad, left for a few minutes, and then rinsed off.
It removes unsightly discoloration, to restore wood to its natural colour.
It is claimed to be equally efficient for removing stains and organic growth from bricks, concrete and stone.
It is available in 500ml and 1 litre packs.,.
HANDY FENCE BRACKET
A British-made fence coupling system eliminates one of the main problems encountered in fence building and repairing — namely joining the rails or panels to the posts.
Called the Fence-fix, it is a metal coupler which can be used to fix rails or fence panels to 3in square posts.
The couplers are produced in a range of types for all arrangements of fences — straight couplers, right-angle couplers, end couplers, T-piece couplers, and cross-unit couplers.
After fixing the rails, weatherboards, slats, or wire mesh can be added, or the couplers can be used with fencing panels.,.
TESTING
QUALCAST TURBO 30 ROTARY MOWER
The Turbo 30 is an updated version of the popular S3000 rotary mower, with added turbo-vac, Qualcast's unique patented cutting/collection system, providing quicker mowing and better collection of clippings.
Giving a 300mm (12in) width of cut, the Turbo 30 is ideal for the medium sized lawn.
Improvements on the S3000 include a better metal cutting blade, restyled body, new sturdy black wheels, and a more comfortable handle.
A rear roller gives a gentle striped effect on a short cut.
A grass collection box at the rear is easy to attach and empty: it simply locates on wedge-shaped protrusions under the flap, and is held in place by the flap, which fits into a recess on top of the box.
The box can be left off when cutting short grass, so that clippings mulch the lawn.
A safety button has to be used in conjunction with the starting lever to prevent accidental starting of the mower, essential on a mower with a metal blade.
You press the red button, and keep it depressed, then squeeze the switch lever, which starts the mower; then the red button can be released.
This is a slightly awkward combination which takes a bit of getting used to, but it's a good way to prevent you accidentally or absent-mindedly starting the machine.
Once the red button has been released, a power break automatically stops the blade within three seconds of the switch lever being released.
Two very easy controls give heights of cut, from a maximum of 37mm (1½ in), to 18mm (¾ in).
Low or high settings are obtained by adjusting the height of the rear roller and front wheels — the roller by means of two plastic levers, one on each side of the mower, at the rear.
The height of the front wheels is obtained by pushing or pulling up two plastic adjuster plugs on the front of the machine, which adjust the height of the axle.
A medium cut is given by setting the front wheels to low, and the rear roller to high.
No tools are needed.
The Turbo 30 is supplied with a generous 52ft of bright red cable.
Plug or connector are not attached.
Instructions include a warning to always use a residual current device (RCD), plugged into the mains socket.
To emphasise this safety point, Qualcast is offering its Power-Safe RCD at half-price when you buy one of the company's mowers.
The Turbo 30 came boxed with the handle in four parts, and the grass box in two, and was easy to assemble.
A nut and bolt fixed the handle shafts to the top section: the blade spanner incorporates a small spanner for the nut, so only a screwdriver was needed here.
Plastic pins simply pushed in to secure the lower half of the handle to the body of the mower.
Instructions for the folding part of the handle referred to an earlier model with a spindle; but the wingnut handles were obviously fixed by a bolt, and released by a few turns when the handle needed to be folded for storage.
We tested the Turbo 30 on three lawns.
It coped with very long grass from an overgrown lawn which hadn't been cut since last year, and produced a satisfactory cut even on the first mowing.
A few days later the few uneven patches were shaped up with a second mowing, with the greatest of ease.
The stripes were hardly noticeable, as the cut was left longer here, but it took slight bumps in the ground in its stride, and cut well up to edges.
It didn't cope so well with a small, uneven lawn, with more obstacles.
The grass box made it difficult to manoeuvre here, but it was easier to use when this was removed.
The Turbo 30 gave the best results on a well-kept, even lawn with medium to fine grass, which could be cut short.
It coped easily with gently curved edges, and was in its element coasting up and down a slightly sloping lawn, producing those satisfying stripes that can make mowing a distinct pleasure.
WHAT IT COSTS The Qualcast Turbo 30 costs £99.99.
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION ,.
Adjustment from low to high cut is in two parts: a simple lever on each side of rear roller alters its height…
and two push/pull levers at front change height of front axle.
Low wheels/high roller give medium cut
To prevent accidental starting, red safety button is pressed, then lever squeezed (can be done one-handed)
Steering-wheel-type handle is easy to use; power brake stops blade in three seconds if lever is released
BLACK & DECKER GTC380 CORDLESS CLIPPER
The outdoor power tool market is the most rapidly expanding one for manufacturers, and it's therefore no wonder that new product development should mean the launch of new shredders, trimmers and cutters almost week by week.
New from Black & Decker, a big player in this market, is the GTC380 cordless hedge trimmer.
Cordless technology is still not perfect, but Black & Decker is the first to try a battery-powered hedge trimmer.
A smaller 9.6 volt model is also offered, but this has only a 330mm (13in) cutting capacity, and takes 12 hours to recharge.
Surprisingly, the GTC380 trimmer looks almost identical to the corded range from the company, with its black and green brand colouring.
The only visible difference is a more elongated handle, with a ‘Univolt’ 12 volt power pack.
Included in the pack are trimmer, battery, charger, blade sheath and fittings.
The latter two allow the tool to be hung on a wall by two screws, which pass through the plastic sheath and convert it into a vertical holder.
This kept the cutter safely out of the way.
Black & Decker suggest that the sheath should be filled with a mix of two parts paraffin to one part SAE 20 oil: this will both lubricate the blades and protect them from corrosion over the winter months.
Before use, the trimmer must be fully charged, which takes two hours.
Do not be tempted to use the small charge that is already in the battery, as this will run down in seconds.
This ‘residual charge’ can be a hazard if you are careless when opening the packaging for the first time.
It seems to occur in some manufacturers' products more than others, and is not a problem with ‘safe’ tools such as drills, but can be with bladed tools.
This product is supplied with one of the company's new Univolt chargers, which can charge a number of different battery packs in two hours.
All energy packs between 1.2 and 24 volts may be charged, useful if you own a lot of cordless tools.
Black & Decker refuses to give an average battery charge ‘life’— understandably, as power consumption will vary from owner to owner and according to hedge composition.
However, we managed to trim a fairly untidy conifer hedge, 2.1m high and 6m long, with one charge and some life left in the battery.
Unfortunately, nickel cadmium batteries run down from full power very quickly, and it is almost impossible to tell when a charge may be required.
Most owners will probably recharge for every trim.
The cutting length of the blades on the GTC380 is 380mm (15in), making the trimmer suitable for small to average hedging tasks, If you own a half-acre garden with hedging, the more labour-saving 500 or 610mm (20 or 24in) cutting capacities of corded models are a better option, or even a petrol powered trimmer.
Cutting ability of the trimmer is better than would be expected of a cordless machine.
A 12 volt battery is really essential for the mechanical action of the trimmer to work effectively over a long period.
Safety has been built into the design in the form of a clever three-way switching system.
The tool can only be turned on by pushing a lock-off switch on the rear handle with the thumb, whilst depressing the two triggers on the front and rear handles.
The two-trigger operation means that both hands must be kept firmly on the handles, and therefore out of harm's way when in use.
With a cordless trimmer it is important to use an efficient cutting technique to conserve power.
This really means cutting in angled sweeps, allowing the double blade to cut on the forward and return arc.
We were surprised by the longevity of the charge with the GTC380.
This, combined with the smallish cutting length, make it a good buy for the owners of small to medium gardens, who want the convenience and added safety of a cordless trimmer.
There were no real drawbacks to this machine and price is relatively competitive.
WHAT IT COSTS The Black & Decker GTC380 Cordless Clipper costs around £100.
Spring clips prevent the battery pack from being accidentally knocked out of the tool handle
Three-trigger safety system should prevent injury.
Perspex guard would have increased visibility of blade
Cutting with both edges of the blade makes the most of battery life of this cordless model
The plastic protective cover doubles as a wall hanger, keeping the tool safely out of children's reach
SKIL 1865U CIRCULAR SAW
It would probably be true to say that most woodwork projects around the house, from making a child's desk to forming a stud partition wall, involve straight rather than curved cutting of wood.
The circular saw is therefore one of the most labour-saving power tools that should be included in a d-i-yer's toolkit.
The Skil 1865U is a mid-range model that is more likely to be found in the independent tool stores than the d-i-y sheds.
It features a hefty 1200 watt motor, double the power of some basic saws.
Ball and needle bearings transfer the power to a 12-toothed tungsten carbide tipped (TCT) blade of 65mm cutting capacity.
Initial impressions are of a heavy tool (5.2kg), thanks to the motor size, with a very solid, compact feel, although the Skil is actually not that large a machine for its capacity.
A ‘shark's fin’ handle protrudes from the motor housing, and this has a safety catch button that protrudes through both sides of the handle.
This means that left and right-handed users can safely start and use the saw.
Ask many tradesmen what they use to rip timber (cut parallel with the longest sides, along the grain) and they reply ‘a Skil saw’.
Skil broke much of the ground in portable saw technology almost 60 years ago, and the company name now has a reliable, quality image.
We were therefore interested to see just how well this American-made tool would perform.
Setting up for cutting is by the conventional depth and angle adjusters.
A metal lever behind the blade guard alters cutting depth.
This certainly locked the blade at the correct depth, but was on the small side, especially for its rather inaccessible position.
Angle adjustment was via a pressed steel butterfly nut on a calibrated gauge.
Tests showed the stop angles of 90° and 45° to be accurate.
We tried rip sawing a piece of 50 x 100mm timber, sighting the saw by eye and freehand.
This is where the advantage of a powerful motor and small blade combination became apparent.
So little forward pressure is needed that attention could be concentrated on following the guide line as the blade slipped in through the timber.
On inspection, a very clean 3mm wide cut was produced.
Unlike some manufacturers, Skil has marked the sight lines on the front of the sole plate ‘0’ and ‘45’, a simple feature that makes usage a lot easier.
We also tried using the Skil with its standard guide fence.
This is a very small steel device with not enough fence area to be of real use.
It is so easy to guide the saw freehand that it will probably end up in the bottom drawer of many a tool box.
Skil offers a TCT blade as standard with the 1865U.
The blade is coated with a Teflon-like material that lessens friction.
The 12-tooth configuration is typical of this type of machine, and makes it primarily of use for ripping wood.
More teeth give a cleaner cut, and are better for cutting across the grain if a really smooth finish is required.
Skil offers 24 and even 76-tooth blades as accessories.
Providing that the standard blade is set correctly, that is, the saw teeth only just penetrate the wood being cut, we found that the blade produced just as good results when cross-cutting.
Safety features on the Skil, in addition to the lock off button, include a self-adjusting riving knife.
This should be a feature of all powerful machines, but is often lacking.
It means that the knife behind the saw blade (which prevents the wood closing up behind the cut) automatically moves to the ideal position relative to the saw blade, as the depth adjustment is made.
A 5mm gap between the blade and knife is always maintained.
A plastic dust extraction adaptor is included as standard.
Vacuum hoses of between 30 and 35mm diameter can be attached to collect the chippings.
A blade-changing wrench is held in a clip at the rear of the sole plate.
The Skil lived up to its name.
If you can live with the slightly awkward depth adjuster, the motor/blade combination makes this a saw which will cut through hard and softwood as easily as a knife through butter.
WHAT IT COSTS The Skil 1865U has a list price of £148, including VAT.
What your Skil saw is for…professional specifications allow the 1865U to cut through almost anything
Kerfs formed across a large joint prior to removing the waste wood.
Very little ‘tearout’ occurred at end of cut
Self-adjusting riving knife at the rear of the TCT blade ensures safe usage.
Wrench is stored at rear of machine
At a full 45°, the cutting capacity of the Skil was 51mm, 14mm less than when in the upright position
PEUGEOT CB30 LINE TRIMMER
There are now so many line trimmers on the market now that it pays to know exactly what you need and how much you are prepared to pay.
Peugeot's CB30 is the company's most highly-specified model.
There is an almost identical CB25 without the extra handle or adjustable shaft length.
The CB30 also has a 300 watt power unit, compared to the 250 watt output of its sister model.
Most of the electric line trimmers are between 150 and 500 watts.
If you are planning to cope with very large lawns, or use the trimmer for keeping an orchard under control, opt for the more durable petrol-engined version.
Assembly of the Peugeot is a matter of fixing the separate plastic guard plate on to the trimmer head.
Most models use plastic lugs for fixing but the CB30 has a single screw fixing.
An 11m long nylon line of 1.25mm diameter cord is supplied with the machine, which is about average.
An automatic line-feed mechanism is also standard.
This simply means that when the cord wears away in use, the spool can be lightly tapped on the ground to automatically pay out more cord.
This worked satisfactorily on our test machine — a small line limiter blade cuts off excess cord.
Spare cord spools are available from Peugeot dealers.
The most unusual feature of the CB30 is the handle set-up.
A kink at the end of the shaft provides an ‘S’ shape, with an arm-rest at the end.
With one hand used to guide the machine by means of the moulded front handle, the hand that pulls the trigger is supported on the forearm by a foam T-bar.
We were very impressed with the machine's ergonomics, allowing the machine to be used for longer periods than the conventional straight shaft models.
As an added bonus for taller users, the shaft length can be adjusted to give a good working stance.
A plastic-handled bolt fixes the telescopic shaft in the correct position.
An extra 150mm or so of handle length meant that even our taller testers were able to work comfortably.
The no-load speed of the reel is quoted at 11,000rpm, and the motor was less ‘buzzy’ than smaller wattage trimmers.
Noise was not excessive.
Like many models, the CB30 does not have a tailor-made edging facility — the trimmer head is rotated to allow vertical cutting of a lawn edge.
We tried using the machine angled to cut an edge, but the handle prevents extended use in this mode.
The trimmer worked well in confined areas, near fences and walls and path edges.
One feature we had not encountered before was a folding metal sidecutting guide.
This thin bar is pushed down to the level of the trimmer head, and is claimed to prevent wear on the cord when working near a tree or wall, that would normally abrade the nylon cord.
We found it was more useful in stopping the debarking of trees or accidental damage to shrubs.
To sum up, the Peugeot is a lightweight, 1.9kg, line trimmer, that will but swathes of around 250mm diameter, making it good for average garden use.
Plus points were the number of little extras on an apparently simple machine — shaped handle and height adjustment being particularly worthwhile.
WHAT IT COSTS The Peugeot CB30 costs around £66.50, but you may find it available for less; it's worth shopping around.
A shaped metal guard flips down to form a complete protective circle around the cord, useful around trees
The trimmer pays out more cutting cord when the cord carrier is lightly tapped on the ground
A bonus for the taller user — adjustable shaft length prevents stooping and backache
An unusual hand/forearm rest distributes the weight of the tool more evenly than straight handles
DIY DO IT YOURSELF
NEXT MONTH
Some of the major features to be included in the August issue
FENCES & GATES
Choosing a sound surround for your garden.
Whether safety or security is more important, we look at all the types of fences and gates and give tips on building them
STAIRCASES
Repairs to treads, nosings, strings, banisters — plus background advice on complete replacement
GARDEN ELECTRICS
How to install decorative and functional lighting plus power for electrical equipment.
We show you how to install circuits safely
JOBBING NOTEBOOK
FITTED WARDROBES
Installing one of the latest systems
PANELLING
Fixed decorative panelling for a new-look bathroom
BARBECUE
Enjoy outdoor eating with a simple to build barbecue
ADVICE CENTRE
All our regular features plus special reports on
GARDENING Hiring tools to make life easier
WOODWORM Getting rid of this unwanted pest
TOOL SAFETY Hints and tips on how to avoid injuries while working with hand and power equipment — plus advice on maintaining tools to keep them in top condition.
LETTERS
YOUR SAY
STAR LETTER PRIZE
This month's Star Letter prize winner will receive £50 worth of JB Weld adhesives.
JB Weld is a complete adhesive range which can fix all your d-i-y requirements.
Its innovative Coldweld compound actually etches the materials before bonding them together: the secret combination of liquid steel and non-toxic chemical hardener results in a product which fixes, fills and bonds any surface to any surface.
JB Weld works on iron, steel, aluminium, bronze, brass, copper, pewter, all woods, ceramics and plastics, and it applications are endless — mechanical, automotive, plumbing, around the home, and around the garden.
It is odourless, resistant to very high temperatures, and does not shrink.
Call  for more information.
STAR LETTER BIG FOOT
Some years ago my family moved to a small cottage, which had one ground floor bedroom with a toilet attached, just perfect for Grandad.
The whole place was rather grubby, so I started by painting the extension.
The toilet consisted of a wc and basin, and the room was too small to get a ladder in there, so I reached the ceiling by standing on a chair.
Unfortunately, I dropped the paintbrush, which of course went down the loo.
Stepping down off the chair to pick it up, so did I, and I got stuck.
When my husband came in, bringing the new neighbours with him, I was sitting on the floor, one foot wedged in the lavatory basin, and with the broken seat round my neck!
Never mind: no-one lets me do any painting now — and I can't say I mind.,.
NEAT SEAL
A good way of getting a neat mastic seal between bath and basin is to use masking tape, spaced at the right distance, on the bath and the wall.
Smooth the mastic down, then remove making tape as soon as possible afterwards.,.
TILE CUTS
I've found that an easy way to cut ceramic tiles to shape is to use a brand new hacksaw blade.
Mark and cut the shape on a piece of cardboard, transfer on to the front of the tile, and using a few downward strokes to get the cut started, saw out the shape.
It even works for ceramic floor tiles.,.
MAINS TESTER WARNING
I wonder if other readers, like myself, are under the misapprehension that mains test screwdrivers are infallible?
They're usually purchased over the counter with no instructions, but last week I bought one in a plastic sleeve, on which the following instructions were printed: ‘This voltage indicator is suitable for testing AC voltage from 100 volts up to a maximum of 500 volts against earth The metal part on top of the indicator must be touched to operate it,and the earthing position of the user largely determines whether it lights up or not .
Note: Failure to light up therefore does not indicate with certainly that no voltage is present.’
(The underlining is mine!)
Assuming that this statement is correct, these testers could prove lethal, and should certainly only be used by competent people with a considerable degree of electrical knowledge; and they definitely shouldn't be relied on to check if a circuit is dead.
Manufacturers please note: when selling mains testers, instructions are vital, as are recommendations for the correct earthing position of the user.,.
SPRAY SOLUTION
When my d-i-y man was in hospital, our front door became very difficult to close.
Having had to resort to asking passers-by to pull it closed for me, I was worried that one day I wouldn't be able to get in.
I tried using some spray furniture polish, rubbed well in, on the areas that were jamming.
I repeated a few times, and it worked a treat — on a window as well.
I know my husband would have taken the door down, and used a plane, but this way there was no mess.,.
SANDVIK TOP TIP PRIZE…
PLUMBER'S ARCH
This month's Top Tip prize winner will receive £50 worth of labour-saving paint scraping and Sandplate tools from Sandvik Saws and Tools.
Sandvik paint scrapers have blades made from extremely hard-wearing tungsten carbide, which remain sharp 10 times longer than conventional steel blades.
They are ground to a slight curve to prevent corners from scratching work surfaces, and are suitable for removing paint from wood, metal, plaster, filler and glass-fibre-reinforced plastic.
Sandplate is a ‘sandpaper’ made of steel, which lasts 100 times longer, and works five times faster than ordinary sandpaper.
Its minute teeth resist clogging, and actually cut, rather than grind the material, leaving a very smooth finish.
The sanding plate won't rip or tear, and is simply attached to tools with a self-adhesive backing.
Three easy to use hand tools are available, with matching replacement plates.
Here's an idea for a cheap, quick and easy garden arch — the plumber's way.
Make an arch out of copper tubing, which is bendable, so it's easy to form the arched top from it.
Join together two vertical sections for each side of the arch with short horizontal pipes in at least two places, leaving enough vertical pipe to push below ground for support.
Join two arched top sections together in the same way, and using solder ring fittings throughout, join the arches to the verticals.
Paint the arch white, green or black.
Push into the ground until it's stable, plant your climbers, and in about two years time, you'll have a perfect cottage garden arch, needing no maintenance..
INSPIRATION
I recently moved into a house of my own, knowing nothing about d-i-y at the time.
But I have now fitted my own  carpets, put up shelves, constructed a pine cabinet in the bathroom, and decorated the whole house throughout — all thanks to DIY, with its step-by-step pictures, clear instructions and informative articles.
It showed me that d-i-y decorating and repairs need not always be so technical and difficult — and you don't have to be a big strapping man to do d-i-y.
It gave me inspiration, and it was fun .
I'm now a regular reader — thanks!,.
NO-FUSS FILL
When filling small cracks, I've found that I get a smooth finish, which requires little or no sanding, of I roll over the crack with a paint roller a few times, while the filler is still damp.,.
VERSATILE BORDERS
I save all my left-over striped or patterned wallpapers to make into borders.
Cut carefully into strips, a wide border looks most effective used around a room at ceiling level, or a narrower one below a picture rail.
A room decorated with plain paper can be transformed with a pretty flowered border, and you can even use narrow borders for edging things like mirrors and waste paper bins, or even a plain door (with careful  mitring ).
And it's made a lovely edging for a wooden tray, coated in varnish once the paste is dry.,.
ANTI-SOCIAL
Friends were having repeated trouble with their telephone, for which there seemed to be no obvious reason.
I warned them that d-i-yers should stop short of tampering with British Telecom's property, but they nevertheless decided to take look inside the junction box.
And there was the answer — a large family of ants had made its home there!
Perhaps Busby should be brought back to get rid of them.,.
READER'S STORY
PLUMBING PUZZLE
The middle bedroom of our three bedroomed cottage is a thoroughfare to the bathroom and end bedroom.
This is acceptable when only the family are around, but when we have guests, embarrassing situations can arise.
At least, that was the case, until I demolished a tumbledown pigsty at the bottom of the garden, and built in its place a guest annexe.
This now serves, not only as guest accommodation, but also as an occasional isolation ward, study and music room.
Being unable to afford the various tradesmen required, I undertook the project myself.
The learning-on-the-job approach was very enjoyable and, with expert advice from various d-i-y books and a building friend, also successful.
In fact the whole exercise was fairly straightforward, except for one problem which required a one-off solution.
The building is 25 × 12ft, of single storey, under a tiled roof.
Inside there are two store rooms, a guest room, an entrance hall, and a room with a toilet and wash basin.
It was the plumbing of the latter that required some thought.
The problem was to get hot water to the wash basin.
It would have been too expensive in electricity to pipe hot water from the house, which is about 40ft away, although the pipe run could have followed the cold water supply, which is taken, underground, from the house.
It was necessary, therefore, to heat the water in the annexe itself.
Since the only source of energy in the building is electricity, it was this that had to heat the water.
Instant water heaters were not an option, since the power rating of the electricity supply to the annexe was only 13amp, giving a maximum wattage of about 3,500.
Of this, 250 or so is taken up with lighting, leaving a little over 3,000 watts for water heating.
The solution had to be a hot water cylinder with an immersion heater.
However, even the smallest cylinder stocked by plumbers' merchants was far too big for this application — what was needed was a small, neat cylinder, that would fit snugly under the wash basin unit.
A good motto for the d-i-y enthusiast is: ‘If you can't buy it, make it, and if you can't make it, have it made.’
I certainly couldn't make the cylinder I required, but a walk through the Yellow Pages revealed several firms in Birmingham which specialised in copper smithing.
The very first one I tried said, ‘No problem.
Let us have a drawing, and we'll have it ready in an hour or so.’
Sure enough, an hour and a half and some window shopping later, the cylinder was ready complete with tappings and foam insulation.
The cost was only £35.
Installation was straightforward, and a 3kW, 12in immersion heater completed the job.
The system has been working for about five years now, with never a hitch.
A little ingenuity certainly paid off.,.
Top: New annexe from old pigsty.
Above: Made-to-measure hot water cylinder fits neatly under sink, hidden by cupboard doors.
GARDENWISE
Colour on reflection
A slight slope is ideal for introducing steps and a natural-looking rock garden
Suggested planting  
How to repair loose steps
Crumbling or loose steps are extremely hazardous, and it may not be sufficient to re-mortar individual pieces.
Starting at the top, carefully remove the stones or bricks, and stack them so that they can be replaced in the correct position
Chisel out any broken or crumbling foundation, and replace with new concrete (one part cement, five parts combined aggregates).
If there are areas of soft ground, ram hardcore into the area before laying the concrete
Once the concrete repairs have set, rebuild the steps, starting from the bottom.
Make sure any old mortar has bee cleaned off the stonework before using new mortar.
Check levels frequently (a slight downward fall will shed water)
Arbour Appeal
Provide a sense of seclusion and an attractive feature in a garden which is lacking in privacy by building yourself an arbour.
Simply made from trellis panels, it can soon be covered in climbers, giving a cosy, private place from which to enjoy your garden.
Suggested planting  
Make an arbour
Insert seven 75 × 75mm (3 × 3in) post spikes for the supporting posts.
If you intend to buy ready-assembled trellis panels, adjust the spacing to suit the size of the panels without cutting
Construct the frame from 75 × 75mm (3 × 3in) treated timber, and secure the joints with coach bolts or galvanised nails.
Tighten the spikes to ensure the posts are rigid (check verticals first)
Buy or make trellis panels.
Make sure they are treated with a wood preservative before nailing or screwing to the frame.
Plant climbers, and tie them to the trellis until they can support themselves
NEWS UPdate
SIMPLE, SAFE WAY TO STRIP WOOD
A safe, water-based paint stripper has been introduced, called 3M Paint and Varnish Remover.
It has no unpleasant fumes, will not burn skin, and can be used indoors without ventilation.
The product forms part of a complete system of surface removal, with tools and wood finishing products, all designed to give superior results!
To give more effective stripping, 3M has designed a special Stripping Tool which, unlike wire wool, will not stain wood with rust spots, while also speeding up stripping on flat surfaces.
There is a range of Heavy Duty Stripping Pads, and Final Stripping Pads for remaining residues.
Use the stripper by applying a thick coat by brush, leave for 45 minutes, remove residue with a paint scraper, and the surface is finally cleaned with the special stripping tool or pad.
for further information,,.
FUN DESIGNS FOR KIDS' ROOMS
Whizz Kids 3, designs of borders with co-ordinating wallcoverings, have been introduced by Forbo-Kingfisher for kids who are really on the move.
Made from solid vinyl, the wallcoverings and borders can match the toughest child, and are fully washable for a quick recovery!
Co-ordinating wall coverings are available in little triangles, dots and miniature abstract prints, but because the focus of the collection is on the borders, it is possible to put up just a new border and save on decorating the whole room.
The borders vary in width, and are designed specially to create the main impact in the room.
The designs themselves are lively and fresh, and come in bold primary, and soft pastel colours, making them suitable for any bedroom or playroom.
Young girls and boys will enjoy watching penguins at play in Arctic Fun (above), and elephants and lions look lively in Jungle Jive (left).
The new collection is available from all good wallcovering stores.
Prices start from £6.26 for a 5m roll for borders, and £12.99 for a 10m roll for wallcoverings.
If bought from stock, prices may be considerably lower, and may vary.,.
TAPES AND HAMMERS WITH FREE HOLSTERS
Stanley Powerlock measuring tapes and Steelmaster claw hammers are being promoted with free top-quality leather holsters.
Attached to a belt, the holsters are convenient when working in difficult surroundings as they leave both hands free for the job.
Toe complement its range of professional quality tools, Stanley is also supplying a high-grade matching leather belt for just £3.99.
This is the first phase of a four-phase Accessory Plus offer.
The three subsequent phase, each with their own special Accessory offers, will appear in the shops in the summer, until October.,.
FREE! 200 DIY MIGHTY WIPES
Oily spillages, greasy marks, and other dust and dirt created while carrying out messy d-i-y tasks can be easily cleaned up with Nouvelle's new Mighty Wipes.
The environmentally friendly wipes, made from 100% recycled paper, are strong, heavy-duty paper towels, specially developed to mop up messy oil spills and grease marks.
Priced at £1.49 for a two-roll pack, they're available from Tesco stores.
If you want to try a pack free,DIY readers have the opportunity to do so by sending their name and address on a postcard to:,.
The first 200 cards picked out of the bag after that date will receive a free two-roll pack.
ADVICE CENTRE
BCMA FEDERATION OF BRITISH CARPET MANUFACTURERS
Designers usually start at floor level in home refurbishments.
Get the groundwork right and, in theory, everything else should slot into place.
This month we focus on the work of the British Carpet Manufacturers' Association (BCMA), which has some useful advice for d-i-y fitters.
The BCMA came into being when two other organisations, The Federation of British Carpet Manufacturers, and The Tufted Carpet Manufacturers Association, merged in 1976.
Regional trade association for the carpet industry date back to the 1930s, but the first national one didn't make an appearance until 1949.
WHAT THE BCMA DOES
The organisation is involved in the classification of carpets, and in the registering of ‘quality’ names.
It also helps to promote consumer awareness of the industry, and runs a training and safety advisory service, and a general consumer enquiry service (the phone number appears at the end of this feature).
If you're confused about what kind of carpet to buy, have a problem with an existing carpet, or have a query about colour or design elements, the BCMA should be able to help.
Problems arising from faults in carpet manufacture or fitting may be passed on to a body like the British Carpet Technical Centre, which can sometimes offer a testing or arbitration service.
However, your contract of sale is with the shop where you bought your carpet, and problems must first be raised with them.
The BCMA currently has 32 members — all are UK manufacturers whose products meet strict standards of quality: around two-thirds of BCMA members to conform to BS5750, a standard method for ensuring consistent and accurate production to agreed specifications.
A list of members, giving details of the kinds of carpets they make, is available free of charge from the association; write to the BCMA (enclosing an sae) if you'd like a copy.
The association also makes representations to the Government, the EEC, and standards organisations on matters relevant to the industry.
CARPET CRITERIA
When you're buying a carpet, look out for the BCMA logo on the underside.
Alongside, you'll find details of the BCMA grading scheme, which is your assurance that the carpet has been independently checked to comply with various BS tests.
The tests look at carpet construction (it will be tufted, woven, or bonded), type of pile material used, and the weight and density of the pile, etc.
The scheme also uses machine testing to assess the carpet's ability to retain its ‘as new’ appearance after years of wear.
In addition, a room suitability guide shows which grades of carpet are suitable for different areas in the house (see grading panel).
The association produces two useful booklets:Carpet Facts (which tells you all you need to know about different types of carpet and how to choose the right colours and designs for your home); and Carpet Care (which gives tips on cleaning and maintenance).
Both are available free of charge, but please enclose an sae.
A third booklet, called Shading , deals with the problem of light/dark effects produced on carpet pile under natural or artificial lighting (the effect will change if the pile is brushed in a different direction); it costs 80p, including p&p.
CARPET CLASSIFICATION
The BCMA's carpet grading scheme is based on BS7131.
This British Standard sets minimum levels of quality for colour fastness, backing materials, flammability, etc, before a carpet can be graded (with special requirements for stairs and bathrooms).
It classified carpets as follows:
Class 1
Moderate domestic (suitable for bedrooms and bathrooms).
Class 2
General domestic/moderate non-domestic (use in dining rooms, master bedrooms, study-bedrooms).
Class 3
Heavy domestic/general non-domestic (ideal for living rooms, halls, landings).
Class 4
Heavy, non-domestic use.
The BCMA's carpet grading scheme applies these classes to domestic use only, and shows whether a carpet in any one grade is suitable for light, medium, or heavy use.
In Class 4, an ‘extra-heavy’ description is used for the heaviest and/or toughest carpets, which get a very high rating for pile weight, density, and appearance retention — this class is suitable for all areas of very heavy traffic and wear in the home.
CALL IN THE PROFESSIONALS
With middle to top-quality carpets retailing at anything from £15 to over £40 per square metre, it can be a false economy not to call in professional carpet fitters for some jobs.
One argument against d-i-y carpet-laying is the fact that you could be putting your rights as a consumer at risk if a problem arises with the carpet at a later date.
Also the professionals are used to moving heavy rolls of carpet around; you may not be, and could slip a disc!
However, there are occasions when doing-it-yourself may be less risk-prone.
Professional carpet fitters get paid per square metre (or yard) of carpet laid, and they don't like being given fiddly jobs like kitchens, bathrooms, or small bedrooms, unless they are part of a whole-house installation.
These are the areas that can be easily tackled by the amateur, without the expensive tools needed for carpeting larger areas.
Carpet tiles, too, are suitable for d-i-yers, but do follow the maker's installation instructions.
Points to remember if you intend to do the work yourself:
Make sure the floor is level: place hardboard over uneven floorboards, or use a smoothing screed over concrete;allow sufficient time for the screed/concrete to dry properly — if this isn't done, damp from the floor may cause the carpet to rot or shrink.
If you're carpeting a new extension, remember that a 6in thick concrete floor may take up to 6 months to completely dry out.
Read British Standard 5325:1983 — your local reference library may be able to lend you a copy: this is the code for installing textile floorcoverings.
When nailing or screwing down carpet gripper strips, be careful to avoid piercing any water pipes or electricity cables.
Foam-backed carpet can be fitted using double-sided tape, provided the sub-floor is smooth, clean and dust-free.
Use underlay under woven carpet, or jute-backed tufted carpet.
Unroll the carpet and let it get acclimatised to the room's atmosphere and temperature overnight before laying.
Use a sharp knife to trim round fittings or skirting boards — obviously this needs to be done with care.
Information supplied by Marian Smith, Deputy Director, BCMA.
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION:,.
SPECIAL PAINTS
There comes a time when we have to decide which of the paints on the market will do the best job.
This is hard enough when you are considering a normal decorating job, but when it comes to choosing paint for a special job, then the task can be very complex.
Special paints don't have a large range of colours to choose from, so at least that choice is simplified.
One of the reasons why the range of special paints has diminished over the last few years is that ordinary paints and primers are so good.
But there are still some surfaces or locations that need something a little different.
Special paints are designed to cope with conditions that ordinary paints will not withstand, or to provide a surface that satisfies a certain need, eg fire retarding or damp-proofing.
This article deals specifically with these paints, not primers or undercoats, unless they are necessary for the satisfactory application of the special top coat.
Fire resistant paints may be clear like a varnish, or coloured like a paint, but they cannot be overpainted.
Building Regulations contain strict fire prevention regulations, some of which refer to the treatment of surfaces to prevent fire spreading too rapidly.
The spread of fire within a building may be inhibited or at least reduced by the coatings used on walls and ceilings.
If you want decorative timber panels on the ceiling, you may need to use a fire retarding paint or varnish on the surface, although this is not usually necessary in most homes.
Most fire retardant coatings are intumescent, which means that they expand when heated, forming a solid foam with a charred surface that protects the wood it is on.
Floor, garage floor, and step paints are hard wearing and not slippery, although they cannot be called non-slip.
Many floor paints can be used to smarten up wood, lino, or concrete floors; they are ideal for areas that cannot be carpeted but need some decoration.
Take care to choose the right one for the job.
For instance, garage floor paints are made to withstand the suction and abrasive effects of tyres, as well as being resistant to oil, etc.
These would be fine used inside the house, but normal floor paint may not be tough enough for the garage.
There is a rapid drying floor paint on the market that would be useful in areas that are used regularly.
At least the newly painted floor would not be out of commission too long.
But it does make sense to paint floors last thing at night, giving the paint a chance to dry overnight.
Step paint is like a floor paint, but for use on concrete or stone steps.
These paints are not damp-proof, and the surface you are painting needs to be dry before you start (ie no recurring damp).
One of the problems with old masonry door steps is that, very often, they are not bedded on a damp-proof course.
This means that they are always slightly damp, and so step paint would tend to bubble or blister.
Tile red is a red paint which forms a protective and decorative surface to outside tiles, brickwork and masonry.
It reduces water penetration and prevents the growth of mould.
It is intended for use on surfaces which will not be walked on.
Blackboard and matt paints are two very similar, perhaps even the same paints, in different containers.
They give a matt, non-reflective finish to surface, which does not show up irregularities.
They are often used for painting beams and ornamental metal work.
Matt paints are not easy to clean, and will not withstand constant washing down.
They are easy to use, and quick-drying.
Radiator enamels are specially formulated to prevent the yellowing which usually occurs when normal white paint is used on a radiator.
It's still usual for most radiators to be painted white, so most radiator enamels are white.
The solvent in some of these enamels will attack the original paint on the radiator.
To prevent this, use a recommended primer before the radiator paint is applied.
There is a range of five colours available in Homestyle's new spray-on radiator enamels, which includes a special primer.
Some radiator paints need special brush cleaners and thinners.
Buy these with the paint; brushes can't be cleaned with white spirit or water.
Hammerite is a unique paint: it dries to a very hard finish, and needs no primer or undercoat.
It can be painted directly on to a surface that is rusty, as long as all the loose rust is removed first.
It cannot be used on aluminium or galvanised surfaces.
As with all special paints, read the label carefully to determine how and where it should be used.
You'll need to use a special thinner/brush cleaner.
The original Hammerite got its name because it has a finish like a hammered metal; a smooth version is also available.
Heat resistant paints withstand heat up to 200°C.
They are usually black or aluminium coloured and tend to be rather specialised and difficult to buy.
Child-safe paint : We haven't found any paints that are claimed to be totally lead-free, but the safe ‘nursery paints’ are within the strict British and European limits for the amount of lead permitted in child-safe paints.
Most of these are water-based acrylic paints, are quick drying and have a low odour.
Take care with application: if not applied properly they can chip off and could be swallowed by a child, which might not be harmful, but won't be very pleasant.
Humbrol enamel, sold mainly in tiny pots for modelmakers, is also suitable for toys and nursery furniture.
It can be used on wood and metal, and needs no primer or undercoat.
Anti-damp paint prevents damp in a wall from coming out and avoids those ugly damp stains.
These paints should be considered a temporary measure until the cause of the damp has been found and cured.
A wall that has been damp will often contain moisture for a long time after the cause has been remedied, so it is better to allow the walls to dry out naturally, although anti-damp paint could be used to allow the room to be decorated before the wall has dried out.
Several companies, such as Johnstone's, Cuprinol, and Feb, also do a clear damp-proofing liquid.
Anti-condensation and insulation paints contain minute glass spheres which make the surface of the paint warmer to the touch, and so less likely to encourage condensation to form on its surface.
Fungicide is also added to anti-condensation paint to prevent mould growth.
(Pin mould is the classic indication that there is a condensation problem in a room.)
It is far better to ventilate the room well, and so remove the damp air causing the condensation.
Both can be overcoated with ordinary paint.
Anti-asthmatic paint is intended for use in rooms where asthmatics sleep.
It contains fewer chemical pollutants, which asthmatics are often allergic to, and so helps to prevent asthma attacks.
Paints for people with allergies:Some of the chemicals in paint can bring on allergic reactions in sensitive people, and some paints are made omitting the specific materials that cause these allergies.
FINANCIAL BUDGETING FOR BILLS
Suppose your gas, telephone and life insurance bills all arrive on the same day.
If your bank account is already low, do you take out a loan, send off cheques regardless, or stuff the bills in a drawer, hoping they will go away?
Budgeting could be the answer: by spreading regular bills over the year, you will never need to find large sums when you're short of cash.
Besides saving on charges, you will also avoid rows with your bank manager, and perhaps even disconnection.
Here are three ways of easing the pain.
1.
Pay by equal monthly instalments.
Most large organisations allow this.
They estimate what you normally spend in a year, divide by 12, and arrange for you to pay this sum by monthly direct debit.
It doesn't matter if the cumulative amount is temporarily less than what you owe, because you'll be asked to make up any shortfall at the end of the year; and money overpaid will be returned.
Usually, there's no extra charge, but insurance companies may boost your annual premium by, say, 6%.
2.
Open a separate building society saving account.
Add up all last year's bills: car service, gas, electricity, insurance, poll tax, telephone, TV licence and water, and add 10% for inflation and the unexpected.
You might also include Christmas and holiday expenses.
Divide by 12, and have this amount transferred by monthly direct debit from you bank current account.
When a bill arrives, pay it with a building society cheque.
There are no fees, and you collect a good rate of interest on the balance; but you can't raise an overdraft.
If several big bills fall due when you first start you may have to ‘prime the pump’ with savings.
3.
Take out a separate bank account for bill-paying only.
With Lloyds' Budget Account, for instance, you divide the total of your year's bills by 12, and transfer this amount from your current account by monthly direct debit.
You can then pay bills immediately, using a separate chequebook, even if it means that you slip into the red.
The cost is £2 a month, plus interest of 26.8% APR on any account overdrawn.
You collect interest of 1.13% a month when you're in credit.
The Midland offers a similar arrangement using a Number Two current account, but charges £15 a quarter, plus interest at 26.7% APR when you're overdrawn, and gives no credit interest.
REGULATIONS
BUILDING CLOSE TO BOUNDARIES
‘Can I build right up to my boundary?’
This is a question that is often asked when planning home extensions, particularly when space is limited.
The simple answer is — yes.
It is legally possible to build up to the boundary of your ownership, but there are a number of points which should be considered if you decide to do so.
First, your extension will have to comply with the Building Regulations, which include various requirements for preventing fire spreading from your house to your neighbour's property.
If the flank wall is construction of materials which will resist the spread of fire for at least half an hour, then the wall can be sited on the boundary.
The general rule is that the more combustible your wall is, the greater distance it has to be away from the boundary.
A brick wall which does not contain openings will provide a good fire barrier and can, therefore, be sited on the boundary.
Compliance with the Building Regulations does not give you any legal rights to encroach on your neighbours land, no matter how small the encroachment may be.
When a wall is positioned right on the boundary, the foundations, rainwater pipes, guttering, and even the fascia board, are all likely to project over the boundary.
Although these encroachments may appear to be rather small, they could give your neighbour valid grounds for complaint, which could result in costly legal proceedings.
Buildings which are positioned on boundaries can also be difficult to maintain.
In the absence of any agreement with your neighbour, you will not have any rights to carry out repairs or general maintenance works to the exposed face of your wall.
There is also the possibility of your neighbour erecting a wall within his own land, which would then make it impossible for you to carry out any maintenance works, even if you were able to gain access to your neighbour's land.
If you are fortunate enough to have a friendly neighbour who does not object to you working on your wall from his side of the boundary, then do get his agreement in writing.
Although verbal agreements can be binding in law, they can be difficult to prove in later years, particularly when a new not so friendly neighbour comes on the scene.
When planning a project which is likely to affect your neighbour in any way, it's always advisable to consult him or her at an early stage, so that he is fully aware of your plans.
A lot of disputes between neighbours can be prevented if there is consultation before building works start on site.
Early consultation with your neighbour can also be to your advantage.
He might like the proposal you have in mind, and decide to do the same on his property.
Joint ventures with a common party wall can overcome a number of boundary disputes.
Finally, there is the matter of planning permission to consider.
As a general rule, small extensions to dwelling houses do not need planning permission if they can be classified as ‘permitted development’.
However, if this is not possible, and you are informed that your project needs planning permission, then a number of environmental issues may have to be considered.
Building up to a boundary and the likely effect this may have on your neighbour could very well be one of these issues.
Building on and close to boundaries needs to be considered very carefully.
MORTGAGE ADVICE
Think twice before taking out a mortgage offered by your friendly estate agent.
Has he chosen the right one for you — or the right one for him?
It's not just that he makes more commission by selling you an endowment rather than a repayment mortgage.
Many firms of estate agents are also surveyors, and it's important to them to get on to building society panels to enjoy a good flow of valuation work.
According to the Office of Fair Trading, there's evidence that some building societies choose firms that bring them mortgage business in return, so your estate agent may be tempted to steer you towards a building society that he needs to butter up.
Before deciding, shop around and discuss your needs with several banks and building societies.
GARDENING
FOLIAGE BEDDING
WEED CONTROL
Weeds are much easier to control if you never let them become established.
Mulching the ground with a thick layer of garden compost, cocoa shell or chipped bark is an effective way to suppress them in flower beds, but you must start with weed-free ground.
Paths and drives require a different approach, with hand weeding or chemical control being the only practical option.
Hoeing, the traditional way to keep weeds down during the summer, is very effective for beds and borders and among vegetables, provided you do it frequently and do not let perennial weeds form a good root system.
Destroy annual weeds before they have the chance to flower and spread their seeds.
Weedkillers fall into five broad categories:
Non-persistent contact weedkillers destroy top growth quickly, and are very efficient at destroying annual weeds and seedlings of perennials, but established deep-rooted perennial weeds will probably regrow from the roots.
Paraquat with diquate (trade name Weedol) is an example.
Non-persistent systemic weedkillers are absorbed through the leaves and move throughout the plant, including the roots.
They may take a week or so to work, but can kill most deep-rooted perennial weeds without being persistent.
The chemical is quickly inactivated by the soil, so you can replant as soon as the dead weeds have been cleared.
Glyphosate is the main chemical of this type.
It is widely available as Tumbleweed and Greenscape but if you have a large area to treat (say 500m2), look for the more economical Roundup GC.
Persistent surface weedkillers remain active in the top few centimetres of the soil, killing new weeds as they germinate, yet they do not harm most established roses, shrubs and trees, whose roots are well below the surface.
These are useful for keeping the ground around shrubs and fruit trees weed-free (but check the label to make sure the product is suitable for use with the plants you are growing).
Simazine (Weedex) is typical of this type of weedkiller.
Persistent total weedkillers will kill all plant growth, perhaps for six months or more.
They should only be used on paths, etc, or to clear a derelict patch of ground that you want to clear a derelict patch of ground that you want to clear but not replant for some time.
Sodium chlorate is an example.
Selective weedkillers contain plant hormones that stimulate abnormal (and fatal) growth in certain types of plants.
They are usually designed to kill broadleaved weeds among grasses, but some also control grasses among broad-leaved plants (useful if you have couchgrass in your rockery, for instance).
Alloxydim-sodium (Weed Out Couchgrass Killer) is an example of the latter.
FOLIAGE BEDDING
Summer bedding is usually associated with flowers rather than foliage, but leaves can be as attractive as flowers if you choose the right plants.
The grey-leaved Helichrysum petiolare , or moss-like lime-green Pyrethrum aureum ‘Golden Moss’, used for a neat edging, will also act as a pleasant foil for the brighter plants that they frame.
Foliage plants, such as purple-leaved cannas and the conifer-shaped burning bush, will add height to the bedding, and if used as ‘dot’ plants, also act as focal points for the overall design.
For something really different, try a whole bed of foliage plants.
Provided they are hardened off very thoroughly, and you avoid a windy position, multicoloured coleus will create a sense of the exotic.
Mix different kinds of foliage plants to create a design, as you would with flowering plants.
The tall, spiky effect of purple-leaved cannas or purple-red Lobelia cardinalis , for example, can be used in the centre for height, around which multicoloured plants like coleus can be used, framed or broken up by single-colour foliage plants, such as the cinerarias and pyrethrums, suggested in the table.
Also try growing vegetables among the flowers.
Add colour with red lettuce, red-stemmed rhubarb chard (similar to spinach), or one of the spring onion varieties with red-based stalks.
Feathery carrot foliage, fennel, dill or parsley also provide foliage texture.
Flowering plants should provide the backbone of summer bedding, but use foliage for contrast, and try a small foliage-only display at least once!
FOLIAGE BEDDING PLANTS
Canna (Indian shot)Large bronze, purple or green leaves.
Yellow, orange, scarlet flowers.
Can be grown from seed, but rhizomes also sold (these should be started in pots).
Cineraria maritima (dusty miller)Silvery-grey foliage, finely divided in most varieties.
Try ‘Silver Dust’ for finely divided foliage, ‘Cirrus’for more entire leaves.
Coleus (flame nettle)Multicoloured leaves, many very attractively marked.
Be sure to harden off very thoroughly, as they are usually sold as indoor plants.
Cordyline australis (cabbage palm)Eventually a tree, but young plants form a rosette of long, strap-shaped leaves.
Hardy in mild areas, especially green form.
Otherwise overwinter in cool greenhouse.
Helichrysum petiolare Ground-hugging/semi-trailing habit.
Grey leaves; a popular basket plant.
A good edging for a bed of bright flowers.
‘Limelight’ has pale yellowish leaves.
Kochia scoparia ‘Trichophylla’(burning bush)Mound of feathery green foliage, resembling a conifer.
Crimson in autumn.
Cheap and widely available.
Use as a ‘dot’ plant to provide height in the bed.
Lettuce ‘Red Salad Bowl’A non-hearting attractive red-leaved lettuce with divided leaves that you can pick as required.
Sow directly where they are to grow.
Makes an interesting edging.
Lobelia cardinalis (cardinal flower)Erect habit.
Crimson to purple leaves and scarlet flowers.
A perennial, but needs winter protection in a frame or greenhouse.
Perilla frutescens Purple-bronze leaves, a little like a coleus.
Pinch out growing tip to make bushy.
Easy from seed; not often sold as plants.
Pyrethrum aureum ‘Golden Moss’(syn ‘Golden Ball’Mounds of feathery yellow foliage, useful for an edging.
Many produce yellow flowers, but these are best removed to maintain the foliage effect.
Pyrethrum ptarmicaeflorum Very finely cut silvery foliage.
A useful foil for bright flowers.
Swiss chard/rhubarb chard Big leaves with conspicuous stems, red in rhubarb chard, white in Swiss chard.
Leaf blades can be cooked as spinach, stems like celery.
Sow now, directly in the ground, where the plants are to grow, then thin.
All the plants mentioned are likely to be available from good garden centres, but cannas are not often sold as growing plants, and Perilla frutescens may be difficult to find as plants (seed is widely available).
The lettuce, Swiss chard and rhubarb chard must be grown from seed — all three are widely available.
Cordyline australis is likely to be found among the hardy shrubs, and Lobelia cardinals with herbaceous perennials, and sometimes with waterside plants.
GROWING BAG SUPPORTS
Staking tomatoes in a growing bag can be a problem, as there is insufficient depth of compost to secure canes firmly.
Several propriety systems are available to support canes.
These are very useful and should last for several seasons.
If you prefer to improvise, place the growing bag close to a wall, and stretch horizontal strands of galvanised wire between vine eyes.
Space the wires about 230mm (9in) apart, and either tie the plants directly to these, or tie canes to the wires for additional support.
BE WATER-WISE
After four years of unusually low rainfall, most UK water reserves are low, and many areas have hosepipe and sprinkler restrictions in force, whilst in other areas, people are being asked to be sensible with water, and not to waste it.
Those who don't take heed should remember that they can be fined up to £400 for ignoring a hosepipe or sprinkler ban, and up to £2,000 for ignoring a drought order.
Help to conserve water with the following measures:
Collect water from gutters in a rainwater butt, and use it for watering plants outdoors (not in greenhouse or indoors).
Wherever possible, re-use water that's been used for washing vegetables, not-too dirty dishes, bathwater, rinse cycle of washing machine, etc (again, only on outdoor plants).
Water plants first thing in the morning, or last thing at night, so that it doesn't evaporate, but goes straight to the roots.
Plants that aren't in containers benefit more from a good watering once or twice a week, rather than a little every day.
Right: For year-round foliage interest, the spiky stalks of variegated grasses can't be beaten.
Miscanthus sinensis Variegatus, with its bright primrose yellow markings, also has long-lived flowers, and is non-invasive
Left: Create a riot of colour, without a single flower, with a stunning selection of coleus amongst your summer bedding.
For an interesting mix of leaf colours and marking, try: Thompson & Morgan's Dragon Sunset & Volcano Hybrids, and Fashion Parade; Mr Fothergill's Milky Way, and Sabre Mixed; and Sutton's Rainbow Choice Mixed, or the dwarf Wizard Mixed
SEEDS TO SOW NOW FOR SPRING BEDDING
Bellis perennis (double daisy)Small pompom-like flowers, in shades of red, pink, and white.
Useful as an edging, or to interplant with tall bulbs such as tulips, or with forget-me-nots.
Brompton stocks Fragrant spikes in many colours, like summer-flowering stocks.
By choosing a ‘selectable’ strain you can identify and eliminate the singles.
Cheiranthus allionii (Siberian wallflower)Like ordinary wallflowers, but smaller and only yellow or orange.
Flowers later than ordinary wallflowers (late spring and early summer), but very bold.
Myosotis (forget-me-nots)Masses of tiny blue flowers though there are pink varieties and mixtures.
Invaluable for planting among tall ‘leggy’ bulbs like tulips, as they help cover the soil.
Pansies Needs no introduction.
The ones to sow now are those for winter/spring flowering.
The ‘Universal’ range is popular for winter, and available in separate colours or mixed.
Polyanthus Bright flowers in many colours, often with contrasting ‘eyes’.
Germination is often erratic.
Sow in boxes in a greenhouse or frame.
Wallflower Extremely fragrant flowers in shades of red, yellow, and pink.
Single colours are often bolder than mixtures.
Use dwarf varieties for containers.
Canterbury bells Masses of blue, mauve, pink, or white bells.
There are single and double forms.
Useful for June/July flowering in the herbaceous border.
Sweet Williams Flat heads of very fragrant flowers with distinct ‘eyes’.
Excellent way to add fragrance to the herbaceous border in June and July.
SEEDS TO SOW NOW
This is the time to sow biennial flower seeds, to flower next spring and early summer.
Some perennials that are best treated as biennials, such as polyanthus, can also be sown within the next month.
The table suggests some seeds that you might want to buy and sow mow for a bold but inexpensive display next year.
Spring bedding plants that you raise yourself provide a much cheaper spring display than bulbs.
With the exception of polyanthus, all the plants mentioned can be sown in a spare piece of ground outdoors.
Just keep the area well watered and weeded, and thin out the plants, or transplant the seedlings to another piece of ground to grow on, once they are large enough to handle.
Keep weeded and watered for the rest of the summer, then move to their flowering positions in the autumn.
Because polyanthus are more difficult to germinate, start them off in seed trays or pots in a greenhouse or cold frame.
Any gaps in vegetable or flower beds can be sown with quick-growing crops: lettuce, radish and parsley.
There's still time to sow courgettes, carrots beetroot, French and runner beans.
WATER METERING
Water, water everywhere but not a drop to drink — because it's all gone down the sink!
Serious worries about this disappearing vital resource herald big changes in the way we pay for water supplies.
Keen gardeners and fanatical car washers may have second thoughts about lavish spraying if we end up with a water meter at the bottom of our garden to measure the amount we actually use.
Metering has been on trial in England and Wales for the past two years, to assess whether it is a serious option as a basis for domestic charges from the year 2000 — when the present charging system based on the rateable value of your house is due to be scrapped.
It now makes sense to join the rest of the world by paying for what we use, say experts Kent Meters in Luton, Bedfordshire, a firm which turns out a million meters a year — and sells them abroad.
Television pictures of dried up reservoirs and algae-encrusted lakes have recently shocked viewers out of their complacency.
Now the water industry is set to spend billions of pounds in improvements, the likely result of which is that our bills will go up by at least 50% over the next few years.
So, economy makes sense.
Paying the piper as we call the tune is the idea behind metering, which is already in use all over the world.
In Europe, only Ireland, Norway and the UK have not yet adopted it.
DIGITAL READ-OUT
A meter, installed in an inspection pit at the boundary of your garden, gives a digital read-out of the amount of water you have used, in the same way that gas and electricity meters record quantities consumed.
Sometimes meters can be placed inside the house, but not if you have any take-off piping to a garden tap, greenhouse, shed or swimming pool.
One big advantage of an outside pit for the water companies is that meters can be read even if there is nobody at home when the water company official calls.
But the disadvantage for the householder is that any leaks in the pipe crossing your property will also be measured by the meter.
It would be you responsibility to repair the pipe, or pay for all the water wasting away into your garden.
And some home-owners have been shocked by the size of the bill when old and worn pipes water their front lawn from below.
At an average £200 or so for installation, meters don't come cheap, and it will take a few years of saving on bills to meet the initial cost.
But it is easy to see how it will make you think twice before washing your car twice a week, or leaving your sprinkler on all night!
HOUSEHOLD CONSUMPTION
Water costs somewhere around 50p per cubic metre (220 gallons).
One house might use 120m3 a year, but this figure can be doubled or halved depending on personal circumstances — the number of people in the house and their habits of water usage.
Sewerage charges add roughly as much again to the bill: it costs 1p to flush a toilet, and other comparative costs include: shower, 3.5p; dishwater, 5.5p; bath 8p; washing machine, 11p; garden hose for one hour, 54p.
Most of the meters used in the trials were supplied by the Kent Meter Division, the UK's leading water manufacturer and the largest in the world.
With two factories here and 17 manufacturing units worldwide, the firm is investing heavily in a new plant to meet the expected increase in UK demand.
‘Every single drop of water going in to your house has been expensively treated to make it drinkable, so do you really want to spray it all over your car?’ said Kent Meters Marketing Director Terry Stoten.
‘If water were properly conserved, our reservoirs and the infrastructure would be adequate to provide the supplies needed.
Water is a product — it doesn't just come from the sky, it has been processed, and there is no doubt metering will save some of the water being wasted.
In every other area of our lives we pay according to our consumption: for food, petrol, gas, and electricity, so why not for water?
Without water we would survive about four days, so in order of priority for life it's number two after oxygen.
There's also a question of social conscience — why should careful users subsidise those who waste it?
SAVINGS MADE
The 12 trial sites range from 53,000 properties on the Isle of Wight, to groups of several thousand all over the country, from Middlesbrough in the north, to Poole in the south.
So far the trials have shown an average saving of around 10–15%, so meters clearly do have an impact.
The biggest savings will obviously be made by people who use most water now, either by being wasteful, by having several people in the household, and/or by using appliances like dishwashers.
Elderly people living on their own are not likely to change their lifestyles enough to conserve much water and cut bills.
And many disabled people require large quantities of water, so it is expected that social legislation will provide grants to cover some of these categories.
But at least everyone will be able to see just how much water they are using, even to the extent of checking the meter just before turning on the sprinkler, and then switching off when the dial shows enough water has been sprayed to cover the lawn or vegetable patch.
The worrying fact is that serious over-use is drying up some of our rivers and natural underground water levels.
Experts at Kent Meters, who have vast experience of conditions in different climates, reckon that metering could save more water in a year than is currently stored in northern Europe's biggest man-made reservoir, Kielder Water in Northumbria.
Some water companies might let you have a meter in kit form, but you will have to ask locally, because most prefer a professional contractor to carry out the installation in case of possible back-siphonage or other problems.,.
WATER FACTS
Britain is almost unique in continuing to charge almost all its domestic customers on an unmeasured basis.
Water is becoming an increasingly scarce and valuable resource, and to charge for it as if it were free is beginning to look absurd.
Some £26 billion of capital investment by the industry is required over the next 10 years.
The total demand for water has increased by 70% over the last 30 years.
Monthly rainfall figures show a 16-fold drop in rainfall from September 1988 to the start of last year.
Most countries in the world meter water as a matter of course, just as we meter gas and electricity.
The two-part tariff is the most common payment method, where customers pay a standing charge, plus a charge for the water consumed.
Self installation is allowed by some companies, who supply the meter and usually arrange a survey and inspection.
Costs vary considerably.
Severn Trent Water, for example, supplies a free meter, and d-i-y costs are around £30 to £70.
East Worcestershire Waterworks Company supplies d-i-y kits from £76 (prices are from last year).
Quotes taken from the booklet The Case for Water Metering , published by Kent Meters Ltd.
PROBLEM SOLVER
For free advice on any d-i-y problem, write to: Problem Solver, DIY, Link House,.
We can reply only if:
1: You enclose a valid Free Advice Coupon with each query.
2: Also enclose an sae.
Each separate query must be accompanied by a valid Free Advice Coupon and an sae and each query should be written on a separate piece of paper.
We regret that we are unable to answer multiple queries that do not comply with these instructions.
And we are unable to supply plans for projects.
GARDEN PONDS
Choosing materials
How do the different types of pond liner differ?
Polythene, the grade sold for ponds, is thicker than normal and several layers are usually used, but it's a short-life material best restricted to temporary pools.
Pvc liners (some are reinforced with nylon or Terylene) should last for many years, but don't be too influenced by the strength claims of the reinforced liners — the most likely cause of damage is piercing (from a stone, children poking sharp sticks into the pond, or accidents with the garden fork), and the reinforcement used won't do much to avoid this kind of mishap.
Don't be too influenced either by colour — you can often buy pvc liners in blue or ‘stone’(buff or beige), but you're constructing a pond not a swimming pool, and mud and algae will soon hide or discolour the liner below water level, and every part that shows above can look glaringly conspicuous.
Butyl liners (unless they are bonded to a coloured plastic, which adds a cost, with few benefits) are black.
This sounds unattractive but is perfectly satisfactory in use.
It gives the water a greater sense of depth, and if a bit of liner does become exposed it doesn't look so conspicuous.
Butyl has a substantially longer life expectancy than pvc — it's used in the construction of reservoirs — but it can still be damaged by piercing.
The cheaper ‘economy’ butyl liners, which are thinner, are most vulnerable in this respect.
Butyl is the best liner to work with because it's more flexible, and you can expect many trouble-free years from it provided you don't assume it's immune to damage.
Both pvc and butyl liners can be repaired quite simply once you find the hole or tear, but if it's a small one it may be troublesome to locate.
CEILING CLADDING
Preparing the ceiling
How do you decide on the direction to run cladding on the ceiling?
It will be necessary to batten the ceiling to take the new boards.
The direction of the batten depends on which way you want the matchboard to run.
It is usual to have the boards running so that you look down them as you enter the main door of the room.
However, this is not always the best direction, because boards running down the longest area of a room will make it seem even longer and narrower.
You may prefer to fix the matchboard across the narrowest width of the room.
Whichever way the boards are to run, the battens will be at right angles to them.
In either case, you will have to find the ceiling joists and mark their positions on the wall.
The battens are either nailed along the joists or set out at about 400mm centres, at right angles to the joists.
In houses built during the last 50 years, the joists will be at about 16in centres.
Prod around the ceiling until you have located both sides of a joist; it will be about 1½ to 2in thick.
Then mark its centre and work from there.
VENTILATION
Siting a fan
Is it best to fix an extractor in a ceiling?
In many cases, the most sensible location for an extraction fan is in the ceiling.
It may be the only possible location id neither wall nor window-mounting is feasible.
Ceiling-mounted fans are usually designed to extract air into the loft space or a similar ventilated void, rather than direct to the outside.
However, air that is very damp can cause rot in the roofing timbers if it is evacuated in this way, so it is best to use ducting to the outside as well.
GUTTERS
Replacing metal
Our old metal gutters are rusting badly — what should I replace them with?
Badly corroded metal gutters and downpipes can be replaced with the plastic type, which are light, easy to fix and maintenance free.
Plastic gutter systems are available in various styles, in grey, white, brown and black, which do not need painting.
Guttering systems are also in different sizes to suit the area of roof being drained.
Plastic gutters are easily fixed by clipping them into brackets screwed to the fascia board.
In theory the gutters will drain if fixed dead level, but in practice it is better to fit them with a slight fall of about 1in in 50ft.
Fix the end brackets first using 1 in zinc plated gauge No 8 round head woodscrews.
Stretch a string between the brackets and then fit the intermediate brackets at the spacings recommended by the manufacturer, usually about 3ft apart.
The gutter channel and fittings simply clip into the brackets.
DRIVES
Laying gravel
How is a gravel drive laid?
This is the simplest way of laying a new path or drive.
All you need is enough 10–20mm diameter pea gravel to form a layer about 2in (50mm) thick over the path or drive area; your supplier will advise you on how much to order if you tell him the size of the area.
You'll find local suppliers listed in Yellow Pages under Quarries or Sand and gravel suppliers , or you can ask at your local builders' merchants.
To lay a path or drive simply excavate the area to a depth of about 6in (150mm), or 8in (200mm) on soft clay soils, and ram in a 6in thick layer of hardcore or hoggin, covered with a thin layer of sand to prevent the gravel from sinking into the sub-base.
Then install some form of perimeter edging: path-edging stones or brick pavers, for example, set in concrete.
Once they are in place, you can have the shingle delivered — it can be dumped directly on to a drive site from the road, but you'll need to barrow it to remote garden paths, so set planks on the lawn if you have to run across it.
Simply shovel it out, rake it level, and it's already.
It's a good idea to keep a couple of sacks of gravel over from the job, so you can fill ruts and top up bald patches as the drive wears and settles down.
LIGHTING
Safety first
I have been advised to use low-voltage lighting in my garden.
Can you outline its advantages?
Low-voltage lighting has all sorts of advantages for outdoor use, the main one being its safety — you won't get a shock if you stick your garden fork through the cable, for example.
Installation is easier than with mains-voltage supplies too, because you can simply trail the cables across the ground instead of having to bury them.
This in turn makes it easy to move light fittings around: many low-voltage lights are mounted on spikes with this in mind.
You can also use them safely in or around an ornamental pond.
If you decide to go for a low-voltage set-up, work out how many lights you need and where they will be sited, so you can buy enough cable to connect them all up.
This will also enable you to decide on the size of transformer needed to power them; most transformers included in low-voltage kits can usually cope with only four or six lights, so check before you buy.
Once you've chosen your lights and bought the transformer and cable, all you have to do is position the lights, run the cable to them, and connect it back to the transformer terminals.
This should be sited in the house or in an outbuilding, where it is simply plugged into a convenient socket outlet which acts as the on/off switch for the lights.
WOODWORM
Loft treatment
What sort of preparation is needed in a loft before using woodworm spray?
The insecticide is carried in a very penetrating light oil but it is nor fair to expect it to penetrate heavy deposits of dust, dirt and cobwebs before it reaches the timber.
It is therefore necessary to clean down all the timbers before spraying.
A stiff yard broom and a small stiff hand brush will remove most of the debris.
A final run over the surfaces with a vacuum cleaner is needed.
Any severely damaged pieces of wood should be replaced before spraying.
FIREPLACES
Removing a surround
I have to remove a fireplace.
How is it fixed to the wall?
The way in which fireplace surrounds are held on to the wall of the chimney breast varies according to the type of surround.
Metal and tiled concrete surrounds are generally help in place by two or four brackets (lugs) with screws through into wall plugs.
Timber surrounds may be secured by screws straight through the timber, while built-up brick or stone surrounds will be secured by wall ties built into the construction.
A built-up surround will have to be dismantled piece by piece, but with the other types, you can chop away the plaster just next to the surround until you find the brackets, after which the screws can be undone (or the brackets sawn through) and the fireplace surround levered away from the wall with a crowbar.
Be sure to get help with tiled surrounds.
They are extremely heavy!
FLOORING
Staining floorboards
Our timber floor is made of attractive boards in good condition, so I'm wondering if there are any problems with staining them and then finishing them using a clear varnish.
Can you advise?
There are no real problems, but if you plan to varnish a floor it is important that all traces of old finish are removed, otherwise the stain won't be able to soak into the timber, and this results in uneven staining.
If you have difficulty removing varnish which has soaked into the wood grain, the alternative is to use a varnish stain, which colours and varnishes in one coat.
When choosing a varnish, be sure to choose a flooring grade which is able to withstand hard wear.
Lifting floorboards
How do you lift tongue and groove floorboards?
I need to gain access to the space under the floor.
Ideally use a floorboard saw, or alternatively a general purpose saw with fairly fine teeth to cut down between two boards.
To make a start, drill a number of holes close together then join them using a chisel which can be tapped with a mallet.
The saw will cut off the tongue of one board so that you can use a wide wood chisel, or a bolster chisel, to lever up a board from the side.
Use scrap pieces of wood to hold the gap open while you work.
Be very cautious when drilling and cutting in case there are cables and pipes just below the surface.
Where a nailed board refuses to move, it is often easier to punch the mails down into the joist rather than trying to prise them up.
Use a hammer and nail punch.
Sticking back parquet
A couple of blocks in our parquet floor have parted from the concrete beneath.
Is it possible to stick these back?
If so, with what?
Refixing these parquet blocks should present no problem.
Lift the blocks, noting which holes they fit back into, then clean off as much of the old adhesive as possible.
Then apply a bitumen flooring adhesive to the back of each block, taking great care not to get any adhesive on the face.
Press each block firmly in place, and weight them with something heavy until the adhesive has set.
PLUMBING
Loft supply
I want to convert my loft to a shower room.
How do I get a water supply up there?
Getting cold water into the attic is no problem.
Hot water is a different proposition.
As the pressure for the hot system is provided by the cold feed tank, which sits on the ceiling joists — now a few inches below the new floor level — you would have to raise it as high as possible.
Even then the flow could be slow.
This also applies to most central heating systems.
So, hot water is best provided by either a gas or electric instantaneous water heater.
If you want to use gas you must employ a competent gas fitter.
You must not do it yourself?
Electric units are different.
You can install the equipment yourself, provided you understand the principles of electrics.
If in any doubt employ an electrician.
GARDEN
Dimensions
Can you give me some safety hints on garden step design?
For safety, treads should measure at least 300mm (12in) from front to rear, so that your toe or heel don't catch the edge of the step above as you ascend or descend the flight.
The steps should have a minimum width of 600mm (2ft), and at least 900mm (3ft) if people will want to pass each other.
Don't forget to provide drainage so water does not collect on the treads; this will make them slippery and potentially dangerous, and will also encourage the growth of algae and moss on the surfaces.
Standing water will also freeze in winter — an obvious but often forgotten hazard.
Allow a fall of about 12mm (½in) towards the front of each tread.
Think too about drainage from paved areas at the bottom flight; in wet weather the steps can act as a small waterfall.
A gully leading to a nearby soakaway may be the answer.
Fit a handrail or build parapet wall beside long flights, especially if they will be used by children or the elderly.
Ensure that tread nosings project beyond the face of each riser, to throw a shadow and accentuate the edge of the tread.
Provide lighting if the steps will be used at night.
BUILDING
Dry lining
Can you tell me how to fix plasterboard to form a new wall surface?
Where are two methods of dry lining walls using plasterboard; one is to fix battens to the wall and nail the plasterboard to them, and the other is to fix the plasterboard directly to the wall using a plaster-like adhesive.
The first method is probably the easiest for the do-it-yourself enthusiast.
Battens are plugged and screwed to the wall at 400mm (16in) centres to take boards 1220mm (4ft) wide, but of course other sizes of boards can be used if necessary.
It is usual to use boards large enough to reach from the floor to the ceiling as the fewer joints you have the smoother the wall finish will be.
Cut the boards about 6 to 12mm (¼ to ½in) short so that you can get a batten under them to lift them tight up to the ceiling.
The small space at the bottom will be covered by the skirting board.
For dry lining, the plasterboards used are the type with tapered edges which allow a reinforcing tape and filler to be used to finish off the joint flush with the board surface.
If there are any horizontal joints, noggins have to be fixed between the uprights to take the edges of these boards.
It is usual to use 50x25mm (2x1in) timber for battening the walls, but where insulation is to be installed between the battens, thicker timber can be used to enable more insulation to be inserted.
CHIMNEYS
Poor draw
My open fire is erratic — having either too little or too much draw.
What is the solution?
Failure of a fire to draw properly, or too much smoke in the room, can have a number of causes — such as an overlarge fireplace, a blocked flue, a cold flue or an insufficiently high chimney.
Fitting a cowl to a chimney may solve a drawing problem, but it may not.
If you have a smoky chimney or one which is not working properly (even after having the chimney swept), ti would be a good idea to call in a chimney specialist to diagnose the problem and recommend the cure.
Sometimes, the problem may be lack of fresh air, especially if the house has been well draught-proofed.
Opening a window or door will give temporary relief, but for a permanent solution you will need to fit air vents in an outside wall, or either side of the hearth if the floor is timber.
Sometimes a ventilator in an inside wall (over the doorway) will provide the answer.
FURNITURE
Burn marks
How can you repair burn marks?
The only really satisfactory way of repairing the damage is to remove the old finish and then treat the burnt area.
However, a patch repair can be carried out by carefully scraping away the burnt area with a knife until all the charring has been removed.
The damaged area should then be very carefully sanded with the finest glasspaper or garnet paper.
If the article was unstained, and was finished with a clear coating, the damaged area can be filled up by repeated applications of a clear polyurethane, transparent French polish or cold cure lacquer.
The whole area can then be lightly sanded and the glass brought back with a metal polish.
STAIRCASES
Loose treads
I can't get at the underside of my staircase; how can I fix loose treads from above?
If you've no access from below, you can screw slightly loose treads and risers together through from the tread, but the job will be more effective and last longer if you can prise the joint between tread and riser apart (the riser may be tongued into the tread), squirt in a little wood glue, then screw into the edge of the riser through the tread.
Drill clearance holes first and countersink the screws.
If not to be covered by carpeting, fill with the appropriate shade of wood filler or wood plugs.
At internal angles between riser and tread, it won't be possible to prise them apart, so fill any slight gaps with a little wood adhesive and secure through the joint with a few nails.
Make repairs using glue in a period when no one will be using the stairs, to give the glue time to set without the joint flexing.
WOODWORK
Trimming rebates
Is a shoulder plane the correct tool for trimming accurately?
The shoulder plane has a blade running the full width of its narrow body, which is machined so its sides can guide the blade accurately for trimming shoulders and rebates.
It's available in three sizes —.
Plane choice
Can you explain the odd way that smoothing planes are sized?
The smoothing plane, which measures about 245mm (9½in) long, can have blades between 45 and 60mm wide.
There are three standard sizes, numbered according to a quaint system followed by all major plane manufacturers.
The first is known as a  each slightly longer and with a slightly wider blade than the one preceding it.
Smoothing planes are available with smooth or corrugated bases, and the blade is fully adjustable.
They are used for all general-purpose planing work where an absolutely true and flat finish is not essential.
Web clamp
Would you recommend adding a web clamp to my kit of tools?
A web clamp is useful for holding frames together while the glue sets.
A nylon webbing strap is wrapped around the frame and is then tightened using a ratchet action of the clamp head.
DAMP
Interior walls
It isn't easy to get access to the outside walls of my house.
Can I therefore treat the damp problem from inside?
There are a number of products on the market intended fro damp-proofing the interior of damp walls.
Use these only as a last resort, since it is better to stop moisture getting into the walls in the first place.
All these products do is to stop the damp from ruining decorations.
The exception to this is Newtonite lathing, which is used to line chronically damp walls, especially in basements, so that they can be plastered and decorated normally.
Solid floor
How do you cure damp in a solid floor?
Damp rising through solid floors can usually be cured by brushing on a double coat of liquid bitumen-based damp-proofing compound.
This should be linked to the dpc in the house wall by stripping off the plaster up to dpc level and applying the compound in a band just above the floor level.
GUTTERS
Stopping a leak
What do you do to stop leaking joints in gutters?
I have both metal and plastic on my house.
Where joints in metal gutters leak, try filling the joint with flexible, silicone-rubber or bituminous mastic after clearing away debris and wire-brushing the surface.
With plastic guttering, check that the joint is properly assembled and that the rubber seal is in place.
Remake the joint if necessary, bedding the overlapping section on a generous bed of silicone-rubber mastic.
DECORATING
Ceiling paper
Is there a correct direction to hang ceiling paper?
It's usual to hang ceiling paper parallel with the main window in the room, but if you're tackling the job for the first time and the room is noticeably shorter in one dimension, you may find it easier to manage shorter lengths and hang it the other way.
In either case, set up scaffold boards parallel with the position of the first length so you can walk safely across the room at a convenient height.
The right niche
I want to install an ornamental niche.
Are they suitable for any kind of wall?
Manufacturers now offer much shallower niches which can be incorporated in a hole cut in the inner leaf of a cavity wall, for example.
One or two even offer niches which are simply surface-mounted; the projecting plasterwork frames a shallow but deceptively deep recess.
Many are also available as corner types, allowing a full-depth niche to be installed without the need to cut into the brickwork.
Niches come in a range of styles and sizes, from a delicate 600mm (2ft) or so in height, up to 1.8m (6ft) high.
Smaller types generally have a solid base and are intended to display a solitary objét d'art; larger types may have several glass shelves and a frosted glass base which can conceal a light source.
An opening will need to be cut in the brickwork for fully recessed types, and on larger types a small lintel may be needed to bridge the opening.
The niche is then set into the recess (with a damp-proof membrane draped behind it in cavity walls) and is held in place by mirror plates screwed to the rear of the niche surround.
The plasterwork is then made good all round.
INSULATION
Loft work
How should I insulate the pipes and tank in the loft?
Run the pipes under the loft floor insulation (or, rather, lay the insulation over the pipes) so that they can benefit from the heat rising up from the ceiling below.
Also make sure that cisterns are well insulated with a proper insulating jacket (or one constructed from loft insulation blanket), but do not insulate or put loft insulation under the cistern, so that some heat can pass through the ceiling to the water inside.
Make sure all exposed pipes are lagged with insulating bandage or foam tubes.
Pay particular attention to bends and pipes running near outside walls.
DRIVES
Sunken paving
A large depression in my crazy paved drive collects rainwater.
How can it be levelled?
Also, how can I tackle repointing?
Similar in construction to ordinary paving, the popular crazy paving path or drive suffers the same problems.
The cures are very much the same too.
Any sunken area has to be taken up and relaid after ensuring that a firm foundation has been made.
Edge restraint for this type of path is also important.
Where the pointing needs renewing, the old pointing must be dug out as deep as possible as frost tends to lift shallow layers of cement.
The new mortar should be mixed at one part cement to four parts sand.
Make the mix fairly dry and press it well down into the joints, filling them right to the top and finishing them flush.
Cover the area and keep the joints damp in warm summer weather, but in winter cover the area for at least 24 hours to prevent frost attacking the mortar before it is thoroughly hardened.
CONDENSATION
Double glazing
I have been guaranteed that double glazing will solve window condensation.
Is this correct?
In addition to its role in conserving heat, double, glazing is an important contributor to the reduction of condensation.
However, it should be realised that double glazed windows are not completely immune to the formation of condensation — this is especially true in steamy bathrooms.
The measure of efficiency is determined by the airspace between the two panes of glass: the optimum is 20mm, although some double glazed units have a smaller gap.
Nevertheless, the benefits over a single glazed window are considerable.
Wall problem
There is mild condensation on my kitchen walls.
Would lining them with polystyrene be the answer?
Modern polystyrenes are a good choice when considering wallcoverings.
In houses particularly prone to condensation, you can cover walls with a thin layer of polystyrene before applying wallpaper.
This is available in rolls 600mm wide and 9.14m long — the material is usually 2mm thick.
You should remember, however, that this cannot act as a barrier if you have damp problems.
On the other hand, it has noteworthy thermal characteristics and feels remarkably warm to the touch.
It is applied using a special adhesive.
ROOFWORK
Replacing tiles
How do you remove and replace a damaged roof tile?
Loose tiles should be replaced by raising neighbouring tiles with small wooden wedges and hooking the displaced tile back into position over the roofing batten.
Use a large builder's trowel to lift the tile to make this task easier.
Use the same technique to fit a new tile.
At ridges and hips, lift loose tiles and re-bed them on mortar.
FLOORING
Stripping tiles
Which is the easiest way to strip vinyl floor tiles?
Hire an electric-powered floor tile stripper.
A wide blade with high frequency vibrating action slips underneath the covering to provide a smooth surface ready to accept the new flooring.
The angle of the blade is adjustable according to the adhesion and type of material to be stripped.
DIARY
EATING ‘OUT’
Extracts from the diary of a working supervisor in a small building company, with useful tips on all sorts of building and decorating work.
You many have thought, like me, that serving hatches went out when the craze for eating in the kitchen came back into fashion.
Or was it architects convincing us that's what we wanted, in order to make building cheaper?
Why should anyone choose to invite family and friends for a meal, then sit amid dirty pots and pans, and the smell of boiled cabbage or fried onions, in preference to a separate dining room with a good size table?
But a separate room does mean a lot of running back and forth with this and that, so perhaps it's not really the best option.
Where design permits, the old-fashioned serving hatch can come in handy: it's the dumb waiter of the less-palatial home.
And these days they can look more attractive than ever when matched to hardwood window frames and internal doors.
We had an order to supply and fix a mahogany serving hatch in Regency style, with Flemish patterned glass, prior to the customer redecorating.
The design had been calculated to the blocks of internal wall.
It's not essential that you should do this, but it will save some cutting of blocks in situ .
Blocks have changed size over the years, but as a rough guide, a block and mortar joint is around 9in high and 18in long.
For properties built within the last 20 years or so, this would be 225 × 450mm.
Positioning was governed by the 915mm high kitchen worktop on the other side.
The customer wanted the bottom of the hatch 225mm (9in) above the worktop, a convenient distance of one block.
Horizontal location was not too critical in the absence of wall cupboards.
Naturally, the hatch unit should be made first, either the whole thing or just the carcass.
Here, butt joints are perfectly acceptable, or you can use a simple housing or half-housing joint (not forgetting that hardwood will need pilot holes for both screws and nails).
Internal walls can be anything from 75mm to 250mm thick; if there's a door in the wall you can measure the lining for the width of timber you'll need for the serving hatch.
Failing this, the most accurate method would be to drill through within the area of the proposed opening and, with an assistant, measure the depth.
Designing the hatch is critical to its finish, and its usefulness.
Anything less than about 600 x 750mm long (24 x 30in) may look too small.
Although our hatch was raised above the worktop, you may prefer one that's level with it for full, easy reach of the area behind, then you'll have no need for a shelf to stand things on.
This type may need more height than width.
Doors of the hatch can be hinged or sliding, or even a lift-down flap, as long as it's got adequate support.
If you're unable to find suitable fixings and cabinet furniture at your local hardware shop, there is a firm in Lancashire called Woodfit which supplies all sorts of things by mail order, including some you've probably never imagined existed.
A browse through their catalogue could be very interesting.
Once marked out, we were ready to cut the opening, after pinning up a dust sheet on the kitchen side.
It's common sense to keep the dust down, as the kitchen is probably the most difficult place to clean up properly.
We removed some plaster in the centre, to see exactly where the joints were in the blockwork, so we could use these to save some cutting, as I said earlier.
With the exact position established, the outline can be scored with sharp blows from a club hammer and bolster chisel.
Scoring usually prevents the plaster breaking away beyond the score mark, saving some making good later.
Getting a start on the hole through the wall is always the most difficult bit, but once started, it takes no time really.
It's always best to start by chopping out the hole for the lintel which goes over the frame first.
This way the surrounding masonry will offer support when only part of a block has to be cut away, and help to prevent it becoming loose.
The lintel must extend at least 150mm beyond each side of the frame.
The lintel is wedged up tight and level to the wall above, using tile, slate, steel or any hard and non-perishable material under the ends.
The rest of the opening is then carefully formed.
We were now ready to fit the woodwork, which was about 5mm smaller all round than the opening.
We wedged it in place firmly, but not too tight against the lintel, leaving room for adjustment.
The frame should be automatically level, but we checked just in case, in the same way the side was checked for upright, which it was, as the corners were square.
This left the other vertical, which in this case came flush with the face of the wall.
With the carcass being slightly smaller, ply packing pieces were needed behind the two screws through each side, to prevent frame distortion.
Sited behind the loose door stops, so that there was no filler to mar the appearance, they penetrated the masonry by about 25mm — any longer is unnecessary, and a waste of expensive steel fixings.
The messy part was over, so the dust sheet came down, and the gap around the frame was pointed.
The render coat over the lintel was mixed fairly stiff, the same as for the pointing.
Concrete absorbs next to no water, and soft mortar takes too long to stiffen before it can be smoothed off and marked with a light cross-hatch key.
The following day we used proper plaster over the hardened mortar, but cellulose filler could also have been used.
The way to avoid a lot of sanding of filler is to apply it only slightly proud of the surface, and fairly evenly.
When it begins to set, splash a little water on to it, and rub gently with a pointing trowel in a circular motion, to smooth flush, leaving little or no sanding.
We were left with fitting the doors and stops, and pinning up the architrave, which matched the skirting moulding.
A sand down, and two coats of acrylic stain and it was finished.