

Undermining Ireland
The community reaction to mining in Ireland over the last two decades is one that can be presented in an almost linear, chronological fashion.
While on the part of the state there has been a continual and almost unlimited welcome for the mining multinationals, there has been an increasing sophistication in the response by communities confronted by them.
In the early days the communities as well as the state welcomed the mining companies with open arms, expecting to share in the bonanza promised by mining.
The state did its utmost to accommodate the companies, in the early days imposing no environmental regulations on their operations, and allowing the export of both unprocessed metals and untaxed profits.
During the late sixties and early seventies the mining companies brought shortlived booms to the areas in which they were operating, before heading off for other prospects, leaving their wastes and miners behind them.
Tynagh, Co.
Galway, Nenagh, Co.
Tipperary and Gortdrum, Co.
Tipperary were to see controversies eventually over the waste disposal habits of the mining companies, but these controversies arose after the mining was over and the companies had packed their bags and gone.
In describing the first wave of mining in Ireland, this chapter will concentrate on the experience of Tynagh Mines.
Here we find an acquiescence by the local community to the mining, trespass by the mining company on land, payment of inadequate compensation both for land and disruption of local residents' livelihoods, and pollution problems both during the life of the mine and after its closure.
The turning point in community reaction came with the campaign against uranium prospecting and mining, which represented the second wave of mineral exploration.
Resistance to the EEC-funded search for uranium began with the anti-nuclear movement but quickly developed, in the major area being prospected, Co.
Donegal, into an autonomous and community-based anti-mining campaign, organized mainly by the Donegal Uranium Committee (DUC).
This committee and other  activists opposed prospecting by planning objections, public meetings and demonstrations, political lobbying and direct action by the local landowners in the areas being prospected.
This opposition was not confined to Donegal but also appeared in other areas — Cork, Carlow and Wicklow.
This hostile reaction has continued.
The major prospecting and proposed mining projects over the past few years, the third wave, have been met by community investigation and, eventually, resistance.
This has been the case both in the British-occupied north and in the south, though the projects in both states have shown differences related to the local economic situation and ideologies.
Thus the proposed lignite mining in the north, as Baker (1989) has pointed out, is in line with the current Thatcherite privatization policy, while in the south one of the sons of the current Taoiseach is a managing director of one of the mining and prospecting companies.
The most recent wave of community opposition began in the occupied north with the formation of the Lignite Action Group (LAG) to oppose mining of lignite in the Moortown/Ardboe area of Co.
Tyrone.
It then appeared in the west with concern over, and then opposition to, proposed gold mining.
This became a national issue focussing on the proposed mining of gold on Croagh Patrick in Co.
Mayo.
Further concern then grew over gold prospecting in Co.
Waterford, over proposed andalusite mining at Mount Leinster, near Borris, Co.
Carlow and over proposed lead/zinc mining at Galmoy in north Co.
Kilkenny.
Opposition is now beginning to proposed gold mining in Co.
Tyrone and to quarrying both at Cavehill, historic founding-place of republicanism, and at Black Mountain in Belfast.
Such opposition is bound to spread as further prospecting continues in all provinces.
The first wave
According to the authorized version in the Christian Brothers' geography books of the sixties, Irish mineral resources were meagre and scarce.
Despite this seemingly unattractive situation, there was a large influx of mining companies prospecting in the country in the late sixties.
While some companies, such as Rio Tinto Zinc, were unlucky, others struck rich.
For a country with meagre mineral resources, Ireland was to provide rich pickings: ‘By 1978 the Republic of Ireland had become the world's fifth largest zinc producer, its third largest barytes producer and a significant producer of lead and silver’.
Table 3.1 gives an indication of the boom that resulted.
The mining industry in Ireland was dominated by north American capital.
One company in particular, Northgate, was to be a major force in the development of mining in Ireland and continues to occupy a central position in Irish mining up to the present.
In 1958, five Irish immigrants to Canada purchased Kirk-Hudson Mines Ltd, a Canadian public company, which they reorganised and renamed Northgate Exploration Ltd.
This company through its wholly-owned Irish subsidiary, Irish Base Metals, owned and operated Tynagh Mines and was involved in Gortdrum Mines.
It was later involved in uranium prospecting through both Irish Base Metals and yet another subsidiary, Munster Base Metals.
Northgate was the only foreign mining company that made major attempts to raise capital locally in  Ireland .
Nevertheless, despite Northgate's Irish facade and despite the growth of local mosquito exploration companies, mining in Ireland has since the sixties always been controlled from outside the country.
As Curtin and Shield point out, ‘Northgate was a publicly quoted company, registered on the Toronto Stock Exchange.
Despite its Irish directors, therefore, the company's viability and success was determined by the assessments of its Canadian shareholders, and the readiness of Canadian financial institutions to support it.
Long-term planning was based in Canada’.
This point is underscored by other observers:
Eighty per cent of the Northgate group's shares were held by individuals or groups resident outside Ireland, and nearly all Northgate's expenditure on exploration and development was financed from abroad.
Mogul of Ireland was 75 per cent owned by its Canadian parent, while the remaining 25 per cent was held by a company with substantial British shareholding.
The second Avoca development was almost wholly Canadian owned, while both it and Mogul were entirely financed by foreign funds.
The baryte project at Silvermines and the dolomite development at Bennettsbridge were 100 per cent owned and financed by US companies.
This has continued to be the situation.
In the current controversy over Croagh Patrick, the deciding interest is held by the Finnish mining multinational Ooutukumpu, a company which also controls the Navan operation of Tara Mines.
The mining industry proved to be another technology-intensive industry of the type favoured by the IDA.
Mining was highly capital-intensive and therefore expensive in terms of investment per job generated.
In 1976 the average capital investment per job generated by grant-aided foreign direct investment was £7,850; for Tara's Navan mine in 1977 it was £93,800 per job.
Employment in mining stood at 104 in 1964 and at 2,100 in 1977, about 0.2 per cent of the workforce.
Mining proposals continue to have the prospect of minimal impact on unemployment rates.
The Institute of Mining and Metallurgy estimates that some 400 jobs could be created by the recent exploration successes.
In many cases, these jobs would have required technical qualifications which would not have been available in the immediate local area, so mining companies provided mainly unskilled work for local residents.
Despite the lack of jobs created by the industry, the Irish state kowtowed to the mining companies.
The naivety of Irish politicians in dealing with the foreign mining companies has been excellently summed up by O Faircheallaigh: Irish politicians'’ response…to this situation was to accept as valid the mining industry's account of what it needed.
They drew no distinction between what the industry needed and what it wanted, with the result that government policy was usually determined by what the foreign mining companies asked for’.
More cynical observers thought the explanation for this did not lie in the naivety of Irish politicians, but in the coincidence of interest between the mining companies and certain politicians.
Whatever the basis for these suspicions, it is undeniable that close connections between the mining companies and some prominent politicians were to raise grave  doubts about the legitimacy of state actions in relation to mining.
Note here the delicate manner in which O Faircheallaigh approaches the issue of what influence the mining companies exerted over Irish politicians:
In the Irish case, it is quite clear that close relationships existed between various politically influential individuals and officials of foreign mining companies; the president of the Northgate group, for instance, was a personal friend of the Deputy Leader of the Labour Party, and of a number of senior Fianna Fail ministers.
These relationships were probably strengthened by the fact that a number of family relations of senior politicians were employed by foreign mining companies.
(This is not to imply that any of the individuals involved were not qualified for the positions they held).
For example, the son of the Deputy Leader of the Labour Party became Secretary of Tara Mines Limited (an associated company of Northgate's), while the brother-in-law of a Minister for Industry and Commerce was also employed by Tara.
Without engaging in speculation, it can be said that relationships of this type might have acted as a channel for ideas and opinions and represented a means by which influence could be exerted.
From the point of view of the environmental impact of mining, if the state was prepared to allow the mining companies to export their profits tax-free, it certainly was not going to try and impose expensive pollution control, environmental and reclamation regulations on their operations.
So, for example, Mogul of Ireland ran into no problems over its failure to apply for planning permission for its tailings lake.
At Tynagh, negotiations on a reclamation project for the devastated area began between Galway County Council and Northgate only after the company had finished its operations in the area.
Thus despite the companies' use of highly toxic chemicals, such as cyanide, there appears to have been little or no state regulation of the environmental impact of mining, until the Navan mines project.
The foreign multinational control of Irish mineral resources was the only aspect of the first wave of mining to be contested politically.
This opposition eventually developed into the Resources Protection Campaign.
This political opposition involved no ecological critique of mining's effects: instead it wanted more industrial development, smelters to go with the mines, and major state involvement, if not outright nationalization.
This opposition naturally came from the left of Irish politics, with support from left Labour figures such as Noel Browne and David Neligan, trade unionists such as Michael Mullen of the ITGWU and members of the Workers' Party.
Northgate at Tynagh
While the leftists in the capital called for more development, on the ground the communities welcomed the expected bonanza from mining.
In August 1961 Northgate began prospecting at Tynagh without a prospecting licence.
In September 1961 it made its find and, in typical bureaucratic behaviour, a prospecting licence was issued to Northgate in December 1961 by the Irish state.
No doubt this retrospectively legitimized the prospecting.
If Northgate ignored the bureaucratic niceties of prospecting licences, it also ignored the legal niceties of land ownership and trespass.
In what was to become typical behaviour for mining companies in Ireland, the company did not ask local landowners for permission to enter their lands to prospect.
Thus the farmer on whose land the first find was made discovered his land was being prospected only when he found the prospectors sampling streams on his land.
While they had not asked for permission to enter his lands and claimed they were not in a position to pay for the disturbance, they promised he would be well looked after if the find was as good as appeared.
Thus local landowners were promised that they too would share in any bonanza the mining brought, and this promise ensured their acquiescence in the company's prospecting operations.
According to Curtin and Shields, Irish Base Metals literally occupied the area on which they found metal: ‘Thus early prospecting was carried on outside the framework of the mining legislation and involved a tortious interference with the property and livelihood of local farmers.
This aspect of the Tynagh discovery was never reported in the press and litigation was not initiated by the injured parties.
When the mining companies discovered that they had a valuable find on their hands, they took de facto control of the land in the immediate vicinity.’
The reaction of local farmers to this disruption of their normal farming activity was to wait the situation out, as they expected a high price for their lands.
In general the local reaction welcomed the prospect of development: ‘The excitement created by the discovery of the mine and the expected bonanza it would bring to the area also dampened opposition.
The local petty  bourgeoisie dominated voluntary and other organizations in the area, and like similar groups in other parts of the country, they were active in support of outside investment.’
The farmers had to wait some considerable time for compensation, and when it came it was not the expected bonanza.
Some land involved  was not bought until a year and a half after the find.
Furthermore the company bought the land at its agricultural price, with little or no premium paid to compensate for their original trespass and disturbance.
While the land had still not been bought, the company began operations, bulldozing hills and undertaking large-scale drilling on land they did not own.
One farmer quoted by Curtin and Shields indicates what the company got away with: ‘They were telling us what to do.
They left our land useless to our livelihood without compensation, permission or reward.
People at that time were loath to take any action.
If it was now, they might be inclined to be physical’.
The farmers' lack of legal action against the company was based on an uncertainty about what their legal rights were, particularly in regard to mineral rights, lack of financial resources to risk going to law and no reliable information on the worth of the minerals.
Even those who did take legal action received little advantage from it.
One farmer had 90 acres of his 200-acre farm occupied by the company from August 1961.
He allowed this to continue in expectation of eventual compensation, but in April 1962 issued proceedings against the company.
This never came to trial and in the autumn he sold the land to IBM for a price similar to that received by other farmers, with a sum for damages much smaller than that he had sought in his suit.
As they began, so they continued.
With some 80 per cent of manual workers in the mine recruited from farming backgrounds, the company had literally greenfield labour to do its bidding.
Also ‘in the view of many ex-workers there was a lax attitude to health and safety regulations’.
The company succeeded in creating an identity between its own interests and that of the local community, particularly the elite of the local town: ‘The petty  bourgeoisie who dominated the town had proved incapable of generating economic growth and in pursuit of its interests in expanding retail markets had devoted their energies to attracting external capital which would provide employment’.
This company town mentality was shown by the local Chamber of Commerce's response, issued after an emergency meeting, when the coalition government in 1973 abolished the 20-year tax concession:
We wish to express our deep concern with regard to the proposed ending of the twenty years tax concession granted to mining companies operating in this State, by the Government.
We fear that if said concession is ended, as proposed, that this may have an adverse effect on employment at the Tynagh Mine and consequently on the economy of Loughrea and  District where there is already much unemployment.
We fear, too, that the proposed change in the Tax System with regard to the Mining Industry may have a detrimental effect on the Industrial Development Programme, by discouraging foreign interests from establishing planned new industries here unless they are assured of a continuation of the tax incentives and grant aid already in operation.
The company also did its bit by dispensing the usual largesse:
‘Northgate frequently sponsored local events, e.g., the Seven Springs Festival and the Chamber of Commerce's promotional brochure.
The company also offered to provide £30,000 towards the construction of a Sports and Social Centre, primarily for the mine employees, but also to be used by the people of Loughrea…
Finally, the company donated part of a site which it owned on the shores of Loughrea Lake, to the town of Loughrea…
These various factors combined to ensure that the local elite (even if they were capable of considering it) would not attempt to kill the goose ‘that laid the golden eggs’.
Thus, for a small expenditure, the company assured themselves of the acquiescence of, and acceptance from, those who dominated Loughrea's economy and social structure.
While opencast mining lasted lead emissions were estimated at 43–46 tonnes annually: this dropped to 3–6 tonnes annually when underground mining commenced.
During the early opencast mining period, IBM admits dust containing cyanide, lead and zinc was blowing around the area.
The first pollution problems with Tynagh developed in 1966 when four animals died in a field behind the plant.
‘The mining people reacted swiftly.
They poured thousands into rebuilding the extraction, processing and drying equipment and bringing more sophisticated replacement machinery with the most up-to-date safety devices.
Worried about the effects of lead dust on humans, they began a system of blood tests for employees.
They also set up a programme of constant monitoring of the overall environment, both within the mine and for some miles around’.
Despite all this, livestock deaths continued and alarm grew among the local farmers.
They pressed IBM on these issues and the company took over and worked the land of fifteen surrounding farms.
The company asked farmers not to eat their own produce, and provided free milk, butter and vegetables, as well as paying the farmers a yearly sum for loss of earnings.
This continued for some ten years, until the company announced its end in January 1977.
The farmers threatened to sue IBM and one, Jack Briscoe, whose farm was only a few hundred yards from the mine entrance, claimed to have lost 40 animals in the past ten years from  toxic lead fallout from the mine's operations.
‘We cannot, and will not, drink the milk from our own cows.
They are now threatening to withdraw compensation from us although they have given us no written guarantee that our lands are free from contamination’, he said in 1976.
Thus the company paid compensation during the opencast mining period in which the company extracted its highest profits from the mine: the cost made little dent in the company's profits.
In later years, however, the company denied that it was still responsible for pollution and certainly lead emissions were considerably reduced when mining went underground.
It was only after the mine was closed in 1979 that concern over pollution reappeared.
In 1981 IBM began using up to 8 tonnes of cyanide a week to extract silver ore from waste tips at the mine, having invested $1.4 million in extraction equipment.
The used cyanide was dumped in the tailings area.
On 2 September 1982 the Galway County Executive of the IFA instructed farmers living near the mines not to co-operate with IBM which was carrying out further prospecting in the area.
The IFA statement deplored the condition in which the countryside was left after production at the mine ceased and claimed that the current situation at the mine was a serious health hazard to humans and other animals in the area.
Tynagh Mines' manager, David Fitzgerald, denied all the allegations and said that the company had spent half a million pounds on safety work and intended spending a further £200,000.
He maintained the IFA's statement resulted from its desire to speed up court cases pending against IBM and used the tired old argument about local opposition blocking further investment and thus hurting the local economy: ‘Irish Base Metals are working with a major oil company and we have to convince them that Ireland and Galway are good places for investment.
Farmers are looking for free drainage schemes and for ways of selling their land to us.
But if this action continues, they — and the people of East Galway — will be the real losers’.
The controversy  received a new lease of life in March 1983 when the Irish Farmers Monthly published a confidential, internal IBM report and claimed that up to 2,000 acres of agricultural land near the mine were so badly contaminated with lead, zinc and arsenic that they were unsuitable for agriculture.
In response IBM's David Fitzgerald said that the internal report related to the early seventies when there had been a problem at the mine and that monitoring by both Galway County Council and An Foras Forbartha revealed no cause for concern.
This bright vision clashed darkly with a description of the area by Joe Killeen, the local IFA chairperson:
It's worse than anyone could imagine, worse even than the local people realize.
When the wind blows, it blows the powder, like flour, out from the Tynagh mines and the lead in it kills everything it touches.
Yesterday I saw young green briars killed a half-mile away from the mine, fur–e too and grass.
There's a hole there 700 foot deep where they mine, and a 99-acre man made lake deep and dead, which could burst its banks some time in the future.
A terrible place.
Mrs Theresa Briscoe, a widow with a farm within 500 yards of the mine told the Irish Times that since the mine opened she had lost four horses and some fifty cattle and sheep to lead poisoning.
In 1982 Mrs Briscoe's fields were covered in black powdery fallout which, when analysed by the Western Health Board, was discovered to contain 500 parts per million of lead.
Mrs Mary Whelan, who lived next to the mine, said she was unable to use her tap water for a long period due to cyanide contamination.
A survey of Jim Killeen's land with the help of ACOT found lead, zinc, copper and cadmium in the soil, with lead levels in one field as high as 899 parts per million.
However, local farmers found themselves unable effectively to combat the pollution or even to extract adequate damages from the company.
To begin with, the general pollution picture was complicated by the presence of an American company, Milchem Ltd, which for ten years had extracted barytes from Tynagh's waste for export.
IBM were also able to argue that the local soil always had a high lead content.
Furthermore the period of intense pollution at the beginning of the mining was now barred by statute from legal suit and also the company could claim it had provided compensation then which was accepted.
This also complicated the question of evidence as to when and how the land was polluted.
Farmers contemplating  suing the company would have been required to prove both the extent of the damage resulting from the pollution and Northgate's exact responsibility for the pollution.
While two cases were completed against IBM, they were settled without a hearing.
It is an experience they have been prepared to share with other communities, and Jim Killeen has spoken against mining at meetings in Westport, Co.
Mayo and Borris, Co.
Carlow.
Mogul's legacy
Tynagh was not the only mine to leave behind its waste to trouble its neighbours.
In February 1985 a young pregnant woman from  Ballywilliam, Nenagh, Co.
Tipperary, was taken to hospital coughing blood.
Two houses in the area were evacuated because of vast clouds of dense dust blowing from a drying tailings lake where wastes from Mogul's lead/zinc mine were dumped.
A spokesperson for the Silvermines Pollution Action Group (SPAG), James Gill, said around 20 farms in the area were affected by pollution from the tailings lake.
A report by Tipperary County Council (North Riding) found that mineral seepage from the mine into the Kilmastulla river, which flows next to the mine, had killed all fish life in the river and had damaged wildlife in the immediate area.
The Mogul mine at Silvermines, which went into production in 1967, was owned by Mogul of Ireland Ltd, which itself was 75 per cent owned by Mogul of Canada and 25 per cent owned by the Irish-based company, Silvermines.
In 1976 Mogul of Canada's 75 per cent stake was sold to another Canadian company, Kerr Addison Mines.
Mogul was estimated by local Labour TD John Ryan in 1982 to have extracted £50–60 million profit from its mining of lead and zinc at Silvermines in the previous 15 years.
There were also problems with the Mogul mine when it was in operation.
Mogul was fined several times for pollution offences.
In February 1976 the company was fined for the pollution of a stream near Silvermines in 1974 and 1975.
In October 1980 a spillage of dangerous lead and zinc waste into the Kilmastulla river led to some 20,000 householders in Co.
Limerick being warned not to drink their tapwater, as local authority officials worried that cyanide might have been involved in the spillage.
A spokesperson for Mogul said, ‘I would not say it could form a cyanide mixture — I wouldn't say the material was poisonous, although it is not something I would want to drink myself’.
The next day, following tests, the IIRS said the pollution was well diluted and below the tolerable level.
Joseph Maloney, secretary of the local angling association, said at the time that earlier, less serious pollution caused by Mogul had killed all fish life in what had once been a good trout and salmon river.
Serious problems began after the mine closed.
Local people claimed that dust blown from the drying tailings pond (though lake would be a more accurate description, as it covered 148 acres) left after the mine closed was harming human and animal health in the area.
The saga of the tailings lake shows the neglect of environmental issues relating to the mine by the local authority.
The tailings lake was begun in 1967 when production commenced at the mine.
Mogul — which began operations in Silvermines three years after the introduction of  the Planning Act — never submitted a planning application to Tipperary County Council for the tailings lake.
The council claimed planning permission had never been sought or been granted, but in 1984 told SPAG that they were unable to take action on this issue as the statutory period of five years within which action could be taken had passed.
In 1985 Tipperary County Manager John McGinley told a Magill reporter that the County Council did not find out about the lake until after this five-year period had elapsed.
The Magill reporter concluded that the County Council officials ‘must have known of the existence of the tailings pond soon after it began’.
When James Gill of SPAG informed the County Council of the lack of planning permission for the lake, the council wrote to Mogul asking them to apply for planning permission to retain the lake.
While Mogul published a notice in the local paper seeking the retention of the lake, ‘the application for retention was never received from the company, and the County Council did not pursue the matter.
For a second time, the County Council had neglected its statutory dudes regarding planning permission’.
On 15 April 1984 the black dust began blowing off the tailings lake.
It continued to blow until October.
During the hay and silage making that summer farmers had to wear dust masks to allow them to work in the dust.
On 19 June 1984, local residents and landowners formed the Silvermines Pollution Action Group (SPAG) to campaign for the mine to be made safe and for it to be covered with topsoil.
Estimates of the cost of covering the tailings lake with soil varied from £2 million to £7 million.
Eamonn de Stafort, public relations officer for SPAG, said two cattle had already died from lead poisoning but it was not certain whether dust or water pollution was responsible: ‘What we are worried about is what will happen when the lake starts to dry up completely’.
The tailings lake now covered an area of 160 acres, of which only one acre had dried out at the time.
Affected livestock suffered weight loss, sore eyes and lack of appetite.
SPAG commissioned the IIRS to undertake tests on six areas of the tailings lake at a cost of £400.
This found insignificant levels of cyanide but ‘very significant levels’ of lead, averaging out at 5700 parts per million, a lead content of 0.57 per cent.
James Gill, a retired civil engineer and member of SPAG, estimated on the basis of the IIRS tests that the tailing lake contained 35,000 tons of lead.
The group lobbied Liam Kavanagh, Minister for the Environment, who asked his department to test water, air and soil in the area.
The group also lobbied the next meeting of Tipperary County Council for support for further  tests.
Previous tests by the council had found that mineral seepage from the mine had killed all fish life in the Kilmastulla river and damaged wildlife in the immediate area.
Dust from the tailings pond began to blow over the countryside again in 1985, starting on 10 February, a Sunday.
By the following Tuesday, Geraldine Hogan, whose family lived a few hundred yards from the lake, was spitting up blood.
As she was seven months pregnant at the time, Geraldine feared not only for herself but also for her unborn child.
On Thursday Geraldine was admitted to Nenagh Hospital and the following day her husband and two children evacuated their house.
(Luckily, tests showed Geraldine's baby was in no danger.)
Her husband John's mother then evacuated her house, which was next door.
She told Magill: ‘I had clothes on the line outside and they were black and heavy.
It was like a fog to see it from the main road.
I left the house before it stopped.
I came back t vice but I was very depressed just looking at the outside of the house.
The dust was acrid.
It would cut the throat out of you’.
Between February and August 1985 two cows and one heifer belonging to Mrs Catherine Minogue, whose farm was in the direct path of the dust, died from lead poisoning.
Vegetables in Mrs Minogue's garden were tested: brussels sprouts were found to contain 45 parts per million (ppm) of lead.
The normal level is two ppm.
The local creamery refused to accept milk from the area as dust was floating in it.
Investigations by the Mid-Western Health Board found that grass samples showed readings six times over the maximum contamination levels allowed by EEC regulations, while Mrs Minogue's vegetables had over twenty times the normal contamination level.
Dr McGowan, the Chief Medical Officer, reported to the County Secretary that there was no immediate danger to the public health but called as a matter of urgency for a resolution to the problem, as lead is a cumulative poison: ‘The continual exposure of people to such high levels of lead is a definite health hazard and remedies to have this matter rectified should be carried out as a matter of urgency’.
In the meantime the Health Board advised people to take precautions against overexposure to the dust, such as wearing masks if they had to go out in it.
On Saturday 16 February SPAG decided to take legal proceedings against Mogul, as they feared the company would continue to do nothing to rectify the situation.
Local residents again pointed out that so far all the dust that had blown had come from one three-acre section of the  lake: ‘The worry is that if it's not attended to and if the entire 150 acres rise up and start blowing at the same time it could be a national disaster.
Land for miles and miles around could be ruined and people would be badly affected’.
In the meantime Mogul had been sold to Ennex International (a company set up by Northgate) which denied all responsibility for the tailings lake.
Peter McAleer of Ennex told the Sunday Tribune : ‘When we bought Mogul of Ireland from its previous owners it was on the understanding that they would retain any responsibility for any earlier workings at Silvermines and that includes the tailings pond’.
Mr McAleer said ultimate responsibility for the tailings lake pollution problem lay with Kerr Addison and Silvermines Ltd.
By the following month Ennex had changed its tune, saying they had bought Mogul on the understanding all was in order.
‘Therefore the problem that had emerged in 1985 has come as a considerable shock to us and I would say that the present directors of Mogul Ireland — ourselves — have acted promptly, decisively and responsibly since it came to our attention.
We are dealing with it.
We are not running away from our responsibility’, claimed David Coyle, Ennex's chief financial officer.
Remedial measures included spraying with bitumen and experimenting with varieties of grass mixtures to revegetate the area, in the hope that the grass would keep the dust down.
On the basis that these remedial measures were in hand, the judge did not grant the injunction sought by SPAG at the end of March 1985.
In some ways the locals were lucky that Ennex had bought Mogul as the original lease did not require the leaseholders, Mogul, to rehabilitate the area until the lease expired on 1 December 1988.
Despite this demonstration of the Department of Energy's failure adequately to foresee a threatening situation, it was not to safeguard its own reputation that the department refused originally to give information on the lease to a Magill reporter: ‘these leases are negotiated individually between the company and the department.
It would not be in the interests of the company to make them public’.
Thus even in a situation where the public health was threatened by the department's failings, the department's major concern remained the interests of foreign capital.
‘Ah but we didn't know what we were doing then’, is no doubt the department's answer, an answer echoed by local farmer, Jack Maher, though the ignorance of local farmers seems understandable, while that of the department seems culpable: ‘We hadn't a clue what they were going to do.
We had no experience of mining or waste and it [the mining waste]just grew over the 18 years until look at the height of it now’.
The turning point: the campaign against uranium mining
With the opposition to uranium mining the relationship between foreign mining companies and Irish communities underwent a complete change.
That opposition began locally  with a meeting in Fintown, Co.
Donegal in December 1979 but the story of uranium mining actually begins three years further back.
In May 1976 the first exploration licences specifically for uranium were issued to Maugh Ltd, a subsidiary of the French company Minatome, a company which in turn was partly owned by Total, the French state-owned oil company.
At the end of 1976 this prospecting received financial support from the European superstate.
In December 1976 the European Commission granted £130,000 for uranium prospecting in Ireland, £80,300 to Maugh Ltd, £43,500 to Irish Base Metals (IBM), and £6,000 to the Geological Survey, an office of the Department of Industry and Commerce.
These grants equalled nearly a third of all EEC grants that year for uranium prospecting (£416,000).
It was also the first direct aid ever paid to exploration companies in Ireland.
This support was to continue.
The following July the EEC again committed further funds amounting to nearly half a million pounds.
This time IBM got, £137,850, 60% of their prospecting costs for 1978, while Maugh was to  receive £61,277 for 1977 and £242,568 for 1978, while the Geological Survey was awarded only £21,750.
The support was given because of the EEC's desire to obtain some sort of self-sufficiency in uranium supplies.
Past sources of this strategic metal were all outside the EEC and strategic questions might possibly interfere with future supplies, which were essential not only for the nuclear power industry but also for the European nuclear arms industry.
The Irish government was totally supportive of this EEC initiative.
It was essential to the continuation of prospecting: indeed some cynics implied that some companies continued prospecting only as long as EEC grants were available.
Thus from the beginning the community in Donegal found themselves in opposition to state policy when they raised questions over the implications of uranium prospecting and mining.
They also found themselves in opposition to certain local commercial interests as a fair number of shares in the mining company had been sold to people in the area, and thus certain local people had a vested interest in mining going ahead.
In September 1979 the Screamers, a female-dominated community living off the coast of Donegal, became aware of the nature of the  prospecting going on in Donegal: IBM had claimed that month that it had encountered ‘encouraging evidence of uranium’ in Donegal.
The Screamers alerted the Belfast section of the and-nuclear movement for help.
In response the Belfast And-Nuclear Group, many of whose members were involved in the anarchist collective and bookshop, Just Books, produced a short pamphlet,Uranium mining in Donegal — the dangers and deceit .
The pamphlet was distributed free in Donegal and went through five reprints up to February 1980, with 6,500 copies being produced, most of which were distributed free in Donegal.
The pamphlet drew attention to the ecological and human devastation caused by uranium mining in other countries, as well as the tie-in with the nuclear power and nuclear arms industries.
As a result of this pamphlet's distribution, the Fintown Development Association called a meeting at Fintown Community Hall which was attended by several hundred people, with the local priest in the chair.
On the same day Donegal Vocational Educational Committee (VEC) discussed the issue and decided to consider holding a seminar on the issue.
A second meeting was held in Fintown on 19 December, at which the Donegal Uranium Committee (DUC) was formed.
The DUC, with some ten members, was not initially anti-mining and was formed only to investigate the implications of the prospecting and then to report back and decide in consultation with the community what action should be taken.
When the DUC was organized, the Screamers bowed out and returned to their own concerns.
‘As soon as the public meetings were held, the Screamers…stood aside.
And it was very much local, respected members of the community that got involved…people like local schoolteachers, our local doctor, various farmers.
They were all men, actually, at the beginning…there was one (woman) later on’.
Thus while outsiders sparked off the opposition, an autonomous and strong community-based opposition quickly developed.
The first committee had three members from Glenties, two from Ardara, three from Lettermacaward and one from Raphoe.
In January 1980 mining shares rose on the back of media reports of uranium finds.
In a public statement early in January, the DUC said that its primary task was to ensure the health of the people of Donegal and that their environment would not suffer from uranium mining and related activities.
The statement ended: ‘The decision on whether or not the mining of uranium is commenced in Ireland is one which will have profound and serious implications for the entire country.
Now is the time for us all to inform ourselves about the problem to make sure  that we all have a part in the making of that decision’.
On 15 January the VEC met to consider holding a seminar on uranium mining.
A variety of opinions were aired on the matter by the politicians present, and there seemed to be a definite acknowledgement that at least some of those present held shares in Anglo United, the mother company of IBM.
Councillor Willie McCafferty said that a lot of hot air was being blown about the issue, and that they shouldn't hold a seminar until they were actually sure mining would go ahead, adding, ‘A lot of people here will have their pockets well lined and I make no apologies for that’.
Senator Paddy McGowan thought it would be stupid of the VEC to get involved in ‘this circus’ which would be used by platform jumpers ‘from hell to Connaught’.
Senator McGowan's chief concern was for ‘the poor people of Fintown who had to stand beside the sod ditch’ and whose future was now being jeopardised by people who ‘wanted to get on the bandwagon’, but he complimented Councillor McCaffrey ‘if he has shares’, though he said he had none himself.
The Senator also proposed an interim bureaucratic manoeuvre to head off the seminar: ‘I genuinely fear that if the seminar is held the VEC will put itself at risk because you are giving a platform to people who are not sincere.
Why not send a deputation to the department who have all the facts?’
When the full County Council met at the end of January the County Manager proposed the Council should commission An Foras Forbartha (AFF) to undertake a study of the issue.
The County Manager said that a conference of Health Board and Department of the Environment officials and County Council engineers, who were undertaking a special study of uranium mining, had agreed to investigate the situation.
They particularly wanted to obtain copies of the prospecting licences to see what conditions were attached.
The one licence they had seen had very few conditions attached.
Councillors agreed with the need for a study but felt that the government or the EEC, not the County Council, should provide the money for it.
Deputy Paddy Harte said: ‘Until I am satisfied beyond a shadow of doubt that there will be no danger I will oppose this in the County Council, the Dail and even by public demonstration if need be.
We should be on the side of the ordinary people irrespective of what the multinationals want.’
Councillor Seamus Rogers of the Workers Party felt that the County Council should set up a sub-committee to look into the issue, while Councillor Brian Gallagher said they should get experts down to the area quickly to issue a ‘statement that this will not be detrimental in the long term’.
Meanwhile the DUC chairperson, Brian Flannery, a schoolteacher in Glenties, spoke at a meeting in Letterkenny organized by an Taisce.
In February, however, the local population took direct action to ensure that uranium prospecting would not contaminate a well in Glenleighan near Fintown.
The local residents formed a Committee and appointed John Magee, a native home on holidays from the US, to act as spokesperson.
The Donegal Democrat presented the following account of the dispute:
The Committee succeeded in preventing drilling up until Friday and they also received the support of the Fintown Development Committee in their stand.
On Saturday the company again attempted to drill and the Glenleighan Committee went to the site and reiterated their position.
The confrontation became heated and a force of Gardai came on the scene.
Officials of the Fintown Development Committee also arrived and between 20–25 people were present.
Mr Cranley (of IBM) asked the drillers who were subcontracted to do the work to commence drilling, but they refused.
Mr Cranley claimed at a well attended meeting the following day, Sunday, which was also attended by public representatives that the workmen were subject to mob rule and intimidation.
He would not agree to suspend drilling but he gave an assurance that work would not re-commence until Wednesday.
However on Monday the drilling equipment was removed from the site and Mr Cranley said the drilling was ‘temporarily suspended’.
Dom McGlynn, secretary of the Fintown Development Committee, condemned the company's response.
‘Up to this there were good relations between the people of Fintown and the mining company.
They could go into land without asking permission and farmers would not even say a word, but that has been upset now.
The foreman of the drilling crew said they would not work for any company that is in dispute with the local people.
There was no mob rule or intimidation and Mr Cranley should not have made those remarks’.
Mr McGlynn interpreted the confrontation as follows: ‘I believe that it was a test by the company to see how far they could get with us.
But we are not African natives where they can come with bailiffs and throw us out.
At least education has given people confidence to stand up for their own rights’.
John Magee said that when he told Mr Cranley that if IBM tried to drill, it ‘will be over my dead body’, Mr Cranley replied ‘in that case your body will be under the mud’.
Describing the IBM representative's attitude as ‘intransigence, obstinacy, bluff and deception’, he concluded: ‘Our gut reaction is to view with suspicion any encroachment on our rights by multinational concerns.
The people of Glenleighan were chased out of Northern Ireland into these hills because the ruling class felt that there was nothing worthwhile here.
Now the same classes of people believe  there is something here and they are trying to chase us out again.
We will not allow that.’
Meanwhile the DUC had continued gathering information on the ill-effects of uranium mining abroad, and in March began an intensive series of public meetings throughout the area.
By the time it published the first issue of its bulletin,STOP , in February 1980 the DUC had effectively changed from being an information and research group into an opposition group, as the bulletin made clear: ‘After investigation into the hazards related to uranium and its by-products, the DUC feels that since uranium cannot be mined safely, exploration should cease.’
The series of public meetings came to a climax on the weekend of 30 March with a large protest march, in which anti-nuclear groups participated along with local people, in Lettermacaward.
At the end of March over 800 people attended the demonstration at Gweebarra bridge.
Most protestors were local but people from Belfast, Cork, Derry, Dublin and other areas attended.
The demonstration began with a march from St. Brigid's Hall, Lettermacaward to Gweebarra bridge led by the Lettermacaward Junior Band.
At the bridge protestors were addressed by members of the DUC and the Cork And-Nuclear Group.
That night and Monday morning, acts of sabotage were carried out by persons unknown on a shed, an excavator, tractor type machinery, a drilling rig and pipes.
The DUC condemned the sabotage, which was widely believed to have been carried out by militants from outside the local area.
The next day it was the local people at Loch Eirig, between Glenties and Fintown, who took direct action by blocking Munster Base Metals from boring a hole near the summit of Croaghleighan for fear of water pollution.
One of the drillers was told if drilling started he would be bored through the ground.
The DUC disassociated itself from the arson and monkeywrenching, and remained independent of the and-nuclear movement.
While DUC members individually might have supported various other political campaigns such as CND and the anti-nuclear movement, they saw that success against uranium mining in Donegal would result only from a single-issue, locally-based and respectable campaign: ‘The DUC was trying to get the support of the local community, was trying to get the County Council on their side and this wasn't going to happen if you're gonna have people running around burning JCBs’.
A further example of the alienating effect national anti-nuclear protestors had on local people was provided by the DUC's Ralph Shepherd when he described one of a series of meetings organized by  the DUC to which anti-nuclear groups nationally were invited:
There was a long series of public meetings in 1980 and one of these was set up as a sort of week-end rally to which the anti-nuclear people were invited from all over Ireland, and at a big indoor public meeting during that weekend where you would normally have expected about 400 people to turn up, only about two locals turned up and the rest were all outsiders.
So it was pretty clear to the DUC that people from outside with long hair and beards were not going to advance the cause of the campaign.
In March 1980 the state began to react to local concern.
George Colley announced the setting up of a ‘working party’ to examine the issue.
The state also responded that March by sending the Nuclear Energy Board (NEB) to investigate the situation.
Of course before they had any evidence on what the situation was in Donegal, the Minister for Energy had already told the Dail that the NEB had informed him that there was no evidence that prospecting would be hazardous.
Brian Flannery of the DUC attacked the Minister for prejudging the situation: ‘I would like to know on what measurements that statement is based if the NEB are only now coming down to carry out measurements’.
The NEB itself seemed to imply more than prospecting might be going on: ‘It has been suggested that some of the investigations might have been more extensive than might normally be expected.
This is causing local people some alarm.
If it is warranted it might be necessary to put some limit on the amount which can be shifted during excavation procedures’, with Dr Nowlan saying the line between prospecting and mining had to be drawn somewhere.
Meanwhile, a joint committee of the NEB, Department of Energy, An Foras Forbartha, the local authorities and unspecified other bodies was being set up to monitor prospecting.
The NEB's stance that uranium prospecting was harmless was heavily criticized by the DUC.
‘The NEB…sent up a few people to take samples and they produced an interim report on the levels of radioactivity in the area.
Now that report was complete rubbish.
It was very easy to discredit it.
It was based on a handful of samples and even they showed widely fluctuating results.’
Thus the NEB's reassurances were taken with a strong dose of salt.
Indeed, according to Ralph Shepherd, the NEB was ‘widely perceived as just a mouthpiece of the industry’.
Various state bodies such as the North Western Health Board and the County Fisheries Committee also discussed uranium mining.
Further discussion took place at the County Council meeting in March, at which £15,000 was included in the estimates to finance a study.
At the beginning of April the programme for the VEC seminar was leaked to the DUC.
None of the speakers suggested by the DUC  were on the programme; all the speakers, while ‘allegedly neutral’, were considered pro-mining by the DUC.
A major row developed, with the DUC threatening to boycott the seminar if no and-mining speaker was included on the panel.
The VEC relented but, with such short notice, the DUC was able to obtain only one speaker, Dr Robert Blackith, a zoologist from Trinity College, Dublin who was at that stage a veteran anti-nuclear speaker and campaigner.
The day before the seminar, some 500 people attended a public meeting in Buncrana organized by the DUC.
The seminar, which ran for two days, was attended by some 300 people.
After the final summing-up by the platform speakers, contributions from the floor followed, the last of which was from Brian Flannery, the DUC chairperson, who received a standing ovation.
The DUC considered the seminar a success in that their one platform speaker, helped by contributions from the floor, made the seven pro-industry speakers look foolish.
It was obvious from this that all the various reassurances from the state had failed to convince the local residents that uranium prospecting was harmless.
The local opposition did not require much effort to undermine state legitimacy on the effects of uranium mining: indeed the state itself contributed strongly to its own delegitimization.
The impressive expertise used by the state in reassuring the population was easily undermined: ‘the long distance perceived between the Dublin-based experts of the NEB who assured the population that they were not at risk and the respected local doctors who spoke out about health hazards of uranium, called the legitimacy of the established authority into question’.
Similarly, the state refused to provide the DUC with a forum for presenting its case: on 22 April, George Colley refused a DUC request to be represented on his ‘working group’.
The independence of the pro-nuclear experts having been challenged, the DUC decided it needed to mobilize outside expertise to back up its position.
Having decided that an environmental impact study was  necessary , it wanted the study to be undertaken by an independent group which would be more sympathetic to community concerns and interests, rather than have such a study conducted by a government agency such as An Foras Forbartha.
The DUC went in search of counter-expertise.
While the DUC itself had amassed information and expertise by now to undertake this study itself, it realized that the report would have to be produced from outside the community if it was to have legitimacy or to be seen in any way as neutral: ‘We in the  Committee felt that we knew  enough to write the report ourselves but we also felt that it wouldn't be acceptable to the County Council so we had to get somebody else to do it’.
The DUC found the group it was looking for in the Oxford-based Political Ecology Research Group: ‘They more or less said to us, ‘We'll not take on your issue if we decide that in the upshot our report will be favourable to the mining companies.
If we decide that the results will be favourable to you, then we'll do it for you’.
And that was the position’.
The DUC announced the PERG study at the VEC seminar.
Pro-industry forces, seeing the failure of the reassurance operation at the VEC seminar, struck back with a smear campaign against the DUC.
The smear campaign involved unsigned leaflets circulated around Fintown, Glenties, Doochary and Lettermacaward.
The following are two sample excerpts: ‘Jobs, Jobs, Jobs — School leavers and unemployed apply to Flannery and the Donegal Uranium Committee for emigration to the USA and England’; ‘Shops, Pubs, Hotels — Count the cost of Flannery and Donegal Uranium Committee: they are OK, they have jobs’.
The campaign also involved the sending of intimidatory postcards to the Flannery family, as well as an ill-judged but unsuccessful attempt to de in the DUC with the British Army.
The campaign continued apace, with various local committees springing up and with the DUC operating as an umbrella organization for these local groups.
‘The DUC operated as a kind of umbrella organization and there was a little group in all the different localities where uranium prospecting was going on…and each of these groups had their own little committee of two or three people who were feeding back information to the DUC and it was a real grassroots organization then.’
There were around 17 such local groups in the end.
The campaign involved a two-pronged attack on the mining companies.
The first of these involved grassroots campaigning, the setting up of local groups, farmers and landowners putting up notices stating ‘No Uranium Prospecting’.
This ground-level opposition meant that the mining companies never got to prospect the total area that they wanted to investigate, as they would have needed to get court injunctions to get on each farmer's land.
This grassroots campaign was the deciding factor in the campaign's success:
It was the mass support of the public that really won the campaign…
There was at one stage prospecting starting in a locality about ten miles distant from the main area and there was, I think (my figures may not be exactly right but they're near enough right) 276 landowners in the locality and 274 of them  signed a petition to the prospecting companies to stay off their land.
Now, with that kind of support you [i.e. the mining companies]can't operate.
And that's what won the campaign in the end.
The other prong of the attack was the political lobbying and the use of such institutions and fora as were open to the group, though few state-sponsored fora existed in which the long-term concerns of the DUC could be articulated.
The DUC realized that the companies had converted buildings and built a store without the required planning permission.
They appealed against retrospective planning permission for these developments and were supported by ten local and-uranium groups in this.
The process continued with a hearing before An Bord Pleanala on April Fool's Day 1981.
This combination of grassroots campaigning and legitimate participation in whatever channels as were available overwhelmed the mining companies and their supporters.
In August 1980 the DUC produced the second issue of their bulletin STOP .
They also took their campaign onto the national stage through their participation in the Anti-Nuclear Power Show at the Carnsore Point site.
Brian Flannery spoke on the national news reports from the festival site.
The campaign also received coverage from foreign media, with both BBC2 Newsnight and Canadian radio covering the issue.
The mining companies counter-attacked shortly after Carnsore by bringing a PR team to Donegal to present their case to the public.
The companies produced an unsigned pamphlet,Uranium exploration — the facts .
Needless to say, this was heavily criticized as lacking facts by the DUC.
A dispute also blew up over attempts by the mining companies to present their case in the local schools.
On 19 September 1980 a VEC ban on mining company PR staff visiting local schools was reported.
Later that month the DUC won another victory when Donegal County Council voted to ask the government to stop the exploration and voted £9,500 for a study of possible effects of the mining.
Three days prior to that, planning applications were submitted by the mining companies.
Early in October a meeting of three An Taisce branches in Donegal agreed to oppose these applications.
The DUC also decided to make uranium mining an issue in the forthcoming by-election.
This had the required effect.
In a speech in Donegal before the by-election in November 1980, Garrett FitzGerald of Fine Gael said, ‘Until and unless it is shown conclusively that this danger can be effectively-controlled, which appears not to be the case, we oppose exploration’.
Fine Gael also called for a full public inquiry before exploration began.
The mining companies  offered ‘donations’ to all the political parties participating in the by-election.
This tactic backfired when the Sinn Fein the Workers Party (SFWP) candidate, Seamus Rodgers, rejected as insulting the donations offered by Irish Base Metals and Munster Base Metals.
The director of elections for SFWP, Gerry Doherty, told the Irish Times that a mining company representative told him the donation was made ‘to help safeguard democracy and stop tyranny setting in’.
A SFWP statement responded: ‘Companies engaged in the robbery of our mineral and oil wealth should stop interfering with our democratic system in the hope of increasing their political influence’.
Councillor Rodgers said, ‘They are interfering with the democratic process in this by-election and seeking to buy political influence with what amounts to bribes’, and noted the offer was personally embarrassing for him as he negotiated as a union official with the companies over workers' pay and conditions.
The other parties followed suit by rejecting their donations.
Garrett Fitzgerald wrote to Brian Flannery: ‘As far as the offer of money from the mining companies was concerned, I made the position clear.
Denis McGinley, our candidate, was offered money in a telephone call.
He refused straight away.
A cheque subsequently arrived and was sent back immediately’.
An Irish Base Metals spokesperson wondered what all the fuss was about: ‘We regard contributions in this sort of situation as quite normal practice.
It is not unusual for a corporate business to make political contributions’.
During the campaign against uranium mining, the legitimacy of the central state was constantly challenged.
The independence of the state was anyway in doubt, because of EEC influence.
Local  campaigners were aware that the decisions on this issue were being made, certainly not locally and also not nationally, but in fact in Brussels.
The campaigners succeeded in returning both the policy debate and the decision-making powers to the local community.
Thus, while the state attempted to monopolize such discussion as took place — for example when the ‘neutral’ forum for discussion at the VEC seminar was turned by the authorities into a reassurance session — this was resisted locally by successful intervention and contestation at the VEC seminar both by an outside speaker and by DUC activists, and by forcing the issue back on the table for discussion at the local authority level.
Through their series of public meetings and the springing up of local action groups, the campaign returned to each individual farmer and landowner the decision as to whether the companies could even prospect.
The companies found this a major block to their activities and  eventually pulled out from the area: ‘The companies never officially admitted that they were leaving, just sort of let their prospecting licences lapse…the reason they departed was because they couldn't see any way that they could effectively operate with such total opposition.
But they never admitted that publicly’.
Furthermore, the DUC also realized that the mining had to be prevented by preventing prospecting and not waiting to begin opposition with the planning applications for the mining itself: ‘We always felt that if it came to an actual application for mining that we would lose.
Because we felt that the application for mining, the timing would be picked by the companies, there would be immense pressure on the people to change their position because at that stage it would be out in the open that there was money there and that it would be in the government's hands and we felt we would lose that so what we had to do was get it stopped before it got to that stage’.
This strategy proved to be correct.
Finally, the DUC was later to share its experience of campaigning tactics with other community groups, such as those opposing lignite mining near Lough Neagh and those opposing gold mining in– the west, and to provide these groups not only with its campaigning expertise but also with a shining example of how a community could defeat outside interests by grassroots organization.
Lignite on the loughshore
Of the most recent struggles against mining, that at Moortown and Ardboe shows most starkly what ultimate stakes can be involved in those conflicts.
Here a community is fighting against its destruction for the short-term benefits of outside economic interests.
Again the interests supporting the mining are the state and foreign mining companies who would reap all the benefits from the ‘development’, while all the costs of the mining are to be borne by the local community.
Behind the current dispute is the living memory of a similar population relocation during World War II and elder folk memories such as those evoked by fisherman Neil Coney: ‘During Elizabethan times the people around here were driven into the ‘badlands’.
The good land was taken off them and now it looks like we're going to be driven into the ‘badlands’ again.
Everything points to the destruction of a whole community’.
The more recent experience was cited by Niall Fitzduff of the Lignite Action Group: ‘Many of the older people in the community remembered families being moved out of their homes to allow the building of an aerodrome in the 1940s.
It left a very deep  scar on the community and people are determined not to let anything like that happen again’.
Commercially viable deposits of lignite were confined to the area around Lough Neagh in the early 1980s.
In May 1984 the British government granted a licence and planning permission for the extraction of up to one and half million tonnes of lignite a year to Northern Strip Mining, part of the British Burnett and Hallamshire group.
The company had identified reserves of more than 100 million tonnes at Crumlin, and estimated a further 300  million tonnes might lie beneath Lough Neagh.
The mining, which was expected to begin in 1986, was estimated to produce 100 jobs in the short term with a possible 300 long term jobs involved.
It was also expected that this decision would lead to the building of a power station to use the lignite.
The mining did not go ahead and Burnett and Hallamshire sold their interests in the area to BP Coal.
In December 1985 a licence was granted to Anglo United and an associated company, Grenmore Holdings Ltd, to prospect 26 square kilometres in the Lough Beg area near Crumlin in Co.
Antrim.
Currently, to the east of Lough Neagh, near Crumlin, some 420 million tonnes of recoverable lignite has been reported to exist, but two thirds of this lies under the lough itself.
Around Moortown, on the Western side of  the lough, some 200 million tonnes of lignite have been indicated but there is some evidence that the deposit around Moortown may contain at least the same amount as the Crumlin deposits.
There is also exploration further northeast of the lough in the Ballymoney area.
The proposal is to mine the lignite and to burn it at a mine-mouth power station, probably near the  Crumlin deposit.
The companies involved are all foreign: at Ballymoney the Australian Meekatharra Minerals Ltd; at Loughbeg, Anglo United Development Corporation, an associate of Northgate of Canada and Grenmore Holdings Ltd (a British company which later changed its name to the more local-sounding Tyrone Lignite Ltd); in the Coagh and Washing bay areas BP Coal Ltd, a subsidiary of the giant BP oil company.
The company prospecting at Ballymoney, Meekatharra Minerals, is headed by Donegal-born Don O'Callaghan, who made his original fortune in property before expanding into mining and oil.
The company is also prospecting for gold.
Meekatharra wants to build a 450-megawatt power station at the mine mouth and is also considering the production of lignite fuels and briquettes, no doubt to supply the expanding ‘green’ market for smokeless fuels.
It claims some 3,000 jobs in construction would reduce to 1,000 full-time jobs when the construction phase is over: the local area has a 30 per cent male unemployment rate.
It believes it has  proven the existence of 350 million tonnes of lignite at Ballymoney.
That mining might mean the end of the road for the town, with a population of some 6,000 people, did not unduly worry the man from the Department of Economic Development — Northern Ireland (DEDNI), Ivor Greene, who told the Irish Times ‘If it was decided that the time was proper for mining to proceed, Ballymoney could disappear but the people would be well compensated if it came to that’.
The proposed lignite development in Northern Ireland is strongly in line with Thatcherite ideology.
The capital for the mining and the proposed power station — estimated at £400 to £500 million in 1986 — is to be provided by the private sector, which would then profit by  selling the electricity it generated to the Northern Ireland Electricity Service.
Tom King claimed that the proposal could generate two to three thousand jobs, especially in the construction industry, as well as having other beneficial effects in expanding the local economy: ‘The injection of £400 to £500 million of private capital would be a major demonstration of confidence in the province and the largest private investment ever made (sic)’.
The area in which this prospecting has been strongly resisted is not Ballymoney but the rural, lough-side communities of Moortown and Ardboe.
Here the Lignite Action Group was set up in March 1985 after a public meeting in Moortown to express concern over test-drilling in the area was attended by 500 people.
Lignite Action Group (LAG) set itself a three-fold objective: to gather ‘information concerning the future in relation to what major changes would take place’; to participate ‘in any discussions and decisions which are to be made concerning our lives’ and ‘to be consulted and have our fears and wishes for the future of the community respected and given a fair hearing’.
On 26 January 1986 the first protest against the proposed lignite mining took place when over 2,000 people marched from Moortown school to the Old Cross at Ardboe where they held a rally.
Speakers at the rally warned that thousands of acres of land on the shore of Lough Neagh could become a lake if the mining went ahead, leading to the forced relocation of hundreds of families.
As the rally took place over thirty boats sailed past Ardboe to support the protest.
Dr Rhodes Boyson, Minister at the DEDNI, received 2,200 letters of protest over the proposed lignite mining.
On 24 February 1986, LAG issued a booklet,Lignite on the Loughshore — the case for community survival , which they circulated among politicians, universities and the media to increase awareness of the issue and to increase pressure on the British Government to hold an inquiry on both the environmental and social impacts of the mining.
In response to the pressure from residents, the Department of the Environment agreed to hold a public inquiry if a mining application was made.
However, given the outcomes and conduct of previous British government inquiries on energy issues (Windscale, Sizewell etc.) little relief is involved here.
Recognizing the value of promises from the British government, the community has organized itself locally to block BP Coal's operations.
As in Donegal, the unity of the community is providing major logistical problems for the mining company in its day to day operations.
‘To date there are only fourteen families in the whole district that have given BP Coal right of access to their land.
And BP Coal is paying £1,000 per borehole, which is a lot of money if you're a small farmer who is dependent upon eel fishing for economic survival.
And of these fourteen families, two returned their cheques, with quite a lot of ceremony, to BP Coal once they discovered what in fact BP Coal were up to in the district’.
As in Donegal, such victories as have been won have resulted from a unified community opposition and through direct action.
In February 1988, BP Coal attempted to move heavy drilling equipment into the area on a Saturday night.
The following morning the convoy was stopped by a one-person LAG picket.
Following this direct action, BP Coal flew in its executives to meet LAG, a meeting that LAG had been attempting to organize for a year and a half.
As the meeting between LAG and the BP executives took place, local residents took part in a large protest.
The result of these negotiations was that BP Coal undertook not to prospect in the area without consultations with LAG and the local community.
Since then negotiations have continued between LAG, BP and the DEDNI.
The local community has also been able to draw on outside resources in its struggle, both from the experience of the Donegal Uranium Committee in its battle against uranium prospecting in Co.
Donegal, and from research and other help from a support group outside the community.
Also of major importance in the local campaign was a programme transmitted on Ulster Television describing the experiences of a community in Hambach, West Germany, which was relocated for similar reasons.
Some 25,000 people have been relocated from 64 villages outside Cologne to allow lignite mining to take place.
All that remained, where green fields, valleys and townships were, was a huge gaping black hole.
The problem for the local community is how to prevent this same  destruction in their own area, given the strong support by the British state for this type of initiative by private capital On a more local note, given the sectarian nature of the state in the north, the local community  has major problems, given that it is a Roman Catholic community, in making its position heard by the local Unionist-dominated council.
In more general terms the community is putting forward a demand that it should have the decisive voice in determining its own future, something no state is likely to welcome.
‘They want to see economic development in the local area for them’.
The community has also grasped the nettle of the unemployment argument for development.
As another part of their struggle against mining, the population has formed a Community Development Association to explore other options for development in the area.
The local resistance raises even more basic questions about the type of destructive development involved in mining: what is the point of destroying a sustainable ecologically-managed way of life for the short-term benefits of outsiders?
This question echoes those regarding sustainable development raised by the opponents of gold mining in the west of Ireland and by opponents of Merrell Dow in east Cork.
What is involved here on the part of the local people is a question much more basic than an economic one and is seen as such by the local people: ‘Is it really necessary to mine lignite?
Who's going to gain at the finish?
Definitely not the people here.
In fact, we stand to lose everything.
Money can't compensate for losing your home, your livelihood, your way of life, your past or your children's future.
There's no way money can make up for losing all that’.
Or, as Niall Fitzduff put it, the community ‘is not to be destroyed at the whim of mining company’ while nothing could ‘compensate us or the generations to come for the loss of our community’.
This concept of a community or culture struggling for its existence is not something attributed to it by academic observers, but one expressed in the community's actions and statements.
Thus the rally at Ardboe High Cross was also feted by a selection of prose and poetry by local writers which focused attention on the area's rich history and culture.
One piece read to the rally referred to the local effect of the militarization of Europe during World War II when an aerodrome was built locally, and was written by Polly Devlin, a journalist originally from the area.
‘A thousand acres of good farmland was taken, thirty families evacuated leaving the nine families in Sesslagh and fifteen families of Farnsagh lopped off from the rest of the world.
In the Cleggan every disappeared hillock and mound had a name that told and contained the kernel of its history and the people who knew the names, and why they were so called, were removed to another district as anonymous to them as the place they left behind had become anonymous’.
There have been three recent developments of concern to LAG.
The first one is the possibility being mooted that BP Coal may sell off its interests in the area to another company, as part of a wider restructuring.
This would render fruitless two and a half years' negotiations between LAG and  BP Coal leaving LAG to start from scratch with a new company.
The second development is a new strategy which has been adopted by BP Coal.
Having failed in its attempt to induce individuals by offering to pay £1,000 per borehole, it is now attempting a new strategy which involves inducing the whole community.
It has offered to fund a ‘social and cultural and ecological study of the Lough Neagh area, a sort of baseline study’ and to fund a development project, looking at community employment and development options.
In return BP want permission to sink only five boreholes in the area.
Some local people have reacted by thinking that this is a cheap price to pay for two projects the community would welcome.
This response ignores the fact that the study BP is proposing to fund is essential to accompany any mining application BP eventually makes as part of its environmental impact assessment.
Nevertheless, the strategy is placing renewed pressure on LAG: ‘Lignite Action's position has always been that they do not want to allow any form of boreholing or test-drilling by the company because this will give them a foothold into the area and once in, it will prove more difficult for them to be ousted again’.
The third pressure comes from the push by Meekatharra Minerals to exploit the very rich deposits of lignite in Ballymoney and develop a private sector power station.
Once such a station runs out of the fuel supply at Ballymoney, it will want the lignite from the Ardboe/Moortown area to continue operating.
LAG have received some indirect support through the recent formation of other groups concerned about mining in other areas of the occupied north.
In Gurtin in the Omagh area, where Riofinex has already caused huge disturbance to local people simply through its exploration activities and where it is proposing to stripmine for gold, there is strong opposition which stretches across the political spectrum from Sinn Fein to the Democratic Unionist Party.
A local group has formed to oppose the mining and has held its first public meeting.
The DEDNI's suggestion that it might encourage companies to testdrill on Cavehill, particularly for gold, has led to the formation of the Save the Cavehill Campaign in Belfast, while in west Belfast the Black Mountain Action Committee is trying to save the Mountain from disappearing through quarrying activities — the committee has found local people to  be suffering from health problems, particularly of the eyes and throat, related to dust from the quarrying.
There is a recognition among these groups of the unity of their struggles and a desire to support each other, based on the recognition that if one community stops mining in its area it will add to the strength of opposition groups in other areas, while a defeat in one area will lead to a weakening of campaigns in other areas.
As one attempt to bring the opposition together, LAG are proposing to hold a coordinating meeting of all the groups involved.
Talc mining
In Mayo Talc Mining Awareness has been  successful in its opposition to the proposal by Talc Technology to build a talc quarry and processing plant at Conrig Hall near Westport.
The group was founded in 1989 to inform the local community of the advantages and  disadvantages of having a talc mine/quarry on their doorstep.
The group formed various subcommittees to examine the effects of talc extraction on tourism and agriculture, as well as the issues of noise, dust and water pollution.
Tomas Tierney, a local teacher, and PRO for the group, said it was founded to enable local residents to block the proposal if it presented any environmental dangers.
The proposed site is reported to contain around 3.5 million tons of talc.
Talc Technology has recently sold a majority holding to Ivernia West for £125,000.
Objections to the application for planning permission had also come from the Western Regional Fisheries Board and Westport Tourism as well as several individuals.
Chairperson of Westport UDC, Sean Staunton, who is also chairperson of Ireland West Tourism welcomed the decision to refuse planning permission and asked: ‘The question everybody must face up to is — do we want the short-term and dubious economic benefits of all mining in this area or the long-term and positive benefits of ongoing tourism and development?’
The company intend appealing to An Bord  Pleanala .
The chairperson of Talc Mining Awareness, Paddy Muldoon, responded: ‘We are determined to stay with this right to the very end.
We always expected an appeal to An Bord Pleanala and we are well prepared for it’.
The first public meeting to draw attention to local concern over the proposed mining for andalusite on Tomduff Mountain, near Borris, Co.
Carlow, took place at the Parish Hall on Tuesday 28 November 1989.
The meeting was organized by the Mining Awareness Group and was addressed by retired geologist Gerry Wilson.
Navan Resources, the company which had prospected Tomduff for andalusite was invited to the meeting but refused to attend, saying it would be premature, unethical and grossly irresponsible to discuss mining at this stage.
Gerry Wilson warned: ‘Mining is all about greed and devastation.
The people from the mining company do not care about the land and they do not care what happens to the countryside.
All they care about is what they gouge out of the ground and grind into profit’.
Warning that workers at the mine could suffer from silicosis and that dust from the mine could have a devastating effect on the local soil chemistry, Mr Wilson said it was cheaper to manufacture andalusite artificially, and wondered why Navan Resources wished to go the expense of mining it: ‘To make it in any way economically feasible to mine this, it would have to represent over 30 per cent of the total of the rock formation of the mountain and this means that almost one third of your mountain would disappear’.
No decision was taken at the meeting except that a further meeting on the subject would take place in the New Year.
On 9 February 1990 Navan Resources announced that its.
testing at Tomduff found the situation there to be as good as or better than those with the existing producers of andalusite in South Africa.
Navan appointed a consultancy group to undertake a pre-feasibility study and was involved in discussions with a major North American mining group.
By the time the second local meeting took place on Wednesday 28 February 1990 at Myshall, concern over the mining had hardened into opposition which was strongly expressed.
The featured speaker at the meeting was Jim Killeen from Tynagh, Co.
Galway, who warned: ‘When a mining company goes out the door that's when problems start for the people left behind’.
Speaking of Tynagh he said the company had failed to fulfil the only planning obligation required of them: that they leave the place as near as possible to how they found it.
Members of Mount Leinster Mining Awareness Group had visited Tynagh the previous weekend and videoed the devastation left at the site.
This video was shown at the Myshall meeting.
Navan Resources were again invited to attend but again declined.
The meeting was also addressed by Dr Michael Blade of Shangarry, who outlined the health effects of exposure to mining dust, and Chris Murphy, a vet from Tullow, who warned of the mining's effects on animal health.
Mr Murphy also raised the issue of why Navan Resources wished to mine andalusite when it can be manufactured more cheaply than it can be mined: ‘Maybe because it is gold — there is gold there but the problem with gold is getting it out, because that is a very difficult  process which involves the use of cyanide as a metal wash’.
Mary White, the secretary of the Mount Leinster MAG warned, ‘You may think this going to be a small hole gouged out of the mountain but it reaches for five miles on top of Tomduff.
If they mine there the whole of Tomduff is going to be reduced to one big ugly hole with no plant or bird life’.
She said that while the carrot of jobs was being held out to the local community, local people would only be used for the most menial of tasks.
Digging for gold
An intensive wave of gold prospecting swept Ireland in 1987 and 1988.
By 1988 licences for gold prospecting had been issued not only for Connemara but also in counties Cavan, Kerry, Monaghan, Tipperary and Wicklow.
Companies exploring for gold in Ireland in 1989 included Andana Resources, Burmin, Celtic, Chevron, Cobh Exploration, Ennex, Feltrim, Glencar, Irish Marine Oil, Newment Exploration, Ovoca, Rio Tinto Finance and Exploration (Riofinex), Silica Sand, Terra Mining and X-Ore Ltd.
This list of companies ranged from local miners to multinational giants.
Of course gold prospecting in Ireland started much earlier than this — in 1957 Anglo-United were prospecting for gold in Clentibret, Co.
Monaghan, a prospect they returned to in 1983.
Nor was Anglo-United the only company prospecting for gold in the early eighties.
In 1984 Tara Prospecting discovered gold in Croagh Patrick, Co.
Mayo.
In 1987 it formed a joint venture with Burmin Exploration and Development, a company whose Managing Director, Des Burke, is a former Cistercian monk and a former geologist for Tara, to exploit the gold find.
In June 1989 Burmin estimated the deposit it had discovered on Croagh Patrick might be worth a minimum of £30 million.
In June 1989, Des Burke said Burmin could begin operations by June 1990 if they got planning permission for Croagh Patrick.
Burmin also spread outside Connaught.
In August 1989 it was assessing results from tests at sites in the Galtee and Comeragh mountains in Munster.
Other companies have also discovered gold.
Rio Tinto Finance and Exploration, a subsidiary of Rio Tinto Zinc, announced in 1987 it found gold three miles west of Omagh, Co.
Tyrone, while Ennex International said its provisional estimate of 300,000 ounces of gold in its find in the Sperrin Mountains, also in Co.
Tyrone, might need to be increased after assessment.
In March 1988 North West Exploration found encouraging prospects in its search for gold in Co.
Antrim, in a  joint venture with Ennex International's subsidiary, Ulster Minerals.
In 1988 Meekatharra Minerals claimed it found gold above normal limits near Ballymoney, Co, Antrim.
Prospecting continued in other provinces, though most intensely in Connaught and Ulster.
In March 1988 Glencar announced that it had found deposits of gold, estimating the reserves at £300 million.
Meanwhile Ivernia West described results of its tests in Co.
Waterford as highly encouraging — exploration between Kilmeaden and Kilmacthomas found primary gold traces of nearly two ounces per tonne — though this is of course a long way from a commercial proposition.
Other places in which gold prospecting is taking place include Tory Island off Donegal and Conary near Avoca in Wicklow (Rio Tinto in both cases).
The first reaction to the gold prospecting came when a group of concerned people formed the group Mining Awareness following press reports in March 1988 of gold finds in Conamara and Mayo.
It was formed when there was little information available on gold mining and when local opinion on the issue — such as it was — was generally in favour.
Mining Awareness (MA) set itself three priorities: gathering information and disseminating it to the public; lobbying for legislative change; and calling for an independent environmental impact assessment.
Their first move was to put together a leaflet containing a map of the areas being prospected and a list of concerns related to the effects of gold mining: this was distributed in June.
The group then undertook local information meetings which built up to the campaign's first large public meeting in Letterfrack, Co.
Galway.
At that meeting Dr K. Bradley of the Dublin Institute of Technology spoke of the dangers of water pollution associated with mining and stressed the need for an environmental impact assessment before mining be allowed to go ahead; TD Michael D. Higgins drew comparisons between the current situation in Conamara and that in Tynagh in the 1960s when Northgate carried out initial prospecting without a licence, while Patrick Gageby, a barrister, spoke on landowners' legal rights.
Difficulties in obtaining information legally was one major problem for the group.
The mining companies were being extremely cagey over what information they were prepared to release.
This is not surprising given the value of information in this area; exploration companies are extremely volatile on the stock market.
A further example of this caginess was the list of companies that refused to be interviewed for a Today Tonight programmed on gold mining in March 1990: Riofinex, Glencar, Feltrim's Conor Haughey and Navan Resources  all refused to be interviewed for the programme, leaving the defence of the mining industry in the hands of the Institute of Mining and Metallurgy, Ennex International and a speaker from Tara Mines, rather than Tara Prospecting.
One of the group's members observed: ‘One of the worrying things is the utter secrecy that surrounds all these prospecting activities now taking place — it's extremely difficult to get any information about what's going on and what people's rights are and what dangers are involved’.
While obtaining information on activities presented difficulties, amassing information on the effect of gold mining abroad was highly successful.
This information was made widely available by Mining Awareness.
By July 1988 it had published two issues of a newsletter.
In fact the anti-gold mining struggle has shown an ability to utilize a wide variety of cultural weapons in its campaign.
One example of this imaginative aspect of the campaign was an exhibition of photographs portraying present day Mayo and comparing it with scenes from areas in Ireland where mining had taken place.
This was organized by the Mayo Environmental Group and was exhibited at Croagh Patrick.
A further development of this aspect came from the work of the Galway city group, West Aware, which organized an art exhibition on the mining issue which was exhibited in Dublin as well as in Connaught.
This group also organized musicians to play benefit concerts for the campaign.
The Mayo Environmental Group has also used videos to document the havoc wreaked at other mining sites in Ireland.
Some indication of how successful Mining Awareness's campaign to spread information had been was provided on 21 March 1989 when Gold EIA was founded.
The diversity of organizations and associations that joined together to form Gold EIA shows how widespread concern had become (see table 3.2).
As Emer Colleran, chairperson of An Taisce, noted, Gold EIA contained members of national and local bodies involved in towns, agriculture, aquaculture, recreational use of the environment and environmental conservation.
As she stresses, ‘We are not an anti-mining group.
Our sole function is to provide as much information as possible to our member organizations and to the general public on the environmental, social and economic impacts of gold-mining in the north Galway and South Mayo areas.
Thus the basic demand here was still not the prevention of the mining but the production of an ‘objective’ study of the mining's implications.
The stipulation that the study deal not only with the environmental impact, but also with the social and economic impacts was important.
Impatience with this position, held by at least some influential members of Mining Awareness, and its lack of aggressive response coupled with the conviction that opposition was now called for (at least in areas such as Croagh Patrick where prospecting was strongly advanced) led to the setting up of the Mayo Environmental Group (MEG) early in 1989.
This organization was one of outright opposition.
The MEG campaign focused initially on Croagh Patrick.
There were strong tactical reasons for this.
Firstly Burmin, the company exploring Croagh Patrick, were at an advanced stage of prospecting: the company had said it had found ‘an extensive gold-bearing structure’ and ‘an economic deposit’.
Thus if mining was to be stopped throughout Mayo, it had to be stopped here first.
The company had already built a road up the side of the mountain without planning permission.
The local community at Murrisk at the foot of the mountain depend on water from streams on the mountain for their water supply and were worried about possible contamination from the mining company's activities: relations were not helped by the accidental pollution of water by diesel during the company's operations.
Furthermore, the mining companies were in an extremely weak position because of the major religious significance of Croagh Patrick and the annual pilgrimage there.
A campaign to prevent the desecration of the holy mountain was inevitably going to receive support from the Catholic Church.
This came later from Archbishop Cassidy but by  March, Fr.
Patrick Costello, the priest in charge of the chapel on the summit said, ‘The majority of people around here are against gold mining and since the church is the people the church is against it’.
The companies also failed to take the opposition seriously enough.
Des Burke, Burmin's Managing Director, was reported to be confident of dispelling opposition: ‘Of course there are people jumping up and down…
I would expect that because at this stage they do not understand all the pros and cons.
However there is no way we will interfere with the pilgrimage’.
At this stage the company was still defending the use of cyanide.
‘Cyanide is a well-proven method’, Mr Burke was quoted as saying.
While the company was later to compromise on this method of operation, cyanide understandably enough having had its share of bad press, by suggesting gravity extraction (which as well as being cleaner was also cheaper) as a technical fix to the opposition to cyanide, the opposition had by then extended its attack to issues such as blasting, dust pollution and the contradiction between the short-term benefits mining would bring and the long-term development of the area threatened by mining.
By March 1989 Paddy Hopkins of MEG was arguing against the type of short-term development involved in mining and in favour of development based on indigenous, renewable natural resources, especially on the tourist and leisure industries: ‘We want to concentrate on the development of  tourism to provide jobs, not the short-term benefit — perhaps five years — which mining would bring’.
This mirrored the same argument that opponents of Merrell Dow and of lignite mining in Co.
Tyrone were making.
Other issues, familiar from previous campaigns began to emerge.
The first of these was the connection between mining companies and the political elite.
Even the Financial Times noted the fact that Conor Haughey, the Managing Director of one of the mining companies, Feltrim Mining, is a son of Charles Haughey.
It was also claimed that some people in the media held shares in the mining companies and thus coverage of the exploration could be uncritical.
Familiar too was the appearance of allegations of the intimidation of activists.
A mining company managing director recently telephoned a campaigner who had generated anti-mining publicity.
‘You've been making a lot of noise’, the mining man is alleged to have said.
‘We've been looking into your  background and there's a few things there I don't think you'd like to come out.’
‘Are you  threatening me?’ the campaigner replied.
‘Not at all’, the miner said.
Opposition continued to build up.
In May 1989 Westport Tourism  Organisation released a statement against the mining.
It said that ‘short-term and somewhat minimal job prospects’ created by gold mining would be ‘more than offset by a drop in tourism jobs.
A clean healthy, pollution-free environment is absolutely essential to the ongoing development of tourism’.
Opposition began to be organized locally as well.
In June 1989 a survey carried out in Lecanvey parish found that the majority of local people were opposed to mining on Croagh Patrick, according to the Croagh Patrick Environmental Group.
In June 1989 teacher Denis Carroll and fisherman Tom Roche began collecting signatures every weekend on a petition opposing gold mining and continued all summer long, at an information kiosk at the foot of the mountain.
The petition, backed by a committee from the Murrisk Residents' Association, was signed by more than 20,000 people.
Denis Carroll, chairperson of the Residents' Association, said ‘Objections from 93 per cent of the local community to the gold prospectors are 50/50 between environmental and religious concerns.
We are all worried, farmers, fishermen, teachers, housewives, the unemployed, everybody.
Foreigners who visit here are aghast that we would even think of gold mining in such a wild and unpolluted area.
We are not against progress or employment, but we are worried about our Holy Mountain and about pollution’.
Building on the spreading opposition, MEG organized a massive public rally against the mining in Westport.
Over 3,000 people participated in what was reported to have, been the largest meeting since the days of the Land League.
The meeting was addressed by David Bellamy and by Gerry Wilson, a retired Canadian geologist who had been head geologist for Holannah, one of the biggest mining companies in the world, and who knew intimately the industry he attacked so fiercely.
‘First they have to blast the rock around the ore body.
This rock will form the core of the slag heaps.
Great roads will have to be built.
They will not be roads you or I can use.
They will be used to bring in the rock crushing plant, the industrial chemicals and the explosives.
The crushing plant creates dust.
It contains potassium, cadmium, manganese and silica which gets absorbed into the soil until the heavy metal acidity builds up’.
After this David Bellamy was almost an anti-climax, imploring his audience not to allow the local blanket bogs be destroyed.
The local County Manager, Michael O'Malley, issued an edict to planning officials not to attend public rallies.
Gold EIA went ahead to commission the Centre for Environmental  Management and Planning at the University of Aberdeen to undertake the first phase of the EIA, its scoping.
This was important to set the issues that would have to be addressed in any mining company EIA in advance and to ensure community concerns formed a major part of the agenda to be  addressed .
The public meetings for this scoping phase provided further opportunities for the opposition to express its position.
In June 1989 Des Burke said Burmin could be in operation by June 1990 if they received planning permission.
The company commissioned its own EIA from a former consultant to Tara, Bob Dallas.
MEG criticized Burmin for commissioning someone to undertake the EIA who was previously connected with the principals involved.
Burmin's EIA was reported as being due to be completed in July 1990.
The companies continued to underestimate the local opposition.
Companies told the Financial Times that ‘much of the opposition to their plans is ill-informed and orchestrated by outsiders.
‘Real local feeling’ is in their favour and such issues should not be decided at emotionally charged public meetings, they say’.
Outsiders in the communities appear to be less opposed to the mining than ‘real local feeling’.
Thus the original organizations set up mainly by ‘outsiders’— Mining Awareness (Galway) and Mining Awareness (Mayo)— were not in fact anti-mining groups, but wished only to initiate public debate.
The co-chair of Mining Awareness (Mayo), Lesley O'Dowd was US-born, while the  Galway chair was Dublin-born.
Mining Awareness was superseded by other locally formed groups.
Gold EIA, a group which consistently reiterated that it was not anti-mining, is mainly concerned with the adequate articulation of local interests through consultation with the state over the proposed mining.
The local community-based organizations that have since formed have been more basic in their opposition to any mining and have taken political organization — through lobbying, petitions, demonstrations and public meetings — as their mode of operation.
Officers in these groups have been local.
Sean O'Malley, secretary of MEG, is a maths and chemistry teacher at Westport Christian Brothers school: he was previously a Fine Gael councillor; Paddy Hopkins, chairperson of MEG, is a retired engineering company personnel manager.
Other local groups are similarly staffed.
Other opposition has been ad hoc and in some areas, such as Inishturk, has not formalized itself into an organization.
These groups refused to be specific as regards how far  they would go in their opposition but, as Peter Shanley of the MEG told Today Tonight ‘We're not ruling out any action whatsoever’.
The local disquiet and mistrust was articulated in a letter issued by Dr Joseph Cassidy, Archbishop of Tuam, in which he expressed his concerns over gold mining, warning that ‘one man's gold could be another man's poison.
A handful of gold for some could mean plenty of dust for us all.
The history of gold mining in many places provides no grounds for optimism.
What has happened elsewhere could happen here.
‘Sometimes a balance has to be struck between beauty and material gain.
In too many instances in the past the interests of beauty have been heavily outweighed by commercial considerations.
One would like to think that  it's not going to happen here.
We have a right and a duty as a community to do all that is lawfully in our power to prevent its being disfigured or destroyed’.
Dr Cassidy put forward fairly Burmin's assertions that gold mining on Croagh Patrick would in no way interfere with the pilgrimage: ‘I say in all fairness that should planning permission for mining ever be granted Burmin have given me repeated assurances that there will be no interference with the Pilgrim Path, there would be no interference with Patrick's Peak or that particular part of the mountain range.’
‘Again, in the event that planning permission is granted, they have indicated their intention of  tunnelling into the mountain from behind, at a point which is  uninhabited and out of sight from the road at least’.
These concessions from the mining company seemed to point to another Irish solution to an Irish problem —‘We'll do it but we'll do it out of sight’.
Early in July Gold EIA and CEMP undertook their public scoping hearings.
At Westport 25 members of the public spoke and several written submissions were handed in including one from Archbishop Cassidy of Tuam.
A fish farmer warned of the effect of the mining on the 60 full-time jobs in aquaculture in Clew Bay; a teacher from Murrisk, a village at the foot of the mountain range, said a survey of households there found 91 per cent against the mining, 8 per cent would not indicate their position and 1 per cent ignored it.
A youth hostel owner who had experience of gold mining in South Africa warned that planning conditions would not prevent the mining from devastating the area.
In July Burmin went on the offensive by issuing a circular on myths and facts relating to the mining, which suggested that gold mining could be turned into a tourist attraction, said no cyanide spills would take place, the visual impact on Croagh Patrick would be minimal and the Church  was not opposed to the mining.
This led to a local outcry and priests at St. Mary's Westport stated, ‘We are clearly and categorically opposed to mining on CP’.
The Church then moved into action on the issue.
The Westport Parish Committee issued a leaflet on the issue claiming that Des Burke had ‘admitted that they had no plan for the way in which the rehabilitation of the mine site’ would be funded.
Later that month, the Archbishop of Tuam delivered a sermon in which he came out against the mining.
Calling Croagh Patrick ‘the foundation mountain for Irish Christians’ he compared tunneling into it with ‘digging deep into the history and religious sensibilities of our people’, since the 1,500 year link between the mountain and St. Patrick involved ‘an incomparable accumulation of spiritual wealth’.
MEG took part in the annual pilgrimage by erecting a marquee at the foot of the mountain where they displayed an exhibition of contrasting photographs of Mayo now and the aftermath of mining in Avoca and elsewhere in Ireland.
They also used loudspeakers to address the pilgrims and collected thousands of signatures on a petition against mining from the crowd, estimated at over 40,000.
The exploration continued, with each new move made by the companies creating renewed community concern and opposition.
In Clifden, Co.
Galway, the Swedish company Terra Mining sampled around the local water supply.
In February 1990 the opposition to gold mining went international.
Paddy Hopkins, chairperson of the MEG, flew to Finland, home country of Outokumpu, at the invitation of Hans Fers, a Finnish journalist who had written widely on environmental matters and covered the proposed mining of Croagh Patrick.
Mr Hopkins' schedule included meeting Finnish politicians, representatives of Outokumpu, press, radio and television journalists.
Mr Hopkins was also to receive a Civic Reception from the Community Council of Pelkosenniemi, a Lapp community near the Lapp holy mountain, Pyhatunturi, which is also threatened by gold mining.
‘There is as much concern in Pelkosenniemi about what is proposed for their holy mountain as there is in Mayo and throughout the West of Ireland over what is proposed for Croagh Patrick.
A united partnership of opposition to such developments is something that the MEG warmly welcomes’, Mr Hopkins told a local paper.
The most recent target of the gold prospectors is Inishturk, a self-contained island community off the coast of Mayo where some 84 people live on 1,650 acres.
Prospecting began in April or May 89 and continued until November.
Mining company employees made no  attempt to inform local residents of what they were prospecting for.
In the words of Mary Catherine Heanue of the Inishturk Community Council:
April/May they were in, taking rock samples out and at that time we didn't even think they were looking for gold…
We knew they were taking rock samples with them.
We didn't know what they were looking for in them.
We knew they were geologists…they didn't come in contact with anybody on the island, they didn't tell people what they were doing or what they were looking for.
Instead of being informed by the prospecting company, Navan Resources, islanders learned of a possible gold mine on their island through hearing an item, based on a newspaper report, on the Gay Byrne radio show.
The newspaper report was based on an announcement to shareholders and the media by Navan Resources.
The islanders were naturally put out to hear news that might be so important to their community in that way.
‘We were rather angry in the beginning to have heard it off the radio.
We felt that Navan Resources should have made earlier contact with us to let us know that there was gold here, before we had to hear it in that way,’ Mary Catherine Heanue said.
The controversy over Croagh Patrick meant that islanders were aware of the problems with gold mining already.
On 26 November members of Mining Awareness took the boat from Cleggan to visit the island to provide the residents with information.
Mining Awareness produced a leaflet that drew attention to the problems of blasting, dust, chemicals, silting, erosion, water supply, pollution of the area and waste disposal problems associated with gold mining.
Islanders were concerned that pollution from the proposed mine would damage the islands supply of water, as well as contaminating their land and fishing grounds, the main livelihood on the island.
Islanders correctly realized that such employment as the mine would bring would be short-term, while any damage done would remain after the mining company left.
‘There wouldn't be that much island employment anyway, it would be mostly outsiders in doing the work.
They might get work in, like construction work and the making of roads and that kind of thing…but how long would that last for and we'd be left with what, like you don't know what you would be left with in the end,’ said Mary Catherine, who concluded ‘I'm not one to stop progress by any manner of means but I don't think gold mining is progress.
It's a step in the wrong direction.’
At a meeting at the end of 1989 between Navan Resources and the islanders, the company were told by the islanders that they did not want gold mining.
By March 1990 Navan Resources still had not told the islanders the extent of the gold find or their plans for it.
Any attempt by the mining company to undertake operations seems certain to run into strong opposition.
Another islander, Michael O'Toole, explained that local people would be quite prepared to take part in direct action to prevent any mining on the island against the wishes of the community:
‘Here you have the sea so I think we have ways and means of — if it came to it — of stopping them from entering the harbour landing.
So I would think that would probably be the only way we would protect ourselves if the threat did come….
There's no doubt about it.
It would go that far.
If you want to protect your livelihood or protect the environment you're living in, you'd do everything possible to make sure it's not damaged by this way or any other means.’
Raybestos Manhattan
As the 1970s began the US asbestos industry experienced a severe safety crisis that threatened the industry's continued existence.
Following decades of neglect of safety and suppression of information on asbestos's health effects, by 1965 it was established that cancer rates among workers exposed to asbestos were extremely high.
‘Asbestos dust inhalation has been linked to increased risk of cancer of the lungs, esophagus, stomach, colon, rectum, kidneys, pleura and peritoneum…
The (US) Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare announced in 1978 that for the remainder of this century and part of the next, 17 per cent of all US cancer deaths (over 50,000 per year) would be attributable to asbestos.’
The increased official recognition of the hazards of asbestos led to a veritable torrent of health-related regulations in the US.
In 1970 the US passed the Occupational Safety and Health Act and the Clean Air Amendments.
On 7 June 1972 the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) issued a standard on asbestos exposure at work which took effect over a four-year period to 1 July 1976.
In October 1975 OSHA recommended a further lowering of exposure levels while at the end of 1976 the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) recommended a further lowering of the standard to the lower limit of detection by optical microscopy — 100.000 asbestos fibre per cubic metre — though NIOSH admitted that even at that level of exposure there is probably still an increased risk of cancer.
In March 1977 the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced that it would target asbestos as one of the 15 substances to receive priority attention under the Toxic Substances Control Act of 1976.
The US asbestos industry responded by complaining that this increased regulation brought into question the continued existence of the industry.
Raybestos Manhattan described the NIOSH recommendations as ‘so extreme as to be totally unrealistic and unpracticable’ in its 1976 annual report, and suggested Raybestos Manhattan's future  strategic direction would be away from the use of asbestos in friction products:
The escalating costs associated with handling this raw material and the uncertain consequences of future government asbestos regulation…have necessitated our decision to work towards the elimination of asbestos from all our friction products and this eventuality has become an essential part of our long-term production and manufacturing plans.
A different tactical response by the US asbestos industry was to export its hazardous production to other non-regulated peripheral countries such as Mexico and the South American countries, following earlier examples of asbestos companies who had moved to the southern US states to avoid higher insurance costs in the northern states.
This export of hazard was strongly attacked by American environmentalists and trade unionists.
It was in this context of increased regulation and hazard export that Raybestos Manhattan came to Ireland.
The IDA's success in attracting Raybestos Manhattan led to perhaps the longest and most bitter struggle against a multinational in Ireland.
While Raybestos Manhattan, IDA and other state officials denied that Raybestos' move to Ireland was an example of the export of hazard, on this issue an observer has been quoted:
Raybestos officials deny that the move to Ireland was in any way connected with the difficulties faced by producers of asbestos products in the US.
However the former economic attache for the US Embassy in Ireland, Kenneth McGuire, said that while market factors may have been important considerations for Raybestos, the relocation factor probably cannot be entirely dismissed in the Raybestos case.
While it has been suggested that the IDA was taken unaware by the problems Raybestos encountered, its handling of the company was discreet in the extreme.
In September 1975 the IDA announced a £4 million investment by Raybestos Manhattan for its advance factory in Ovens, Co.
Cork.
From the beginning the IDA trod carefully: the planning application for the site appeared in the national daily, the Irish Independent , rather than in the local paper the Cork Examiner , and the application did not specify that the factory would be using asbestos.
The IDA regional manager said the factory would be a ‘clean industry’.
Thus planning permission had been granted (on 22 December 1975, close enough to Christmas for no-one to have been paying much attention) and the period for appealing the planning permission was past before local residents discovered that Raybestos Manhattan  would be processing and emitting asbestos, a highly toxic pollutant and confirmed mass killer.
The ensuing struggle involved almost every aspect of the continuing battles fought by Irish communities against multinationals, plus some less usual elements, specifically the workers' struggle, which appeared only in this fight.
The affair was in some ways summed up by photographs that appeared in the media in June 1978 of gardai forcing their way past a picket of women and children to allow the American multinational to dump its deadly waste.
The struggle involved some 18 opposition groups in all, most arms of the state — the IDA, IIRS, local authorities, An Bord Pleanala, both ordinary, decent and political police — politicians, trade unions, international experts and rank and file workers.
It was unquestionably a major landmark in Irish anti-toxic struggles.
Having lost the opportunity to oppose the factory itself, local opposition first focused on the factory's dumping plans.
Much of the initial opposition came from Beverley, an upmarket housing estate on the southeastern side of the factory which had a clear view of the factory site.
On 15 July 1986, Ovens residents objected to a planning application by William O'Brien Ltd for an asbestos dump in a quarry at Knockanemore, about a mile from the Raybestos Manhattan factory site.
Shortly afterwards the local Fine Gael cumann also objected to it.
When the Cork County Council planning committee met later that month it agreed to hold further consultations with local residents.
In August Raybestos announced a change in their proposed dumping method: instead of dumping wet asbestos, the company announced it would encapsulate the asbestos waste in concrete pellets.
At the same time the company announced that it would spend £225,000 on installing a special air filter in the factory.
The meeting between the councillors and local residents did not take place, despite this having been agreed unanimously by the Planning Committee.
Moving the suspension of standing orders at the next meeting of Cork County Council, Councillor Gene Fitzgerald TD complained that the first council members heard of the planning decision was when they read of it in the morning paper.
The County Manager explained that, as a full meeting of the County Council was not due before the statutory decision-making period was up, he had referred to the Planning Working Committee who decided that the Manager should clear the decision with the County Council Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson.
Councillors complained that the full council should have been consulted before planning permission was given.
The council seemed satisfied by that and early in September, with protestors gathered outside County Hall, gave permission for the dump.
Later that month a meeting of Ovens residents decided to appeal formally against the planning permission.
By the end of that month Raybestos decided to abandon the Knockanemore dump ‘in the interests of community harmony’.
As a result the IDA began what was to become the first step in the desperate local search for a toxic dump site.
The same day the Cork branch of An Taisce declared that they were satisfied that Raybestos' plans represented no threat to the environment.
Following the defeat of the dump plan for Ovens, local residents began a campaign to force Raybestos to use a safe alternative raw material rather than asbestos in the factory.
Thus they were able to continue their campaign against the use of asbestos but also say they were not opposed to the Raybestos factory as such.
In November 1976 a meeting was held in Sreelane Parish Hall to demand the use of a safe alternative raw material after some 600 people signed a petition calling for the use of such a material.
Prior to this meeting, Raybestos got the backing of the unions and the Minister for Transport and Power, local TD and merchant prince Peter Barry.
Two ITGWU officials, E. O'Callaghan, County District Secretary and Liam Beecher, Secretary of the Cork No. 6 Branch, were first into the fray.
Their statement read: ‘We are saddened by the actions of a small vocal minority within the community who are endeavouring to impede the economic development of the area….
We believe that a continuation of this activity could in the long term be detrimental to the welfare of their less privileged neighbours, who have to depend on a weekly wage for their survival’.
Mr Barry called on local people to let the factory go ahead and ‘accept the assurances of the County Council, the IDA, An Taisce and the IIRS, that this factory will be safe and will not be a health hazard’.
He also claimed that local protestors blocking factories would be ‘very serious for the country's image’.
Barry linked the Raybestos Manhattan case with the recent pull-out by Schering Plough from Co.
Tipperary after local opposition, saying the Raybestos case was worse as the Ovens objectors were trying to force changes after the statutory period for planning objections had long passed: ‘Foreign companies coming to this country and adhering to our planning conditions will begin wondering if they can go ahead at all if they see the assurances of the IDA and the planning authorities are not the final assurances.’
Having shown his concern for the problems of multinational capital, Barry then laid it on the line for the Cork objectors: ‘These objectors must accept that the public and voluntary bodies involved in scrutinizing polluting industries are genuinely concerned and responsible.’
He then rejected local criticism of one of these bodies, denying that the IIRS ‘is the lap-dog of any company…
I do not accept that the Institute produces reports to satisfy industry on the basis that ‘you get what you pay for'’.
The day before the Sreelane meeting was due to take place, the IDA sent Professor John Corbett McDonald, head of the British TUC Centenary Institute of Occupational Health at London University, to Cork to reassure the residents.
Professor McDonald was brought to meet the County Medical Officer, Dr P.B.O'Meara, journalists, and Mr John Fahey, PRO for the Ovens objectors.
While emphasizing that he was a health expert rather than an engineer, Professor McDonald was most reassuring, citing Canadian evidence which he claimed showed that asbestosis and lung cancer had never been associated with environmental exposure to asbestos in the general community and were in fact confined to workers in the industry.
‘He spoke of surveys on which he was engaged in Quebec, one of the areas where white asbestos is mined.
According to the Professor, people were virtually living on mountains of asbestos and despite this ‘gross exposure’ there was no evidence of people who had  contracted  mesothelioma , a form of cancer related to asbestos’, the Cork Examiner reported.
Professor McDonald was reported to have been associated with major Canadian investigations since 1959 into the effects of asbestos on health.
While again emphasizing that he was not an engineer, McDonald described the Raybestos factory as ‘the most modern I have seen.
It is superior in its precautionary methods to anything I have seen before’.
A letter concerning Professor McDonald was sent in January 1977 to John Carroll, anti-nuclear vice-president of the ITGWU from Charles Levinson, General Secretary of the International Federation of Chemical and General Workers' Unions.
It noted that ‘Corbett McDonald has a long history as a lobbyist for the asbestos industry.
Bona-fide occupational health scientists in North America consider him an industry spokesman’.
Drawing attention to a monograph by the International Agency for Research on Cancer which concluded that the only true protection against asbestos' carcinogenicity was a ban, Levinson pointed out that this was the view of the best medical expertise.
The Institute for Industrial Research and Standards (IIRS) were also drafted in to reassure the residents.
It was admitted that while the  IIRS had prepared a report on the factory itself, it had not surveyed and reported on the Knockanemore dump site as it had not been commissioned to do so by either the IDA or Cork County Council.
The IDA had now commissioned a report from the IIRS on the safe disposal of asbestos waste.
Dr Tom McManus of the IIRS praised the equipment Raybestos were installing.
Some of his reassurances were marvellously paradoxical, claiming the contradictory characteristics of novelty and experience at once.
‘He also said the factory included many novel and revolutionary schemes not operational in any other part of the world, although he stressed that all equipment had been tried out elsewhere’.
The IDA were represented at the press conference by John Gannon, the IDA's Executive Director, and Thomas Linehan, its Regional Manager for Cork.
Dr Tom McManus of the IIRS defended the Institute against allegations that it had been ‘bought’ by industry by claiming the IIRS had turned down 15 major industries which could have caused dangerous pollution: he cited the example of a herbicide factory which could have wiped out much of the marine life in Cork Harbour.
He also pointed out that for years waste from 7,000 tons of asbestos a year had been dumped in quarries near Athy and Drogheda.
The public protest meeting went ahead.
There was heated argument at the meeting, with strongly differing views advanced.
John Fahey, PRO, said his role as ‘spokesman’ was over now that an independent medical expert had examined the situation but it was up to the people of Ovens and Ballincollig to decide whether the assurances resolved their worries.
Laurence O'Toole, another member of the ad hoc committee, dismissed the meetings and press conference as a ‘slick piece of public relations’ but said he would have believed assurances from the British Society for Social Responsibility in Science (BSSRS).
‘If they said there was no danger, I would have to stand down from any further action on the matter.’
Dr James O'Neill of Ballincollig suggested that an independent assessor should be agreed between the residents and the IDA.
A strong, vocal group argued that Raybestos should not be allowed to emit any asbestos dust from the factory, and called for the use of a safe alternative in the factory process.
The meeting elected members to the Residents' Committee for the Investigation of the Effects on Health of Asbestos Fibres in the Environment.
The residents rejected Dr McDonald's evidence and proposed calling in another independent researcher of their own to survey the factory, saying further investigation of the cancer risk posed by the factory was ‘essential’.
On 1 December, the IDA applied for permission for an asbestos waste dump on land it owned at Curraghbinny, an exclusive residential and scenic area of Co.
Cork.
Following recommendations from the IIRS a different technical fix was to be employed to improve safety in dumping the asbestos.
While this form of reassurance was given to the residents, Michael Killeen of the IDA attacked the local community activists, claiming that the opposition to Raybestos and Schering Plough was causing ‘incalculable damage’ to the IDA's attempts to promote Ireland as a location for industrial development abroad.
Speaking to the Nenagh Chamber of Commerce he referred to how Schering Plough, despite offering no pollution threat, had been turned away because of unreasonable and implacable opposition from small groups of people:
In the case of the Raybestos Manhattan project in Cork, we have a similar example of unreasonable opposition to a new manufacturing project invited into this country by the IDA.
This opposition is mounted by a small but vocal group who persist in their objections despite the assurances on the safety of the plant given by a world renowned expert.
Shortly after the IDA applied for planning permission, 46 workers representing eight trade unions who were working on the construction of the Raybestos factory issued a statement:
We, the workers at the Raybestos Manhattan construction site, Ovens, Co.
Cork, wish to place on record our disgust and concern at the continuing objection to the establishment of this plant.
The information on this project provided by the IDA and the IIRS should have provided sufficient assurance to those concerned regarding the plant suitability and safety for the area.
Not only is this information ignored, but some of the new-found local expertise on asbestos and health is apparently greater than that of Professor McDonald, the independent expert who has studied some 12,000 case histories.
The contribution of the latter must put the objections, on health grounds, outside the pale of reasonable dispute.
The statement ended: ‘It is a sad reflection on the morality involved if thousands of badly needed jobs cannot be provided, as proposed factory sites may lead to depreciation of property value in the immediate vicinity.
Alas, the objectors refused to be reasonable.
The opposition in Ovens was now joined by opposition in other areas considered for the dumping of Raybestos's waste.
When Raybestos decided towards the end of August 1976 to give up its designs on the Knockanemore dump, Michael Harrington of the IDA undertook a search for an alternative dumping site for Raybestos's waste.
This involved two weeks’ full work, including the use of a helicopter.
Sites investigated included a disused railway tunnel and bogland in Nad.
The IDA eventually dropped the idea of Nad, according to evidence given at the An Bord Pleanala appeal, because most of the suitable land was held in common.
Towards the end of 1976 the IDA selected a site in Lough Beg for which it already had outline planning permission for dumping.
It also applied for planning permission to dump at another site it owned at Barnahely, Ringaskiddy.
The Lough Beg option came under attack on 21 January, 1977, when Cork County Council was accused by a group of 30 naturalists and scientists of planning to dump asbestos waste in the middle of a 70-acre marsh on the south side of Lough Beg, near Curraghbinny Wood.
Mr Patrick O'Hara, spokesperson for the Ecological Study Group, claimed that the marsh land, which he described as an important area for wildlife containing 31 species of waders and wildfowl including some rare species, was zoned for industry in the council's draft development plan.
He said these proposals ran counter to a report from An Foras Forbartha in 1974 which had been commissioned by the Council to study the effects of industrial development on wildlife at Lough Beg.
Mr O'Hara called for the publication of this report.
Opposition also began to mount among concerned citizens of the area, an opposition which manifested itself both individually and through the Ringaskiddy Residents' Association, formed two years previously, which had not involved itself in any controversy over previous planning applications for industrial projects in the area.
While the population could understand trading off pollution for jobs, they saw no advantage to the locality in being the site of a toxic dump.
Concern was also focused on the fact that Ringaskiddy school was within 400 yards of the planned asbestos dump site.
Thus in February 1977 the opposition to Raybestos developed on two fronts: in Ovens against the factory, in Ringaskiddy against the dump.
The opposition to Raybestos was unusual in that it involved the formation of an autonomous women's group, in which up to 30 women became involved.
This women's group was set up because of dissatisfaction with the lack of action by the male-dominated Ovens committee.
One member of the group said ‘We were very frustrated that nothing was being done in the local area against the factory….
The men's committee was waffling on twice a week and doing nothing’.
The women's group's orientation was towards action: ‘There was no way we could beat them in the courts.
We felt we could only do it through local pressure, using the media and direct action’, a member of the group  recalled.
Fifteen members of the group picketed the US Embassy and the Dail.
The group also wrote to US President Carter asking him to intervene in the dispute.
They had previously picketed the IDA offices in Cork, Cork County Council's headquarters and the Raybestos site.
The group later organized a major picket of the factory in November 1977.
The Ovens committee continued its activity, organizing a press conference in Cork at which Alan Dalton of the BSSRS and Nancy Tait of the House of Commons Asbestos Action Committee spoke and the committee presented its report, which concluded that the planned emission of asbestos fibres into the atmosphere and the lack of effective control of this by the authorities represented a major health risk to the local population.
This report was the result of four months' research, including material relating to Britain, Belgium, South Africa, Canada and the US, and noted that the IDA's and the IIRS's ‘complacent attitude’ towards asbestos was not shared by many eminent bodies throughout the world and that there was movement towards the phasing out of asbestos.
Alan Dalton attacked the IIRS-recommended level of 2 asbestos fibres per cubic centimetre in the internal factory air as 20 times higher than the levels recommended by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health in the US.
He also attacked the IDA's attempt to locate dump sites near water as irresponsible.
Nancy Tait attacked Professor McDonald's stature as an independent witness, dismissing his statement that there was no risk to the Quebec community even where there were mountains of asbestos waste by citing a new state investigation that found almost 60 per cent of asbestos industry workers had abnormal X-rays.
The committee claimed that it had the support of 90 per cent of the area's population and noted that representatives of the IDA, IIRS, AFF, Raybestos and the trade unions did not attend, despite being invited.
Local doctors were present in force, as were a county councillor and Alderman Sean O'Leary from Cork Corporation, and apologies for non-attendance were received from the two local TD's.
The IDA responded to the charges by pointing out that it had brought Dr McDonald in to allay local fears after a residents' spokesperson had said that an independent medical opinion could satisfy the residents and noted that this internationally renowned expert had pronounced the factory to be entirely safe.
The IDA also supported the IIRS, expressing complete confidence in it and rejecting the criticism of it expressed at the meeting.
The IDA statement concluded: ‘Finally, the IDA does not encourage  industry to locate in Ireland which would pose a threat to the public health.
The best possible evidence available conclusively indicates to us that this new industry is entirely safe.
As a responsible public body, we would not continue to give active support to an industrial project which would be a health hazard’.
A statement by Raybestos dismissed as ‘ridiculous’ the committee's estimates of the increase in background asbestos levels due to the factory emissions, saying ‘The increase in fact will be virtually immeasurable in the region of 3 per cent and is totally safe’.
Raybestos also attacked the competence and motivation of the experts that had supported the residents:
We would again point out that whereas the Committee has produced ‘evidence’ from a politically motivated group, the British BSSRS (sic) and an emotionally committed woman, Nancy Tait, our plant has been assessed and approved by the IIRS, Cork County Council, Cork County Medical Officer, An Taisce and the IDA.
Government environmental and medical authorities in Northern Ireland, Britain, Germany, Holland, Belgium and the US have also been consulted and their advice has been incorporated in building the most modern asbestos using plant in the world.
Raybestos refused to allow Alan Dalton and Nancy Tait to inspect their factory.
The IDA came in for attack the following day from residents' associations in both Currabinny and Ringaskiddy.
A statement issued by Ray Sutton, Honorary Secretary of the Currabinny Community Association, said:
Despite the IDA's allegation, this concern is not merely shared by ‘a small vocal group’.
From our own research and study of reports of the IIRS relating to asbestos, it would appear that the IDA and IIRS are using outdated information in compiling their recommendations.
In view of the most recent research, it is difficult to contemplate how the IDA and the IIRS can be emphatic about their recommendations…
Whilst there is so much contrary scientific opinion with regard to the dangers arising from asbestos dust, it is difficult to understands the IDA's reliance upon the opinions of Professor McDonald when it is known that he derives a large share of his research funds from the asbestos industry itself.
The Currabinny Community Association then provided a long list of other sources of responsible relevant information.
A similar statement was issued by the Ringaskiddy Residents' Association (RRA), which took the opportunity to inform the IDA, Cork County Council and the IIRS that they were opposing applications to dump asbestos both at Currabinny and Ringaskiddy.
Opposition continued to grow, however.
A week after the meeting, Cobh, Midleton and Passage West, three towns around the Harbour, expressed support for the Ringaskiddy residents' campaign and urged An Taisce to review its support for Raybestos's use of asbestos.
On Thursday 24 February a provisional committee was formed to support Raybestos in the Ballincollig/Ovens area.
The group issued a statement which said that in view of the adverse publicity accorded to a vocal minority they felt that it was their duty in the interests of democracy and employment in the area to state that there is a silent majority in favour of the proposed Raybestos development.
Following the statement, the silent majority returned to silence.
On 28 February Cork County Council was to meet to decide whether to grant planning permission.
Two days before the meeting, the IDA flew in yet another independent expert, Dr Robert Murray, Secretary General of the Permanent Commission and International Association of Occupational Health and a consultant in occupational health.
Dr Murray dismissed the BSSRS as ‘a left-wing sponsored body with sinister anti-capitalist motives’, and enthused over the guinea-pig possibilities provided by the factory.
The Irish Times reported: ‘He regards the Ovens factory as an ideal guinea-pig situation in which the workers, protected by the best current standards, would be medically tested going into the plant and continuously tested over the next 20 years in order to measure the exposure risk and the effectiveness of the standards’.
Dr Murray was to reappear as an expert witness for Raybestos Manhattan and the IDA at the appeal to An Bord Pleanala.
Statements of support for Raybestos were also issued by Cork Chamber of Commerce, the Association of Chambers of Commerce in Ireland, the ITGWU District Committee and the Cork Regional Branch of the FUE.
The ITGWU also intended doing its bit, announcing that 17 of its Cork branches would take part in a march from the National Monument to County Hall in support of Raybestos on the day the County Council was meeting there to decide on planning permission.
(Members of the No. 6 Branch had previously visited the US Ambassador to reassure him following protests against Raybestos outside the American Embassy in Dublin by the Ovens  Women's Group.)
Raybestos also released a statement they had been authorized to make by Dr Selikoff, the world's pre-eminent expert on asbestos and director of cancer research at Mount Sinai Hospital, to the effect that asbestos did not need to be banned to protect society, if it was properly controlled.
Dr Selikoff had been listed by Dr Murray as among those who were politically motivated in the general controversy over the health effects of asbestos.
Meeting on the 28 February, the County Council voted 27 to 17 to grant planning permission.
Raybestos' trade union supporters pulled out all the stops.
The ITGWU and the Workers' Party organized a march of trade union members to picket the County Offices and then crowd the public gallery to watch the meeting, while dockers supporting the protest struck for a day, bringing work in the port to a halt and tying up seven ships.
Joining the workers in the public gallery were Ted Deane, Raybestos's managing director in Ireland and the corporation's international vice-president and European director, with their PR consultants.
The decision to grant permission did not come easily: the meeting lasted four and a half hours.
An open letter to the meeting by nine local doctors argued the factory would ‘unfortunately constitute a definite health hazard to the existing local population and in the long term to their children….
There is no safe atmospheric level of asbestos fibres universally accepted at the present time’.
Similarly Dr Jim O'Neill, a heart specialist who spoke for the objectors, said that there was no doubt that the factory would have an effect on the health of a small number of workers and local residents.
In response, Dr Robert Murray contended that there was ‘no medical reason why this plant should not go ahead’.
The IDA and the company were accused by Donal Creed TD, then Ireland's spokesperson on health and the environment at the European Parliament, of resorting to brainwashing and threatening tactics by declaring that Cork's industrial future was being jeopardized by the opposition, while Flor Crowley, TD, said the opposition would do Ireland more good than harm internationally and Councillor Martin Corry said the proposal was for ‘a cancer factory’ and should be ‘thrown out’.
Donal Creed TD pointed out it was not just the people in ‘the 30,000 houses, but people living in humble homes too’ who were concerned over asbestos.
Eileen Desmond TD and Deputy Murphy, both of the Labour Party, spoke for the project as did Councillor Joe Sherlock of the Workers' Party.
Tom Meaney TD (Fianna Fail) also supported the factory and said: ‘On our decision stands 2,000 jobs.
If we lose this factory, we will lose 10 other industries.
The credibility of the IDA will be gone.
I'm in favour of the factory going ahead’.
Ted Forde, RRA chairperson, said the RRA would appeal and said most of the council debate was  irrelevant to their concerns over the dump, as the debate had focused on the factory in Ovens.
In response to the decision the Ringaskiddy Residents Association (RRA) issued a plan of opposition:
Ringaskiddy Residents Association (incorporating Shanbally, Raffeen, Coolmore, Raheens, Barnahely and Loughbeg)
Having considered all the developments relating to the planning application for an asbestos waste dump at Barnahely, Ringaskiddy, Co.
Cork, we outline hereunder an Eight Point Programme to ensure that this is not imposed on the community.
1.
Any approval by Cork County Council will be appealed to the new Appeals Authority set up by the Minister for Local Government;
2.
Should approval be granted contrary to the majority decision of Cork County Council, section 4 of the Planning Act will be invoked;
3.
Ratepayers in the above areas will withhold payment of rates and we will recommend similar action to the many other communities who have publicly supported us;
4.
Pickets will be placed on Connolly Hall by trade union members resident in our areas whose wishes were not represented by the current action of the ITGWU;
5.
Pickets will also be placed on the IDA offices, the County Hall and premises of other bodies supporting the action;
6.
Contractors involved in the transport of the waste and the site excavation will also be picketed;
7.
In the event of any attempt to commence dumping we will recommend that the parents withdraw their children from the National Schools of Shanbally and Ringaskiddy, in view of the proximity of these schools to the site;
8.
We will take any further steps necessary to ensure that the wishes of the community will be complied with.
We trust common sense will prevail and that the Authorities will heed the massive number of bona fide objectors to the application.
On 3 March, some 250 people met in the Community Hall under the auspices of the RRA and approved the plan of opposition.
By that stage the RRA's opposition also had the support of Crosshaven, Currabinny and Carrigaline Community Associations, Cobh and Middleton Urban Councils and Passage West Town Commissioners.
At the end of March, however, An Taisce, Cork, decided not to object to the granting of planning permission.
On Friday 22 March, John Carroll of the ITGWU called for a sworn public inquiry into the possible health hazards of the Raybestos factory, though also saying Raybestos must be allowed to go ahead.
The ITGWU County Cork organizer, Hugh O'Callaghan, who had been a member of the workers' delegation to the US Ambassador, responded that he was convinced that the project would go ahead, though an inquiry might help to quell current concern.
An appeal against the decision of the County Council was lodged with An Bord Pleanala, and the hearing was set for June.
The IDA once again flew in another independent medical expert, Dr Muriel Newhouse of the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, who assured the planning inquiry that she would not object to an asbestos dump, such as the one proposed, being sited ‘at the bottom of her garden’.
Dr Tom McManus of the IIRS got up again to say that an assistant to Dr Selikoff at Mount Sinai had told him they were unable to associate any increase in asbestos-related disease to exposure below 100 nanograms, while 100,000 was considered tolerable in a factory!
Dr McManus agreed with the counsel for Crosshaven Community Association that a register of results from monitoring of companies operating in Ireland, including Raybestos, should be made available to interested groups.
Raybestos and the IDA shared the same legal representation at the hearing.
Also present were legal representatives of the RRA and for one of its individual members, Edward O'Callaghan, who lived nearest to the proposed dump.
The hearing revealed that Raybestos proposed to dump 400 lbs.
of asbestos in Barnahely per week.
The basis for the objections was that the RRA considered the site to be unsuitable and felt it was chosen by the IDA simply because the land was to hand.
Raybestos ruled out the possible compromise of a temporary permission to dump asbestos at the site.
Some three months later An Bord Pleanala granted planning permission for the dump, subject to 18 conditions.
This finally freed Raybestos to begin production, which they expected to start by the end of the month.
(Raybestos' planning permission for the factory was conditional on having an available and operating dump.)
The media reported that the delay had cost Raybestos £500,000 and that the losses of market possibilities due to the slow start-up meant that Raybestos would not immediately be providing the 110 jobs originally promised.
The local residents were bitterly disappointed with the decision.
They threatened to withdraw their 186 children from the Ringaskiddy and Shanbally national schools.
They continued to argue that the Barnahely site was unsuitable, because it is water-logged and, during the winter, even flooded.
The RRA was very doubtful of the adequacy  of stringent planning conditions in restraining companies' operations in view of their own experience with other companies.
The residents also released copies of a letter from Raybestos's managing director, Ted Deane, to the IDA which cast doubt on Mr Deane's public assertion that the reason Raybestos had abandoned the Knockanemore dump was to improve community relations, implying the real reason was that the owner had changed his mind about selling the site.
According to a letter from Mr Deane to Mr Killeen (dated 3 August 1976) Deane wrote that the owner of the site had ‘changed his mind’ leaving the company ‘in the highly vulnerable position of an objector reporting publicly that we are filing on site owned by a man who has no intention of letting us use it’.
The campaign had already cost the locals £2,000 and a fighting fund was started to enable them to take a High Court case if necessary.
It must have seriously worried both Raybestos and the IDA that this letter was provided by a source inside the factory.
Local residents also placed a skull and crossbones sign on the gate leading to the dump site with the slogan ‘This site is a graveyard for the children of Ringaskiddy’.
At the end of the month, Raybestos and the IDA applied for a temporary injunction to prevent Michael Lenihan of Ringaskiddy, and anyone acting on his behalf, from picketing the dump site.
Thomas Linehan of the IDA stated in court that a fencing contractor had been warned by pickets at the dump, one carrying a sign reading ‘We want justice not asbestos’, not to go on the site or there would be trouble.
The IDA's Mr Linehan said the men said they were members of the RRA and that there could be 300 people blocking the site within two minutes.
Mr Linehan (of the IDA) said the men said they ‘would welcome confrontation, even of the physical variety’.
Sergeant Murphy and four accompanying gardai then took the men's names and addresses.
The contractor's men refused to pass the picket or go onto the site until the issue was peacefully settled.
In response to the injunction, residents of Barnahely maintained their 24-hour watch on the site and members of the picket refused to accept copies of the injunction issued against them.
The struggle in Ovens intensified again in November when over 200 people picketed the factory there.
Carrying pickets reading ‘Asbestos kills’ and ‘No Surrender’, the protestors picketed the main road from eight to eleven o clock.
Mrs Rosemary Cubitt of the Ovens Women's Action Group said ‘Our demonstration is more to alert public opinion than to block the entrance.
This is not an attempt to stop production  at the factory’.
Pressure continued on the community to end its resistance, with Raybestos claiming it had lost orders of £1 million in the past six months alone and another source claiming the company was suffering from a ‘crisis of consumer confidence’.
Thus the financial health of the company seemed to be of more importance than the community's concern over the health of its children.
Two days later another legal struggle by the Ovens residents failed when the High Court refused an injunction to Patrick J. McFadden, a pharmaceutical representative of Beverley, Ovens, to stop Raybestos Manhattan carrying out any process using asbestos.
Four days later, Raybestos' managing director, Ted Deane, accompanied by 12 gardai, met a human barrier of some 60 men, women and children when he attempted to gain access to the Barnahely dump, all of whom refused to accept copies of the interlocutory injunction.
When the protestors refused to move, gardai took the names and addresses of the protestors.
The tension increased further on 16 November when the IDA issued a warning that those picketing the dump could face jail for defying the High Court injunction.
The IDA threatened to return to the High Court with a list of names of those defying the injunction.
The statement emphasized that the IDA and Raybestos Manhattan were operating jointly in this matter.
The following month negotiations between the residents and the IDA led to a compromise, allowing interim dumping at Barnahely until an alternative permanent dump site was found.
By May 1979, when Raybestos made its first attempt to dump at Barnahely, the site was blocked by residents and the compromise had apparently failed.
On Monday 15 May, however, Raybestos' second attempt was successful when 25 gardai brutally forced a way through a human barrier of women and children to allow Raybestos's waste onto the site.
Some 200 protestors, including 80 schoolchildren between the ages of seven and twelve, had assembled at the site to block the dumping.
Local people were amazed at the violence of the gardai.
Nine people were treated in hospital and one ten-year-old child was detained overnight.
The RRA's chairperson, Ted Forde, commented ‘It's clear now we live in a police state’.
The local newspaper reported:
The confrontation was extremely violent, reminiscent of a street battle in Derry or Belfast, and introduced an ugly new element to the asbestos row.
Children were knocked to the ground, screaming and crying as the guards broke through the picket line.
Women who were knocked down later said  they were punched and kicked by gardai.
A man on a crutch was thrown to the ground.
Other men engaged in close hand-to-hand scuffles with the gardai…
A big rock was thrown by a man at the front of Mr Deane's Mercedes.
It shattered the window but the glass held and he escaped injury.
Mr Deane was quoted in the local paper describing the incident as ‘an awful shock.
Not so much the opposition — what shook me up was to see children being used in the front line by protestors.
They are being taught by their parents to defy the law of the country’.
When Mr Deane eventually left Ireland later in 1978 he confided to the Cork Examiner that the decision to have violent confrontation at Barnahely was not made by him: ‘That morning was handled on the advice of other people.
Being a foreigner, I felt I should take that advice.’
Deane refused to disclose who these ‘other people’ were.
Mr Deane also received important and heartening gestures of public support from locals the following day.
‘The morning after the dump confrontation when I felt very shaky and was very low, the phone rang a dozen times and friends and members of other organizations told me ‘You had to do it, Ted.
We understand'’.
Mr Deane was not the only one shocked at the treatment of the children.
Speaking at a meeting attended by some 400 people in the local village hall that continued for two and a half hours local primary teacher Donal O'Connor said children should not be used in future protests.
‘Children have been used up to this because we felt it showed a non-violent style.’
Residents of other areas, all opposed to the dump, such as Carrigaline, Crosshaven and Naad/Lyre attended the meeting to show their support.
An action committee over 20 strong was elected at the meeting to decide further action.
The committee, which previously had consisted 80 per cent of women, was dramatically changed.
As the committee sat down to meet, the call went out for women to leave the hall, and the male members of the committee to remain.
The results of the change in gender were immediately obvious.
That night the main gate of the dump was destroyed, the chain link fence around it torn down and the concrete posts lining the entrance to the dump smashed.
That day Raybestos had succeeded in dumping some 100 bags of waste.
Some 30 sacks were taken by six cars to the factory 25 miles away and thrown into it over the main gate at three o'clock in the morning.
Other bags of the waste were thrown about the entrance to the dump.
Women residents continued  to picket the dump and denied all knowledge of the overnight incidents.
The previous day also the factory was evacuated after a bomb scare.
The following day the Irish Times headlined the company's intention to remain in Ireland, giving it more prominence than a Cabinet statement.
James McLoughlin, a senior vice-president with Raybestos Manhattan in the US, said they saw the scenes at the dump site as simply another obstacle on their rocky road to success in Ireland.
While admitting that the US company's board had discussed winding up the Irish operation a number of times, he emphasized his gratitude and that of the board for the help and co-operation received from the Irish government and the IDA.
The Cabinet statement, relegated to the article's last three paragraphs, deplored breaches of the law in Ringaskiddy and stated ‘It is the wish of the government that this factory will continue to operate’.
It softened the blow to local people however by emphasizing that the Ringaskiddy dump was only a temporary solution: ‘The dump at Ringaskiddy is, as has already been made clear and accepted, simply a short-term temporary dump’.
The next day the Irish Times reported that 711 ex-workers of Raybestos Manhattan in New Jersey in the US were sueing the company and its asbestos supplier, Johns Manville, for $2 million each in workers' compensation and punitive damages awards.
One year after the New Jersey factory closed, Raybestos Manhattan began talks with the IDA about setting up in Ireland, but a senior Raybestos Manhattan vice-president ‘categorically denied’ any connection between the two events.
Following the violent confrontation the dump was closed.
The IDA and the residents began negotiations again which resulted in another agreement to allow the short term use of the dump.
The agreement included the arrangement that a local resident should supervise and inspect all dumping operations.
But in the end the resident was only allowed to inspect the security of the chain link fence around the dump.
One local resident explained the factors behind the agreement:
The agreement when it was signed was full of loopholes.
First people really believed that it was going to be a temporary dump.
A public meeting in Ringaskiddy heard Gannon say that it would be ‘a matter of months, not a year’.
‘I suppose people were afraid too.
We'd fought hard all day and night guarding the dump and the weather wasn't too good to us either.
People offered us support, financial and whatnot, but we needed physical support, we're a very small community and in a way we were left on our own.
The crunch came when they moved in the police.
People didn't expect such violence and brutality.
The women and the kids had been really badly beaten.
One child was flung over the eight foot fence and he was in and out of hospital four times.
Another child's teeth were knocked in.
The County Council had given permission for a 70 acre toxic waste dump in Ringaskiddy on part of the 1000 acres owned by the IDA — there was that threat over people's heads.
Part of the agreement was that if we accepted the asbestos waste temporarily, there would never be a toxic waste dump in the Monkstown parish.
But we realized later that for the IDA and the county council the dump was there to stay till they found another.’
While the agreement with the Ringaskiddy residents that they would allow interim dumping of Raybestos' waste in return for a future advance factory provided a short-term solution for the current crisis, a final solution was needed for the toxic waste produced in Cork.
Thus began a desperate search for a toxic dump site for County Cork, with each move the County Council made resulting in the mushrooming of local opposition.
In May 1978 the County Council began carrying out a technical feasibility study on a section of state forest in the Boggeragh Mountains between Rylane and Nadd, in the townland of Annagannihy.
The 35-acre site had been offered to the council by the Department of Forestry on 16 December 1977.
The area was highly unsuitable as it was considered a watershed for the Lee Valley.
Residents therefore argued that the proposed dump threatened not only their locality but that contamination from the dump could affect Cork city's water supply.
Why then was such an unsuitable site being considered?
One local resident commented at the time, ‘Possibly this area may have been picked because they think they might meet least resistance from a depopulated area’.
This reasoning was immediately undermined by the local community's decision to resist any dump.
The local principal teacher, Jerry Keating, said ‘We'll make a fair effort at stopping them.
After we heard the rumours we organised a meeting of the local community.
There was almost 100 per cent attendance and we found that everybody was anti-dump — and vehemently so’.
The local residents formed a committee to oppose the dump.
Its secretary was Dr Susan Alwyin, a medical biochemist, who argued that the bogland's acidic properties would undermine the usefulness of the proposed pelletizing process for the asbestos waste.
Local residents who gathered at the site of the testing were assured by County Engineer  Liam Mullins that nothing would go ahead until a full meeting of the County Council discussed the matter.
They were less reassured when he also let it be known that Annagannihy was not being considered only as an ‘asbestos-related dump, but that other forms of dumping might take place’.
The further search for a dump for both Raybestos's asbestos waste and County Cork's toxic waste will be dealt with in the following chapter.
May 1978 came to an end with yet further controversy over Raybestos's asbestos dumping.
Allegations this time centred on the Cork Corporation municipal dump on the Kinsale Road in Cork city.
Members of the Ovens Action Group (OAG) claimed that they had followed a dumping truck from the Raybestos factory to the city dump, where the company had permission to dump non-toxic waste.
OAG members examined the dumped waste, suspecting that Raybestos was dumping asbestos waste there while being prevented from dumping in Ringaskiddy, and sent some of it for analysis to London.
Dr Martin Brewer of the Institute of Geological Sciences in Britain reported that the material he had been sent did in fact cont–in asbestos.
The story is well told in two affidavits sworn by members of the OAG:
‘We (named), the undersigned, swear on oath that on April 22nd last, we followed a waste disposal truck from the Raybestos Manhattan factory at Ovens, Co.
Cork, to the Kinsale Road dump, Cork.
At the dump, we took two yellow bags which had been left by the truck and put them in the boot of a car.
We subsequently brought the bags to Grange, Co.
Cork, where another member of the Ovens Action Group collected them’
‘I (named), the undersigned, swear on oath that I collected two yellow bags containing waste material from a friend's house at Grange, Co.
Cork, on April 22nd, 1978.
The bags contained dust, asbestos-like scraps of waste and envelopes bearing the name Raybestos Manhattan.
I sent two samples, one of dust particles, the other a piece of waste I believed to be asbestos, to Dr Martin Brewer in London for examination.
The latter sample is the same as that since confirmed by Dr Brewer as being asbestos.’
Raybestos continued to deny that the asbestos came from their Ovens factory.
The County Council dismissed the charges, saying both the Corporation and the IIRS were making routine checks on Raybestos Manhattan's waste and there had never been evidence of asbestos in the consignments that had been checked.
Eamonn Dalton, Chief City Engineer, ‘said it could be argued that the Ovens claim was not based on objective evidence in that the samples said to have been taken at the dump had been handled, transmitted and analysed in all cases presumably by people with a particular interest in one  aspect of the  case.
By contrast the Corporation's sampling was objective and carried out by people who were truly independent’.
In November 1978 Rory Finegan, conducting his own case, challenged the planning permission for the Barnahely dump site before the High Court.
The case went to the Supreme Court, which found against Rory Finegan at the end of July 1979.
Unfortunately for Rory Finegan it also allowed costs to An Bord Pleanala, the IDA and Raybestos Manhattan, estimated at £10,000.
Rory Finegan was reported to be considering going to the European Court.
One element of his appeal related to the right to be heard in an oral planning hearing.
The 1962 Planning Act upheld the right of any applicant to have their case heard at an oral hearing, but the 1976 Planning Act made this a discretionary matter for An Bord Pleanala to decide.
The opposition to Raybestos then appeared to die down for the following year, only to return with a vengeance in 1980.
When the factory started up the women's group dissipated.
‘It was one thing to challenge it before it set up and another thing once they'd got going’, a member said.
Looking back on the community's experience of opposition, she reflected ‘If we had got going earlier, and got support from all the locals, if we hadn't waffled for ages, and demonstrated properly, and been more vocal — we had difficulty raising money, we just couldn't raise money — we would have made an impact.
When the objections became fashionable (i.e. around the time of the Bord Pleanala hearing) more people became involved.
People were slow to come out and if these people had made a concerted effort in the beginning it might have been different’.
In April 1980 the first attack on Raybestos came yet again from the Ringaskiddy residents.
While the agreement between the IDA and the Ringaskiddy residents over interim storage seemed to settle the dumping issue, the residents had accepted the agreement only after they had been physically attacked by the forces of the state, and the resources and energy of the community had been exhausted.
Their naivety in believing the IDA's promise that the dumping would only be short-term soon became apparent as other communities resisted proposed dumping in their areas and the Nohoval farmers began their long and eventually successful campaign in the courts.
The RRA monitored the dumping operation, however, and on April Fools Day 1980 Michael Linehan of the RRA announced that he had found exposed sacks of asbestos waste at the Barnahely dump.
He employed a professional photographer to photograph the bags  and other serious irregularities in the dumping: these included reject brake pads lying exposed on the site, as well as a container which still contained substantial amounts of asbestos.
Having documented the problem, Mr Linehan brought other members of the RRA to the site and contacted County Council and Raybestos Manhattan officials.
The following day the IDA advised Raybestos to cease dumping in Ringaskiddy for the moment.
The company began storing the waste at its factory site.
On 3 April, Raybestos denied in a statement that any irregularities had taken place: ‘The condition of the waste disposal site has been checked frequently by the proper authorities, Cork County Council and the IIRS.
They have been fully satisfied that the site was being operated to the highest standards.
Monitoring results have confirmed that everything is in order’.
The Chief Environmental Officer for County Cork, Liam Mullins, refused to travel to Ringaskiddy to meet the residents ‘to be harangued’ but said he was prepared to meet the residents to discuss the alleged irregularities: ‘I am quite willing to meet the residents for talks.
It is obvious that we should have talks but I am not willing to be told that the talks can only take place at one location and I am not willing to accept an invitation to a slanging match.
I want a sensible venue and a sensible discussion’.
Mr Mullins said Raybestos' record was ‘excellent as far as the County Council is concerned’.
One day later the Ringaskiddy residents announced that they intended going to the High Court to seek an order enforcing the asbestos dumping regulations.
The Association's solicitor, Charles Hennessy, pointed out that they contemplated taking proceedings ‘under the Local Government Planning and Development Act, 1976, which states that the High Court may, on application from any person, by order, prohibit the continuance of an unauthorized use of land when a breach of the planning conditions occur’.
The RRA also intended to meet County Council officials.
As a result of these meetings early in June Cork County Council began steps to take legal proceedings against Raybestos for the violation of the dumping regulations.
In return for the council taking proceedings against the company the residents deferred their own legal action and allowed the dump to re-open.
On 9 June, in a hearing before the High Court, new safety procedures were agreed by both Raybestos and Cork County Council.
These new procedures were drawn up by the company itself, according to the council's senior counsel.
Included in these procedures were the keeping of a log book of each container load of waste, notification  of the County Council, in advance of the dumping schedule so that officials could inspect dumping operations and a prohibition on containers, empty or full, being left overnight on the dumping site.
Raybestos was found by the High Court to have violated six conditions of its planning permission.
According to Leonard, ‘Although Raybestos officials claimed that they were strictly observing all agreed upon dumping procedures, on-site inspection provided clear evidence to the contrary.
Asbestos pellets and waste brake pads were strewn about the site unburied and a large waste bin left on the site was covered with substantial quantities of asbestos dust’.
The court heard that when the Deputy County Engineer inspected the dump site on 15 April, he found four bags of pelleted asbestos exposed on the site, pellets scattered on part of the site and for 70 yards along the access road and one pellet at the entrance gate to the site.
While this company-suggested compromise seemed likely to settle the waste issue for the immediate future, another threat to Raybestos' operations had entered the scene the previous month, a threat that was finally to end Raybestos's operations in Ireland.
While Raybestos had succeeded in carrying on despite the intense opposition of two communities, it was unable to survive the actions of its own workers fighting the hazards of asbestos at the point of production.
Little problem had been expected from that workforce: it was young, unorganized and naive.
There were no older workers in the factory and therefore no tradition of workplace organization and militancy for the workforce to call on.
‘A key factor to the defeat of Raybestos Manhattan lay in convincing workers of the dangers to their lives from their working conditions.
Raybestos lost the war when their workers refused to believe them any longer.’
The key here lay in the provision of information on the occupational hazards of asbestos to the Raybestos Manhattan workers.
This information did not come from the communities: the residents had few if any contacts with the workers.
Given their portrayal by trade unionists as rich members of the bourgeouisie who were concerned only over the value of their property, they did not expect a sympathetic reception from workers.
The information came from a political group that was an offshoot of the anti-nuclear movement.
When a spill of asbestos occurred shortly before 3 a.m. on Tuesday 27 May, workers stopped work immediately.
A meeting of the workers was called in the locker room by the shop steward at which it  was decided that no one would return to the contaminated area.
Management then asked the workers to leave the premises and pickets were placed by the 27 night-shift workers.
The pickets were not passed by the 30 workers arriving for the morning shift.
A spokesperson for the workers said the dust was so thick in the air it could be seen: ‘This is not the first time this had occurred.
It has happened on four or five other occasions’.
On Tuesday morning, management met with ITGWU officials.
The officials asked the workers to lift the pickets, which they did.
The afternoon shift, however, refused to go into work.
A mass meeting of the Raybestos workers was then held at which workers agreed to return to work after being assured by union representatives that a safety investigation would take place at the factory and the findings would be made available as a precondition for a return to work.
A Department of Labour inspector visited the factory on 28 May.
According to Raybestos the inspector spent the day in the factory ‘giving it a top to bottom going over’.
The company also described the spillage as a minor one, and said that ten days previously an IIRS monitoring test had found emission levels from the factory to be satisfactory.
A further meeting between management and union was promised over issues still outstanding such as the pay lost by the workers while they were on strike.
This militancy on the part of the workers did not spring from nowhere.
Working conditions at the factory were claimed to be atrocious.
According to one worker:
This wasn't the first time the pin in the tower blew out, it used to happen one in every six mixes.
Safety is a joke…some men don't have dust-proof overalls.
They work in ordinary blue boiler suit things…
There's a poster beside one of the machines —‘DON'T DISREGARD — REPLACE THE GUARD’, it says…you have to laugh — there are no guards, they were taken off the machines to up the production, they only put them on when the big bosses are coming over from the States to inspect the place — the place really gets cleaned up then.
Two men nearly lost their fingers with the grinding machine.
You can't wear gloves — there is no grip…there is so much dust around the grinding machines — one of them caught fire five times during the past three months…then there is a fellow going around with a bottle of water.
That is supposed to be the sprinkler system for wetting down the dust.
The dust is diabolical — at one stage you could be fired for using a sweeping brush and not a vacuum.
Now it's all brushes.
Two weeks ago we were given hand brushes to dust the machines in front of us.
Another thing is the heat — the temperature at the presses is around 150 degrees…you just couldn't wear a mask there.
A member of the Cork Noxious Industry Action Group (CNIAG) described the working conditions as follows: ‘Blue overalls, no hairnets, they didn't shower before they left work.
They went from the workplace into the canteen, they sat and opened their lunchboxes in their working clothes.
They went home in the evening…and they didn't  necessarily wash when they went home either.
So whatever fibres were flying around they would have been carrying’.
Still the previous spills of asbestos in the factory had not led to any action by the workers.
The main reason for this was that neither management nor the union had gone out of their way to provide workers with information on the hazards of asbestos.
Prior to the spill in May, however, the workers were provided with information on the hazards of asbestos by the Cork Noxious Industry Action Group (CNIAG) a group organized by political and ecological activists drawn mainly from the anti-nuclear movement.
This group distributed leaflets to the Raybestos workers warning of the dangers posed by exposure to asbestos, leafleting both in the morning and the evening to catch the different shifts.
The CNIAG later took part in discussions with the Raybestos workers and continued to share information with the workers by producing a series of leaflets on the hazards of asbestos and on the need for workers to organize autonomously from the trade union in order to defend their health and safety.
CNIAG was a group formed mainly by activists within the antinuclear movement who wished to extend the opposition to nuclear power to other toxic process industries and who had organized several workshops on toxic industry and toxic dumping at the Second Anti-Nuclear Power Show at Carnsore, Co.
Wexford in 1979.
This group, as well as the anti-nuclear movement itself, was strongly influenced by members of Revolutionary Struggle, an extreme left-wing group which mixed neo-Marxist economic analysis with traditional republican ideology and was strongly influenced itself by the revolutionary movement in Italy and, to a lesser extent, France, at the time.
There were also anarchist influences within the movement generally and in its anti-toxic outgrowth.
Membership of CNIAG overlapped with that of the Cork Anti-Nuclear Group (CAN).
‘CAN and CNIAG had no formal membership, no executive or committee structures, no elected secretary, treasurer or chairperson.
Members were free to engage in any activities, whether using the name of the group or autonomously, and to adopt any tactic (violent or otherwise) as they saw fit.
The only condition was that those involved opposed nuclear power (CAN) or toxic industry (CNIAG), terms loosely defined.’
The combination of this group of activists with either the residents or the workers was likely to raise questions on the continued operation of the factory, rather than demands for it to be operated safely, as the activists refused to accept that it was possible to work safely with asbestos or other toxic substances, following their similar rebuttal of threshold limits for exposure to radiation in the anti-nuclear movement.
The residents' associations were not the type of organization that would welcome such an alliance.
The workers, placed in a situation where they could trust neither management nor union, entered into an uneasy alliance with the group, engaging in a series of discussions and meetings over the summer of 1980.
The issue erupted again when asbestos spilled in the factory over the first weekend in June and Raybestos management announced it had closed down that section of the factory.
On Friday 6 June night shift workers again took unofficial action when a mixed material containing asbestos dust spilled.
Raybestos made the factory available for reopening the following Monday, and, though no pickets were placed, the workers did not come into work.
Management offered to pay the workers for the lost days if they returned to work by Wednesday morning, but at a mass meeting on Tuesday 10 June workers voted 48 to 10 against resuming work and rejecting settlement proposals worked out between management and the union until they had seen a report from the  Department of Labour Factory Inspectorate.
Workers eventually returned to work on Monday 16 June, having accepted as satisfactory a Department of Labour Inspectorate report at a meeting over the weekend.
However, Raybestos Manhattan had had enough.
With the prospect of continuing struggles with the factory workers over the safety conditions in the factory, and with a highly suspicious community monitoring its dumping operations, the company could afford no further mistakes.
The County Council had also now to increase its monitoring of dumping operations in response to community concerns.
On 22 October 1980 Gabriel Ferrucci, president of Raybestos Manhattan's international division, flew into Cork to appear at a joint press conference with IDA at which the company announced its intention to pull out of Ireland.
Mr Ferrucci denied that the continued dispute over the safety of asbestos had any part in the company's decision to close the factory, though he admitted that the environmental difficulties experienced were ‘more severe’ than Raybestos had expected, and no other Raybestos Manhattan factories were being closed down.
Mr Ferrucci  blamed the closure on the severe depression in the US market for brake disc pads.
He also admitted that the initial delay in bringing the factory on stream had lost Raybestos Manhattan a market opportunity in Europe.
Nevertheless he dismissed the residents' protests as mere ‘inconveniences’ and insisted ‘The closure of our Cork plant is in no way a reflection on our workforce, on the IDA, nor the Irish government which extended all possible facilities to our corporation in the difficult times we experienced.
Notwithstanding the difficulties we encountered our experience in Ireland has been positive’.
Others were less sanguine.
John Keegan of the IDA Automotive and Engineering Department said the lesson of the Raybestos Manhattan affair was that, while the people of Ireland supported the IDA, the same people ‘were not prepared to see an industry right on their doorstep’.
Other lessons were drawn by the opposition.
The Raybestos struggle was important as the only struggle in which both workers and community activists were involved, though not, unfortunately, in alliance with each other.
The struggle highlighted again the problems posed by the divisions between the community and the workers, while the role of the trade union was also highly criticized.
Locally the struggle was seen as a defeat, with the workers reportedly being blacklisted for their efforts to defend their safety and health, and the communities at both Ovens and Ringaskiddy having being defeated despite their strong opposition.
Nationally it showed how far the state was prepared to go to force an industry on a recalcitrant community and how, when a choice existed between the interests of foreign capital and the health and safety of both community members and workers, the state and its various organizations defended and protected the multinational.
As a final ironic footnote, in August 1982, after the showing of a documentary on Yorkshire television on the hazards of asbestos, Liam Beecher of the ITGWU, one of the officials involved in the Raybestos controversy, expressed concern over the effect on the health of the Raybestos workers of their exposure to asbestos in the factory and called for regular monitoring of the health of the 130 people who had worked in the Raybestos Manhattan factory.