

‘I foresee no problems.
You seem to be in excellent health.’
‘Thank you.’
Celia's initial examination by her gynaecologist was over.
‘Because you are in your thirties, I will arrange for you to have an amniocentesis test, but only as a matter of course.’
‘Thank you,’ she said again, while the thought came to her, unbidden, horrifying and wicked, yet it would not go away: If the result of this amnio-whatever test is adverse, if there is something wrong with the foetus, then I could have an abortion with a clear conscience.
Hating herself, she sat facing this kindly man over the top of his tidy well-appointed desk.
On the mantelshelf behind him there was a photograph of a pretty, smiling, dark-haired woman, a boy of about ten and a girl a few years younger.
His wife and children, presumably.
It was all very normal, very orthodox, so different from what Celia herself happened to be feeling.
The sensation of being processed, on a conveyor belt, was stronger than ever.
‘I think we might reckon on early November, but at this stage I wouldn't be too dogmatic.
Babies like to dictate their own time, and why shouldn't they?’
Why shouldn't they, indeed.
‘Of course,’ was all she replied.
He regarded her a little more closely.
‘You mentioned that you would like to continue working during your pregnancy.’
‘Yes.’
‘Well, I suggest you give up about the beginning of September.
You'll be wanting to take things a bit more easily by then, I dare say.
Suppose you come and see  me again at the beginning of April.
Perhaps you would like to make an appointment with my secretary on the way out.’
‘Thank you.’
They said goodbye and she felt she had let him down, that her unresponsiveness had been noted but not commented upon.
Once back in her office, she tried to work on the promotion of Hindley Foster's book, but found she was unable to concentrate.
She knew she ought to get a piece about him in a national newspaper.
She reached for her telephone and dialled the number of a journalist friend, unaccountably irritated at being told that he was not available.
The visit to her doctor, however straightforward physically, had upset her considerably and disrupted her whole afternoon.
At four o'clock, she told her new secretary that she was going home.
‘The letters, Miss Carrow?’ the girl said, in some surprise.
‘I'll sign them tomorrow,’ she answered, picking up her coat and handbag.
She was amazed how much easier the tube journey to Mornington Crescent was at this time of the day.
Alone in the house, she wandered about restlessly.
On the top floor she stood looking out of the dormer windows across the London skyline, and then downwards through the burgeoning green tracery of sycamore trees to where daffodils were blooming and a woman and a child were feeding some pigeons.
Normally, she liked this time of year.
There was anticipation about it.
By rights, she knew she ought to be feeling extra anticipation now.
She was going along with nature, wasn't she?
It was all perfectly natural, or should have been.
The woman with the child began to move away.
Celia wondered if she was a mother or a nanny or maybe a grandmother.
It was difficult to tell from this distance.
But they had made a pleasant enough scene, one with which she felt she ought to be able to identify.
Yet it filled her with apprehension.
It was impossible to imagine herself standing about patiently feeding pigeons with a toddler beside her.
She would be bored to distraction.
She was  simply wrong for the job she had been obliged to undertake.
Ever since her teens she had sensed such shortcomings in herself, but had shied away from any kind of self-analysis.
She began thinking about the possibility of at last talking to some other female about it all — not Alison, because she was the maternal type — but perhaps a professional.
It would, of course, have to be without Brian knowing.
He had always been so scathing about psychiatrists and psychotherapists, emphatic that she was normal, that she would be just like any other mother once she had a child of her own.
He was still sure.
Like her gynaecologist, he could foresee no problems.
And thinking of her gynaecologist, surely such a step could not be taken without his sanction and the idea of asking for this seemed out of the question.
Desperately, she turned back towards the room and tried to apply her mind to more practical matters.
It could, she supposed, be made suitable for a nanny, but the nursery would have to be one floor below in what was their present spare room with the extra bathroom.
Nanny and baby could both be accommodated there for a while.
But for how long?
And what would happen on nanny's nights off?
Would she, Celia, then find herself relegated to the nursery?
What a ridiculous house for this sort of caper.
Full of stairs and small rooms on each floor and no garden to speak of, only a kind of paved area leading off the basement kitchen which rarely got any sun.
It had seemed perfectly all right for a working married couple, but now they were to be invaded.
The set-up had changed.
Their home alone would give Brian every justification for moving.
But where?
She had been waiting for him to bring up the subject and was not surprised when he did so that very evening, although not, as she had anticipated, because of the eminently satisfactory report from her gynaecologist but for another reason altogether.
‘Alex is thinking of putting his flat on the market.’
She frowned.
Alex was an older colleague, a chest specialist, who kept a small pied-à-terre at the top of  the house in Harley Street where Brian had his consulting rooms.
‘He's retiring,’ he went on.
‘Going to live permanently in Sussex.’
‘Oh.’
‘He asked me if I wanted it.
I felt…well, the offer couldn't have come at a more opportune time, could it?’
She knew, of course, what her husband was getting at but, perversely, she did not help him out.
Then she said after a small silence, ‘Alex's flat is too minute for two.’
This time it was he who frowned, but said nothing.
Quickly, she added, ‘I mean, if you're still wanting a place in the country, it would be far too small for us both during the week.’
‘You're intending to keep on at Brentwoods then, after the birth?’
His voice was quiet, controlled, but there was an edge to it.
‘Yes.
I agree that where we're living at the moment doesn't exactly lend itself to being a family home.
I've been considering the problem this afternoon.
I'd be willing to move out to, say, Richmond.
Somewhere like that.’
‘And commute?’
‘Yes.’
‘I don't much fancy that kind of daily journey.
Richmond's all right, but it's not a village, Celia.
Not really country.
Don't you think it would be better to belong somewhere?
More like Alison and Geoffrey?’
‘I don't see how we would belong.
We'd be country weekenders.’
‘I was intending to spend at least one night mid-week at home.’
‘Oh I see.’
She got up and went down to the kitchen to start getting their dinner.
It was one of the evenings when Mrs Bennett, having left everything ready to be heated, was not returning, especially as Celia's feeling of nausea at this time of the day had more or less disappeared.
She could hear Brian  moving about in his study overhead.
In all the years they had been married, she could not remember quite such serious conflict.
During the meal, as if by mutual consent, they talked of other things, but it was difficult.
Towards the end she watched him peel an apple with deliberate care.
Then he looked up and said, ‘Celia, you don't want to remain at Brentwoods for ever, do you, to have our child turn to some third party for its emotional and creature comforts, to get the odd pat on the head from a parent at six o'clock of an evening?
Not even that if you were in London five days a week.’
‘Brian, I'm sorry.
Terribly sorry.’
His gaze was unnerving.
She looked away.
‘I hate the thought of being in the country, stuck,’ she added, lamely.
‘But you wouldn't be stuck.
We'd have help, naturally, and with the baby.
But you can't tell me that you'd be happy remaining in London, not in charge, not being around to see everything was all right.’
She wanted to say, ‘I'd be more than happy to leave it to the experts.’
Instead, she said, ‘I'm sure someone else would do the job far better than I.’
‘I know it may seem a trite remark,’ he answered, slowly, and there was a harshness in his voice she had never heard before, ‘but mothers usually know best.’
‘Mine didn't,’ she replied, defensively.
‘You hardly knew your mother, by all accounts.’
‘No.
I have no role model, if that's what you mean.
But I did warn you, Brian, right at the beginning.
If you're so keen on procreation, why in God's name didn't you marry Alison?
She told me when we were staying there that she'd been trying to conceive ever since her wedding.’
She was crying now.
Tears seemed to come very easily these days.
It was the worst row they had ever had.
She could not believe she had rounded on him in the way she had.
That jibe about Alison was mean and contemptible.
It was the worst thing she had ever said to him, but it had come out unpremeditated and could not be unsaid.
For answer, he got up and put his arms round her.
‘I didn't marry Alison,’ he answered, ‘because Alison isn't you.’
He had always been able to defuse a potentially explosive situation.
Hillmarden House was situated on a small knoll just outside the village of Hillmarden itself.
It was not in any way grand: simply a solid nineteenth-century country residence with a small courtyard and a pleasant garden sloping down to the river; the sort of place, Celia reckoned, which had been built for a man of some substance: a prosperous merchant or, more likely, a gentleman farmer, the land having been incorporated into the nearby estate.
At the back there was a long low out-building, described, somewhat euphemistically, as the Dairy or Daye House, for which planning permission to convert into living quarters had been granted to the vendors, but never actually acted upon.
The nearest railway station was only six miles away, London only thirty-five.
Celia could see at once that the place had distinct possibilities.
She and Brian went to view the property on a particularly promising April day: blossom in the apple trees, undulating green downs in the background and puffs of white clouds scudding across the blue overhead.
So much pie in the sky, she remembered thinking later.
What was it Granny Tremayne used to say?
Always try to see a prospective home in the depths of winter.
Then you know the worst to expect.
But that Saturday, feeling now surprisingly fit and with Brian's enthusiastic encouragement, she could not help admitting while they were having lunch at the village pub afterwards that it was nice.
‘Much nicer than I expected from the particulars,’ she added.
Since that fraught evening over a month ago, Celia had had a certain change of heart.
It was not that she felt any differently about motherhood.
She still did not want a baby, but she knew how much she did want and need her husband.
The amniocentesis test had proved everything  was normal and she had done her best to push into the background the treacherous thoughts about it which had assailed her on her first visit to the gynaecologist.
She had come to the conclusion that if giving up Brentwoods and moving to the country was what Brian wanted, then perhaps she ought to go along with it, stop being selfish.
Leopards might never be able to change their spots completely, but she was willing to try to get rid of a few of her more unattractive ones.
She knew she had will-power when she chose to exercise it and she was still conscience-stricken over her outburst regarding Alison.
The acquisition of Hillmarden House and Alex's flat, plus the sale of their existing home, made her decide to give up work in June, rather than September.
There was more than enough to see to, domestically.
There was also, besides preparations for the baby, the question — and Brian was as intent about this as she was — of finding a monthly maternity nurse and a suitable permanent nanny to take on after she left.
Rather to her surprise, that July Celia received a letter from her late grandmother's one-time employee, then Edna Rafferty but now Mrs Porritt, the widow of a local builder.
Apart from Granny Tremayne, Edna had been the only other permanent reliable character in Celia's youth.
Her senior by fourteen years, she had been a splendid nursemaid and even after marriage, while rearing her own family, Edna had still managed to do part-time cleaning and a weekly wash in the Tremayne household.
With her ready compassion and cheerful good humour, she had provided much that was lacking in Celia's circumscribed upbringing.
It was Edna who had actually imparted to her the facts of life, Edna who had accurately predicted how long each governess would last, Edna who had vowed she would name her first daughter after Celia — and kept her promise.
Yet over one thing Edna had remained consistently reticent.
However much she was questioned, Edna had shut up shop, as it were, whenever Celia mentioned her mother.
Once, in exasperation, Celia had said, ‘But you  must remember her, Edna.
You were here before she died.’
And Edna, banging her iron down on the cloth on the kitchen table, had replied, ‘It was a long time ago, Miss Celia.
A body forgets.’
’ But what happened ?’
Celia had persisted.
‘Surely she didn't bathe alone at the Cove, especially at that time of the year?’
’ I can't rightly say,’came the guarded response.
‘Now, suppose you go and fetch them things off the line.’
And Celia had gone, angrily and unwillingly, to obey her request.
Today, what seemed like a lifetime later, Celia opened the envelope addressed in Edna's large well-known scrawl and wondered exactly what had prompted her to get in touch.
Edna had never been much of a letter writer, preferring to send illustrated cards with emotive printed messages at Christmas and on birthdays.
Even now, her missive was not long and, as if to aid its content, was accompanied by a family photograph.
There was, however, no mistaking the reason for such a communication.
Having made some preliminary enquiries as to Celia's well-being and references to that of her own children, Edna had put ‘Karen, my youngest, has just got her NNEB.
She's looking for a good situation.
She wants to get into a family where there might be more kids and she can stay on.
She's grown up a lot lately.
She's the one on the left in the photo.’
There was no question of Edna knowing that Celia was pregnant.
They had not exchanged news since Christmas, when Celia had sent the usual hamper and received, in exchange, the customary box of chocolates and a card with robins on, inside which Edna had expressed her best wishes and profuse thanks.
No, this recent information must have been relayed partly out of pride but obviously with the hope that Celia might have some suitable friend who needed a nanny.
She sensed that Edna had long given up hope of Celia herself having any children.
Because she was so certain that she wanted someone older and more experienced to look after her baby than a young girl straight out of college, Celia had not bothered  to mention Edna's letter to Brian.
She had simply made a mental note to thank her, popped it into the in-tray on her desk and left the photograph tucked in a corner of her blotter.
It was Brian, chancing to come across it a few days later while looking for some envelopes, who said, ‘Who on earth are all these people?’
‘Oh, Edna's brood.
I've just had a letter from her.
Her youngest daughter seems to be going in for nannying.
Just passed her exams.’
‘You don't mean to tell me you hadn't thought of interviewing her?’
‘Well, yes.
Or rather no.
I mean, we want someone with more experience.’
‘Do we?’
She looked at him standing there, half turned towards her, the photograph still in his hand, alert, enthusiastic and incredibly good-looking.
‘It seems to me,’ he continued, ‘if you've got a personal contact like this, knowing the family background and all that, you'd be crazy not to see this girl.’
‘But she's so young, Brian.
Not yet twenty and I know nothing about babies myself.’
‘Have you,’ he enquired, ‘thought how many women there must be in this country who are giving birth this very minute who know nothing about babies, but will have to cope without any help whatsoever?’
It was a swift, obviously involuntary remark, rather like hers had been during their last fateful argument.
She could tell that he had just as swiftly regretted it, for he quickly added, ‘I mean, between us, surely, we're capable of raising a child.
It can't be all that difficult.
Here we are, hale and hearty, neither of us exactly a moron.
With the help of someone like Edna's daughter, it should be easy.
We don't want an old battle-axe of a nanny having it all her own way.
I think you should at least see this Karen.’
His reasoning was impossible to fault, his advice always so sensible.
She couldn't refuse to see Edna and her daughter, especially as they came, as it were, from her side of the partnership.
It wouldn't do any harm, either physically  or financially, to have the two of them come up to London, possibly put them up for the night.
Edna would probably love the trip.
She had never met ‘the Doctor’, as she referred to him.
In order not to disappoint anyone, Celia would explain in her reply that although she was pregnant, she was really looking for an older nanny.
Yet, once again, the feeling that she was no match for the forces conspiring, as she felt, against her, was overwhelming.
Ten days later, Celia met Edna and Karen at Paddington, Edna, somewhat larger but cheerful and comfortable as ever, Karen a thin pretty girl, just like her photograph, with a quiet but impressive manner.
No fool, Celia remembered thinking, as she drove them both back to the home she was soon to vacate.
Brian was attending a medical dinner that night, so it was left to Celia to entertain the pair alone.
Much of the evening was taken up with reminiscences, talk of Edna's family — particularly her fisherman brother, Bert — and the fact that Four Winds had changed hands four times in as many years.
‘Shame, really,’ said Edna.
‘It's nice to have…well, continuity in a place.
I suppose it's still too isolated for some.’
Eventually, they got around to the main purpose of the visit.
Edna enlarged upon how well Karen had done at college, how, although she was the youngest in her family, she was always being called upon whenever she was at home to help out with other people's children, how she had passed her driving test at the first attempt.
‘But she wants to spread her wings,’ Edna affirmed.
‘I can understand it, even if I don't like to think of her moving far away unless I get a personal recommendation about whoever takes her on.’
It was palpably clear the way Edna's mind was working.
It was more important to her to have character references of any future employer than bothering about any her daughter might be expected to produce.
It went without saying, of course, that Karen's were impeccable.
Brian did not see the two of them until breakfast time the next morning.
Edna was obviously charmed to find that Celia had married such a presentable husband who  was a heart specialist into the bargain.
As for Brian, on his way out of the house, he managed to say quietly to Celia, ‘You couldn't do better, could you?’
A little later on she dropped Edna and Karen in Oxford Street, where they planned to do some shopping before catching the train home.
By then it was agreed that Karen would do temporary work until she came to Hillmarden House in November.
The nanny question was settled.
Like so many other things, it seemed to Celia that events had overtaken her.
She was no longer in charge.
It was not a meeting she was looking forward to, but Celia thought she could hardly get out of it.
Alison had rung to say that she was coming up to London for an appointment and could they lunch at a restaurant to which they had both occasionally gone when working at Brentwoods, if they happened to be feeling affluent.
Celia had immediately suggested that she might like to spend the night but, rather to her relief, Alison had said that she had to get back to accompany Geoffrey to some local gathering that evening.
It had been distressing enough, a month or so earlier, feeling obliged to let Alison know she was pregnant.
Now, with the physical signs so very apparent, Celia was even more concerned at the prospect of confronting her.
It seemed so unfair, somehow.
Here was a woman who had been trying to have a child ever since her marriage and yet she, Celia, had conceived not merely without any difficulty but on the one and only time she had not taken steps to prevent it.
She could only hope that Alison's appointment in London might have something to do with happier news in this connection.
It would be nice to think they might meet on an equal footing.
Sadly, on the appointed day, her hopes proved wrong.
Alison, thinner than when she had last seen her, seemed also uncharacteristically nervous.
Her appointment in the afternoon turned out to be with a specialist dealing solely in her particular problem.
‘I've seen others about infertility,’ she admitted over lunch.
‘I didn't tell you because…well, I felt you had problems of your own.
I do hope that you've come to terms with pregnancy now.’
Had she come to terms?
What did that mean exactly?
It was as if her body was carrying her along, matter over mind, in fact, instead of the other way about.
She could not exactly deny the existence of what she thought of as  the stranger within.
For one thing, it was now very much alive and kicking, a sensation which she found both distressing and uncomfortable.
In her heart of hearts Celia knew that she hadn't really come to terms with her condition at all, but she couldn't say so point-blank to Alison.
‘More or less,’ she lied, before adding, ‘although I wish to God I were more like you.’
‘But then you wouldn't be having a child, would you?’ came the swift, quiet, but strangely disconcerting reply.
She wanted to say: What is it like?
Why do you want to reproduce?
What on earth do you get out of it?
But the last unspoken question consumed her with fresh guilt.
Alison had probably never thought about getting .
She was a giver, with love and enough to spare.
Would it, Celia debated with herself, be wrong now to ask her to become a godparent?
Under the present circumstances, it seemed somehow tactless.
But what a perfect godmother she would make.
Perhaps it would be better to wait until, hopefully, Alison might have better prospects of a child of her own.
Rather desperately, Celia steered the conversation round to her and Brian's new house in the country, how Alison and Geoffrey must come and stay, that they would be less than fifty miles apart; while Alison, obviously thankful to turn to less delicate matters, regaled her with a description of all she had been doing in her garden and some rather dull anecdotes about the neighbours whom Celia and Brian had met on their last visit.
‘You'll let me know, won't you, the result of your appointment this afternoon?’
Celia asked, as they said goodbye.
‘Of course.’
Alison waved from the window of the departing taxi and Celia waved back, a sudden feeling of depression taking hold of her to such an extent that she abandoned her idea of looking for a pram and set off, rather aimlessly, in the direction of Leicester Square in the faint hope that perhaps a cinema might take her mind off things.
‘Miss Carrow…
Mrs Markham?
It is you, isn't it?’
A man caught up with her on the pavement and for a moment she stared at him blankly.
Then recognition dawned.
‘Oh, Mr Foster.
How nice to see you again.’
She often felt that she had let him down.
By leaving Brentwoods earlier than anticipated, she had not seen him through the publication of his novel.
She had merely telephoned to let him know that she would be handing over to a girl called Kate.
He had seemed genuinely dismayed at her news but gallantly offered his congratulations when she had explained the reason.
Today, the remembrance of her visit to his home in Wimbledon and its harrowing aftermath came back with startling clarity.
‘Your book?’ she enquired, doubtfully, angry with herself for allowing domesticity to prevent her from keeping more up to date with the literary news.
So far as she could recall, she had seen no reviews but then, of course, she knew she could easily have missed them in the interstices of choosing wallpaper, driving down to Hillmarden, overseeing decorators, interviewing nannies, buying a layette and all the hundred and one other things with which she was continually being confronted.
‘I have to admit the publication was a disappointment,’ he replied.
‘I couldn't help feeling that…well, in your hands it might have done better.
But perhaps it wasn't such a very good story after all.
I've been to Brentwoods today to talk about another one.’
‘Really?’
He fell into step beside her and they continued to walk in the same direction.
‘Shall you go back there,’ he asked, ‘after you've had the baby?’
‘Oh no.
We're moving out of London altogether.
My publicity days are over, I'm afraid.’
‘Afraid?’
He was quick, she noticed, to take her up on any casual remark and supposed that his interest in other people's affairs and their reactions had something to do with the novelist in him.
‘Well, yes,’ she answered.
‘I mean, naturally I miss the work.
I found it stimulating, meeting authors and all that.
Meeting you,’ she added, with a smile.
Her depression had lifted now.
She felt as if she were back in a milieu which she understood, that she had an indefinable rapport with this tall, shaggy, rather solitary figure, dressed in jeans and an open-necked shirt and, as she had just observed, running-shoes.
‘You'll have other interests now, though,’ he went on in a friendly, easy manner.
Procreation for a woman is the most rewarding experience there is, I understand.’
‘Not all women,’ she replied and then regretted her rather tart reply.
‘No?’
She was aware of his quizzical sideways look.
‘It's not a subject I know much about, only what I've heard and read.
I've often thought it might be better if I had more intimate knowledge.
For my writing, I mean.
There's nothing like personal experience, is there, although, of course, a mere man can never really know.’
‘No?,
I suppose not.’
She smiled again.
They had almost reached Leicester Square now.
‘Were you going anywhere particular?’ he enquired.
‘Well, actually I thought of going to a cinema.
I've just had rather a disturbing meeting with one of my girlfriends.’
‘So you need diversion?
Suppose you allow me to take you to the Odeon?’
He mentioned a production now showing.
‘It is, I believe, hilarious.’
She accepted, with alacrity.
There was, surely, no reason why she should refuse.
It was a perfectly innocent rather charming suggestion on the part of Hindley Foster.
During her time at Brentwoods, although she had never actually gone to a cinema with another man, she had often entertained or been entertained by members of the opposite sex, usually at lunchtime, occasions which she had afterwards described in detail to Brian, much to his amusement.
He had never been remotely jealous.
Their marriage had always seemed far too secure.
Yet later that evening, when they had both returned home and he had enquired about her meeting with Alison  and whether she had bought a pram, she had hesitated before admitting she had actually been to a cinema.
‘A cinema?’
He looked surprised.
‘What, alone?’
‘No.
I happened to bump into Hindley Foster near Leicester Square.’
‘Foster?’
Brian frowned.
It was obvious that he had forgotten who the man was.
‘My so-called Wimbledon recluse,’ she said, by way of explanation.
‘Ah yes,’ came the equable reply.
‘Well, I suppose we don't need a pram just yet.’
In spite of Celia's undoubted organising capacity, the move to the country was by no means straightforward.
It was due to take place the last week in August and Mrs Bennett who, since the death of her husband, had lived with her married daughter, had promised to ‘see it through’, as she put it; but she had also made it quite clear that she had no desire to stay on permanently, as Celia had hoped.
They shared similar ideas about the country, Mrs Bennett's a little more vociferous than those of her employer.
‘I wouldn't like all them dark months.
I'm a Londoner, born and bred.
What would there be to do in Hillmarden?’
‘I believe there's quite a few village activities,’ Celia had replied, hopefully.
‘Whist drives and things.’
‘But a body would need to have a car for that kind of caper.
You wouldn't catch me walking back to the house alone at night.
Whatever anyone says about muggings and suchlike up here, there'd be no one about at all in the back of beyond.
That time you took me there ‘twas all sunshine and light, but come Christmas, my Gawd.’
The reference to the back of beyond had upset Celia considerably.
Had she really agreed to live if not exactly in a wilderness, yet certainly in a place which gave every appearance of being truly rural?
When the baby was born, the maternity nurse had departed, Karen arrived, Mrs Bennett back to the delights of Notting Hill and — as Brian had intimated — a possible replacement for her engaged, what was she going to do with herself?
With Brian away so much of the week, would she have the strength of character to sit down and try to write as she had once imagined?
Yet before any of these things happened, worries about the immediate future began to assail her.
If the birth of her child was to take place in London as had been arranged, then presumably for some weeks beforehand she would have to remain in the Harley Street flat, kicking her heels or at least suffering the kicks inside her, which she had greatly come to resent.
She had already told Brian that Alex's pied-à-terre was not suitable for two.
How would they shake down in such a confined space with what amounted to more than two and a half?
Her husband's optimism, far from helping her, had begun to jar.
His habit of saying, ‘No problem’, whenever she mentioned any of her private fears, exasperated her.
They had, naturally and by mutual consent, ceased to have any kind of physical relationship, something which had always meant a lot to them both.
But now, her pregnancy and his ever-increasing work-load meant that at the end of the day they were both so exhausted that there was only the desire for an early night and a brief conversation about all their plans or what Brian called, ‘the state of play’.
Hitherto, she had thought him an unusually sensitive man.
Now, she was not quite so sure.
Sometimes, although she chided herself for the thought, it seemed as if in trying to be unselfish and giving him what he wanted, she had allowed herself to be turned into a sacrifice.
Other people upset her, too.
She found she was short-tempered with shop assistants, angry if something she had ordered failed to arrive on the appointed date.
She considered the builders and decorators at Hillmarden were being unconscionably slow.
She supposed that she ought to spend more time at the place, but was always thankful when she was once again on the road back to London.
The gardener they had taken on also came in for her unspoken dissatisfaction.
Ernie Brewer seemed to have his own ideas as to what and when and how things should be done.
Never having taken much interest in the garden at Four Winds, other than it being a place in which to read or play solitary games, she at first decided that it was probably best to let him have his way; but his silences began to unnerve her, as much as his occasional seemingly innocent remarks about his previous employers.
‘Mrs Chadwick,’ Celia learned, 'was a great one for roses', and  ‘Mr Chadwick, he liked his veg.
Got I to grow more carrots.
Kept 'em in sand.
A rare one ‘e was for ‘is carrots.’
As for‘the old lady’, as he called Mrs Chadwick's mother, ‘well, she just loved to sit out by that mulberry bush and watch I cuttin' the grass.
Said there was nowt like the smell of new-mown grass.
Took 'er back to 'er childhood, it did.
‘Twere such a pity she died.
She was that looking forward to living in the Daye House, once they'd got planning permission.’
Celia felt that he speculated privately about her condition every time he saw her, noting, with his countryman's eye, her increasing girth, maybe even reporting progress in the local of an evening.
‘That there Mrs Markham,’ she could almost hear him saying, 'not a bit like Mrs Chadwick.
Don't rightly seem to fit in, some'ow.’
Yet on the rare occasions when Brian was able to accompany her, she sensed that he had Ernie's wholehearted approval.
‘The Doctor’, as the old man referred to him on her subsequent visits alone, ‘the Doctor said as 'ow ‘e were all for veg, like Mr Chadwick.’
Or, ‘The Doctor wants I to see about the moss in the tennis court.
Reckon as how you'll be playing there next summer.’
‘Would they be playing tennis then?
At the weekends?
They had played quite a bit at Hurlingham when they had first been married.
But then, somehow, other things had taken priority.
Could it be that eight years on and with a child into the bargain, she and Brian would be taking the game up again?
Until, perhaps, another child came along and put a stop to such activities, at least, as far as she was concerned.
Brian would never be content with one child.
He did not approve of only children, even though he was one himself who had married another.
There were other people in Hillmarden who also got on her nerves.
It was surprising how ‘accidentally on purpose’ callers arrived whenever her car was parked outside.
‘Oh, Mrs Markham,’ a Mrs Prothero and President of the Women's Institute said one day, ‘I happened to be passing and just wanted to extend a welcome on behalf of the whole village.’
A week or so later a Miss Symes walked up  the drive with two whippets at heel.
‘It is Mrs Markham, isn't it?’ she asked, by way of an unnecessary opening gambit.
‘I felt I'd like to introduce myself.
You see, I happened to be born in this house, so naturally I take a rather personal interest in its occupants.’
Then, with a purposely studied look at Celia's figure, she added, ‘It is so nice to feel it will be turning into a real family home at last.
The Chadwicks were childless.’
So the previous owners were childless, were they, Celia reflected, after Miss Symes had gone.
She had never really known.
Only that when the old mother had unexpectedly died before they had got around to converting the Daye House, they had decided to sell up and go to live in Spain.
She had only met them once and they had seemed a friendly and most devoted couple.
Celia often thought that some of the happiest marriages were childless.
After all, it stood to reason, when one came to think about it.
There was no division of love or loyalties.
Each could concentrate on the other.
No demands from a third source.
What was this primeval urge to reproduce all about?
Why was one stigmatised for not having it?
Did Miss Symes, a seemingly frustrated spinster if ever there was one, have it to excess and was that why she was so anxious for Hillmarden House to become a family home?
One day, a week before the move, while she was standing at one of the upstairs windows, Celia saw the rector pushing his bicycle up the drive.
There was no trying to disappear, for even though she had taken to parking her car carefully at the back of the premises, she knew the front door was wide open and the painter in the hall would certainly, if asked, say that she was around.
Slowly and with misgiving, she went down to greet the Reverend James Longley.
Would he, she wondered, expect her and Brian to go to church?
Apart from a few weddings she hadn't been inside a church for a long while.
Yet, presumably, they would want him to christen their baby?
How two-faced could one be?
Contrary to what she had imagined, James Longley was young and rather charming.
After the usual pleasantries, he said, with surprising directness, ‘You will find living here a great change from London.
I believe you were in publishing?’
So — the grapevine had been at work, had it?
Her credentials, if she could call them that, had somehow got about.
She supposed it was inevitable, for she was no stranger to country habits.
She had been brought up in the most isolated of spots — although, perhaps, because of its very isolation and Granny Tremayne's aloofness, she had simply known about, but not exactly experienced, communal village life.
She answered James Longley's question in the same direct way it had been posed.
‘Yes, it will be very different.
I hope I shall be equal to the challenge.’
Afterwards, she realised how far those two brief sentences had revealed her doubts.
Miss Maynard, a maternity nurse said to be the best on a well-known agency's list, was due to arrive at Hillmarden House on October 20th and stay for six weeks — a little longer than the usual period.
Henry (Harry) Tremayne Markham, who was expected around November 1st, was born in London on October 11th.
Babies like to arrive at their own time, Celia recalled her gynaecologist saying.
How right he was.
The pains had begun while she was in the flat one morning soon after Brian had left for the hospital.
They were not at first acute and Celia supposed that they could be due to indigestion and therefore a false alarm.
However, she was equal to the occasion.
Having had a small suitcase packed weeks ago, she alerted the maternity wing of the clinic in which she was booked, asked the receptionist downstairs to get her a taxi and took herself off there as if the early arrival of babies was an everyday occurrence in her life.
Only when she was installed in her room and, after examination by the Sister in Charge, told that she was, indeed, going into labour, would she allow her to contact Brian.
Celia had already stressed that she would never countenance her husband at the birth.
Having always taken great pains over her appearance, the thought of Brian seeing her in such hideous circumstances appalled her.
She had also said that she did not want an epidural.
When her gynaecologist asked why, she had told him that, apart from her hatred of injections, she wanted to know exactly what was going on.
He had remarked that she was unusual but, as long as things went well, he would abide by her wishes.
When Harry, without complications or much assistance, arrived that same evening, she remembered ever afterwards thinking quite clearly how much easier it was to  bear physical than mental pain.
She had brushed aside the congratulations of her gynaecologist when he said, ‘Most women would have been screaming for some kind of relief long before now.’
The short process of giving birth to a baby seemed to her a triviality compared to the long haul of rearing it that lay ahead.
Brian was waiting for her when she returned to her room, a room which was soon to fill with flowers.
His own bouquet was certainly startling in its profusion.
‘Your husband,’ the nurses said to her next morning, ‘must have bought the florist's shop.’
He saw to it that notices of the birth appeared in The Times and the Telegraph within another twenty-four hours.
His joy on becoming a father was so manifest that if she had not been feeling so depressed, Celia might have laughed at him.
It was as if no one had ever had a son before.
Yet all she could keep saying was, ‘Have you got on to Miss Maynard?
Can she come as soon as I leave here?’
‘Not quite.
But she's agreed to come straight from one job to another, something she tries hard to avoid.
She'll be with us on the 17th.
I gather you'll be able to leave here on the 15th.
That only leaves us two days to cope alone.
I'm sure we can manage.
I've altered all my appointments.
With you feeding Harry there won't be any problems about making up feeds.’
Very quietly she said, ‘I'm not feeding Harry, Brian.
It's all been settled.
He's had his first bottle.’
He looked at her with such incredulity that she turned away.
‘But you've plenty of milk.’
‘Yes.
But they're giving me pills…to dry it up.’
‘But what about his immunity?
It's important to get it from the mother.’
‘I'm sorry, Brian.
I just can't.
I can't face breast-feeding.’
She did not go into details: that she found herself so physically revolted by the process that she had begun to retch, nor despite being warned that all new mothers had a fit of the blues after giving birth, she had been crying most of that day.
She could sense the rising tension in the room, almost as oppressive as the scent of all the flowers.
She could see Alison's roses and felt them to be a rebuke.
Out of the corner of her eye, she watched her husband staring down at the cot.
Then he mumbled, ‘Well, if that's the way you want it.’
Defiantly she answered, ‘I'm not a cow, Brian,’ yet hated herself for what she supposed was perfidy in his eyes.
He did not visit her again until the following evening and his first words on entering the room were, ‘What on earth have you done with Harry?’
She made a studied gesture of looking at her watch.
‘The nurses must be feeding him right now, I think.’
Once again, she refrained from mentioning that she had asked them to keep the baby in the nursery as his presence in the room was upsetting her.
‘But don't you give him his bottle yourself?’
There was definite accusation in Brian's voice now.
‘The nurses are better at it than me,’ she replied, wearily.
‘They know when to do all the winding or whatever it's called.
He kept being sick when I fed him.’
She was terrified that Brian was going to bring up the word all the baby manuals kept using and which she had come to hate: bonding.
But fortunately at that moment her gynaecologist called in for a brief visit and Brian went off to the nursery.
When he did not return for quite a while, she guessed they had been talking to each other about her.
At last, when Brian came back, he said, more kindly, ‘The powers that be think it would be better if you stayed here until the 17th.
I can collect Miss Maynard from Liverpool Street and then drive us all down to Hillmarden together.’
The following afternoon Alison came to see her.
If she was surprised not to find Harry in Celia's bedroom, she did not say so.
She merely went off to the nursery for a brief inspection, came back and pronounced him gorgeous.
Only then did she impart her own news: that she and Geoffrey were to adopt a baby girl in a month's time.
Plenty of other people got in touch.
Mrs Bennett, still at Hillmarden House, Edna in Cornwall and Karen in a  temporary post, sent almost identical cards: a baby in a muslin-trimmed cot surrounded by blue birds and butterflies, the only difference being the unfortunate — at least, to Celia — personal wording in Edna's which ran,May your long-awaited bundle of joy bring you lasting happiness .
Another more formal card, to her surprise, came from Ernest and Emily Brewer; while all the time bouquets of one sort or another kept pouring in: from the receptionist in Harley Street, from Brian's secretary, the nurses at his hospital and even an enormous sheaf of gladioli from ‘All at Brentwoods’.
Horrified, she realised she would have to write and thank everyone.
The list looked like becoming endless.
The day before she was due to leave the clinic she received what appeared to be an ordinary letter.
The writing seemed vaguely familiar, but she did not guess the identity of the sender until she opened it and read, ‘Dear Mrs Markham,’
Might I congratulate you on the birth of Henry, or Harry as I notice he is to be called from the announcement in the papers.
I do hope all is well with you both and that you will find motherhood not quite as difficult a task as I suspect you were anticipating.
It was a great pleasure meeting you a few months ago and I should like to feel our paths might cross again some time.
One never knows.
Perhaps you will change your mind about returning to publishing one day.
With every good wish,
Yours sincerely,
Hindley Foster.
She held the letter in her hand for several minutes and then read it again.
Hindley Foster had obviously perceived her dilemma and understood it, even though he had said he had no intimate knowledge of procreation.
How was it that this strange, seemingly rather lonely man, had been able, in so brief an acquaintance, to get inside her mind, when her husband couldn't — or wouldn't?
Yet when she came to think about this further, she  realised that she was nowhere near understanding Brian.
For all his apparent virility, she felt it was he who should have been Harry's mother.
Was it because he had lost his own parents during his teens that he so desperately wanted a family?
But wasn't she orphaned much earlier?
Surely it must be something else, something basic, inherent in a person's character or, rather, most people's characters, which saw to it that the world went round.
If everyone had been like she was the human race would have died out long ago.
Or would it?
In the olden days, with no contraception to speak of, there were probably masses of women, especially the poor ones, to whom child-bearing must have been a penance which they were forced to endure because there was no way out.
How terrible it was that here were she and Brian, possessed of every material advantage, subconsciously blaming each other for something they either had or did not have.
‘Perhaps you would like to nurse Harry for a while?’
‘Nurse him?’
Celia, standing uncertainly at the door of the nursery while her son was finishing his bottle, had been feeling rather de trop .
She had hoped to time her nightly visit to the nursery so that he was actually being put down to sleep.
Miss Maynard's invitation had caught her off guard.
‘Well, yes, Mrs Markham.
Babies need a lot of love,’ Miss Maynard went on.
Celia was mortified, yet, to her horror, she wanted to scream.
You're like Brian, you're at it, too.
I'm frightened of nursing him.
Can't you understand?
Surely a few minutes in my arms isn't going to mean much to Harry at this stage, one way or the other.
I know I ought to be different, but there it is.
He's getting regular excellent care and attention from you.
Can't we leave it at that?
Yet, unable to refuse the implied reproach, Celia sat down in the antique rocking chair she had bought and allowed Miss Maynard to pass her the child.
She was aware how awkward she must seem to the older woman, if not exactly all fingers and thumbs, certainly all arms and legs.
She crooked her elbow, but the baby's head didn't seem to fit comfortably into it.
She tried sitting with her thighs apart in an effort to provide more of a lap, but was not surprised when Harry's face began to pucker and he started to cry.
After a moment or two, the maternity nurse, finding that her ruse of trying to get mother and baby more acquainted was not going to work, took him from her.
Celia hoped that her relief was not too apparent.
‘You want to tuck them in well,’ said Miss Maynard, as Harry immediately stopped crying and she began to demonstrate the correct way of settling him into his cot.
She had obviously not abandoned the idea of giving instruction to this clumsy unnatural mother.
‘After all, they haven't long been out of a very warm secure environment, have they?’ she continued.
‘No, I suppose not.’
Why couldn't the woman simply say ‘womb’, Celia thought.
Miss Maynard's lessons on infant care, however well intentioned, were beginning to get on her nerves.
‘Harry is my eighty-ninth baby,’ Miss Maynard went on, proudly.
‘When I leave here my ninetieth will be the son and heir of Lord McClintock.
He and his wife know the sex already.
It was quite definite from Lady McClintock's scan.
I gather there was some doubt in your case?’
‘Yes.’
The guilt which she had felt over her feelings about the amniocentesis test assailed her once again.
It was also unthinkable to have to admit to this maternity nurse that the sex of her baby was the last thing she had ever worried about.
‘Well, everyone's different,’ said Miss Maynard, giving her charge a last fond look.
‘Some like to know for sure and some don't.’
The woman was not just getting on her nerves now.
Celia felt that she had actively begun to dislike her, although it was clear she knew her job.
In her hands Harry rarely cried and Brian considered her a miracle.
‘We ought to get Karen here at least a week before she leaves,’ he said to Celia that weekend, ‘so she knows the routine.’
‘But Karen might have her own ideas about how to look after Harry,’ she replied.
‘Yes, but she's young.’
Brian seemed to have forgotten his previous bias against older nannies.
‘We don't want Harry upset.
It's important to have continuity.’
Miss Maynard herself echoed Brian's words a few days later.
‘This young girl you've engaged, Mrs Markham,’ she said, laying great emphasis on the word girl , ‘I should like to get her into my ways or, shall we say, Harry's ways, before I leave.
You'd be surprised how much babies dictate their own routine.
Up to a point you have to go along with them.
Now Harry is a good baby.
He responds well to  careful handling.
It would be a pity for any initial training to be wasted.’
‘Yes.’
These days, it seemed to Celia that she was continually saying yes or no, as she tried to go along with whatever Brian or Miss Maynard said.
What an incredibly complicated thing this baby business was if one didn't have a flair for it.
That evening, she was about to telephone Karen's mother about a definite date for her arrival, when she was confronted with yet another domestic issue.
Mrs Bennett waylaid her at the door of the little sitting-room which Celia had designated for her and Brian's everyday use.
‘Now it's coming up November, Mrs M,’ she said, after Celia had asked her to come in and sit down, ‘I should like to get back to London.
‘Specially as you're all fixed up with Harry.
‘Oh.’
Celia, though aware that this might happen, was nevertheless taken by surprise.
‘Well, it was our arrangement, wasn't it?
I said as how I'd see you through the move and I've already stayed on longer, just to help out, like.’
‘Yes.
Yes, I see.’
There it is again, Celia thought, only I'm complying with Mrs Bennett this time.
‘I shall miss you,’ she continued, slowly.
‘I had been wondering whether you'd change your mind and live here permanently.’
‘But there won't be no need, will there?’ came the swift reply.
Mrs Bennett, large, matriarchal and down-to-earth, stared her straight in the face.
‘I mean, with you home all day and Ernie's wife saying she'll come mornings and this Karen, well she won't want waiting on like Miss Maynard.
She's young.
I dare say she'll row in all round.’
Celia was already aware that there was no love lost between Mrs Bennett and Miss Maynard.
She also knew that it was probably quite beyond Mrs Bennett to appreciate that a trained nanny, even as young and nice a one as Karen, would not take kindly to being asked to do anything other than the job for which she had been engaged.
In a totally uncharacteristic and confused way, she had been  hoping against hope that Mrs Bennett would settle down in Hillmarden and come to terms with what she had called ‘all them dark months’.
Now that she was forced to accept that she hadn't, Celia began to panic.
When Karen had her time off, which she understood was two full days a week, she herself would be left in charge of Harry.
In the back of her mind, she had always harboured the thought that Mrs Bennett who, after all, had brought up five children, would be around to play a strong supporting role.
‘I'm very sorry.
Very sorry indeed,’ was all she could reply — and meant it.
‘Well, shall we say November 10th then?’
Mrs Bennett went on, obviously anxious to know exactly where she stood.
‘It's a Monday.
Perhaps the doctor wouldn't mind giving me a lift that morning when he drives up to town.’
Celia realised it was no use trying to persuade Mrs Bennett otherwise.
She had got it all worked out, even to when and how she would travel back to London.
‘But we'll keep in touch,’ Mrs Bennett went on brightly, as she stood up.
‘I'd like to know how Harry gets on, dear little mite.
Well there, I'd best be getting Miss Maynard's tray ready.
A rare one she is for putting her feet up and having an early supper in front of the telly you've put in her room.’
Celia felt she had to get away, at once.
The house and its occupants seemed to be closing in on her.
There was a funny kind of tightness in her chest preventing her from breathing properly.
Going into the hall, she flung on a coat, pocketed the keys lying on the silver salver, and let herself out into the night.
It was very cold and still.
A brilliant moon flooded the whole valley in white bright light, so that the houses and cottages stood out like toy models, relieved here and there by squares of glowing orange where someone had failed to draw a curtain.
She took the path up to the downs above the house.
She did not know it well, only that it led to a clump of trees at the top called Beckwith's Folly.
She and Brian had been meaning to explore the area at weekends, but there had always seemed so much else to do.
The physical act of  walking, quite fast, now calmed her a little and, at the entrance of the folly, she stopped and turned, leaning against a gatepost.
She could see the back of Hillmarden House where her child lay sleeping and where no doubt Miss Maynard was sitting with her supper tray, watching Wogan.
Perhaps Mrs Bennett was doing likewise in the little room off the kitchen, unless, of course, she was preparing Celia's own meal.
She realised it was thoughtless of her to have rushed out and not said where she would be going, nor that she wouldn't want anything to eat.
It was also, she supposed, foolish for a woman in times like these to walk about alone at night.
Mrs Bennett would have a fit if she knew Celia had gone up to Beckwith's Folly, but it wasn't the first time lately that she had been overwhelmed by the desire to escape, although it was the first time she had actually done anything about it.
There was a rustle in the undergrowth behind her.
Startled, she turned to see a man with a gun walking out of the folly and then, to her relief, a dog at his heels.
Her countrywoman's upbringing told her that he must be a gamekeeper on the estate owned by the people at Hillmarden Hall — some property developer and his wife, she believed.
The man looked at her curiously as he passed, touched his cap and muttered a curt good evening, which she acknowledged equally briefly.
She was certain he knew exactly who she was.
Most people in the district made it their business to find out all about newcomers, who were kept under fairly strict scrutiny before they became accepted.
Would it now get about that Mrs Markham was a little peculiar or, worse still, that she had some assignation?
It was the sort of story that would spread like wildfire.
She was unaware how long she remained where she was until coldness forced her to look at her watch.
Then, reluctantly, she made her way home, a home in which, in some extraordinary way, the advent of one small baby appeared to have given rise to a revolution.
It didn't seem right, somehow.
There were five television sets in the house now: one for the nursery, one for the nanny's room, one for her and Brian's bedroom, one for their sitting-room  and one for the room off the kitchen.
At present there were two living-in helpers and a gardener.
The wages bill had quadrupled, the amount of extra household and furnishing equipment she and Brian had bought didn't bear thinking about.
Gone were the days when she could just get up in the morning, make coffee, leave a note for Mrs Bennett and go off to Brentwoods with, maybe, the anticipation of quite an exciting day.
Life was now both duller and more complex.
So many other people, not just Harry, had come into the immediate picture.
Where once there had been simplicity there was now multiplicity.
Mrs Bennett was standing in the hall when she entered the front door, beady-eyed and flustered like an angry hen.
‘Why, Mrs Markham, wherever have you been?
Do you know the time?
The doctor's telephoned twice and said as how if you weren't back by ten, he'd drive down from London.’
‘I just went for a walk.’
‘What?
At this hour?’
On the other end of the line there was both relief and accusation in Brian's voice.
‘You might have let someone know.
Especially as apparently you'd gone out in a hurry and not taken a handbag.
Poor Mrs Bennett was in a terrible state.’
‘I'm sorry.’
Would she always have to account for her actions now, Celia wondered.
In London she had often been late.
She remembered that fated evening when she had come back from Wimbledon after seeing Hindley Foster.
Brian had simply made some lighthearted quip about Hindley having possibly asked her to spend the evening with him.
Somehow, being late in London wasn't quite the same as being late in the country.
Of course, ten p.m. on a winter's night, when one was a lady of leisure expected to be indoors enjoying a meal which someone else had cooked, was perhaps a bit much.
But Celia was annoyed to feel she had now become so answerable to others.
A baby tethered one in the most relentless way, even a mother who was lucky enough to be able to leave her infant in the hands of others.
Once one had given birth one could never really be free.
It was this lack of independence which so appalled her, while at the same time she knew, when it came down to fundamentals, that she had such a vulnerable appendage permanently dependent on her.
Why was it that other women didn't mind?
Welcomed it, in fact?
Could it be that, subconsciously, motherhood gave them a feeling of power?
No, that was a wretched thought.
Yet they certainly yearned for and must get something out of it.
Perhaps, now that Alison was at least going to become an adoptive mother she would be able to have  a long heart-to-heart with her on the subject; although Celia knew that she would be reluctant, even ashamed, to reveal her innermost feelings.
She had not even discussed them with Brian.
When he came down to Hillmarden that Friday night he did not, mercifully, refer to her mid-week sortie.
He was, if anything, gentler and more solicitous.
He suggested they went out to dinner on the Saturday at a reputedly excellent roadhouse.
But there was an uncomfortable constraint between them which she had never experienced before.
During the weekend he spent a considerable amount of time in the nursery.
Other than their mutual interest in Harry, she wondered what on earth he and Miss Maynard could possibly be talking about.
It never occurred to her until the Sunday evening that it might have been herself.
‘Would it help, do you think,’ he said, just before they went up to bed, 'if you were to see Winifred Shalcross?’
‘Winifred Shalcross?’
She recognised the name at once, that of a woman psychotherapist who had had particular success, Celia believed, with female patients.
‘Why?’ she continued, looking at him doubtfully.
He had always been so against any kind of what he called ‘gobbledygook’.
‘Miss Maynard thinks you are suffering from post-natal depression,’ he answered, coming straight to the point.
‘She should know,’ he added, with a smile, ‘after being with, so I gather, eighty-eight other mothers.’
‘She's been talking to you about me then?’
Celia was angry, on the defensive.
‘No.
It's I who have been talking to her.
Let's face it, Celia.
You haven't been too bright since Harry arrived, have you?’
She wanted to retort: what did you expect?
Instead, she said, ‘I'm still trying to get used to a different way of life, if that's what you mean.’
‘Is it,’ he asked, and this time his voice was unnaturally quiet, ‘so very difficult?’
‘Yes, if you must know,’ she burst out.
‘I'd hoped, like you, that everything would be all right, that I'd feel  differently once the baby came, that I'd come to like living in the country.
In theory, it should have been…splendid.’
She looked at him sitting there, quite still, deeply concerned, in no way disapproving or recriminatory.
‘Well, it just isn't,’ she wound up, crying.
He came and put his arms round her.
It took quite a while for the tears to cease.
Although she was grateful for his tenderness, later on, in bed, she was also grateful that it was too early to resume sexual relations.
She knew that where once this would have been a natural remedy for such an upset, she was unsure now how she would respond.
Whereas hitherto she had looked upon sex as highly enjoyable for its own sake, now she believed that, in some inextricable way, she would not be able to help equating it with what might — and, presumably, should be — the end result: procreation.
In the morning, she agreed to see Winifred Shalcross.
‘It would be nice,’ Brian said, ‘if you could get an early appointment.
I'll square it with the GP down here.
But look, in any case, why don't you come back to town with me today, while we've still got Mrs Bennett and Miss Maynard.
They may not be the best of friends, but between them they can quite well be left in charge of Harry and Hillmarden for a few days.’
She could see the sense of his proposition.
Yet at the same time it reminded her all too clearly of something she was dreading more and more.
Very soon, when those two stalwarts had gone, the chances of her being able to get away would be far more remote.
Once in the flat, with Brian having departed promising to see what he could do about an early appointment with Dr Shalcross, she tried to tell herself that she was feeling better, that this break was all she needed, that coming to London was the answer to any temporary difficulty.
She would take herself out to lunch and do some shopping, look for those new lampshades that were needed for one of the spare rooms.
There was no doubt that the house was coming along beautifully now.
In her mind's eye, from this distance away, it seemed infinitely more attractive  than ever their London home had been.
They would be able to entertain and have people to stay much more easily.
With Ernie's co-operation, the garden would be a picture next summer, especially if they managed to create a covered patio leading off the drawing-room, which Brian had suggested.
That would be a splendidly sheltered place for Harry's pram.
Yet at the thought of her child her mood of optimism vanished.
She was all but out of the door on her way to Oxford Street when, incredibly, she found herself shaking, so much so that she went back into the tiny bedroom and lay down.
She could feel the tightness in her chest which she had experienced when she had rushed out into the night the previous week.
But this time she did not run.
She simply stayed where she was and where, four hours later, Brian found her just before starting to see his afternoon's patients four floors below.
‘You've had no lunch?’
‘No.
I'm afraid I just didn't realise the time.
But it doesn't matter.
I'm not hungry.’
She felt he was looking at her professionally now: a woman who had only had two cups of coffee for breakfast, who had not gone shopping or taken herself out to lunch as she had planned, who, in the old days, never seemed to waste a minute, who never laid down in the middle of the day and yet was now stretched out on the bed, inert, apathetic, openly admitting that she hadn't realised the time.
‘Winifred Shalcross can see you on Wednesday at four,’ he said.
‘I'm sure she'll be the greatest help.’
Was he, she wondered, proclaiming a confidence he did not feel, as he left her with instructions to telephone at once if she needed him.
‘So.
Your husband says you are depressed.’
‘Yes…
I suppose so.’
Dr Shalcross, in spite of her English-sounding name, seemed foreign, mid-European, Celia guessed.
She was small and dark, with her hair scraped back into a bun.
Only the eyes, large and intelligent, relieved her outward appearance of severity.
‘Why do you think you are depressed?’
‘I…don't know.’
Yet she did know, Celia thought.
But she couldn't come straight out with it, not yet, anyway.
‘Have you suffered from depression before?’
‘No.’
‘You have, in fact, led a relatively happy life?’
She tried to think.
Not really, until Brian came along.
‘I don't believe,’ she replied again, evasively, ‘that I thought much about happiness until I met my husband.’
‘But then you became very happy?’
‘Yes.’
‘Yet you did not want a child in this marriage?’
‘No.’
‘Why?’
‘I…’
She began to flounder.
She had not expected such direct questioning.
She had always had a vague idea that psychotherapists made you lie down on a couch and waffle on about your problems until finally, in some miraculous way, they were no longer problems, just a pain that had been gradually eased away.
Celia supposed that she would now have to say something about why she didn't want a child, but it seemed so difficult to put into words.
Why couldn't this woman simply accept it as a fact of life, part of her make-up, such as not wanting to live in the country or swim in the sea.
‘I suppose I'm just not the maternal type,’ she ended up, lamely.
‘And your husband?
He is very paternal, would you say?’
‘Yes.
Very.’
‘Did you not discuss this difference between you when you agreed to marry?’
‘Yes.
But he felt sure I would change.’
‘And you have not?’
‘No.’
Celia wondered whether they had reached an impasse, whether Dr Shalcross was secretly horrified at her although, she reflected, psychotherapists were never horrified, were they?
They were meant to be devoid of personal feelings, deadpan, like lawyers who had to defend a case they didn't believe in, who went home at the end of the day leaving all their patients' foibles filed away in their consulting rooms.
I must try to remember, Celia said to herself, that I am only a statistic to Dr Shalcross, possibly a case history she might wish to quote, anonymously, because I don't happen to run true to form.
I lack that biological instinct which makes most women want to reproduce themselves, especially when they are in their thirties and feel they might be leaving things a bit late.
as if to refute everything that Celia had been thinking, Dr Shalcross suddenly said, ‘Many women fight shy of motherhood for one reason or another.
Some, when they have achieved it, still try to pursue their own aims, be it having a good time or a good job.
You must have read plenty about that sort of thing in the papers these days.
There are others, on the other hand, who desperately want children but become unaccountably depressed after giving birth.
In those cases it is usually due to hormonal imbalance, for which medication is necessary.
Although there are certain pills which might help you at present, from what you have told me I suspect your own very real aversion to having a child is fairly deep-seated.
Tell me about your own mother.’
She supposed it was bound to come.
This business about  the sins of the fathers — or mothers.
But it was something she didn't want to talk about.
In any case, she had almost forgotten, hadn't she?
And what possible good would it do, raking it all up?
‘I don't remember much about her,’ she replied.
‘She was very pretty, I believe.
She died in a drowning accident when I was four.’
‘You do not remember her playing with you, perhaps?’
‘No.
In fact…’
She stopped.
‘In fact what?’
‘Well, she wasn't that sort.
At least I don't think she was.
It was Edna, my nursemaid, who used to take me down to the beach where we lived.
Except once, that is.’
‘What happened on the once?’
‘I can't remember.’
Presently Dr Shalcross said, gently, ‘And your father?’
‘He was killed in the last war, before I was born.
I was brought up by my maternal grandmother.’
‘Did not your father's parents lend a hand in your upbringing?’
Celia frowned.
Grandma and Grandpa Carrow had hardly impinged on her life.
They were vague shadowy figures, rather like her own mother had been, except that she remembered them slightly better because, when she had been about eight years old, Granny Tremayne had driven her over to Newquay where they had been staying.
Even at that early age, Celia sensed a strange unease, a tension amongst the grown-ups.
It was the only time in her life that she had noticed her maternal grandmother at a disadvantage, on the defensive.
Such a meeting was never repeated.
It was as if , by mutual consent, the respective parties simply lost touch.
‘I don't think they were very interested in me,’ she replied.
‘It never seemed to matter much.
Not having known my father, I'm afraid I wasn't particularly interested in them.’
‘In fact, you never formed any close attachments as a child?’
‘Not really, unless you count my nursemaid.’
‘What about at school?’
‘I didn't go.
I was taught by a series of governesses.’
There was a short silence.
Celia felt that Dr Shalcross was probably thinking what a dismal time she must have had.
But it wasn't really, she thought.
There was Edna and Edna's fisherman brother, Bert.
I remember being rather keen on Bert when I was about fifteen.
He wanted to take me out in his boat to see to his lobster pots, only I was too scared of the sea.
But I always had books to read and pictures to paint and it was lovely in the summer when those theatrical people from London came down and put on all those  Shakespearian plays out-of-doors on the cliffs.
I never felt deprived, if that's what Winifred Shalcross is getting at.
It seemed, however, that she was not, for she suddenly switched the conversation by saying, ‘Your husband tells me that your temporary housekeeper is leaving soon and your maternity nurse is being replaced by a young nanny.’
‘Yes.
Edna's daughter, in fact.’
‘And this bothers you?’
‘Yes.’
It seemed an extraordinary understatement.
‘I mean,’ she went on, ‘I can't imagine…when Karen…that's her name, by the way…goes out, being left alone…’
Dr Shalcross finished the sentence for her.
‘With Harry?’
‘Yes.’
From being terse and reticent, Celia became all at once more communicative.
‘I know you must think me awful.
I do myself.
But I can't understand, if you're in charge of a baby, how you can ever have a minute's peace.
Take your eyes off it for one second and…something frightful might happen.
I know other people don't feel like this.
They seem to love looking after a child, or, at least, take it in their stride.’
For the first time Dr Shalcross smiled a little, as she said, ‘There are strides and strides.
Some much longer than others.
I suggest that you are over conscientious.’
‘Over?’
‘Yes.’
‘Well, responsibility for another's life has always terrified me, if that's what you mean.’
‘Better than the other way about, Mrs Markham.
But I think we should try to find out the reason for your attitude.
It is no sin that all you can feel at the moment is trapped, not by Harry, even though that is what you think, but by your own reaction to him.
Obviously you can get no joy out of motherhood if it is simply a constant worry.
Probably, subconsciously or, I dare say, consciously, you knew how you would react if you had a baby and that is why you never wanted one.
Well, you cannot put Harry back where he came from.
I suggest we work at a readjustment of your ideas.
I should like to see you at least twice a week.’
‘Twice a week?’
‘Yes.
Until you feel more able to cope with your new situation.’
‘I don't see how I could leave Harry with Karen and come to London twice a week.’
‘You might consider bringing Harry with you.’
‘Bring Harry with me ?’
Was Dr Shalcross mad?
Totally illogical, surely.
Did she mean her to bring Karen, too?
She certainly wouldn't want to drive them to London.
What a ridiculously expensive excursion Winifred Shalcross was proposing.
She wore a wedding ring, but she could surely never have had any children of her own.
Celia fell back on the only excuse she felt able to make.
‘I shall have to talk it over with my husband.’
‘Of course.
But meanwhile, I will give you a prescription for some pills which should help to relieve some of your anxiety and then suppose we say, provisionally…’ she glanced at a diary at the side of her desk, ‘you come here next Monday at the same time?’
‘Next Monday?
Oh no, I couldn't do that.
It's the day Mrs Bennett leaves and Karen arrives.
And at the end of the week Miss Maynard is going.
Her next case is coming up.
Lady McClintock's baby.
She told me it's a boy…’
Celia was in full spate now.
She could hear her voice rising as the words tumbled out, disjointed, confused, resentful.
‘I shall have to be at Hillmarden.
Brian will expect it.
You must see, I'm not a free agent any more.
And after Miss Maynard goes, I'll be even more tied.
I mean, I probably should never be having a nanny in the first Place.
My friend, Alison, who's going to adopt…well, she won't have a nanny.
She'll be a proper mother, even if the child isn't hers.
She's a natural…’
Celia was aware of Dr Shalcross looking at her intently across the desk.
This time her eyes were troubled, compassionate.
Oh God, Celia thought, wildly, I'm not making sense any more.
Bad, and now mad into the bargain.
But you've made me say things much better left unsaid.
It was all a long time, such a very long time, ago.
Celia's Mother
In 1943, Celia's mother, Elizabeth Mary Tremayne — usually known, to her own mother's regret, as Liza and the woman Winifred Shalcross wanted to know more about — was considered to be a head-turner.
She was not exactly beautiful, nor could she be classed as altogether pretty, in the strictly conventional sense of the word.
Her features were too irregular — large brown eyes, a small tip-tilted nose and a wide mouth which broke into an odd lop-sided smile when she was happy.
It was more her figure which attracted attention: tall, lithe and somehow vibrant.
She moved with a rhythm.
Everything about her flowed, particularly her long luxurious auburn hair — that is, when she was not obliged to roll it up in order not to fall foul of the army authorities.
She had badgered her parents into letting her join the Women's Auxiliary Territorial Service after her eighteenth birthday.
Harriet Tremayne, her mother, had been strongly against this, but Tom, her husband, a charming, indolent and indulgent man, had argued, with a certain degree of logic, that ‘the girl had to do some kind of war work’ and that it was better for her ‘to do something she had set her heart on’.
‘She could nurse,’ Harriet had said, defensively, ‘or go on the land, even if we haven't enough ourselves to keep her here.’
The Tremaynes owned a few acres where Tom, disabled since the First World War, grew early tomatoes and potatoes and, in peacetime, daffodils.
‘Can you imagine Liza nursing?’ he had replied.
'And she certainly isn't land-girl material.
Apart from the fact that I've never known her dig up a weed or pick a single daffodil, she simply isn't cut out for that kind of work.’
Harriet, albeit with misgiving, had bowed to the wishes of Liza's doting father and their headstrong mercurial  daughter.
She had been forced to admit to herself that Liza had not inherited her own fortitude and patience, which had helped her to nurse her future husband back to relative health in a Kent hospital after he had been wounded in the leg during the battle of Arras in 1918.
Like Tom, she could not really see Liza in the role of ministering angel, nor could she imagine her out in all weathers driving a tractor.
Her daughter was far too exotic, a kind of hothouse plant, the sort of girl who enjoyed running wild on the Cornish cliffs during summer but drooped in the cold lonely winters, with their grey skies and seas and not another human habitation within sight.
This was why, for the greater part of her education, she had been sent off to a small private boarding-school, where Harriet liked to feel that the company of contemporaries compensated for all that was lacking in her home environment.
Liza's desire to join the ATS, with a view to becoming a driver, was probably an extension of her avid need for conviviality.
Yet, on the day when Harriet saw her off on Penzance station she was afraid that the new way of life Liza had now embarked upon would prove very far removed from that which she had spent under the dedicated care of her former headmistress, Miss Everett.
With a foreboding which Harriet had experienced more than once in her life, something told her that they were in for trouble.
The first intimation of this did not, however, have anything to do with Liza as Harriet had imagined.
One day, soon after the girl's departure, Tom had complained of pains in his chest after digging the new potato patch, a job which had formerly been undertaken by a youthful employee who had also disappeared into the army.
Harriet, who had hardly had a day's illness in her life — unless she counted a bad attack of shingles some years previously — had at first been inclined to ignore her husband's remarks.
Both he and her daughter were, she knew, apt to exaggerate any aches and pains.
But less than a month later, Tom collapsed with a heart attack.
Within a further month he had suffered a second and fatal one.
Liza, distraught at the news, came home on compassionate  leave, which she spent in such a state of shock and distress that Harriet began to feel that the sooner she returned to her duties the better.
Far from being any support to her mother, Liza's presence in the house was quite the reverse.
When Harriet once again saw her daughter off at Penzance station it was this time with a sense of relief.
So far, she had been able to contain her own grief.
Now, with Liza gone, she felt she would be able to mourn Tom's passing in her own quiet way for, despite his many failures as a husband, she had been deeply attached to him.
Every week she wrote to Liza, letters to which she received brief erratic replies.
Harriet would make excuses for this, rather as she had done over her late husband's peccadilloes.
‘The girl must be busy’, ‘the maintenance course she had been on was probably gruelling’, or ‘she was still too upset to put pen to paper’.
Although, as for this last speculation, Harriet could not help thinking that if Liza was still as distressed as she had been at home, she would have been even more likely to let her mother know, for she had never before been one to suffer in silence.
Sometimes, as Harriet went about her days, inwardly sorrowing but outwardly self-controlled, she felt as if she had lost both a husband and a daughter.
Liza, for her part, had still seemed inconsolable when she first arrived back at her unit on the edge of Salisbury Plain.
But as the days passed, she discovered that there were plenty of people willing to console her.
As often as not, these were men.
Word had got about as to why she had disappeared on compassionate leave and she began receiving many invitations for such recreational activities as were available: film shows, dances or simply a get-together in the local inn.
Half guiltily, half eagerly, she accepted.
In the short space of time she had been in the ATS she had become aware how easily she attracted the opposite sex, a power which did not appear to have been conferred in anything like the same degree on her contemporaries.
Liza was unaware that she was but the female counterpart of her father; for Harriet, resolute and loyal to  the last, had managed to keep any knowledge of Tom's countless affairs from his daughter.
Neither did Liza have any idea that she had also inherited from Tom Tremayne the convenient ability of closing her mind to unpalatable truths.
A month after her return from compassionate leave, Liza was posted to a company of FANYs, whose personnel drove, almost exclusively, officers from the Headquarters of Southern Command.
The feeling of being in the centre of things, of constant activity, of being in charge not only of a vehicle but its VIP occupant — or occupants — and the different venues to and from which she transported them all over southern England, appealed enormously to her restless nature and craving for excitement.
Forever on the move, meeting new faces, constantly in demand socially whenever she was off duty, Liza Tremayne found that there were longer and longer periods between the days when she still suffered black despair over the thought that she would never again see the man she so resembled in character and who had given her, had she known it, more love than he had ever bestowed upon any other woman.
One day in late November, Liza met Captain Freddie Nash.
She had been asked to pick him up at eight thirty a.m. outside his billet at a nearby farmhouse and drive him to Bovington Camp in Dorset.
The visibility was poor and on the outward journey she merely concentrated on her driving while Freddie, on the back seat, studied some notes he had brought with him.
He was to attend a conference of staff officers and, on arrival, he asked her if she would collect him again at five p.m.
Because the weather was raw and foggy she spent most of the intervening hours in a nearby house, which had been commandeered by the army for the use of resident and non-resident FANY drivers.
For all her capriciousness, Liza was aware of the importance of time-keeping in her particular job and she was waiting for Captain Nash as he emerged from the conference hut a little before the appointed hour.
This time, as she held open the door and saw him into the car, she was unable to refrain from privately comparing his  physical likeness to that of her own father.
Moreover, there was something about both of them which reminded her of her favourite actor, Laurence Olivier.
When, after a hazardous journey through thickening fog, using only the statutory semi-blacked-out lights, he asked her if she would care to dine with him at a roadhouse not far from their destination, she accepted with alacrity.
‘I suspect,’ he said, ‘you've missed your usual evening nosh-up and so have I.’Liza had, indeed, missed the evening meal at the FANY headquarters, but she knew she would have foregone almost anything for the pleasure of simply sitting opposite this thin charming young man who seemed to have about him that same lighthearted loving insouciance possessed by the late Tom Tremayne.
When, during dinner, Freddie Nash happened to refer to his wife, for the first time in her life Liza experienced acute jealousy.
She had hitherto had plenty of flirtations.
Now, she had fallen in love.
Freddie, to give him his due, had offered her a meal for no other reason than that he was hungry, Liza was attractive and her response to some of his occasional conversational gambits on the way home had been interesting and unusual.
She had mentioned a father who had recently died, but he naturally had no idea that he looked like him or, at any rate, what Tom Tremayne had looked like as a young man.
In the subsequent weeks leading up to Christmas, Liza saw Freddie Nash only twice: once at a private party given by two officers who rented a small cottage in the district, the second time at a dance organised by a certain county grande dame , who seemed to think she was destined to introduce the opposite sex to one another as her personal contribution to the war effort.
On each of these occasions, Freddie was with someone else, a spectacularly good-looking girl who was a nurse at the local hospital.
Although this only added to Liza's frustration, she could not help thinking that the wife to whom he had referred who, unaccountably, had elected to remain in Scotland helping her parents on their estate, deserved to be deceived.
For it was obvious to Liza that Freddie's present partner was no casual girlfriend for the evening.
When he went north to join his apparently complaisant wife for Christmas and Liza went to Cornwall, Harriet was troubled by the curious change in her daughter.
The grief which she had shown over the death of her father seemed to have been replaced by a kind of nervous irritability.
She would go off alone for long walks over the cliffs — something she had never done before in winter.
She was thinner, abstracted and often seemed unaware of her surroundings.
Harriet sensing, quite rightly, that this must have something to do with a man, failed to receive any response to the most careful attempts to discover what was wrong.
The feeling that she had lost her daughter was stronger than ever.
In the closing days of that year she could only hope and pray that whoever was responsible for Liza's unnatural behaviour would have helped to improve it by the next time she saw her.
At the beginning of 1944 there was — particularly in southern England — an unmistakable air of expectation.
The Second Front was coming.
Everyone knew it.
The New Forest had become virtually a fortress of barbed wire and road blocks.
No one, of course , other than perhaps Winston Churchill and those in the very top echelons of the services, knew exactly when and where it would take place, but the tide by now had definitely and dramatically turned in favour of the Allies.
Liza Tremayne, going about her duties at Southern Command and ever susceptible to atmosphere, was possibly more conscious of this than many of the girls with whom she worked, girls who she well knew did not altogether approve of her present lifestyle.
After her return from compassionate leave following the death of her father, they had been prepared to rally round.
Since Christmas they had not been so friendly.
Liza was obviously a man's woman.
And the men, from Corporal John Carrow who looked after the cars in the depot to which Liza was attached, upwards to the brigadiers and generals whom she drove, were all, little or much, aware of this striking-looking girl in the perfectly fitting uniform, whose expression seemed to alternate so swiftly and appealingly between gaiety and despair.
It would have been impossible for Liza not to realise her growing power over the opposite sex, nor fail to notice the kind of dumb adoration in which Corporal Carrow held her.
This had become a source of irritation to her companions and only added to their resentment.
Liza's car always appeared to be the one which had preferential treatment and although John Carrow, neither approving of nor trusting any lady to tinker about with a machine, begged them all to leave such things as cleaning carburettors  to him, it was always Liza's that got attended to first.
‘Couldn't you discourage the poor chap,’ Eleanor Fuller said to her one day, ‘instead of sitting back and letting him moon around hoping your tyres need pumping up.
At least the rest of us manage to see to that job ourselves.’
’ I don't see why I should,’Liza had replied.
And neither did she.
Having been the apple of Tom Tremayne's eye, since his death Liza increasingly craved any man's attention and admiration.
It kept her going, especially when she was angling for the notice of the one man who, after giving her dinner on the way back from Bovington, had treated her with only a lighthearted pleasant banter whenever they met.
Apart from the two social occasions when he had been with another girl, Liza had seen little of him, even though she had taken every opportunity to pass by the farmhouse where he was billeted.
This situation had been carefully noted by the inquisitive ill-natured Eleanor fuller who had been able, much to her satisfaction, to say on another occasion, ‘It's no use your keeping on going accidentally on purpose by Warreners farm.
Don't you know that Freddie Nash is now sharing Major Hallett's cottage, where we had that party before Christmas?
Jock Hallett's friend has been posted to Portsmouth.
I should think it suits Freddie down to the ground, what with all his goings-on.’
This was a great blow to Liza.
There was no question of her being able to haunt the environs of Mayfield Cottage, as it was down a dead end lane three miles from the nearest village.
Moreover, Eleanor's references to Freddie's goings-on, however much Liza suspected there might have been plenty, upset her.
If he was known to have had many more than one girlfriend, why wasn't she one of them?
It was not until early February that she was detailed to drive him again although, to her regret, not by himself.
He was to accompany a Brigadier Smithson on a tour of outposts along the Devonshire coast and then travel north for a staff conference at Bristol.
All in all, they would be away three days and two nights.
On these occasions FANY and ATS drivers were given an allowance of six shillings a night with which they were expected to fend for themselves.
In the case of this well-liked fatherly brigadier, it was common knowledge that, although he would accept his chauffeuse's six shillings, he would then pay all other expenses in order that she would be wined, dined and accommodated in the same style as himself.
Liza, while delighted at last to be in the company of Freddie Nash for so long a stretch, was nevertheless sorry to have to share him with this senior fellow officer, however much she had hitherto enjoyed driving Brigadier Smithson.
The weather happened to be cold, very cold.
While waiting for her passengers as they inspected isolated gun-sites on windswept clifftops and rocky promontories, Liza was urged by her passengers to switch on the car engine to keep herself warm, however much she knew this procedure to be frowned upon by her direct superiors at Command Headquarters.
On the journey to Bristol the cold intensified.
It reminded her of that other occasion when she had driven Freddie Nash and she wondered whether they were destined to find themselves together battling against the elements.
Had they now been alone, she would have welcomed the situation.
After all, the last time such a state of affairs had existed, it had at least given her the bonus of being taken out to dinner by him.
Sadly, she accepted the fact that there was now little chance of a tête-à-tête.
Then, miraculously, fate played into her hands.
After spending the second night in a hotel in Bristol, she awoke to find the streets and rooftops covered in snow.
Brigadier Smithson, who was apparently due to go on leave the next day, rang Southern Command and managed to arrange that he should go straight to London by train after the conference.
Liza and Freddie Nash would have to make their way back to Salisbury as best as they could.
She sometimes wondered afterwards whether Brigadier Smithson appreciated or had even organised the situation.
Then she dismissed both speculations.
Presumably, with  his straightforward affable nature, he had more faith in the younger genera–on than was justified.
She knew that he had two grown-up daughters of his own and would scarcely have approved of aiding and abetting or even allowing a girl of Liza's age to be left in any compromising situation with a young married man.
But whatever unexpected circumstances had brought it about, soon after three p.m., on a snow-bound road, Liza and Freddie Nash set off by themselves for Salisbury.
This time Freddie elected to sit with her in the front of the car.
However hard she tried to concentrate on her driving, his nearness was distracting.
It was already almost five o'clock when they were only a little way past Bath.
Suddenly, Freddie said, We aren't going to make it, are we, Liza?
D'you think you can get as far as The Angel at Lacock?
It's only a few miles from here.
It would be a good place to hole up in.’
A thrill shot through her.
It was all so much better than anything she could possibly have envisaged.
‘I think so,’ she replied, hardly able to control the excitement in her voice.
He started to give her expert directions and it was plain that he must have been to this particular establishment before.
She no longer cared who with.
Today or, rather, tonight, he was with her.
Flighty as she might have been until then, Liza Tremayne was still a virgin.
Had she but known it, this was why Freddie, rightly suspecting the fact, had refrained from making any passes at her.
He might be a man with a wife in absentia , but he usually directed his charismatic charm towards ladies who, once again, he rightly suspected, knew their way about.
For all his own savoir-faire, he had not, apart from his potentially rich wife, been to bed with a virgin.
The night he spent with Liza Tremayne at the beginning of 1944 was a revelation.
She had not been exactly backward in coming forward.
In the weeks that followed, it became obvious to Liza's contemporaries, much to their envy, annoyance and disgust, that Liza was Freddie's latest girlfriend.
When, in March, she realised her period was overdue, Liza did not at first worry.
Life, for the short space of a few weeks, was better than she had ever known it.
She felt sure that Freddie Nash was as in love with her as she was with him for there was hardly a day when they did not manage to meet, often in Jock Hallett's cottage, where their mutual passion, already discovered at The Angel, seemed to intensify.
When it eventually dawned on Liza that she must be pregnant, she began to panic.
With the intention of seeking comfort and support, she rode over to Mayfield Cottage one evening on the bicycle she had acquired to transport her to previous assignations.
On arrival, she was distressed to find only Jock Hallett working on some papers.
He was a taciturn, curiously detached individual who seemed happy to turn a blind eye to any of his tenants'’ goings-on', as Eleanor called them.
He looked up now as she entered — Freddie had already given her a spare key — and said, pleasantly enough, ‘Hello, Liza.
I'm afraid Freddie's had to dash off to Scotland.
An emergency to do with his wife.
She's had a miscarriage, I believe.’
She stared at him.
‘A miscarriage ?’
It was almost impossible to take in.
‘Yes.
He's obviously upset.
I understand they were both hoping for a child, as well as his in-laws.
You know, they wanted a grandson to carry on the estate.’
Liza did not know how she got back to her billet, only that she had bicycled so fast and furiously that, as she flung herself on her bed, she thought, grimly, that if anyone had reason to miscarry at that juncture it was she herself.
Yet she remained stubbornly pregnant.
She had no idea how long Freddie would be gone and she naturally could not contact him.
She had no girlfriend to turn to.
She felt her mother would surely have a heart attack if she knew.
The only person in the world who continued to show her unfailing kindness was Corporal John Carrow.
When, diffidently, he asked her if she would like to go to the pictures with him one evening, her immediate acceptance seemed to surprise them both.
She did not see Freddie Nash again.
He wrote her a brief note merely saying he had had to go home owing to illness and had found, on his return, that he was to report forthwith to the War Office.
He added that he would always have happy memories of their ‘association’ and sent her his ‘very best wishes’for the future.
Increasingly, she leant on John Carrow.
The girls at the depot watched the development of this incongruous relationship with incredulity.
That Liza Tremayne should take up with a corporal was so unlikely as to be ludicrous.
They all knew that Freddie had, as usual, ended yet another affair, but they reckoned that Liza could have consoled herself with any number of more suitable admirers.
But Liza Tremayne was well aware that there were not all that many who would be able to help her out of her present predicament.
When, at the beginning of April — at least, she remembered thinking afterwards, it was not April 1st — John Carrow asked her to marry him, the immediacy of her acceptance was yet another surprise to them both.
Harriet Tremayne, waiting to greet her daughter and new son-in-law on Penzance station was, understandably, nervous.
She had never been quite the calm resolute individual which she managed to appear to the rest of the world.
On this particular day she wished devoutly that her late husband were with her and wondered what he would have to say about their daughter who had, so unaccountably, married another rank.
Then, with that stoical and selfless streak in her character, she reflected that perhaps it was just as well he was not.
Tom had been much more of a snob than she was.
Harriet had always tended to feel compassion towards the underdog.
All the same, Liz a married to a corporal .
What was the girl thinking of?
Whatever was he like ?
Harriet was soon to know.
As she watched John Carrow walking towards her at Liza's side, she knew instinctively that he was a nice man, personable and anxious to please.
Liza, she was glad to note, had filled out.
Physically, she was looking better than Harriet had seen her in a long while.
But as she led the way to her car — Harriet had used up some of her precious reserves of petrol for this expedition — there was something about her daughter's manner that disturbed her.
On the way back to Four Winds, this feeling intensified.
Liza was alternately overbright and silent.
That John was in love with his wife there was no doubt.
But there was more than a little doubt in Harriet's mind as to whether his wife was remotely in love with him.
The young couple were with her less than forty-eight hours, explaining they had promised to spend another thirty-six on the way back with John's parents, who lived in Cheltenham.
Although Harriet tried her best, she found the visit far from easy.
Sometimes she thought that things  went much better when Liza happened to be out of the room and she was alone with John.
Though shy, he conversed quite pleasantly.
He told her that, like Liza, he was an only child, that his father owned a garage, that he had already started to follow in his footsteps and hoped to continue in the motor trade as soon as the war was over.
He said how much his parents were looking forward to meeting Liza, especially as they had always wanted a daughter.
He seemed genuinely concerned that Harriet lived all alone in such an isolated spot.
He offered to look at the engine of her car, an offer which was gratefully accepted.
Harriet had put them in her smaller guest-room which had a double bed.
When Liza seemed surprised, even put out, at this, she hastily altered her arrangements and made up two single beds in the larger room overlooking the sea.
There was no mistaking her daughter's relief.
After they had gone, Harriet took herself for a long walk over the cliffs, but for once the beauty of her surroundings, the early evening light on the sea, the cry of gulls and the distant sound of waves breaking on the shore below, failed to soothe her.
There was something wrong, very wrong.
Liza and John were like no newly-weds that Harriet had ever known.
Not that she was acquainted with many.
But she could still recall, quite vividly, how it had been when she and Tom had married, just as soon as he had been able to dispense with his crutches: their brief but ecstatic honeymoon, the way he had so gently and expertly initiated her into the pleasures of sex and how, in spite of all his subsequent straying, she had remained faithful, forgiving and in love with him, in her own way, right to the end.
There seemed nothing at all like this from what she had observed of Liza's and John's relationship.
Surely, she thought, her son-in-law must be sadly disappointed by the casual way his wife accepted his courteous gestures, the obvious irritation Liza tried, not very successfully, to mask when he made some ordinary but perfectly reasonable remark?
Was he a masochist?
Was he so blindly and hopelessly  infatuated that he simply did not notice?
What ever had brought about this strange union?
Surely the fact of seeing each other every day at work could hardly be the answer?
Propinquity was not enough.
Harriet tried to ignore the possible reason for the marriage which had sprung, unbidden, to mind soon after their arrival.
It was too unpalatable, too disloyal, altogether too abhorrent to countenance.
Yet she knew it was there, in the background, darkening all her thoughts, rendering her sleepless in the nights following their departure and also confirming something of which she had been dimly aware for a long time.
She had loved her husband.
She had stopped loving her daughter years ago.
She remembered exactly when this had come about.
It had been shortly before the war and Liza had been coming up thirteen.
The three of them were going on one of their rare holidays abroad.
At the last minute, Harriet had developed shingles.
She had told Tom and Liza to go ahead without her.
Tom had demurred but Harriet could always recall Liza, with that innocent beguiling look of hers, saying, ‘Oh Daddy,please .
I'm sure Mummy will get better quickly and join us.’
Mummy had not got better quickly.
She had still been quite ill when the travellers returned from Juan les Pins.
But, oddly enough, Harriet had never held it against Tom who, after all, could easily have elected to cancel or postpone their plans.
She had always known that Liza could twist him round her little finger.
Was she simply jealous of her daughter, Harriet wondered?
Was it a different kind of Oedipus complex?
Whatever it was, she knew that the occasion had been a turning point in her feelings towards Liza.
It reminded her of how, in her youth, she had always been puzzled by the lines of the hymn:Can a mother's tender care, cease towards the child she bear ?
For a long time she had thought they referred to a mother and a female baby bear.
Not until she was quite grown up did it dawn on her that the questioner was asking about — or, rather, refuting — the possibility of any mother actually rejecting her child.
Harriet knew, of course, that she would never cease to  care for Liza, but from then on it was much more a question of duty rather than any labour of love.
What was that duty now?
For the moment, all Harriet felt she could do was to sit back, wait and hope.
She could not lead Liza's life for her.
She could only be ready to pick up the pieces if and when required.
That requirement came a great deal sooner than anticipated.
Harriet was sitting working at some petit-point on the evening of Monday, June 5th.
It was an escapist occupation about which she felt almost guilty with a war on, but nevertheless found helpful in times of extra stress.
There had been a storm the previous day and she could still see white horses in the bay from where she was sitting by a south-facing window.
Not for the first time did she wonder where and when that waiting British Armada would set out with the purpose of liberating Europe.
Liza had written some weeks ago to say that John had been sent, at only a few hours' notice, on a course.
She had no idea where.
Security was tighter than ever.
Liza could only suppose that, with her husband's mechanical knowledge, the powers that be had woken up to the fact that he would be more than useful in what she referred to as ‘an active capacity’.
Harriet, reading between the lines, knew exactly what her daughter meant.
John was being put in readiness for going ‘over there’, so that middle-aged women like herself could sit at home working at petit-point and, hopefully, growing a little food.
The next morning, as Harriet looked out on to a calmer sea, she switched on her wireless to hear that the Second Front had begun.
In the early hours of that same day, June 6th, a little while before her mother heard the official news, Liza Carrow was woken by the sound of throbbing engines in the skies above south Wiltshire.
Creeping to the windows of the married quarters in which she was still living since her husband's sudden and secret posting, she looked up to see a mass of twinkling red, green and white lights, as wave after wave of aircraft passed overhead with unceasing regularity, making the earth shake beneath them as they roared southwards to the English Channel.
Without having to be told, she knew at once two or, rather, three things: the Second Front had begun, John was in the vanguard of operations and that she would never see him again.
She did not know exactly how she had arrived at the last overwhelming conviction, only that she had.
Crouched by the window from which she had lifted the blackout curtain, she also became aware of something else, unmistakable strong, insistent: the first stirrings of the new life within her.
It was almost another fortnight before the War Office confirmed that Acting Sergeant John Carrow had been killed in action.
In the days which followed, Liza went about in a kind of limbo.
She had no idea whether he had ever received the letter which she had felt obliged to write, telling him she was pregnant.
She would never know now.
In a way she hoped he had not and yet, on the other hand, she believed the news would have made his final days very happy, however heinous the deceit with which she would always have to live.
She longed to blot it out, pretend the last few months had never happened.
But there was little chance of that.
As nothing else, the child within her womb kept reminding her daily, hourly of the treachery she had perpetrated.
John's father came down from Cheltenham to see her, grieving and concerned for her future.
Like his son, he was unworldly, kind and courteous.
The fact that his wife had not accompanied him did not surprise Liza in the least.
After that one visit to Cheltenham she had known that Lilian Carrow neither liked nor trusted her.
When she explained to Sidney Carrow that she was pregnant, he had said shyly, somehow seeming to express both pleasure and pain, ‘Where were you thinking of going?
Lil and I would always give a home to John's wife and child.’
At the mention of John's child, Liza had been racked by renewed guilt.
‘Please don't worry,’ she had answered.
‘I shall go to my mother's as soon as my discharge from the army comes through.’
She had sensed his relief, but he went on, fumbling for words, ‘If there's anything…we can do…
I mean, financially…’
‘Please,’ she said again, interrupting him, ‘there will be no need.
I am sure I shall be able to bring up…’ she nearly said ‘John's child’and then altered it to ‘the child, without further assistance.’
She wished him goodbye, thanked him for coming and could see again the face of his wife on the only occasion she had met her: tight-lipped, unable to approve, fiercely loyal to John.
Liza was aware that, on hearing she was pregnant, her mother-in-law as well as her own mother would probably guess the truth.
She travelled back to Cornwall in the middle of July.
Harriet, as might have been expected, behaved admirably.
She was kind, albeit reserved, practical and only asked the minimum of questions, such as when was the baby due?
Had John known?
They must think about a layette.
What provision did the ATS make for discharged personnel of this nature?
Mother and daughter conversed in a wary, detached manner, recognising that this was the best way to handle a potentially tricky situation.
Sometimes Liza would come across Harriet sitting by a window, staring out to sea, her hands, for once, lying idle in her lap, an expression of infinite sadness on her face, which was quickly masked when she became aware of her daughter's presence.
Now and then, Liza thought of John but, far more often, of her child's father, presumably still sitting safely in the War Office.
Having heard of his family's desire for an heir, she fantasised a little as to whether his wife might be expecting again.
At times she hated Freddie Nash with a ferocity that astonished her; yet at others she longed to see him, to have his support, to feel that one day, perhaps after she had given birth to his baby, they would meet again and that she would experience, however transitory and unreliable — at least on his part — their mutual passion.
She could not imagine remaining indefinitely at Four Winds.
Yet she could see no hope of escape.
Tied by a child, never having done a job other than that of a temporary chauffeuse to army officers, what could she do?
With only a widow's pension, where could she go?
Supportive as her mother was, Harriet was not a rich woman.
Tom Tremayne had seen to that and Liza, irresponsible and hedonistic as she was, could not quite see herself leaving Harriet holding the baby while she went off to undertake some kind of training.
In any case, what training?
She had been good at art at school and, had the war not come, she might have tried to make a career out of it.
But reason told her it was a precarious business at the best of times.
Now, it was out of the question.
Moreover, the very isolation of Four Winds precluded her from being able to enjoy the facilities which even a town like Penzance might have provided.
It was seven miles away and petrol was still rationed.
Bitterly, she realised that her night at The Angel with Freddie Nash had shackled her in a way which, even if she had stopped to think about the possible consequences at the time, she could scarcely have envisaged.
She went through the remaining months of her pregnancy in a turmoil of doubt, anxiety and frustration.
As autumn gave way to winter, there were moments when she almost, but not quite, tried to contact Freddie about her predicament.
But she knew that she would  hardly be likely to get very far with her allegations.
She was now a married woman or, rather, widow, ostensibly carrying the child of a man who had been killed in action.
By marrying John Carrow she had forfeited any claim she might otherwise have tried to make.
She went into labour on a bitter November day when snow was falling.
Harriet drove her to the local hospital as soon as the pains started in mid-afternoon and, knowing how hazardous the road back in the dark could be at this time of the year, brought an overnight bag so that she could stay at a nearby hotel.
Liza could not help being conscious of the similarity of the weather conditions which, nine months previously, had been responsible for today's journey.
Yet when she came to think about it further, she knew that if she were honest with herself, there had been an inevitability about her brief, wild, headlong fling with Freddie Nash.
The weather may have helped but, as she saw things now in between the momentary spasms of pain, it was going to happen anyway.
She had been determined to see that it should.
She had wanted to go to bed with Freddie Nash more than anything else in her life.
Used to getting her own way with her father over most of the other things she desired, Freddie's initial take-it-or-leave-it attitude had simply fuelled her determination.
She had made all the running, with the present disastrous result.
The pains, though still at lengthy intervals, were becoming more severe now.
Harriet, resolute behind the wheel, increased speed a little as they neared the town.
Only the whiteness of her knuckles as she gripped the steering-wheel more tightly than usual gave any indication of the stress from which she was suffering.
On arrival at the hospital, however, she relaxed a little, even managing a few lighthearted words of encouragement.
Having booked herself in at a hotel where she was well known, she returned to the hospital and sat with her daughter throughout most of the evening.
Liza, rather to her surprise, found she was grateful for  her presence.
Once, after a particularly sharp contraction, she had a sudden wish to unburden herself to her mother, to tell her that her grandchild had nothing to do with John Carrow, but that its father bore a striking resemblance to Tom Tremayne.
It was somehow a relief when, the following morning, she was delivered of a girl.
Even so, she was overcome by depression which increased as the days went by.
The Sister tried to tell her that all new mothers went through something of this sort for a short time after childbirth; but Harriet knew, when she fetched Liza and her baby back to Four Winds at the end of the week, that what her daughter was suffering from was not the ordinary ‘blues’ which she herself had experienced after Liza was born.
She could see no sign of maternal love in her daughter.
In fact, quite the reverse.
Liza appeared not merely to be uninterested in her child, but positively to reject the dark-haired, red-faced bundle who Harriet felt more certain than ever had not been fathered by John Carrow.
The unspoken truth lay between the older and younger woman like some tangible wedge, driving them further and further apart.
The last winter of the war passed uncomfortably and with agonising slowness for the two women at Four Winds, together with their infant charge.
Liza, apathetic and unable to come to any decision over the baby's name, allowed Harriet to choose Celia, having said it would have been her and Tom's choice had they produced a second daughter.
Harriet also said that she would like to arrange a private christening at the little chapel on the top of the cliffs on the other side of the bay.
But here, for once, she met with strong unexpected opposition.
‘I don't think it's necessary.
I'd sooner leave it for now,’ Liza told her.
Anxious to avoid further difficulty, Harriet did not pursue the matter.
She was aware that, because of their circumscribed and antisocial existence, the question of godparents would probably pose yet another problem.
She did not feel there was likely to be much in the way of ideas or co-operation from her daughter's parents-in-law in this connection — at least, not from Lilian.
It was quite obvious that there had been a definite estrangement between her and her daughter-in-law right from the beginning.
When Harriet had telephoned with news of the birth, Liza's mother-in-law had quickly passed her over to her husband.
A few days later Harriet received a letter from Sidney in which he had clearly done his best to be polite, but was evasive about the invitation she had extended to both Carrows to spend a weekend at Four Winds to see the baby.
Apparently Lilian's arthritis was ‘troubling her’ and he himself had just had a ‘nasty dose of flu’.
He went on to say that perhaps in the spring ‘when the better weather came’ etcetera, etcetera…
Harriet, being no fool, read between the lines and knew that Sidney had been got at by his stronger-minded and cynical other half.
To make matters even more wretched than they already  were, Celia cried both day and night and because of Liza's deepening depression Harriet found it was she who was forced to bear the brunt of this, so much so that after a while she simply swept up baby and cot and took them into her own bedroom.
Mark Jefferson, Harriet's cousin, came down to Cornwall ostensibly to spend a week with them over Christmas, but left the day after Boxing Day.
A bachelor who did not take kindly to children under any circumstances, he found the atmosphere at Four Winds appalling.
He considered that Liza was behaving disgracefully, maintained that Harriet was encouraging her daughter in what he called ‘selfish laziness’ and that, sorry as he was about the death of John Carrow, surely Harriet had not long lost her own husband and it was up to Liza to give her more support.
Privately, Harriet could only but agree.
Sometimes it was all she could do not to reproach Liza for her lack of consideration, for her supine acceptance in letting her mother take on the role which should have been her own.
This justifiable attitude was not exactly vindicated by their young local doctor who, having been rejected by the army and brimming with psychological theories, explained to Harriet, dogmatically and at length, that Liza was unable to help her condition — no one in those days referred to post-natal depression — and every allowance must be made because of the tragic death of her husband.
He spent such a long time alone in consultation with her daughter that Harriet began to wonder whether his efforts at consolation were entirely professional.
Often Liza seemed an enigma to Harriet.
She herself had never been a woman to dote on babies and had found her own daughter much more interesting as she grew older.
Nevertheless, she had invariably done her best for her child as, indeed, she was now doing for her grandchild.
It seemed the least anyone could do for such vulnerable members of the human race, who had been brought into existence through no fault of their own.
That Liza did not appear to share these sentiments was something which Harriet grieved over and found hard to accept.
Sometimes  she felt as if the antipathy between daughter and motherin-law had simply surfaced anew between daughter and mother.
If Liza could see no hope for the future, neither could Harriet.
She felt the only possible solution to the situation would be if Liza were to marry again; but with the girl's precarious mental state and lack of contact with the outside world, this hardly seemed likely.
No unattached man, should he by some miracle present himself at Four Winds, would want to have anything to do with a dejected and increasingly agoraphobic young mother, still in her teens, and a baby whose fretfulness was beginning to get on even Harriet's nerves.
Besides, Liza was no longer the stunningly attractive girl she had been a year ago.
In an effort to remedy matters, Harriet decided to seek assistance from a tin miner's family who lived in a small cottage a mile or so inland.
She had already from time to time employed Mrs Rafferty, although the incredibly swift rate of her pregnancies made her appearances at Four Winds unpredictable.
Since the outbreak of the war Harriet had rather prided herself that she and Tom had been able, for the most part, to manage their property by themselves and certainly the employment of any domestic help at this juncture seemed a luxury to which she was almost ashamed to admit.
But there was also something else about which she was ashamed.
Since her husband's death Harriet knew that she had let the outside of Four Winds go.
The arrival of Liza and then Celia had not helped, but it was clearly time something was done in that direction.
There must be a Rafferty son who could at least do some digging, if nothing else.
It was obvious, despite certain reverses, that the war in Europe was coming to an end.
She had a sick daughter, a fractious grandchild and a life which needed rethinking, one in which she could, perhaps, occasionally persuade Liza to come to Penzance with her for whatever meagre amusement the place might afford: a film or maybe a concert.
In time, she hoped that some theatrical Producer would see to it that  Shakespearian plays were performed  on the cliffs again, as they had been in the nineteen thirties.
One day in early February, Harriet walked up to the Raffertys' cottage and knocked on the door.
It was opened by Edna, not yet fourteen, while her mother, surrounded by various other children, stood, half defiantly, half apologetically, nursing a baby in the background.
It soon became apparent, however, that Mrs Rafferty was only too pleased at the thought of Edna, though still at school, helping out at Four Winds during the weekends.
She volunteered the information that her eldest daughter was ‘that good with little ones’, also that her eldest son, Bert, then fifteen and dead set on becoming a fisherman, might nevertheless be able to lend a hand now and then on ‘the farm’, as she called the Tremaynes' few acres.
‘Bert and Edna could stop the Saturday night at Four Winds, if you like,’ Mrs Rafferty went on.
‘It would give you and Miss Liza’— as she still referred to Celia's mother —‘a bit of a break.’
Harriet walked home wondering why she had not organised something of this sort before and marvelling at Mrs Rafferty's complete acceptance of her own role in the community, one in which she obviously took it for granted that she herself had no need or right to ‘a bit of a break’.
The Raffertys of this world, even in the changing climate of 1945, Harriet reflected, still seemed to think it was their duty to ensure that others, rather than themselves, had a little relaxation.
Though relieved at the arrangements she had made that day, Harriet could not help feeling chastened; and when she entered the back gate of Four Winds and heard the inevitable wailing of her grandchild, her mood deepened to despair that she had not brought up her own daughter to be the kind of helpmeet which she was certain Edna Rafferty would be.
Yet although this turned out to be the case and Edna's and Bert's spells at Four Winds gave Harriet increasing support, she was still unable to rouse Liza out of her permanent lethargy or to get her further than the garden gate.
On one of Dr Forman's visits, she managed to waylay him and ask whether her daughter should see a specialist.
While he did not exactly oppose this suggestion, he added, somewhat enigmatically, that he believed Liza's trouble was due to circumstances quite beyond her control and that she needed the help not so much of a specialist but a sympathetic friend personally acquainted with her predicament.
It seemed to Harriet that Liza must have unburdened herself to Dr Forman rather than her own mother and somehow this increased her sense of resentment.
In desperation, she managed to get the head of a psychiatric hospital near Plymouth to travel to Four Winds, when it became clear that Liza's agoraphobia was too severe to allow her to make the journey to him.
While appreciating the situation, he said that it was not altogether surprising considering the tragic circumstances.
‘But your daughter is young, Mrs Tremayne,’ he had said, ‘and time is on her side.
We must be patient.
She has not only lost her husband but her father.
Some people take longer to grieve than others.
I feel sure there is light at the end of the tunnel.’
Quietly and politely, Harriet wished him goodbye.
She did not share his sentiments.
The only glimmer of light she could see at the moment seemed to come from the cheerful faces of the Rafferty children whenever they arrived on the Four Winds doorstep.
That there was some man somewhere who had, to put it in all its baldness, got Liza into trouble, Harriet had no doubt at all.
Nor that by marrying John Carrow her daughter had behaved in a wicked, even if understandable, way for which they were all now paying the price.
Thanks to the help of Edna and Bert, Harriet soon began to establish some kind of order and routine at Four Winds.
Once Edna had left school, she more or less became a fixture in the household and there was no doubt that Celia was a much happier and more tractable baby under her young but competent handling.
The girl more than lived up to her mother's recommendation of being ‘good with the little ones’.
Although her brother, Bert, was now employed by a local fisherman, Arnold Spence, and could do no more than a few day's work at Four Winds now and then, nevertheless her new arrangements left Harriet free to work outside herself and this regular exercise had a calming effect, releasing her from a great deal of inner tension.
Even Liza derived a little benefit from this new way of life, although she was by no means the daughter Harriet had once known.
Mostly, she remained an invalid, irritable, on edge and defensive, becoming panic-stricken if the slightest attempt was made to get her away from the house.
Any question of taking her into Penzance had to be abandoned and Harriet went off alone to do the weekly shopping, thankful to be able to leave Edna in charge of Celia and trying not to feel guilty that she actually preferred such expeditions without her daughter's company.
Once or twice she re-issued her invitation to the Carrows to visit them at Four Winds, but it seemed that there were always perfectly valid reasons why they could not accept.
Sometimes Harriet wondered why they did not suggest that Liza brought the baby to see them, but then she thought of Lilian and knew the answer.
In any case, Liza's mental state would have made such a journey alone with Celia quite impossible and Harriet was glad not to have to admit to this.
She was, in fact, somewhat ashamed that Edna was witness to so many things which, coming from a large, poor but loving family, must surely be incomprehensible to the girl: Liza's aversion to picking up her child, never attempting to play with Celia, her obvious relief when Edna performed such tasks which any normal mother might have been expected to undertake willingly.
Sometimes, Harriet wondered whether Edna, on her visits home, relayed such inadequacies to her own mother.
But something told her that she probably did not.
Amongst Edna's many unique qualities was discretion as well as loyalty.
She had somehow identified herself with the Tremayne household.
While doing her best to defer to Harriet and Liza, she seemed to look on the baby as her own.
Many was the time when Harriet thanked the Almighty that she had elicited the help of the Raffertys that February day in 1945.
One late summer morning when Celia was getting on for four years old, Harriet drove back to Four Winds after one of her solo shopping-trips and was surprised to find Liza sitting outside with a young woman of about her own age.
Harriet had left her daughter in bed, but now she appeared to be deep in conversation with a visitor.
As she got out of the car and walked towards them, Harriet noted, with dismay, that they both appeared to be drinking gin and tonic.
It was not that she was parsimonious or disapproving of alcohol, simply that she knew it had adverse side-effects on Liza and, not being much of a drinker herself, she only kept a small supply in the house.
When she reached the rough wooden table where the girls were sitting, the stranger stood up, quite politely, and shook hands; but there was something about her which, instinctively, Harriet found distasteful.
Her eyes seemed too bold, her shorts too tight and her sun-reddened limbs too large.
Perhaps, sensing the older woman's reaction, the girl said quickly and ingratiatingly, ‘Mrs Tremayne.
You must forgive my intruding like this.
My name is Eleanor Fuller.
I was with your daughter at Southern  Command.
I'm on a walking-tour with my cousin but she elected to do the art galleries in Penzance this morning, so I thought I would try to look up my old friend.’
‘How nice.
I hope you didn't have trouble finding us.’
Harriet did her best to be pleasant.
After all, Liza saw so few people of her own age.
Callers of any sort were scarce at Four Winds, mostly people who came asking for directions or even a glass of water when the weather was hot.
‘Oh no, although it was a bit further than I bargained for.
I must say this drink Liza has given me is a life-saver.
Perhaps you'll join us?’
Harriet resented being offered a drink on her own doorstep, but she simply replied, ‘Thank you.
No.
I'm afraid it's a bit early in the day for me.’
Would she have to ask Eleanor to lunch, she wondered.
It would be kind, she supposed, and really very little trouble.
She was about to extend an invitation when their visitor said, ‘I must soon be on my way.
I've promised to meet my cousin at that Inn on the Point at half past one.
I'm afraid I won't see Liza's little girl.
I gather your nursemaid has taken her off to her own home today.’
‘Yes.’
‘Well, maybe I'll have the pleasure another time.
I'm sure she's beautiful.’
Then, turning to Liza again, she enquired, ‘Who does she take after?
You or John?’
It seemed on.
the face of it, a perfectly innocent ordinary question which anyone might have asked.
Or was it?
Quickly, Harriet said, ‘I think Celia's her own little person.
Although occasionally she reminds me of Liza at that age.’
‘How nice.
It must be very rewarding to be in a position to watch your granddaughter grow up, especially in such a gorgeous spot.’
‘You've seen it at its best,’ Harriet answered, wishing the girl did not sound so patronising.
‘I don't think Liza thinks much of it in the winter.’
‘No?
Well, perhaps she'll come up to town then and pay me a visit.
I'm working for an estate agent and sharing a  rather run-down flat in the Bayswater Road with two other girls.
One of us is nearly always away at weekends, so there would be a spare bed.
Incidentally, Liza, guess who I bumped into the other day walking down Piccadilly.’
‘I've no idea.’
‘Freddie Nash.
If you ask me, things aren't going too well with him.
He's divorced and doesn't seem to have a job or much money.
In fact, I told him that when I got back from this holiday he must come round and have a meal.
He looked as if he could do with one.’
Eleanor stood up.
There was an odd kind of silence.
Harriet sensed that the girl's parting remarks had not been unpremeditated.
Somehow she felt she wouldn't put anything past her.
She could hardly have been much of a friend of Liza because, although her daughter had never been forthcoming about her time in the ATS, she had certainly never mentioned an Eleanor Fuller.
It was obvious now that Liza was upset.
There were the tell-tale signs: pallor, a slight trembling and, later on, a refusal to eat.
By the end of the day Harriet was not surprised when the girl went to bed early, pleading a headache which her mother did not think was entirely due to gin and tonic at ten thirty in the morning.
In the days that followed Harriet felt more estranged from her daughter than ever.
Liza was withdrawn and preoccupied, hardly able to converse with either her mother or Edna and almost ignoring Celia's presence altogether.
It was all Harriet could do not to confront her, have the whole thing out, tell her that she was not prepared to put up with such behaviour any longer, that she might be a war widow with a child, but she was living in her mother's house and should at least not take such care and help for granted.
She would ask why Eleanor Fuller's visit had so upset her, who was this Freddie Nash she had mentioned on leaving?
I've been a coward, Harriet said to herself.
I've handled this situation the wrong way.
By refraining from questioning I've allowed Liza to go on living a lie.
And yet, if I did have a showdown now, what good  would it do?
Alienate us further?
The past with all its mistakes, tragedies and consequences, cannot be wiped out, nor can it be put right.
For Liza's sake, for Celia's sake, perhaps it would be better to let sleeping dogs lie.
The pathway down to what the Tremaynes had always considered their private beach was steep and slippery.
It was not, of course, private — simply a patch of sand directly beneath four Winds, where the rocks jutted out on either side so that it was screened from the rest of the bay and, at high tide, sometimes cut off from it.
When she was a child Liza had called the place the Secret Cove.
In the height of the season it was invaded by holidaymakers, but later on it was possible to have the area to oneself.
Edna often took Celia down there, carefully going first and waiting while the little girl slid or scrambled down the awkward parts of the cliff into her waiting arms.
Going to the Secret Cove was, as it had been in her mother's time, the child's greatest delight.
During the last week of September that year, Cornwall had been enjoying an Indian summer and Edna and Celia had been down to the Cove every day.
‘Celia see sea,’ the child would lisp as soon as she awoke.
Or sometimes ‘Celia go sea’ or, simply, ‘See sea.’
One morning when Harriet had gone early to Penzance not only to shop but also to have her hair done, Liza came downstairs in her dressing-gown to find her daughter and Edna having, unusually for them, an altercation.
‘Not today,’ Edna was saying.
‘See sea,’ the child persisted.
‘No.’
Celia ran into the playroom, crying.
‘What's the matter?’
Liza asked.
‘Is she sick?’
Edna flushed.
‘No.’
Then why can t you take her to the sea?
‘Well, Mrs Carrow, I didn't want to bother you but there's been a man down there the last few mornings, who seems to have been watching us.
I dare say it's silly of me  but I thought we'd wait till the coast was clear, so to speak,’ she ended, smiling at her own accidental pun.
‘What did this man look like?’
Edna, rather surprised at Liza's sudden intense interest, replied, ‘Tall, Mrs Carrow, dark and good-looking, but somehow…well, a bit shabby.’
Just at that moment there was a loud banging on the back door of Four Winds and when Edna went to answer it she found one of her younger brothers, Bob Rafferty, standing there, red and perspiring, while, in between gasps, he burst out, ‘You gotter come, Edna.
Mum's been took bad.
In bed, bleedin' something terrible.
Dad's up Camborne way looking for another job.
She says as how you'd ring from here for the ambulance.’
While Liza usually seemed vague and non-co-operative, there were times, such as the present one, when she appeared, miraculously, to pull herself together.
It was something that Harriet had particularly noticed and which made her both angry yet hopeful: angry that her daughter could not or would not always behave in such a way and hopeful that perhaps some day Liza would come to her senses and throw off the mask of invalidism behind which Harriet felt sure she was hiding.
Realising that this was an emergency and almost certainly to do with Mrs Rafferty's continual but nowadays abortive pregnancies, Liza said quickly, ‘I'll ring the hospital for an ambulance.
You and Bobby better get back home straight away.’
Edna, torn between duty to her sick mother and her small charge, looked at Liza agitatedly, ‘But Miss Celia,’ she began.
‘I will look after Celia,’ Liza replied, picking up the telephone, and the calm decisive way in which she handled the situation sent Edna running off up the lane with Bobby, without further  demurrence .
After Liza had made sure an ambulance was on its way to the Rafferty home, she became aware of Celia, thumb in mouth, standing in the doorway of the kitchen.
Mother and daughter stared at each other.
Rarely had they been  left alone together for any length of time, but one thing now seemed certain.
Celia was determined to make the most of it.
‘Where Edna go?’ she asked.
‘Edna's had to go home.’
‘Mummy take Celia sea.
Celia see sea,’ chanted the child.
Liza regarded her speculatively.
‘Perhaps.
Come and help Mummy get dressed.’
‘Then we go sea?’
‘Perhaps.’
They went upstairs.
Liza took a yellow cotton button-through dress out of her wardrobe.
It had been hanging there since before she joined the ATS but, though old, she knew it suited her.
Then she carefully made up her face and brushed her long auburn hair, the solemn wide-eyed child watching her every movement.
‘Pretty Mummy.
Now we go sea.’
If Liza was still undecided, Celia made up her mind for her.
‘All right.’
Collecting up a knapsack which contained a few beach things, Liza and Celia went to the bottom of the garden and began their descent, one which was not quite as successfully negotiated as when Edna was in charge.
Celia kept slipping and Liza kept telling herself she was ridiculous to have given in to the child.
It was also ridiculous to think that the stranger Edna had described was Freddie Nash.
There would be no tall good-looking man waiting for them at the Secret Cove and, once there, she found the Place was, indeed, deserted.
She spread a towel out on the sand and sat down but, disappointed and now frightened at her own temerity, Liza began to panic, scarcely noticing Celia when she came staggering towards her, dragging slimy bits of seaweed or producing pebbles and shells in her small fat hand.
After five minutes, Liza said abruptly, ‘We must go home now.’
The child's face puckered.
‘Celia stay sea.’
She stood there, staring at her mother out of large defiant eyes.
‘No Celia.
Come and let me put on your sand shoes.’
It  had been one thing to be suddenly full of Dutch courage at the thought that Freddie Nash, having seen Eleanor again, had decided to seek her out.
It was quite another to feel she had made a complete fool of herself and taken her daughter alone so far from the safety of Four Winds.
It was essential to get back there as quickly as possible.
‘You have a very good-looking little girl, Liza.’
She swung round.
He had come up behind them: thin, tall and tanned.
The similarity between him and his daughter was startling and unmistakable.
He was wearing a faded blue shirt, an old pair of linen trousers and espadrilles.
Liza could quite understand why Edna had thought him somewhat indigent.
He sat down beside her and it seemed entirely natural that he should take one of her hands.
She let it rest in his but said nothing.
She was no longer trembling, as she had been a minute ago.
‘I've been hoping you'd come down to the beach these last three days,’ he went on.
‘Eleanor told me how she had visited you and your mother a little while ago.’
Yes.’
She seemed to have found her voice at last.
‘I didn't like to come to the house,’ he went on, giving her an odd sideways smile.
‘I thought I should probably be persona non grata .’
‘Where are you staying?’
‘At the Inn on the Point.’
‘For how long?’
‘Until tonight.
I'm catching the evening train.
I'm afraid the old pocket won't run to any longer.
I expect Eleanor told you.
I'm divorced now and not finding it easy to get a job in civvy street.’
So he would soon be gone, would he?
She had been just in time.
Absently, she saw Celia, her morning's enjoyment no longer threatened, wander off towards a rock pool.
‘Why did you come, Freddie?’ she managed to ask at last.
He gave her another of his sideways smiles.
‘Let's say I've never forgotten you, Liza.’
‘Did you know…about the child?’
He was quite frank.
‘Yes, I knew.
Towards the end of the war I realised that I had had both friends and enemies at Southern Command.
It was one of the reasons why my wife and I first became estranged.
Then, when you married John I…well, I just hoped that things would work out for you and for Fiona and myself.
I'm sorry…they didn't.’
Celia came back to them, made an attempt to gain their attention, failed, and trotted off again.
A momentary cloud passed in front of the sun and Liza shivered slightly.
He pushed her backwards and covered her body with his own, as he gradually undid the buttons of her dress.
She made no resistance.
It was as if she had been waiting for this moment for four years or more.
She heard the sound of the sea, the cry of the gulls and then her own cry, as he made love to her in the same way as he had done long ago at the Angel Inn.
She did not hear the cry of her child.
Bert Rafferty had been given an unexpected day off.
The boat belonging to Arnold Spence, the fisherman for whom he worked, had developed engine trouble.
Bert knew that Mrs Tremayne wanted a fence repaired and it seemed an excellent opportunity to use his sudden free time by visiting Four Winds.
He liked going there.
He was invariably made welcome, given a meal and paid generously.
Moreover, it would enable him to see his sister, Edna, with whom he had always been close.
Therefore instead of walking all the way along the cliffs that morning, he decided to go down to the beach on the last lap of his journey, knowing that Edna and her small charge could well be at the far end, from whence he could quickly scramble up the pathway to the Tremayne property.
The tide was coming in and, as he rounded the rocks which screened the Cove, he saw two things: a courting couple doing what he felt to be far more than courting and then something a little further away which made his heart miss a beat.
At the water's edge, lapped by the encroaching sea, lay the figure of a small child.
Bert ran then, faster than he had ever run before and, dragging the lifeless form on to the sand, he put into practice all that Arnold Spence had taught him, swiftly, efficiently and with complete self-confidence.
In those few moments Bert Rafferty saved Celia Carrow's life.
Not until the child had come round, white-faced but spluttering and coughing, did Bert become aware of a man and a woman standing beside him: dishevelled, panic-stricken and shamefaced.
‘She was nearly a goner,’ he said to Liza, his voice gruff, his eyes hard and contemptuous.
And then, ‘Where's Edna?’
‘She had…to go home.
Your mother…was sick.’
Liza spoke in barely more than a whisper.
Without another word, Bert Rafferty gently picked up the frightened child and made towards the cliff.
At the house he found Harriet, home from Penzance, aghast at his sudden appearance with her granddaughter in his arms.
‘Whatever's happened, Bert?’
For the first time, the young man's positiveness seemed to desert him.
‘I don't rightly know, ma'am.
Only that this little one all but drowned.
Edna's had to go home because Mum's been took sick.’
‘You mean…my daughter had taken Celia to the beach alone?’
‘It seems so, ma'am.
I expect she'll be up shortly.’
He made no reference to any third party.
As Harriet took her granddaughter from him, all she could murmur was, ‘Thank you, Bert, more than I can say.
You'd best be getting back to your own house now.’
‘You'll be all right, Mrs Tremayne?’
He looked at her doubtfully, as troubled at leaving her with the distressed child as Edna had been at leaving Liza with Celia a short time before.
‘Yes, we shall be quite all right, thank you.’
Then Harriet turned, carried the little girl upstairs and put her to bed.
She had enough nursing experience to know that Celia would recover physically, but she had no way of judging how much harm the episode might have done her mentally.
When, a little later on, as she was sitting beside the now sleeping child, she heard Liza come into the house, Harriet did not go downstairs but waited until her daughter stood in the doorway of the bedroom, wild-eyed and trembling.
‘She's…all right?’
‘Yes.’
‘Bert…was wonderful.’
‘I'm sure he was.
I've sent him home now.’
‘Did he say anything about…what happened?’
‘Not very much.
Only that Celia nearly drowned.’
Was there a flicker of relief in her daughter's expression?
Harriet wasn't sure.
Then she asked, ‘What on earth made you go down to the beach?
I thought you were too scared to move so far from the house, especially alone with Celia.’
‘I…’
A deep flush spread over Liza's face.
‘I…really don't know,’ she replied and left the room.
In the days which followed mother and daughter conversed hardly at all.
Edna, worried about Celia, managed to get down to Four Winds for a little while each day and, as soon as Mrs Rafferty was discharged from hospital, resumed her duties with the child, who hardly let her out of her sight.
It was noticeable that Celia no longer asked to go to the sea although, by that time, the weather had changed.
Autumn had come in, raw and rough.
Harriet, still grieving and perplexed and unable to obtain any further information from Liza, asked Edna outright if she could throw any light on the matter.
The girl, obviously acutely embarrassed, mumbled something about Bert maybe knowing a bit more, ‘him being there, like’.
Not satisfied, Harriet asked her to get in touch with her brother as she would like to see him.
Apart from anything else, she wanted to recompense him in some way, although she doubted he would accept a reward.
But it seemed as if Bert's job, possibly conveniently, prevented him from coming anywhere near Four Winds for the time being.
Soon, gales lashed the Cornish coast.
Winds of a hundred miles an hour or more roared and whistled round the isolated house on the cliffs, tearing at window catches, rattling doors.
Celia, already suffering from disturbed sleep, would wake screaming and Edna, to pacify her, took the child into her own bed.
Liza, in the next room, having hardly slept at all since her disastrous meeting with Freddie Nash, lay awake, now resolved that there was only one thing left for her to do.
Even if she did not suspect that she might once again be pregnant, she knew, after all that had taken place, she had no other option.
Just before it began to get light, Liza Carrow, carrying a torch and with an old coat thrown over her nightdress, crept out of Four Winds and walked towards the cliff.
She hardly felt the cuts and scratches as she slithered down the rocky path to the Cove.
They did not matter.
Nothing mattered now.
Almost, a feeling of elation took hold of her.
She was no longer scared of leaving the safety of her own surroundings.
She knew exactly what she was doing and where she was going.
Once on the shore, she stripped and ran forwards into the sea.
When, a few hours later, Harriet got up to go downstairs and make herself a cup of tea, she was surprised to find Liza's bedroom door open.
Usually it was tightly shut.
Yet when, on taking a look inside she saw that the bed was empty, she guessed instantly what had happened.
Although she quickly did all the right things: alerting the police, the coastguard and Dr Forman, Harriet Tremayne knew that she would never see her daughter again.
At the inevitable inquest a few weeks later which, mercifully, thanks to Edna's and Bert's discretion, the appalling weather and her own reclusive way of life, was held almost in private, she sat in the court, her head bowed, her once handsome face lined and drawn.
Yet, when she was asked by the coroner to step into the witness-box, she seemed to take a grip on herself, drawing on some inner strength.
Tall and erect, she stood there answering Mr Hadley's searching questions in a calm, dignified and unfaltering manner: Yes, her daughter had suffered from agoraphobia and depression ever since the birth of her little girl four years ago.
Yes, it had not been easy knowing what to do for the best.
No, her daughter had never before taken her child to the beach alone.
Yes, her condition had greatly deteriorated since the child's near-fatal accident.
Only when Bert Rafferty was called to give evidence did Harriet Tremayne show any sign of breaking down, as she listened for the first time to his description of exactly what had happened on that harrowing morning.
‘Was Mrs Carrow not watching her little girl?’ she heard the coroner, like a small persistent terrier on the scent, ask abruptly.
‘No, zur.’
Bert Rafferty's voice was subdued but firm, almost, Harriet felt, as if he was relieved to be getting something off his chest.
‘And why was that, Mr Rafferty?’
The questions may have been terse to the point of harshness, but Bert seemed equal to them.
‘Because,’ he replied, in his slower west-country burr, staring straight at the coroner, ‘she were took up doin' zummat else.’
‘And what was that, Mr Rafferty?’
‘She were with a man, zur.’
In the silence that followed, Harriet was unable to refrain from letting out a small gasp.
‘You mean…’ and here Mr Hadley actually hesitated a little, ‘they were making love?’
‘If you put it like that, zur.’
Harriet was allowed to wait in a small ante-room until the verdict was brought in.
She did not doubt what it would be: suicide while the balance of Liza's mind was disturbed.
As the months and years passed, Harriet Tremayne became more and more of a recluse, her whole attention concentrated on her granddaughter.
If Liza had been racked by guilt, now, in a way, so was she.
Somewhere along the line, Harriet felt, she had gone wrong with her daughter's upbringing.
She was determined not to repeat the process with Celia.
Liza had been sent to boarding-school.
Therefore Celia must stay at home.
Liza had been indulged by Tom, to whom Harriet had invariably given in.
She would therefore now be extra firm with Celia.
Liza had always had a tendency to wildness.
If Celia showed any sign of that, it must be tamed.
Above all, Celia must never know the whole story of how and why her mother died, nor that, presumably, somewhere she had a father whom, please God, she would never know.
There was no doubt in Harriet's mind that he was someone called Freddie Nash.
Celia's Husband
The roses which had been so cherished by the previous owner of Hillmarden House, Gillian Chadwick, needed dead-heading.
It was not a job that Ernie Brewer had had time to get around to, with all the other demands the garden made on his time.
On this particular Sunday afternoon, Celia's husband, clad in shorts and T-shirt, bent over them carefully, snipping here and there, and occasionally looking towards the pram, parked in the shade a few feet away, where his nine-month-old son, propped up by pillows and securely strapped in, made contented unintelligible noises at him.
It was late July, hot, sultry and uncannily still.
Presently a woman came out of the door at the side of the house and walked towards them.
‘Thunder coming up, I shouldn't wonder, Doctor,’ she said, as she reached the pram where, at the sight of her, the child became more vociferous and waved his arms about excitedly.
‘Yes, I think you may be right, Edna.’
Brian straightened up.
‘We could do with some rain.
It would save me watering tonight before I leave for London.’
‘I've put Mrs Markham's clean washing all ready in the hall.
You'll give her my love, won't you?’
‘Of course.’
He watched as Edna wheeled the pram back to the house, having announced that it was time for ‘a certain person's tea’.
Then he resumed his task.
More and more these days he found gardening therapeutic.
Cutting the grass, especially when he used a hand mower on the trickier Patches, was best.
The noise, the exercise, the degree of concentration that was required, stopped him thinking.
He did not want to think.
Sometimes, when he did, he wondered whether, however daunting the operation seemed, he would sell up and move back to  London.
It might give Celia something to look forward to.
He had said as much to Winifred Shalcross, but she had shaken her head.
Besides, there was Harry.
There was no doubt that he was thriving at Hillmarden, with Edna and Karen to look after him.
The advent of Edna into the household had been a miraculous and totally unexpected blessing, if such a word could be applied to what had become a devastating situation.
When Celia appeared to go from bad to worse, Brian had advertised for a housekeeper and two had come and gone in quick succession, the first merely saying that the post was not to her ‘fancy’, the second giving a fuller more blatant explanation: that she did not want to work in a household where there was nervous trouble.
With Celia intermittently in a clinic on the outskirts of north London, Brian at his wits' end and pondering whether to bribe Mrs Bennett to return, Karen had suddenly made the suggestion that her widowed mother might be willing to come to the rescue.
It appeared that one of Edna's married daughters had split up from her husband and needed somewhere to go with her small children.
This young woman would therefore be only too happy to take care of the family home fur a while.
‘Mum,’ Karen said, ‘can perfectly well leave Maureen to get on with it and come up here.’
She had apparently already put such a proposition to her mother on the telephone.
So Edna Porritt, comfortable and cheerful, had taken the next train from Penzance and was now, for an unspecified period, easing Brian's worries considerably.
Yet the underlying nightmare persisted.
His wife was ill, very ill, and what made it even worse was that he felt responsible for her illness.
He would look at Harry, the picture of health and happiness and, while marvelling at his steady uncomplicated progress, suddenly think of the child's mother, a travesty of the woman he had once known, suffering, it would seem, from chronic post-natal depression, so much so that, on Winifred Shalcross's advice, a second specialist had been called in.
Sometimes Brian tried to comfort himself with the fact  that, however much he had wanted a child, he had not forced motherhood on Celia, that Harry's conception had not exactly been his fault; but then that thought had been instantly negated by the realisation that his own pleasure at her pregnancy, their move to the country and his insistence that all would be well, amounted to a foolish bigoted optimism for which he blamed himself entirely.
Celia had been in and out of the Meadhaven Clinic three times now.
On each of her periods at Hillmarden he had still clung to the faint hope that she was improving, only to find at the end of a week or a fortnight she had made no progress at all and that when Harry — good baby that he was — occasionally cried, this was enough to make Celia so distraught that Brian was forced to accept that it was better for all concerned if mother and baby remained parted.
When Celia appeared not to be responding to ordinary psychotherapy, the medication she had also initially received had been altered and stepped up.
It seemed to Brian that during each day his wife was never long without swallowing some pill or other which, when she was at home, either he or Edna took responsibility for administering.
He would spend as much time as he could at Hillmarden, but the strain was beginning to tell and, guiltily, he came to look on the nights when he was able to stay at the London flat as a blessed escape.
Each time Celia re-entered the clinic he could not deny a feeling of overwhelming relief, although he still tried to spend at least one night at home mid-week, if only for the brief half-hour in the morning, which he was able to devote to Harry.
Today he would have liked to remain at Hillmarden for another night, but he had promised Celia he would call in at the clinic on his way back to London, knowing he had a very busy week coming which might make it impossible to see her again until the following weekend.
She had not demurred.
Her apathy and acquiescence were sometimes harder to take than her more positive reactions when she became upset or, occasionally, even aggressive.
After he had finished attending to the roses, he went round them once again, cutting a bunch of long-stemmed buds to take with him to the clinic, along with Edna's parcel of clean laundry.
He always took Celia flowers and sometimes books or magazines, but he had come to the conclusion she never read them.
The second specialist who had been called in — a man by the name of Adams — had assured Brian that his wife would recover in time, but he did not share his optimism.
Once or twice he had confided in colleagues, who were sympathetic but had little personal experience of such illnesses which, in any case, were not in their field and Brian had become increasingly reserved, his life revolving round his work, his son and a wife with whom he had difficulty in communicating.
He wondered how he would find her this evening.
The Meadhaven Clinic was, he knew, one of the best in the country, yet he felt immensely frustrated after every visit he made there.
Moreover, the cost was beginning to worry him more and more.
The move to Hillmarden had been expensive enough.
This unexpected added drain on his resources was stretching his bank balance to the limit, and beyond.
He saw Celia sitting under a large cedar tree in the garden when he drove up the long drive and swung the car round into the forecourt.
She did not get up and come towards him as he got out, but waited until he had crossed the grass to sit down beside her on the wooden seat.
‘How is it?’ he asked, as usual, taking her hand.
‘It's…the same.
How…are you and Harry?’
He was pleased she had asked.
Sometimes she didn't.
It was then as if she hardly registered his arrival.
‘Harry's flourishing.
He's got another tooth.
I've been busy gardening.
Edna sent her love and some clean laundry.
I picked some roses for you.
I probably oughtn't to leave them in the car too long.’
‘We'll go in.’
Once up in her room, he said, ‘I'm afraid I may not be able to come again until next Friday.
There s a conference at Brighton I've got to attend.’
‘Oh.
Alison said something about a visit.’
‘That's nice.’
Desperately, he struggled to keep the conversation going.
‘Have you seen Adams again?’
‘Last Thursday.
Or maybe it was Friday.’
‘And what did he have to say?’
Not a lot.
Except that he d like to see you some time.
He thinks perhaps I might have a few days away from here.
Not at home, though.’
‘That's wonderful.’
But his response belied his innermost thoughts.
If he were not to take her home, where would they go?
He would miss seeing Harry and, besides, a weekend at some hotel would cost the earth.
For the first time in his life Brian did not want to be left alone with Celia.
What he wanted was to leave her now, this minute.
He wanted to be free.
Only when he was at last on his way, did he realise that he wanted a woman.
‘Your wife has repressed the memory of much of her early life, Brian.’
It was a fortnight later and they were sitting in Frank Adams's mews house off Welbeck Street.
‘Possibly.’
Brian liked Frank.
They had been on Christian name terms for some time now.
He hoped the man was on the right track and did his best to believe that he was.
There seemed little else that he could do, but it was so far removed from his own branch of medicine, so alien to anything he could have foreseen happening to Celia.
She had always been so bright, so capable, so desirable, a wonderful wife in every way — until a year ago.
No, more than a year, when he came to think about it.
Ever since that ghastly winter's night when she had come back from Wimbledon and said she was pregnant.
‘Her mother's death when she was nearly four had a great effect on her,’ Frank Adams went on.
‘I suspect that actually she does remember more than she ever lets on.’
‘But at the age of four?
Any recollections would be shadowy, surely?’
Brian tried to think how much he could recall of his own early years.
Precious little.
Although there was the time when he was round about that age and had developed meningitis.
He had nearly died, so they said.
He could vaguely remember his mother's face, her constant presence as she sat by his bed seemingly day and night, her smiles as he began to get better.
Was that what had prompted him to become a doctor?
It could well have been.
Helping to save life was an idea he felt he had grown up with.
Wanting to bring life into the world was another.
He might easily have opted for becoming a gynaecologist.
If he had, he supposed that he would now have been in a much better position to help Celia, would have had a better understanding of what sometimes happened after giving  birth.
And yet, in her case, it did not appear to him that she had been struck down by any kind of ordinary post-natal depression, as Adams's next words seemed to confirm.
‘The trouble is very deep seated.
I've even considered hypnosis, but I don't think either you or she would want that.’
‘No.’
It horrified Brian to think of Celia hypnotised by some guru who would try to drag things out of her which might not even have been correct.
‘Oh, no,’ he said again.
‘There is, of course, another alternative.
You have Celia's former nursemaid working for you now.’
‘Edna?’
‘Yes.
Have you ever spoken to her about the problem?’
‘Not a lot.’
‘Would you have any objection to my talking to her?’
Brian frowned.
‘I wouldn't, but have you asked Celia?’
‘No.’
‘Why?’
‘Because although she is relieved to think you and Harry are being so well taken care of by Edna and her daughter, she also becomes agitated whenever I touch on Edna's role in her life when she was very small.’
Frank Adams waited while Brian seemed to consider the matter.
Presently, he said, ‘If it's going to help, by all means interview Edna, but I don't quite see how raking up the past, digging into something which might be better left alone, is going to get Celia over this illness, turn her into a normal woman again.’
‘I appreciate your feelings.
I can only assure you that it does help, sometimes.
Not always.
You might say it's a gamble.
But there are some things which can never be rightly explained.
Celia and I have been battling away for months now and we don't seem to be getting anywhere.
She has a spell at home and then, sooner or later, she's back in the Meadhaven Clinic again.
Look, I've got to go to Cheshire next weekend.
How would it be if you took Celia away and I called in at Hillmarden to see Edna?
That is, of course , if Edna is willing to see me?,
‘She mightn't like it, frank.
She's devoted to Celia.
As loyal as they come.’
‘I'm sure.
But you could explain the importance.’
‘Wouldn't it be a bit like going behind Celia's back?’
‘You could put it like that, I suppose.
But, listen.
Celia constantly refers to her mother's drowning accident.
She never admits it was suicide, even though I'm sure she knows, as we all know, it was an established fact.
She maintains that her own fear of the sea was a result of the tragedy.
But there must have been more to it than that.
Why did her mother, a young and seemingly attractive girl, never come to terms with either widowhood or motherhood?
After the death of her husband in the war, she might well have doted on her daughter, as being all she had left.
But she didn't.
Something I don't understand turned her into a neurotic depressed agoraphobic.
Why did Edna and the grandmother clam up on the child whenever she asked questions, for Celia has actually admitted that they did?
Haven't you ever puzzled about it?’
Grudgingly, Brian was forced to say that he had always thought it odd, but if reticence about her past was the way his wife wanted it, then he had been prepared to accept the situation.
He was in love with her, hopelessly in love; he still loved her deeply, although he realised that was not quite the same thing.
Naturally, he had speculated about Celia's upbringing, but he had kept his speculations to himself.
Knowing her fear of the sea they had invariably travelled by air: to Switzerland for ski-ing, to the States, when she had got leave from Brentwoods to accompany him on a kind of working-holiday.
Sometimes they had driven north and gone on walking tours in the Lake District or the Scottish Highlands.
Once they had spent an enjoyable week in Bath and on another occasion he had suggested going to Cornwall so that she could show him the house where she was brought up.
Her reaction to that had been swift but, so he persuaded himself at the time, perhaps rational.
‘Oh Brian,’ she had said, ‘it might be rather sad-making.
God knows who's in Four Winds now and…well, that part  of my life is over.’
So they had opted for Wales.
She had always liked mountains.
But wherever they had gone, she had been the perfect companion: enthusiastic, amusing and loving.
It was the last attribute which especially bound her to him.
Their need for each other was mutual.
How terrible to think he now dreaded the thought of a weekend away with her by themselves.
But if that was what Adams wanted, well, he was willing to clutch at any straw.
Brian thought Edna seemed wary when he told her that the specialist in charge of Celia wanted to have a talk with her the following weekend.
‘What about, Doctor?’
‘About Celia's early years,’ Brian replied.
‘Dr Adams thinks that it would help him in handling her case.’
Not altogether to his surprise, Edna seemed to have feelings very similar to his own about the matter.
‘I don't think Mrs Markham would like it, Doctor.
Wouldn't it be better to let sleeping dogs lie?’
So Edna acknowledged that there were sleeping dogs, did she?
Perhaps Adams was more astute than he gave him credit for.
‘Edna, my wife is sick, very sick,’ he answered.
‘Her doctor feels that if he could get her to face up to whatever it was that had such a damaging effect on her as a young child, then she would…well, take a grip on life again, see Harry in a different light, enjoy him, in fact, instead of escaping into illness as a way out of all her responsibilities.’
It was not an answer he would have given to many people, but he looked on Edna as an equal.
She remained silent for a while, evidently turning something over in her mind.
For the first time since Brian had known her, a look of pain seemed to cross her honest and usually cheerful face.
‘I made a promise, Doctor, to a dying woman, Mrs Tremayne.
So did my brother, Bert.
She said as how we were never to let Miss Celia know…’
She stopped, flushed and embarrassed.
‘Know what, Edna?’
Brian prompted her, gently.
‘Well, how the child herself nearly drowned.
Besides none of us ever knew the whole story, even though it was as plain as a pikestaff when you came to think about it.
I  suppose, by saying this I've already gone back on my word.
Still, if it's going to help Mrs Markham to get better, I might as well go on.
But if it's all the same to you, Doctor, I'd sooner talk to you than Dr Adams.’
‘Mrs Carrow, she was that pretty, Doctor.
‘Course, I didn't see all that much of her when she were growin' up.
She was sent away to boarding-school.
Shame, I used to think.
But maybe it suited her.
She was a lively one and no mistake.
All for getting out and about.
I suppose it was pretty quiet for a young girl at Four Winds.
That's what made it seem all the more strange when she turned in on herself, so to speak, in the end.’
It was very quiet in the garden, nearly dark, although the afternoon heat still lingered and the scent of late roses seemed almost overpowering.
Brian was tired, very tired.
He had had a long day at the hospital and the drive down from London had not been easy.
Yet, now that Edna had started to open up, possibly helped by the glass of wine he had insisted on her having, he suddenly became alert.
There seemed no stopping her and he felt as if he were listening to some of the most important information he had ever heard.
‘I don't mind telling you, Doctor, Mrs Carrow gave me the creeps sometimes when I took on looking after Miss Celia.
Mrs Tremayne would try to persuade her to go into Penzance with her, but after a while she gave up.
She couldn't get her to walk even a little way from the house.
Mrs Carrow would have one of those panic attacks at the very thought.
I've seen her shaking like a leaf.
Sort of standing and quivering with such a terrified look on her face.
Once, I remember, she even lay down by the garden gate.
There was no reasoning with her then, if you see what I mean.’
‘Yes, I see.’
As a doctor, Brian realised that his wife's mother had evidently suffered from the most acute form of agoraphobia.
He also felt angry, very angry, because of the effect it must have had on Celia.
He was not surprised  when Edna continued, ‘I began keeping the child away from her as much as possible.
Maybe I shouldn't have, but I felt it wasn't good for a little one to be in the same house.
Besides, her mother wasn't interested in her.
If I'd have thought that Mrs Carrow would take it on herself to go down to the beach with little Celia that morning when one of my younger brothers came for me because my mum was ill, well I'd never have gone, however much I was needed at home.
You see, Mrs Tremayne had driven into Penzance and it meant leaving Mrs Carrow alone with her child.’
‘I don't think I've ever heard about this, Edna.’
Brian watched the face of the woman before him.
He could imagine how anxious she must have been, torn between two different kinds of loyalty.
He appreciated how that quality was still apparent tonight; although now, in the half-light, he thought he could detect something else: relief, perhaps, at being able to unburden herself at last.
‘Well, I don't suppose you would have heard, Doctor,’ Edna went on.
‘I mean, Miss Celia, as I still often think of her, being that young at the time and Mrs Tremayne not wanting her to know, pledging me and my eldest brother, Bert, to secrecy.
It was he who came along accidental like, and saved the child from drowning that morning.’
‘Did he, now?
But how could she possibly have been in danger?
I mean, her mother, Mrs Carrow, was there.’
‘Yes, I know, Doctor.’
Edna paused and then, with obvious effort, said, ‘Mrs Carrow had met a man on the beach.’
‘A man?
What do you mean?
Did she have a prearranged meeting?
‘Well, no, Doctor.
Or you might say she did and she didn't.
You see, I'd mentioned the fact that I'd seen this chap several mornings hanging about in the Cove, so I decided not to take Miss Celia down there for a bit, even though we were having a real Indian summer that year.
He would keep looking at the child.
Very interested, he was.
Too interested.
Well, it seemed as if as soon as my back was turned Mrs Carrow went off down there, even though you couldn't normally get her to go no further than the garden gate, like I said.’
‘And this person, whoever he was, had taken Mrs Carrow's attention away from Celia?’
There was a further pause.
Then Edna answered quietly, ‘Much more than that, Doctor.’
There was no mistaking the meaning of her words.
It had become really dark now.
Brian refilled their glasses and this time Edna made no attempt to stop him.
Then he enquired, ‘Didn't Celia, as a little girl, ever say anything to you about the incident at the Cove?’
‘No, Doctor.
Only that she didn't want to go down to the sea again.’
‘And this stranger?
He disappeared?’
Oh, yes.
He shoved off pretty quick.
Me and Bert never saw him again.’
‘Can you remember what he was like?’
Again there was silence.
Then Edna said, ‘Well, Doctor, I think I have to say this.
Bert and I both noticed it, independently like, even though Bert only saw him the once when he were so taken up looking to Celia.
But we both agreed the little mite was the spitting image of the man.
Something about the eyes and them winged eyebrows she's got.
His were exactly the same.’
‘I see.’
There was so much, Brian thought, that he hadn't seen before.
How could one live with someone, love someone to distraction and be blind or, at least, allow oneself to be kept in the dark about so many things?
‘How long after that did Mrs Carrow…have this so-called drowning accident?’
‘Not long, Doctor.
About a week.’
‘And you looked after Celia for how long after that?’
Brian asked.
‘Till I married, Doctor.
She were six then.
It was still a strange set-up at Four Winds.
Mrs Tremayne did all she could, but she were a bit too possessive.
I suppose it was only natural, really.
She'd lost her husband and her only daughter and didn't want anything to happen to her only granddaughter.
She wouldn't let Miss Celia go to  boarding-school or anything like that.
Governesses came and went.
Because the child wouldn't go into the sea, she had her taught to swim in the local baths.
Even that, the poor little kid didn't like.
I was living up Redruth way and I used to go and see her as often as I could, because I sort of sensed she wasn't all that happy.
Once or twice, she'd say, ‘’ Tell me more, Edna, about when I was little.'’
I'd do my best, but ‘twasn't easy.
‘Course, in time she came to know her mother's death wasn't an ordinary drowning accident, but she kept up the pretence.
I don't think she ever knew the ins and outs of the matter.
She never ever referred to what had happened on the beach.
I often think of poor Mrs Carrow now.
None of us really knew for certain what had gone wrong, although, well, you couldn't help putting two and two together.
She suffered from a lot of guilt, I reckon, in more ways than one.’
Edna, the name of this…man.
Did you ever know it?’
An even deeper flush came over Edna's pink face.
‘I'm not sure, Doctor.
Except that when Mrs Tremayne were dying, I thought I heard her say something about someone called Ash, or maybe it was Nash.
You see, she was wandering at the time.’
A breeze had sprung up.
Brian felt that they had come to the end of that day's talk.
He had been given so many things to digest, not the least that it was possible Celia might have a father still living.
How much did she know?
How much had she guessed?
How much information might she have sought and pieced together, about which she had kept quiet?
Was Adams right in trying to get to the bottom of it?
Brian tried to think about all those theories — so abstruse to him — which maintained that unloved children became unloving mothers, abused children turned into abusers of their own offspring.
Nothing would be quite the same after what he had just heard.
It couldn't, surely, get worse, though.
Please God it would get better.
Brian had chosen Bath as a place to which he would take Celia the following weekend, partly because it was not too far away and partly because he remembered how happy they had been there before.
But when he came to sit opposite her in the dining-room that first evening, he felt he had made a mistake.
He was reminded of something he had read somewhere: that it was seldom wise to return to any former haunt hoping to recapture the same pleasure it had first given, because it was sure to be different and disappointing.
Although, to his eyes, Bath did not look so very different, the woman across the table did.
He thought of her previous radiance, the eagerness with which she had made plans to visit the Pump Room, potter round antique shops, drive out to Savernake Forest and Cheddar Gorge.
Her enthusiasm had been infectious.
But there was no enthusiasm now.
She could have been a stranger.
He began to feel uneasy, not the least because, by talking to Edna, he seemed somehow to have double-crossed his wife.
He had reported their conversation to Adams who had been inordinately pleased.
This had only added to Brian's sense of guilt, as if he had been prying, probing into something personal that was not his business.
Although surely it was his business, wasn't it, trying to get Celia well, trying to find out what was causing, as Adams referred to it, her emotional and mental block?
If only he could talk to her now, Brian thought, get into her mind, instead of finding himself practically unable to make any kind of conversation at all.
Suddenly, to his relief, Celia herself broke the constraint between them by remarking, ‘I had an unexpected visitor yesterday.’
‘Did you, now?
Who was that?’
‘Hindley Foster.
You know, the author whose novel I once tried to promote.’
‘Really?
How did he know where you were?’
‘Through Brentwoods.
Apparently he's written another one.
He wanted to find out if I was ever going back there.
He must have realised there wasn't much chance of that when he saw where I was.
Although I must say he didn't seem all that surprised.’
‘Oh.’
Brian did not know what else to say.
He had never met Hindley Foster, someone who seemed very much on the periphery of their lives.
But presumably he must have taken a shine, as the expression went, to Celia, particularly as he had gone to such trouble to seek her out and visit her at the Meadhaven Clinic.
‘He told me he had once nearly gone in for psychiatry.
He's always been interested in what makes people tick.
He's obviously a natural student of human nature.
I suppose that's why he writes novels now.’
A kind of cold fury took hold of Brian.
It was bad enough he himself trying to turn into an amateur psychiatrist or psychotherapist or whatever they liked to call themselves, but to have some strange layman taking an interest in his wife, or his wife's case, was altogether too much.
‘Is Hindley Foster,’ he asked, acidly, ‘proposing to come again?’
She lifted her eyes and stared straight at him.
There was a flicker of response in them which Brian had not seen for a very long time.
‘I suppose he might,’ she answered.
And then, ‘Brian, don't misunderstand the situation, please.
I just find it easier to talk about…this illness with someone I hardly know.
I can't explain.
Hindley Foster means nothing to me.
Therefore I don't mind him hearing the very worst about my past.
I can tell him things because he's not involved, as you and Adams are.’
‘I see.’
Did he see?
Not really.
Only that she must have been holding out on him all these years, that she did have memories which she had covered up or, to give her the  benefit of the doubt, conveniently forgotten about.
They were the reasons why she had never wanted children.
She probably did remember that incident on the beach.
More than an incident, of course.
Had it traumatised her for life?
But why on earth couldn't she tell him about it?
It wasn't her fault.
Suddenly, he stood up.
They had finished their meal, one at which he noticed she had hardly eaten anything.
‘Suppose,’ he said, ‘we go for a walk?’
It seemed easier than confronting her in their bedroom.
‘All right.’
She waited in the hall while he fetched her wrap and they went out into the night.
At least, he thought, he supposed he must be grateful that she was not a complete agoraphobic like her mother.
‘I talked to Edna this week,’ he began, as they started up a steep incline to the north of the city.
‘Yes, I thought you might have.
Adams is always harping on about her.’
‘She told me certain things which happened when you were very small.’
‘Yes.’
She was quiet, purposely noncommittal.
‘How much do you remember?’
‘You mean, about down at the Cove?’
‘Yes.’
‘Well, I suppose now that you've dragged it out of Edna, I shall have to say that I remember a man and my mother in a yellow frock looking unusually pretty and being angry that they wouldn't take any notice of me when I tried to get their attention.
They seemed to have a secret between them that I couldn't share.’
‘So you ran off to the sea?’
‘Yes.’
‘And then?’
‘There was this wave knocking me over.
I cried out and then more waves came up over my face and…well, just coughing and Bert carrying me up the cliff.’
‘Why have you never told me this before?’
They walked on in silence.
It was quite a while before she answered.
‘I don't really know.
I suppose I should  have but, you see, I doubt you'll believe this, I felt so ashamed.’
‘Ashamed?’
He stopped and turned towards her.
There was a nearby seat on the path and he pulled her down on to it.
The light from a street lamp made her face seem translucent, haunted.
‘Ashamed?’ he said again.
‘At the age of four?
What about?’
‘My mother,’ she replied, simply.
‘I felt that she and the man…
Oh, I don't know.
They were looking at each other and touching each other in such a funny way.
I know I shouldn't have gone near the sea, but I did it as a protest.
I wanted to hurt them.
Hurt her.
When my grandmother told me a little later on that my mother had gone away, I was glad.
I never wanted to see her again.
Of course, a bit later still Granny Tremayne said she'd drowned and I thought: serve her right.
She'd never been a proper mother and I hated the way she was acting with that man.
It wasn't until I was much older still that I found out she'd committed suicide.’
‘How?’
‘Well, I began wondering and worrying about a lot of things.
Why Granny Tremayne and Edna never talked about her.
Why my paternal so-called grandparents had been so stuffy the only time I met them.
Why there were no photographs of my so-called father in the house.
Why the only one of my mother had been put in a drawer.
You know, all the things which a growing child might question.
When I was about twelve I had a governess called Miss Mayhew.
Silly woman.
She used to take me to the local baths in Penzance sometimes, because my grandmother insisted I had to learn to swim, even if I wouldn't go into the sea.
On one occasion, when Miss Mayhew had gone off to have her hair done after my lesson, I took myself off to the newspaper offices and asked to look up their old records.
I couldn't find out much that morning, but the next time I had a chance, I did.
I came across a very brief report about my mother's death.
I suppose she killed herself because she felt so guilty.’
‘About what she nearly let happen to you?’
‘Yes and…other things.
I became more and more certain that John Carrow was not my father.’
‘Didn't you ever want to find out about your real one?’
‘Oddly enough, no.
I suppose some people might have but I think I didn't really want to face up to the fact that he might have been that man on the beach.’
‘But I still don't see how this affects your attitude to having a child of your own.’
‘No?
Oh Brian, have a heart.
Don't you see?
I've never actually told you before because I didn't want to undermine your own attitude.
I mean, you're taking responsibility for human life all the time.
I've never wanted to.
I've never really cared for driving.
Being in charge of a lethal weapon, so to speak.
I expect Winifred Shalcross was right, however strange you may think it, when she said I was overconscientious.
With a child, you've only got to take your eyes off it a minute and anything might happen.
Look what nearly happened to me.’
‘But you're nothing like Liza.
She seemed to be more of a good-time girl than anything else.
She made a mess of her life.
You're of a different calibre.
You're my wife.
Harry's mother.’
‘Who's run out.
Let the side down, only in a different way.
‘But if you're so over-conscientious, doesn't it ever bother you about letting others look after him, that they might not do it nearly as well as you?’
‘Only sometimes.
Mostly, I feel so inadequate that I think almost anyone could do the job better than I. I mean, Karen's trained and Edna s had a lifetime s experience.
‘But Harry is your child.
Our child.
His physical needs may be well catered for at the moment.
But I'm concerned about his emotional ones.
He's started to call me Dadda.
Isn't it time he learnt to say the corresponding word?’
He made her as comfortable as possible on the back seat of the car and drove off into the night.
He was aware that they could be setting out on a wild-goose chase, but he had to believe that they weren't.
What was it Adams had once said to him apropos talking to Edna: it's a gamble.
Well, he was taking no end of a gamble now.
It was a long way to Cornwall.
She had not appeared to be surprised when he told her what he intended to do, nor had she put up any resistance.
It was as if both of them accepted the decision as inevitable after their conversation, however curious and illogical it seemed.
He had asked the hotel for some black coffee before they set off and the management, knowing he was a doctor and that their sudden departure had something to do with his wife's health, had been accommodating.
They had even packed up further provisions in the picnic basket Brian had happened to bring, so that they would have sustenance to help them on their way: Taunton, Wellington, Tiverton.
Just outside Okehampton he stopped for a while.
Celia, having taken an extra sleeping-pill on his insistence, did not wake, and he himself dozed off for half an hour.
Then, after drinking more coffee, he pressed on: Launceston, Bodmin Moor, Bodmin.
Dawn was breaking when they reached Camborne and Celia stirred a little.
He was glad, for he realised that he would need her to direct him now.
A little short of four Winds he stopped the car and they shared the remains of the picnic.
It was seven thirty.
Some time that morning they would have to find somewhere to stay, but at the moment it seemed irrelevant.
Besides, being so late in the season he did not anticipate any difficulty; although there was something else to which he had not given any thought.
Would it matter, he wondered?
Probably not.
Not at this hour.
It would be unlikely that there would be anyone about.
Brian took a quick look at his wife.
She was sitting beside him now, staring straight out towards the sea.
It was impossible to know what was going on in her mind, but he was thankful that she seemed in no way agitated.
A strange kind of calm possessed her, as she said, ‘I think we should go on.
The house is over to the right.
You should see it quite soon.’
He packed away the picnic things and started up the engine.
The track was rough and, as they bumped down it, she remarked, ‘Amazing after all these years.
People living here must prefer keeping themselves to themselves.’
He was astonished when Four Winds came into view.
Somehow he had imagined it larger, more forbidding.
The sun caught the old mullion windows on the eastern side and against the grey stone walls there was a riot of colour: late flowering fuchsias, michaelmas daisies.
He felt inordinately pleased to be seeing, at last, the place where his wife had grown up and from which, until now, he had been excluded.
It was hard to believe that so much tragedy had taken place there which she had preferred to keep to herself.
‘Can we get to the Cove without having to go into the garden?’ he asked.
It seemed as if Four Winds did, indeed, have the only access to the beach.
‘Oh, yes.
If you stop here we can skirt round the fence.’
Taking his towelling bath robe out of his suitcase and one of the rugs from the back of the car, they set off towards the cliff.
He thanked God for the sun, already surprisingly warm on their backs.
Cornwall appeared to be enjoying an Indian summer, just like the one Edna had described so many long years ago.
The path down to the sea was certainly steep but Brian noticed that at the worst bends, new paling had been erected.
The Cove, as he had hoped and expected, was quite deserted when they reached it.
He realised it would not matter at all that they had no bathing costumes.
She did not flinch when he suggested a bathe.
They  stripped in silence and he took her hand as they walked down to the water's edge.
Just once, as the waves came up over her feet, she hesitated and gave a short gasp, as anyone might have done at the sudden cold.
Then, still holding hands, they waded in further.
When she struck out alone he could only marvel.
He knew that his plan, vague, unpremeditated and risky, had somehow paid off.
Fate had been kind, not the least with the weather.
Something had been achieved, even though he was not quite sure how or what.
They did not stay in the water long.
For one thing, the temperature saw to that.
Then, after rubbing themselves dry on the bath robe, they dressed and climbed the cliff again.
By the garden gate of Four Winds she stood looking at the house for several minutes in silence before they got back into the car and she told him how to get to the Inn on the Point.
‘It's funny,’ she said, ‘but it's the only place I feel I'd like to stay.
It was pretty rough at one time, but whatever it's like now it will be better, surely, than some posh hotel.’
The proprietress seemed delighted to see them.
The regulars, as she put it, had mostly departed and she and her husband were soon going to close down that side of the business for the winter.
‘Can't say I'll mind,’ she went on.
‘We're fairly new here and I'd like to get a bit of redecorating done.
D'you know these parts?’
Celia hesitated, but only for a fraction.
Then she said, quietly, ‘Yes, although I haven't been here for a long time.
I…grew up,’ she looked across the bay, ‘at that house over there,’she added.
‘You don't mean Four Winds?’
‘Yes.’
The woman's eyes widened.
She stared at Celia, disbelievingly.
‘You're not…you can't be…you're not a Tremayne, are you?’
‘Yes.
Mrs Tremayne was my grandmother.’
‘Well, I never.
Wait till I tell Bert.’
It was now Celia's turn to stare.
‘You aren't a Rafferty, by any chance, are you?’
‘’ Course I am.
Didn't you know?
I'm Bert's second wife.
His first died some years back.
We took on here last March.
He gave up the fishing business.
Didn't Edna tell you?
She's staying up with you, isn't she?’
‘Yes.
Only…
I've been in hospital rather a lot.’
‘I heard as how you were ill.
Still, you must be better now.
Able to have a little holiday and all that.
I'm surprised Edna didn't say.
‘Cor, won't Bert be pleased.’
as if to confirm her statement, a tall powerfully built man came round the corner of the house carrying a box of potatoes.
He stopped, took one look at Celia and his face broke into a broad grin.
‘Bert.’
‘Miss Celia.
Well, I never.
I…we…always hoped you'd come back.
It's been a long time.’
‘Yes.
Too long.
Let me introduce you to my husband.’
She was, Brian noticed, suddenly a little like the old Celia, outgoing, in command.
The months of illness might never have been.
True, she probably still had a long way to go.
She was painfully thin and there was an insubstantiality about her.
But there was no denying that today his wife was better than he had known her for many many months.
He wanted to shout with relief.
Instead he said, ‘I was going to ask you if we might have some breakfast.
I think however that this calls for something a little stronger.
A celebration perhaps.’
As the sun rose higher in the cloudless sky and the sea below took on an almost Mediterranean hue, Bert and Bella Rafferty and Celia and Brian Markham cracked open a bottle of champagne.
Celia's Father
After the near-fatal accident to the young Celia Carrow, Freddie Nash went back to London, managed to persuade the girl at the local off-licence to let him have some bottles on account, and got drunk.
It was not something which occurred all that often for the simple reason that he did not have the wherewithal.
But now, for three days and nights, he hardly knew where he was.
When, eventually he was able to take in his surroundings — the dingy room in a seedy lodging-house near Earls Court tube station — he became increasingly ashamed at having, as he felt, scarpered, even though Liza had appeared not to want him to stay.
He had, after all, been an officer during the war, albeit one who had never been tried in battle.
While other members of the Forces, such as John Carrow, had given their lives in liberating Europe, Freddie Nash, with his tact and sociability, had spent most of his time in the Services either in an administrative capacity at Southern Command or in the War Office.
To his credit, he had never engineered such postings and, in the early part of 1944, he would rather have gone anywhere than remain in close proximity to Liza Tremayne.
When Freddie returned from compassionate leave in Scotland after his wife's miscarriage and found the letter waiting which requested him to report to London immediately, he did so with thankfulness, even though he was not yet aware of the full repercussions of his latest extra-marital affair.
He only knew that Liza was the most sexually exciting woman he had ever come across and that, should they meet again, neither would be able to hold back from a passion which was so powerful it could only lead to trouble, about which his wife might come to hear.
He had  no idea she already had suspicions which might well have been a contributory factor to her miscarriage.
His posting to the War Office had seemed a godsend.
He wrote to Liza, did his best to forget about her and, to give him his due, refrained from much of his previous philandering and settled down to perform, with commendable efficiency, his duties in a commandeered house off Pall Mall.
If, later on, he made rather too much of his lucky escape from one of Hitler's flying bombs, describing the eerie cutting out of the engine noise seconds before it dropped, the blinding flash, the tall plume of smoke as it came to its final resting place in what was known as Bomb Alley — the route from bases in the Pas de Calais , via Kent to the capital — it was, perhaps, understandable.
He liked to give the impression he had been under fire — of a sort.
Freddie had been distressed when, through the grapevine, he heard of Liza's marriage, early widowhood and demobilisation from the ATS on the grounds of pregnancy.
He was even more distressed when, on another of his leaves, his wife, Fiona, started talking about a divorce.
He had wondered who his ill-wishers had been.
He could not help thinking that Eleanor Fuller might have had something to do with the mischief-making.
He had been well aware that she would dearly love to have been one of his girlfriends, more than willing to go to bed with him had he given her any encouragement, and was resentful of his relationship with Liza.
As time went by, he thought he had managed to rectify the situation between him and his wife.
During the last winter of the war she became pregnant again, but only to suffer another miscarriage in the New Year.
This second misfortune seemed to revive her memories of the earlier time when she had been carrying his child and had been given to understand that her husband had been simultaneously carrying on an affair with some young army chauffeuse.
When, on demobilisation, Freddie returned to Scotland, expecting to step into the role of country squire or glorified estate manager — despite the fact that he knew nothing about agriculture — it had been a shock to find  himself coldly received by his in-laws and his wife, who informed him that she definitely intended to start divorce proceedings.
He could not deny that he had been an unfaithful husband, although he was gentleman enough to keep the names of his various inamoratas to himself.
There seemed nothing left for him to do but go back to London, provide Fiona with some trumped-up evidence of adultery by spending the night with a prostitute — something he had never done before — and try to find a job.
Having never settled into any kind of worthwhile career before the war, now, in keeping with many other ex-officers, he found he was virtually unemployable.
Had he known that the sinecure into which he had expected to step was but a chimera, he would have opted for staying in the army which had, in fact, suited him.
Surprisingly, perhaps, he had only risen to the rank of major but, nevertheless, this status had afforded him a certain standard of living, being waited on by subordinates, an agreeable social life and plenty of opportunity, whenever the fancy took him, of indulging in affairs with the opposite sex.
Back in civvy street by himself, Freddie could not adjust.
His gratuity dwindled — fast.
Occasionally, he managed to obtain temporary work: once checking stock in a publisher's warehouse — hardly the sort of job for an ex-officer and far below his not inconsiderable intelligence — and on another occasion, because of his clerical and administrative experiences in the War Office, helping to sort out the vast archive of a deceased general.
The trouble was that although he carried out his duties perfectly adequately, such employment was neither satisfying nor lasting.
As time passed, his reduced circumstances became more and more evident.
He was no longer the debonair Major Freddie Nash in the well-pressed uniform and highly polished shoes and Sam Browne.
There was an unkempt look about him.
Sometimes, when not in work, he did not bother to shave.
He could, he supposed, have thrown himself on the  mercy of his father and stepmother, but the very idea was abhorrent to him.
He had broken with his family long ago.
His mother, whom he had adored, had died when he was sixteen and his father had then married a much younger woman to whom Freddie had taken an instant dislike.
There had been quarrels, resulting in his refusal to go — into his father's printing business and his leaving home altogether at the age of eighteen.
A little later, Patricia, his younger sister, had followed suit by marrying a South African and going to live in Cape Town.
Apart from the occasional exchange of letters with Pat, usually at Christmas, he had no other contact with the Nashes.
He was damned if he was going to let any of them know of his present predicament.
Therefore, in the bleak aftermath of war, he lived a hand-to-mouth existence in the less attractive areas of London.
Sometimes, when in funds, as he thought of it, he would spruce himself up and visit the West End where occasionally he would come across a wartime crony in a small, ex-officers' club in South Kensington.
Memories would be revived, drinks bought, present circumstances either voiced or avoided, according to how well he knew — or could trust — his chance acquaintance.
Sometimes a woman would come into his life who, like him, had missed out in the general scheme of things.
There would be tentative revelations, confidences, exchange of ideas, leading up to the inevitable ‘Your place or mine?’
Invariably, he found the sex disappointing.
Invariably, afterwards, he found himself thinking about Liza Tremayne and all that was or might have been.
Of his ex-wife Freddie heard nothing at all, until, in the early summer of 1948, he encountered a captain, younger than himself, whom he had known at Southern Command and who had relatives living in Scotland.
He told Freddie that Fiona had remarried and produced the son and heir for which her family had long been hoping.
It started him thinking harder than ever about the woman who he was certain had borne his own child.
He was both angered and grieved that he did not know Liza's whereabouts, nor the  sex of her offspring.
A desire to find out took hold of him.
He recalled Liza having once said something about coming from Cornwall, but he had never known or bothered to find out her home address.
Theirs had been an ardour so fierce, so spontaneous and reckless that their respective backgrounds, the possibility of pregnancy, the fact that one of them was married, were of no account.
Their affair had known no conscience.
What had mattered was the here and now.
How, he wondered, did one set about finding a woman, last heard of in Cornwall, whose surname was Carrow — that is, if she hadn't remarried — and a child who he supposed must be getting on for four.
Through telephone enquiries he discovered that there were plenty of Carrows and Tremaynes in the county and not a few who were ex-directory.
He had been debating whether to go down there or get in touch with the record office of the ATS when, returning one day from an unsuccessful interview for a job with a theatrical agent, he had happened to bump into Eleanor Fuller in Piccadilly.
Freddie had never liked her, but he knew at once that she might be the one person who could give him valuable assistance with his research.
He was careful to exchange addresses and telephone numbers and, if he had not been so short of funds, would have suggested buying her a drink at the Ritz, outside which they were both standing.
During the few minutes they chatted, apart from mentioning he was divorced, he did not bring up Liza's name.
Neither, to his disappointment, did the blunt and usually outspoken Eleanor who had guessed, correctly, that Freddie was playing for time, hoping for news of his old flame.
Afterwards, he felt it had been as if each of them had been waiting for the other to touch on a delicate subject.
What Eleanor did tell him however, was that she was about to go on holiday but that she hoped he would come to a meal in her flat when she returned.
She did not say where she was going and had not, in fact, until that moment, thought about the possibility of trying to find out whether Liza was still living in Cornwall.
Something  warned her that it might be better to wait and see what happened during her vacation and to contact Freddie when she returned, if she had anything worth relating.
Although by no means the sensitive type, Eleanor was possessed of a certain amount of native wit, and she had a feeling that she might be able to play quite an interesting — little game with her two old adversaries.
Eleanor Fuller was as good as her word over the question of dinner.
As soon as she returned from Cornwall, having called on Liza at Four Winds, she rang up Freddie and suggested a date.
She said it would only be a little party: herself and Freddie, one of her flat mates, called Pauline — the other happened to be away — and Pauline's boyfriend.
Freddie accepted without, he hoped, showing too much alacrity.
He was relieved to feel that he would not be alone with Eleanor and was sure that he would be able, casually and quietly, to say something about Liza in the course of the evening — that is, if Eleanor did not say something first.
He could have kicked himself, however, for imagining that although Eleanor had kept to her promise of inviting him to a meal, the ‘little party’ she had proposed would actually materialise.
He realised it had only been a bait for which he had fallen.
As soon as he walked through the door of the rather dark basement flat in the Bayswater Road and heard her explain that Pauline's boyfriend was ill so she had gone off to his place to see what she could do for him, Freddie wanted to flee.
Had it not been for his desire to sound Eleanor out on the subject of Liza, he felt he could easily have done so.
He knew Eleanor's sort: predatory, determined, prurient and avid for sex no matter with whom.
He would not have put it past her to make a kind of bargain on that basis.
She gave him a whisky and soda which he drank quickly and he allowed her to refill his glass.
She was wearing a loose purple housecoat zipped at the front from top to bottom.
It certainly camouflaged her ungainly figure, but its shade did not exactly enhance the heightened colour of her face which had obviously caught the sun on holiday.
She appeared to have gone to quite a lot of trouble over the meal, Although, at that time, rationing was still in  force, she produced pâté, a  savoury mince, a surprisingly light lemon soufflé and a passable bottle of claret.
It reinforced his uneasiness, however, when she lit candles on the small dining-table and then turned off the only overhead electric light.
‘Cosier, don't you think?’ she said coyly, as she slid into a chair nearest the kitchen door and gave him what he could only assume was her standard come-hither look.
It was not until they had finished eating and she had suggested having their coffee ‘in more comfortable seats’, as she put it — he was careful to avoid the sofa — that she said, in mock reproach, ‘You've been very quiet, Freddie.
I seem to have done most of the talking.
Isn't there anything you'd like to ask me?
You haven't even enquired about my holiday or where I spent it.’
‘No.
I hope you had a pleasant one.’
‘Yes.
Very.
I went to Cornwall.
The weather was gorgeous and I was able to look up an old friend.’
He could feel his face muscles tighten.
For once, he was glad there was still only candlelight in the room.
‘I saw Liza Carrow,’ Eleanor went on in a matter-of-fact way.
‘Amazing.
She's still living with her mother.
And the child, of course.’
He did his best to keep his voice level.
‘How is she?’
‘Difficult to tell.
Thin.
Nervy.
Sort of fine drawn, I think you'd say.
I wasn't with her all that long before the mother came back in the car.
Bit of an old battle-axe, I thought.
Liza said something about having been ill so that she herself didn't go out much.
I couldn't see why, because apparently the kid is looked after by a local nursemaid, who had taken it off that day to visit her own family.
I gathered that during the summer she and the child spent most of their time on the beach.’
‘Is it…a boy or a girl?’
‘A girl.
Name of Celia.’
‘Oh.’
There was a strained silence.
Then Eleanor said, ‘Oh come off it, Freddie.
Don t you want to know where Liza is living?’
She got up, came across the room and perched  on the edge of his chair.
‘Or perhaps you would like me to inveigle her out of her self-imposed purdah and come up here instead of you going down to Four Winds.’
She stopped abruptly, almost as if she had metaphorically clapped a hand over her mouth.
It was plain that she had not intended to divulge Liza's whereabouts — at least, not yet.
The last words had simply slipped out.
Then, recovering her composure, she continued, ‘You'd be welcome to use this place as a rendezvous, if you understand my meaning, Freddie.
I don't somehow feel that Liza's mother would be all that pleased to see you.’
He stood up.
Eleanor had said enough.
He had had enough.
‘I understand what you mean,’ he answered, coldly.
I must be going.
Thank you for the dinner.
Eleanor was forced to stand also.
In a desperate effort to remedy the situation, she said, ‘Freddie, please.
Don't get me wrong.
I just thought…well, we're old friends, aren't we?
I felt…maybe, now you're divorced you and Liza might like to get together.
I'm no spoilsport.
I've always been prepared to help wherever I could.
Life's never easy for the single man or woman, is it?
I believe in giving pleasure whenever I can, however transitory it might be.
I myself have long given up any hope of a more permanent relationship.’
She seemed to be pushing her enormous frame closer to his, as he tried to extricate himself from the small stuffy room which had begun to give him claustrophobia.
‘I felt sorry for Liza,’ Eleanor continued, standing in the doorway.
‘I don't mind telling you that.
There she was, imprisoned in that isolated house on the cliffs near Penzance with what seemed like a martinet of a mother.’
It was obvious that Eleanor had now decided there was little point in remaining secretive any longer.
‘Oh, Mrs Tremayne was pleasant enough,’ she prattled away.
‘But I could tell.
Liza had given me a gin and tonic and when Granny turned up it was quite clear that she disapproved.
I can't think how Liza stands it.
Perhaps that's what made her ill, being sort of stuck between two generations.’
Freddie had managed to get into the hall by now, although even here his hostess had contrived to place her formidable bulk before the front door, her expression revealing, only too plainly, her disappointment at his early departure and her failure at not having conducted the evening more to her advantage.
He knew if he had only played ball, she would have been more than pleased to accommodate him, as she probably thought of it, when his attentions were not engaged elsewhere.
Having given up all hope of getting hold of a man for herself alone, she would be prepared to share one as the next best thing.
He decided to walk back to Earls Court.
He needed air and time to think.
He knew where to find Liza and the child now.
An odd kind of feeling took hold of him at the thought he had a daughter.
He had no doubt in his mind that Celia was his and that was why Liza had married John Carrow.
He couldn't help feeling sorry for the chap, but then he also felt sorry for Liza.
Whatever else Liza Tremayne was or wasn't, she wasn't at all like Eleanor Fuller.
Liza might have been highly sexed, but there was nothing lascivious about her.
Looking back, it seemed to Freddie that she had simply wanted him and him alone — as he had wanted her.
He was sure that was why his love life had been so unsatisfactory ever since.
If only he had a proper job now, he thought, there was no reason why they shouldn't marry.
The child would have its rightful father and mother.
He began to fantasise quite a bit about this as he walked down Kensington Church Street.
One thing was certain.
He had to see Liza again.
At once.
He was perturbed that, according to Eleanor, she did not appear to be well or happy.
He must put that right.
Her mother might pose a bit of a problem, but once he had seen Liza he could, maybe, win the old girl round.
He had been able to charm more than a few elderly ladies in his time.
At the moment he knew that he had no security to offer, but that was something he would do his damnedest to rectify as soon as possible.
It occurred to him that it might be easier to find gainful employment in Cornwall.
He seemed to recall some casual acquaintance saying something recently about market gardening.
He  wondered whether he could get hold of him.
Go into partnership.
He had turned into Kensington High Street now, fantasy in his mind turning into fact.
With a wife and child to support he would become a new man.
Being able to live and sleep with the most desirable woman in the world would put an end to all the previous months and years of longing and loneliness.
Regular sex would stabilise him.
There was nothing he might not be able to do.
The next day he drew out the last of his savings from the bank and left for Cornwall.
It had been frustrating hanging about the beach beneath Four Winds, watching Celia and the nursemaid spend what seemed to Freddie endless hours doing nothing much at all.
He marvelled at the girl's patience as her charge ran hither and thither, collecting shells and seaweed, splashing in the waves at the water's edge, letting out little shrieks of excitement and then relapsing into relative quietness when food and drink were produced out of a knapsack.
If he had had any doubts about paternity, they were dispelled; for, even though he kept his distance, he did once get near enough to the pair to become acutely aware that the child bore a striking resemblance to him: dark hair, dark brown eyes beneath the same unusual winged eyebrows.
Why, he kept wondering, did Liza not come?
What was she doing up there in that ancient weather-beaten house on top of the cliffs in which, according to Eleanor Fuller, she seemed to lead the life of a recluse.
What kept her from coming down to bathe and witness the enjoyment her child got out of being on the seashore?
Freddie knew little about children and held the belief of the uninitiated that every mother doted on her offspring.
He had almost given up hope of meeting Liza on the beach and was considering whether he would, after all, call at Four Winds, despite Eleanor's warnings, when, to his incredulous delight, on the fifth day of his visit, he saw a different figure scrambling down the cliff followed by a little girl.
Instinctively, he hung back in the shelter of a rock.
He did not want to scare Liza.
It would not do to approach too quickly.
He waited.
As the pair reached the bottom he saw that she was, as Eleanor had said, very thin, but he noticed the same rhythm in her movements as she walked across the cove.
Everything about her still seemed to flow: her long auburn hair, the lines of her body beneath the folds of her yellow dress, the lovely long legs.
He could feel his heart beating, a surge of desire such as he had not experienced since he had last seen her, making it almost impossible to refrain from making an immediate approach.
He held back as she spread a towel on the sand and sat down on it, while the child began to play.
Once or twice she seemed to look about her nervously.
Then, to his dismay, he heard her suddenly call out, ‘We must go home, Celia.’
Why, he wondered?
They had only just come.
He was not surprised when the child answered in a high-pitched rebellious voice, ‘No.
Celia stay sea.’
It was time for him to intervene.
‘You have a very good-looking little girl, Liza.’
Although she swung round quickly, he noticed that she did not seem all that startled.
There was, perhaps, relief, almost elation, in her eyes as he sat down beside her and took her hand.
He sensed her own excitement as they made what amounted to — considering the circumstances and the time lapse — quite desultory conversation.
Only when he told her that he intended leaving that evening did he feel her hand tighten in his.
He knew then that she still wanted him as much as he wanted her.
Now.
This moment, with the sun and the sand and the sea all around them.
It seemed the most natural thing in the world.
When he gently pushed her backwards and began undoing the buttons of her dress and cupped a hand over one of her small breasts she made no attempt to resist.
In a matter of seconds, nothing else seemed to matter save the urgency of their need for each other, not even the child they had created.
When those brief moments of ecstasy were over and the everyday world took precedence again, they stood in shocked silence while Bert Rafferty carried Celia up the cliff.
After a while, as Liza started to follow, Freddie offered to come with her but she was fierce in her refusal.
It would only make matters worse, she said.
He watched her go alone, the trappings she had brought down to the beach  left abandoned.
He saw the figure in the yellow dress become smaller and smaller.
Once, he thought he saw her stop and wave, but he couldn't be sure.
There appeared to be nothing for him to do but make his way back to the Inn on the Point, collect his own belongings and return to London.
On arrival, getting drunk seemed his only option, the sickening hangover after three days a minimal punishment.
Lying on his uncomfortably narrow bed, he thought back to the events which had brought about his present state.
The child had been saved, thank God.
At least, he felt, an act of Providence had prevented him from having a death on his conscience.
But the awareness of what might have been had not some stalwart Cornishman come along the beach in the nick of time and the thought of the possible after-effects on both Celia and Liza haunted him.
Should he write?
Would she reply?
Should he go back?
How much would Mrs Tremayne have been told?
In the end he decided he would write to Liza, taking full responsibility for what had happened, ask her forgiveness, say how much he loved her and whether he might return, this time in not such a clandestine manner, but with a view to meeting her mother.
The only thing which stopped him from making an outright proposal of marriage was the knowledge that he had no security to offer whatsoever.
But in his still semi-confused state, writing a letter to Liza seemed beyond him.
Draft after draft was relegated to the wastepaper basket.
He realised that he would need some more writing paper, as well as something to eat.
With a little food inside him he felt he might find composition easier.
Yet, as soon as he got outside into the Earls Court Road he also realised something else.
During his period of oblivion the weather had changed, dramatically.
He was still wearing summer clothes and, once back in his room again, the only heat was regulated by how much a tenant could afford to put into the meter — and Freddie was abysmally short of cash.
By the end of the day, the effect of too much alcohol, too little food and a sortie in his shirt sleeves on an uncommonly chilly autumn morning began to take effect.
He knew, that night, that he must have a high temperature.
The intended letter to Liza had to be shelved.
By the end of the following day he was in hospital, his landlady, probably more for her sake than his, having insisted on calling a doctor.
After a seemingly timeless period, during which he drifted in and out of consciousness, he became gradually aware of where he was and what had happened.
Fretting that he still had not written to Liza, he proved to be a difficult patient in more ways than one.
As he had been delirious on arrival, the authorities, knowing that his landlady, Mrs Avery, had been responsible for getting him into hospital, simply put down her name as next-of-kin.
When he was out of danger and questioned about relatives, he told them, somewhat reluctantly, that he had a sister living in South Africa and gave them Pat's married name and address.
Although he was still hardly up to seeing any visitors, the staff nurse on his ward was quite relieved one day when a large buxom-looking woman, calling herself a friend, arrived asking to see Major Freddie Nash.
Under ordinary circumstances, Nurse Goodman would probably not have given permission but ‘the Major’, as he had become known, was such a mystery that she was glad to feel that at least somebody knew of his fate and cared enough to come to the hospital to see how he was getting on.
When Freddie saw Eleanor bearing down on him, he was appalled.
She might be his only contact — other than Mrs Avery — with the outside world but, as far as he was concerned, she had served her purpose.
She had been instrumental in putting him in touch with Liza although, as things had turned out, he could not help thinking that it might have been better if he had never bumped into her that day in Piccadilly.
‘Freddie!’
The way Eleanor exuded rude health made him feel all the weaker.
‘Hullo, Eleanor.’
‘I found out where you were from your landlady.
I don't mind admitting I was a bit worried about you.
I mean, I hadn't heard anything of you since you came to dinner that evening and…well, went off rather hurriedly.
I rang that place where you live and one of the tenants, at least I presume it was another tenant, said you were away.
Then, a bit later, I got your landlady who told me the bad news.
I'm so sorry, Freddie.
I've brought you some grapes.’
‘Thank you.’
He found he was sweating.
Eleanor purloined an empty chair from beside another bed and came and sat close to him.
Her scarlet and green plaid outfit made him want to avert his eyes.
‘Poor Freddie,’ she continued.
‘I wonder, when you're allowed out of here if you'd like to come to my humble abode to recuperate?
We've got a room vacant, as it happens.
Pauline has gone and got married unexpectedly.’
He looked at her miserably.
He knew thanks were required but the effort of offering them and making a satisfactory excuse seemed altogether too much.
‘Kind of you,’ was all he could say, at length, ‘but I shall be…all right .’
‘But they said you had pneumonia, Freddie.
Pretty badly.
You were only saved by this new wonder drug, penicillin.’
‘Yes.
So I believe.’
‘You'll have to take it easy when you do come out.
Are you sure I can't help, Freddie?’
‘Quite sure, thank you, Eleanor.’
He closed his eyes.
Even his visitor, insensitive as she was, seemed to realise that her continued presence was not altogether welcome.
‘I'll come again,’ she said, getting up and pressing his hand.
‘If you change your mind about your convalescence, you've only got to get one of the nurses to give me a ring.’
‘Thank you,’ he said again.
He managed to open his  eyes now and give her a wan smile.
Afterwards, he instructed the mystified staff nurse not to let any more visitors, under any circumstances, come to see him.
That way Eleanor would be kept at bay and, after all, the chance of anyone else looking him up was extremely remote.
It was the end of October before he was allowed back to his lodgings.
Weakness kept him confined to his room most of the time and an overwhelming sense of guilt, remorse and failure prevented him from doing anything about writing to Liza.
One day, when he was feeling a little stronger and thought perhaps he would try to start another letter, Mrs Avery appeared at his door.
‘Major Nash,’ she said, ‘I've kept your room all this time because I felt sorry for you.
But you owe two months’ rent now and I'm afraid I must ask you to find other accommodation in a week's time if this is still outstanding.’
Eleanor's invitation came almost instantly to mind, but only to be instantly rejected.
He knew that he still had certain assets on which he could raise cash.
His late mother's gold watch was one of them.
Whatever happened, the last person he wanted to have anything more to do with was Eleanor Fuller.
He told Mrs Avery that he would let her have a cheque by November 1st.
He had not expected Eleanor to beard his lodgings in Earls Court, especially as he had given Mrs Avery the same instructions about visitors as he had given Nurse Goodman.
But one evening, during the first week of November, he was dismayed to hear an altercation going on in the hall in which his name was mentioned.
Coming out on to the landing he was horrified to find Eleanor mounting the stairs, this time wearing a thick tweed trouser suit with a scarf wrapped round her throat, presumably as some sort of protection against the peasouper outside which he knew, to his cost, had already infiltrated his lodgings and was making him cough.
He backed into his doorway, determined not to let Eleanor cross the threshold.
She seemed the same as ever  as she closed in on him with that unfortunate overbearing manner, except that today there was an almost wild look about her as she burst out, ‘I felt I had to come, Freddie.
Liza Carrow is dead.’