

What's new
HAIR BEAUTY FASHION
Six eye-catching, gold brushes have been added to Kent's professional range of hair tools.
Each brush has a heat-resistant handle with a rubber-neck grip for firm hold while you style.
Available with bristles or nylon quills from.
If you're planning on a few intimate moments then why not try new Santes anti-perspirant deodorants.
Like Santes pH balanced Shower Gel and Foam Bath, the new deodorants will help protect your skin against dreaded body odour.
Brand new from The Body Shop this month is a fresh and fruity selection of Bath and Shower Gels.
Look out for Pink Grapefruit, a refreshing gel to tone the body — great for adding a sizzle to your morning shower!
Demi Moore has out-styled Julia Roberts, Mariah Carey and Cher by becoming Hollywood's best tressed star in a recent hairdressers' poll.
As for the lads — it just had to be those gorgeously groomed guys Jason Priestly and Luke Perry, stars of Beverly Hills 90210.
Hair experts at Clynol have recently launched their new professional Salon Formula Styling Collection.
Designed for superb everyday care and styling, Salon Formula contains natural ingredients and vitamins, the most important of these being avocado oil which is renowned for its gentle, moisturising properties.
This total range comprises of Shampoo, Conditioner, Gel Spray, Sculpting Spray, Volume Builder, Forming Mousse, Sculpting Wax and Fixing Spray and is available from Clynol appointed salons only.
Telephone  for your nearest stockist.
If mascara brings tears to your eyes, then take a look at new Intense Colour Mascara, from RoC.
This hypo-allergenic moisturising mascara won't irritate your eyes and is suitable for sensitive eyes as well as contact lens wearers.
If you'd like your lipstick to have more staying power, then try 17's new Lipstick Base.
Its special formula will help your lipstick stay in place and keep your lips looking lovelier for much, much longer!
The Silkience Hair Range, well known for its self-adjusting formula, has been given a completely new look.
The newly designed packaging is complimented by the introduction of a unique new bio-nourishing formula with panthenol.
Easy to use and great for your hair — temporary colourants are THE hair product of the 90's.
Brand new from Wella is Colour Confidence Wash Out Colour.
With 12 fab shades to choose from, you can change your hair as often as you like.
So, if you want stunning colour AND great shine, check them out at chemists nationwide.
Each pack contains colourant, protective cape and gloves and costs.
Yet another all-in-one shampoo has hit the shelves, this time from St. Ives.
They have combined their superb Swiss Formula with Jojoba and Aloe Vera to create two great shampoos.
So, if you're looking for a new all-in-one that isn't tested on animals, has a biodegradable formula in a recyclable bottle then new Jojoba All-In-One for normal/oily and Aloe Vera All-In-One for normal/dry are great value at for 500ml.
With gloss and shine being the buzz words for hair ‘92, Salon Selectives have introduced a new spray-in, Leave-In Conditioner — Type L. Loaded with vitamins and natural ingredients, this ultralight spray can be used instead of or alongside your normal conditioner for a silky smooth shine.
Montagne Jeunesse have created a completely vegetarian, cruelty-free haircare range.
This collection of shampoos and conditioners are all made with natural vegetable, plant and fruit ingredients such as chamomile, kukai nut and seaweed.
The range is also hypo-allergenic, making it perfect for sensitive scalps.
Kiss it Goodbye!— that's the message for Wednesday 11th March, this year's No Smoking Day.
You can call the smoker's quitline on  if you need advice, info or inspiration.
STYLE FILE
It's the mad month of march and we've put together a selection of some of the wildest styles around.
They are fun, outrageous, extravagant and even over the top!
A BRILLIANT BOUFFANT FROM DENMAN
LONG LOOSE LOCKS FROM RITA RUSK
BY DAVID ROLES OF NEW HAIR DESIGN
AVANT GARDE LOOK BY CHARLIE MILLER
WILD CURLS FROM D.L.C. IN GLASGOW
FROM THE HAIR TRAFFIC SALON IN BELFAST
BY THE HAIRDRESSER OF ‘91 — TREVOR SORBIE
CREATIVE BACK-COMBING BY TERENCE RENATI
HAIR BY WAYNE OF THE M & M HAIR ACADEMY
TRES CHIC FROM TERENCE RENATI OF LONDON
INCREDIBLE EXTENSIONS BY TERENCE RENATI
HIGH STYLE FROM NICHOLAS FRENCH
HAIR BY WILLIAM FOR M & M ACADEMY
SPIRAL STYLE FROM TREVOR SORBIE
FROM RITZ INTERNATIONAL IN THE U.S.A.
HAIR BY ROZ MAIN FOR RITA RUSK INT.
Wait around long enough and eventually everything will come back into fashion.
After almost three decades of wash 'n' wear hair, the good old shampoo and set is back with a vengeance but this time it's easier to achieve and much kinder to your hair.
SET FOR SPRING
THE RIGHT TOOL SET
It's easy to get set yourself and with heated curlers, tongs and styling products better than ever before, all you need is a little practice to create the perfect style.
Big rollers are essential — look for Clairol's Curl Control Setters which cost  and BaByliss Soft Curlers,.
Tongs can be used just as effectively but remember that the larger the barrel, the bigger the curl.
BaByliss created their Professional Range Volume Tong specifically for these ‘just set’ styles  and Carmen's Salon Professional Curling Tong comes in a choice of ½ inch and ¾ inch barrels .
Whichever curling method you choose, styling products are invaluable for setting hair beautifully.
Keeping up with the latest hair trends as ever, Wella has just introduced Hair Sets in three variants.
Simply apply them evenly through towel-dried hair, comb through and set hair as usual.
The Hair Sets range cost  from chemists, supermarkets and stores around the country.
The hood-dryer makes a welcome return, according to Jeanne Braa, Creative Director for Paul Mitchell Systems USA.
‘The set gives hair that touch of glamour — it's moveable yet versatile’.
Tongs or curlers — the choice is yours.
Whichever you choose, remember that the bigger the curler or barrel, the bigger the curl.
JOIN THE SALON SET
A new sound can be heard in hair salons around the country — the once familiar hum of the hood dryer is making a comeback.
Essential for sets, you can sit back and relax with your favourite mag or catch up on the gossip with the girl under the next dryer!
One company who particularly favour this method of drying is Paul Mitchell Systems whose professional styling range includes Sculpting Lotion.
Ideal for roller setting, this lotion adds shine and body to hair without flaking.
Available from salons only, call  for details of prices and stockists.
A new and very exciting service now being offered to clients from leading stylists around the country is Tec Ni Pli by L'Oréal Technique Professionnelle.
Comprising of a completely new type of lotion and pinless, lightweight rollers, this unique technique has been introduced to keep up with the increasing demand for 90's sets.
Thermo-Fixing Spray is activated by heat, either from a hair dryer or heated rollers, and contains non-sticky polymers to give volume and control as well as condition and shine.
There are three variants of lotion to enable the stylist to choose one most suited to the client's hair condition and needs.
Special Tec Ni Pli kits will be available from your stylist so you can continue to create the look yourself between salon visits—ask your local L'Oréal appointed salon.
‘A return to the old-fashioned roller set of the 60's would be a step in the wrong direction — with ‘painful pins’, heavy back-combing and practically a can of hairspray’say the experts at L'Oréal.
Their new Tec Ni Pli service is a big step forward for 90's sets.
Some hair may be a little stubborn when it comes to curling.
A soft perm is the answer, adding body and volume to your hair, making it much more manageable and easy to set.
Ask your salon about gentle formulations such as Wella's Optaform perm and L'Oréal's Equa pH acid perm and Dulcia Texture perm.
Whenever leading faces of stage and screen change their image drastically, it's a heavy indication of what's happening generally on the fashion scene.
One lady who's gone for the 90's set in a big way is Lisa Stansfield — her sleek, kiss-curl style has been replaced with this fabulous mass of casual curls by a stylist in Paris.
Thumbs up from Hairflair!
irish style
The first in our series of regional style round-ups, this month we visit The Emerald Isle.
This special section includes exciting new hairstyles, predictions for spring plus some interesting fashion ideas.
‘Hair for ‘92 will be groomed — messy, scrunched looks are passé.
Our haircuts are much sharper, giving more versatility than ever before.
The look is polished, with far more glamour.
70% — 90% of our clients are opting for colour and the obsession with natural products is decreasing — highlights, using 2–3 shades at a time, are the most popular’ REDS, Dublin.
‘We are cutting a lot of shortish, varied bobs and very short strong, straight looks.
The emphasis is on straighter and shinier looks, using colouring techniques to create a more vibrant effect’.
ROBERT CHAMBERS, Dublin.
‘We have an awful lot of ‘earth-friendly’ clients who are interest in herbal and natural colourants.
Longer hair is becoming popular, especially long, curly styles.
To meet with demands, we will be concentrating on achieving natural effects with perms this season’.
N&A, Belfast.
‘This year there will be a strong move towards shorter looks, with soft flattering effects and plenty of hair within the haircut itself.
Natural products are in demand, as are shine and condition’.
SANKEIV HAIR COMPANY, Dublin.
‘The dry set is going to be popular this year—it's fast and achieves the look of the 90's.
We'll be using several shades at once with different colouring and highlighting techniques to create very natural effects.
We'll be concentration on spot perms, taking one area of the head, and perming it to create body’.
DAVID AUMONIER, Belfast and Bangor.
‘Fringes will be big in '92 but we won't be selling a cut or colour: The current trend for dressed styles will continue but there will be a general feel of ‘if you like it, wear it’.
The emphasis this year will be on colour; condition and a healthy sheen rather than one particular style of look’.
PETER MARK, Dublin.
Five easy steps to a perfect bouffant
Having won the title of Northern Ireland Stylist of the Year in 1990, Alan Boyce is a great believer in fuss-free styling.
‘There's no need for hair styling to be fiddly, especially with the right tools’.
He uses the Denman range because, he says, ‘They have a brush for every hair type and styling need’.
STEP 1
Alan sets to work on a simple, single-layered bob by brushing hair through well with a Denman Traditional.
This multipurpose styling brush is ideal for straight hair.
STEP 2
For added body, volume and manageability, hair was set on large rollers.
STEP 3
Once set, Alan worked into the curls with a Denman Mixed Bristle radial brush.
Great for creating curl, this brush is available with different sized diameters which in turn determine the size of the curl created.
STEP 4
For gentle backcombing and tousling, Alan used the Denman Vent brush.
It's a lightweight brush which features a sculpted handle, providing maximum grip for controlled styling.
STEP 5
Using traditional styling techniques and traditional tools, Alan has created a beautiful sixties-style bouffant.
The complete Denman range is available from Boots, supermarkets and stores and comes in a choice of red, white and black.
DESIGNS FROM THE EMERALD ISLE
Blarney Woolen Mills is one of Ireland's oldest mills, reknowned for its traditional quality and style.
Having expanded to English shores, they now have shops in Cambridge and Windsor.
Alternatively you can call  for their latest catalogue.
herbal help
Get back to your roots and solve your beauty problems the natural way
Simple natural remedies are a great antidote to today's high tech, high pressure lifestyles.
Many based on tried and trusted therapies heal the mind as well as the body and are back in fashion in a big way.
So get back to nature, try alternatives to conventional toiletries and techniques, and discover some New Age solutions to your health and beauty problems.
HOME COOKED COSMETICS
Before the days of scientific toiletries, your great grandmother had to make do with simple cosmetics she made herself using herbs and foods from her kitchen cupboard.
And even today these do-it-yourself beauty products often work just as well as anything you can buy.
Milk and honey are just two kitchen cupboard stand-bys that have been used since ancient times in beauty routines, so give these recipes a go.
Honey face saver : legendary as a treatment for ailments such as sore throats and hayfever, honey has also been shown to heal burns and can sort out dry and spotty skin problems, so get stuck in!
It has antiseptic properties to help fight pimples, acts like a cleanser because it draws dirt out of pores, yet at the same time it moisturises and softens too.
Simply smear on a generous amount over your skin after cleansing to make a revitalising face mask.
Relax for fifteen minutes, then rinse off with tepid water.
Elemis natural beauty range
Milk body boosters : milk baths made Cleopatra beautiful and can do the same for you.
You don't need a herd of asses, just tip a few tablespoons of  powdered milk into your bath for a skin softening soak.
Bottled mild also contains fats which makes it a good conditioning and soothing skin cleanser.
Also try mixing it with oatmeal for a really effective exfoliating scrub.
BREW UP FOR BEAUTY
Too much tea and coffee can pump your system full of caffeine, making you tense and anxious.
But there is an alternative — herbal teas.
Not only do they do you a world of good if you drink them but they also have cosmetic uses.
Here are a few examples:
Peppermint — aids digestion; cooled teabags squeezed and rubbed onto skin make a good antiseptic tonic.
Camomile — very soothing; use damp teabags as refreshing eye masks; a cup made with 3 teabags will brighten hair colour if used as a final rinse after shampooing.
Limeflower — induces sleep; makes a fragrant conditioning hair rinse — brew as with the camomile rinse.
Nettle — said to cleanse the blood which in turn means healthier hair and skin; when brewed, makes a good anti-dandruff rinse.
BEST HERBAL BUYS
For convenience, perhaps you prefer to buy your herbal toiletries ready made.
There's plenty of choice as cosmetics made with natural extracts abound.
Here are two of our favourites:
Cosmetics to Go — there's no airy fairy, phoney nonsense with this mail order company, just plenty of fun, fabulous toiletries.
Their Botanomancy range is based on elementary herbalism and offers top to toe treats such as Smaragadine, £4.75/500ml, a shower gel made of nettles, roses, peppermint and orange peel, and Fagner's, £3.25/200ml, a foot lotion perfumed with violets.
You'll find all the ingredients listed on the products.
For mail order details 
Montagne Jeunesse — great for budget priced natural buys.
The range includes all sorts of skin, hair and body products.
Try the skin softening Goats Milk Bath Milk Powder, £2.49/250g, and the Milk and Oatmeal Conditioning Soap, 99p/100g.
FLOWER POWER
The art of aromatherapy is very complex but well worth trying.
It's based on the use of essential oils, found in minute traces in plants, which have a powerful aroma that can boost your mental well-being as well as treating physical ailments.
How?
Through treatments such as aromatherapy baths and massages, some of the essential oil molecules are absorbed into the blood stream and consequently affect the actions of certain organs and glands.
And some of the fragrant molecules are inhaled, thus stimulating smell receptors connected to the part of our brains which control our emotions, well-being and many other bodily functions.
Lavender oil for instance is relaxing and antiseptic and will help heal spots, whilst neroli obtained from orange blossom works well on dry skin and is said to be an anti-depressant too.
There are many more, far too numerous to mention here, but The Body Shop stock a good selection of aromatherapy oils as do most health food sores.
Look out for the Tisserand range which includes sweetly scented hair, body and bath care products made from blends of essential oils.
Get stuck into honey for health and beauty.
For your free copy of the Honey Bureau's new booklet, send and S.A.E. to A Dip Into Honey Booklet Offer,
NATURAL COLOUR
Many make-up manufacturers are now adding natural extracts to improve the performance of their cosmetics.
Outdoor Girl is just one example.
Moisturising thyme oil has been added to the Perfect Performance Powder Creme Foundation £2.99, for instance, whilst the Colour Rich Lipstick, £1.99, incorporates softening rosehip oil.
HAIR GOES GREEN
Harsh chemicals can leave hair dry and dull but there are gentle herbal based alternatives:
Daniel Field , who has several salons in London, avoids the use of chemicals where possible and even his perms and colourants are based mainly on herbs and natural  extracts.
He also offers a range of organic hair products available from branches of Boots and Tesco nationwide.
Inecto Botanicals is a range of shampoos and conditioners made from natural extracts with no animal derived ingredients.
There's Peach Nut for revitalising dry hair, Avocado to make normal hair types shine, and Lemon & Mint to make greasy hair more manageable, each costs 99p for 250ml.
Novena is an environmentally friendly perm from Wella.
The perm lotion is made with seven natural plant extracts and the neutraliser contains fragrant, conditioning oil of mint.
Now there's a complementary shampoo and conditioner to match for use at home.
Novena Shampoo, £2.69/250ml, is a mild, frequent use formula, whilst the Conditioner, £2.99/250ml, contains natural marigold extract, known for its soothing effects on the scalp.
Clynol's environmentally friendly Corregin Active hair care collection combines modern technology with herbal medicine infusions.
For your nearest Clynol stockist,
Henna , the vegetable colourant, was a favourite with the ancient Egyptians and is still popular today.
Richard Burns, colour and tinting expert at Michaeljohn uses the Henara brand of powders which can be bought for use at home from chemists and department stores, costing £2.19.
To enhance the effects of the red shades, Richard suggests adding a few D.I.Y.
ingredients:; the juice of a lemon, for instance, will make the shade even more brilliant; a strong cup of coffee adds depth and richness, whilst a full-bodied, deep red wine will intensify the redness or add an extra glow to the Chestnut Warm Brown variant.
Edmonds , the exclusive Knightsbridge hair salon, offer head and scalp massage with essential oils which work on the pressure points used in shiatsu and acupuncture, to relieve stress and tension.
It also incorporates Swedish style squeezing and kneading to stimulate a healthy scalp and hair.
A half hour massage costs £12.50.
EAT UP
The key to being naturally beautiful is looking after yourself on the inside as well as the outside and that means eating healthily.
It may be worth investing in a course of vitamin supplements — they can't make up for a poor diet but they can provide a useful boost occasionally.
Check out the Seven Seas range based on nutritious cod liver oil.
For example, there are Almond Oil capsules for strong nails, Peachnut Oil capsules for glossy hair, and Avocado Oil capsules for healthy skin, each priced at £3.99 for a month's supply of 30 capsules.
The B vitamins are important too for maintaining a healthy nervous system and stress can accelerate their loss from your body.
So if you've been under pressure lately, try Seven Seas Vitamin B complex, which cost £2.99 for 60 capsules or Vitalert For Stress with B-vitamins, £2.89/30.
Pamper a friend with a natural beauty product by post.
The ‘Green Gift by Post’ service includes a tempting selection of natural toiletries and cosmetics — call  for an order form and prices.
GET SOME THERAPY
At her Paramedical and Beauty Centre, Bharti Vyas uses natural techniques to put right both physical and psychological problems.
But, if you can't get to the clinic, you could invest in her therapy kit.
For £49.99, it comprises two tiny magnets used to stimulate energy flows through the body; mineral salts from the Dead Sea to help eliminate cellulite and pep up your skin; an aromatherapy oil; a hand roller which stimulates pressure points on the hands; vitamin tablets, and finally a body scrub sponge to exfoliate, boost circulation and help get rid of toxins.
All treatments and progress are monitored weekly via Bharti's Helpline.
For mail order, Tel:
STYLE COLLECTION
NEW SHAPES NEW COLOURS NEW CUTS
BORN TO BE BLONDE
BEAUTIFUL BRUNETTES
SHORT CUTS
MEN ONLY
Jennefer Cheyne at Cheynes of Edinburgh used Sienna from the Wella Colour Touch range of long-lasting semi-permanent colourants to add warmth to long hair.
Wella High Hair Bolumising Mousse was applied to create soft curls.
BORN TO BE BLONDE
Beautiful blonde effect achieved by David Roles and his artistic team at Neo Hair Design, Manchester
Glorious curls by Stephen Way and Jeanne Braa using the luxury Paul Mitchell styling range
Shoulder-length hair has been twisted to form rose buds.
By Vici Moorhouse at Rare Moods
The Edmonds team used their exciting new range of styling products for this look
Bright blonde colour on short hair.
Shorter layers have been back-combed.
By Avante Garde
Vibrant Hollywood blonde created by Guy Kremer at French Connections.
Winchester
Long hair has been delicately feathered to frame the face.
By Greens in Derby
If you're in-between styles, this swept back look is ideal.
Created by Geno Ventti
Long, dramatic wig has been dressed with wax to accentuate curl.
By Bryan at Rare Moods
Add body and volume to fine hair with styling products and back-combing.
By Geno Ventti
Pretty short style, enhanced with soft, blonde colour.
Created by Talking Heads
This look from Carlos Galicao in Madrid can easily be slicked with gel
Piles of curls, loosely pinned for a beautiful evening style.
By the Edmonds team
This sweeping fringe makes for a super sexy style.
By C.B. Academy in Cambridge
Sleek, shiny hair, styled into a fabulous forties look.
By the C.B. Academy styling team
A short wig has been razored to achieve softness.
By Bryan Azzopardi at Rare Moods
Figure-hugging hair from Trevor Sorbie!
Perfect ‘feathering’ makes the cut
Hair is in excellent condition and these corkscrew curls really shine!
By Charlie Miller
The classic bob can be swept back to ring the changes.
Hair by Marc Young Associates
Trevor Sharpe at Toni & Guy used Majiblond Lightening Natural Blonde by L'Oréal Technique Professionelle.
Fabulous and firey.
These beautiful curls and vibrant colours were created by Suyo Hair and Beauty in Birmingham
BEAUTIFUL BRUNETTES
An elegant upswept style with whispy tendrils for the sensual look by Temple McAdam
Wella High Hair Volumising Mousse was used to add body and texture to this casual crop
Margaret and Mo Nabbach have used L'Oréal products to create these tumbling, shiny locks
The new Retro hairdryer from Clairol was used to give natural movement to this sleek, glossy look
A perfectly shaped bob.
This strong style was given maximum shine by David Roles of Neo Hair Design
Hair had been gently cleansed using Vidal Sassoon Salon Collection 11 Gentle Shampoo
Fun to wear and great to look after.
This urchin style comes from the Edmonds Salon in London
This short, close crop with whispy fringe was created by the team at Collections Hair Club
Clynol hair care products have been used to achieve superb condition of this shoulder-length bob
BEAUTIFUL BRUNETTES
A stunning shine always looks fabulous.
This beautiful bob comes from The Collections Hair Club
This bob was permed with Bain de Terre Spa Conditioning Perm and styled with Herbal Mousse
Creative colours from Anthony Skito brings life to this style, giving it movement and shine
A soft, chic style with classical waves using the professional Bain de Terre hair care range
Perfect for fine hair, this jaw-length, soft bob was created by the design team at Schumi in London
For a bold look, this permed style was given a strong cut by Ricardo Rizzo of C.B. Academy
Gatsby International of Bangor in Ireland has created this gentle face-framing style
Thick wavy hair has been styled upwards by Burlingtons of London for this off-the-face look
The sleek movement on this fringe length bob was created by Cheynes of Scotland
Charlie Miller created the ‘set’ look of 92' by using rollers and  Modeling Super Forte Directional Spray from L'Oréal
Cheynes used Wella Blondor Special to create subtle lights on this style.
High Hair High Control Gel adds lift.
SHORT CUTS
Precision cutting for a perfect cut.
By Louise Howard of the Architect salon in Leeds
This swinging fringe-length bob is by Margaret Nabbach of the M & M Hair Academy
A heavy weave cut gives this style definition.
By Susan Stirling for Rita Rusk International
Short, chic and spiky.
This easy-to-wear cut was created by the Geno Bentti salon
The fringe on this smooth style has been cut to three different lengths.
By Roz Main for Rita Rusk Int.
Terence Renati has given this style movement with clever colour combinations.
Sophisticated sculptured waves from Ricardo Rizzo of the C.B. Academy in Cambridge
A superb blunt cut on strong hair created by Nicky Oliver for Oliver: San.
Inspired by 70's punk, this short feminine crop is by Nikki Kirk of Architect in Leeds
MEN ONLY
Smart styling from Mo Nabbach at the M&M Hair Academy in London
This great style, ideal for thick hair, is worn with clothes from the GUS catalogue
Naturally curly hair has been styled by Tim at The Hair Collections, Cobham
Sleek styling for guys in The City!
Created by the Terence Renati team
Casual cut for one-length styles.
Hair by the Marc Young Associates team
Layered hair, styled with Bain de Terre Herbal Styling Mousse from Zotos
This square shape was created by Robert Masciave at French Connection, Winchester
The Bain de Terre Spa Therapy range was used by Simon Rattan to achieve this look
Achieve body on fine hair with Wella's High Hair Styling Cream.
From salons only
FASHION SPECIAL
SUIT YOURSELF
The tailored suit has never looked so good, with a fabulous explosion of colour and style happening this spring.
Casual or classically smart, there are spots, stripes and bold blocks of vibrant colour so you really can suit yourself!
Stylish suit with fitted jacket.
Available in black and cream at £39.99 from KIT.
Go dotty in this shoulder slipping suit in navy and cream.
It costs £49.99 from GUS
Be neat and chic in cerise.
This sateen suit is by Rosami and available from the new Freemans catalogue at £69.99.
Sensational summer suits with city style shorts.
Available at £49.99 from Kays.
XLR 8 woven multicoloured cotton jacket, £49.99, worn with a black skirt, £17.99, from Empire.
Be snazzy in stripes!
Jacket £29.99 and shorts £18.99 by Americano from Kays.
These bold, jazzy jackets from XLR 8 cost £41.99 and £36.99 from Empire.
Play smart in this classy Gaberdine suit with black and white edge to edge jacket, £59.99 from Freemans.
double take
This month's regular look at versatile haircuts focuses on short to shoulder-length hair.
Slicked scrunched or back-combed, you can ring the changes with these inspiring styles.
To achieve warm, rich colour on both 60's inspired styles, hair was coloured with Light Mahogany from the L'Oréal Diacolor range.
Modeling Gel Mousse was applied for support.
Two styles which maximise thick hair.
Hair was coloured with Clynol's Viton S Borneo Colour Bath and styled with Corregin Active Blow and Hold
Hair has been cut using the natural contours of the head.
A choppy texturising cutting technique makes it easy to change styles from casual to dramatic
A super slick style which enhances condition and shine perfectly.
This cut can easily be transformed into a stunning, highly fashionable.
Styling products come into their own with a slick of wax adding shape, shine and incredible movement.
A cute, easy-to-wear smooth shape can easily be dressed up with a real 70's ‘glam rock’ influence.
Both styles were created using a selection of styling products from Wella.
Short, layered cuts are possibly the easiest and most versatile.
Use spray gel to create a wet-look finish or mousse for body and texture.
LOréal's Modeling Fluid Control was applied to achieve the smoothest finish, with a change of parting and a little backcombing adding versatility.
celebrity interview
NICOLA STEVENSON
As the shy, retiring nanny of Brookside Close, Nicola Stephenson has caused a stir by snogging a Priest.
We went along to find out if she really is all that bad!
WHERE DO YOU LIVE?
I still live at home with my parents in Manchester.
I'm an only child.
I'm not looking to move out at the moment — I'm quite happy where I am.
We all work and so we have to chip in.
We have pretty much shared responsibility in looking after the house — though they'd probably argue that I do naff all!
DO YOU LIKE LONDON?
I like to get down to London now and again — I've got friends down here.
It's fun if you don't live here and I like the shopping and stuff — I went to the theatre the other night to see An Evening with Gary Lineker.
It was brilliant!
I don't know anything about Gary as a footballer but he's got nice legs.
I really like to get back home to Manchester, though.
WHERE DO YOU GO WHEN YOU GO OUT?
I love going out in Manchester.
I often go to the Hacienda which is the IN place to go.
I bumped into Bob Mortimer (from Bic Reeves Big Night Out) there one night.
I love to go out dancing but you won't catch me being the first on the dance floor!
WHAT DO YOU DRIVE?
A really nippy Peugot 205.
DO YOU LIKE ANY OTHER SOAPS?
I like Coronation Street but my favourite is Neighbours.
It's not a crime to watch a rival soap.
I watched them before I got the job and I'm not going to stop watching them.
HOW LONG DO YOU SPEND ON YOUR HAIR?
I spend about half an hour in the bathroom in the mornings.
I'd probably be quicker only I'm still half asleep!
I wash my hair and leave it to dry naturally.
By the time I get on set it's usually dry.
The hair and make-up people do their thing with it with spray and gel and stuff.
When I'm not working, I tend to give it a break from putting anything on it.
ARE YOU NATURALLY CURLY?
No, it's permed and is prone to being dry and frizzy so I have to use a lot of conditioner on it.
The lights I work under can get really hot and tend to dry it out so I have to be extra careful.
They also play havoc with your skin and it tends to get a bit sweaty under all the make-up I have to wear.
WHICH HAIR PRODUCTS DO YOU USE?
I use loads of different conditioners but as far as shampoo goes.
I like Boots own brand Salon Formula and The Body Shop Jojoba Shampoo.
WHAT ABOUT BEAUTY PRODUCTS?
Like my shampoo, I use a lot of stuff like moisturisers and cleansers from The Body Shop.
I also like Aapri facial scrub.
HOW OFTEN DO YOU HAVE YOUR HAIR CUT?
Because I'm on T.V. I have to keep it looking the same and so it's trimmed every five to six weeks.
WHAT ELSE DO YOU DO TO KEEP IT LOOKING HEALTHY?
I try to look after myself although I'm a bit of a part-timer when it comes to doing exercise.
I go to the odd fitness class now and again and I try to eat fairly healthily though I do succumb now and again to the odd take-away.
I like a nice curry and I love chips.
Otherwise I'll nibble on fruit or something to convince myself that I'm eating well!
I'm not one for a lot of late nights because I have to be on form and looking good for work.
I usually go out late just at weekends to a club or something like that.
HAVE YOU EVER BEEN MISTAKEN FOR THE BLOKE OUT OF SIMPLY RED?(laughs) No!
I even have a problem getting mistaken for Margaret out of Brookside — no-one ever recognises me!
ARE YOU HAPPY WITH YOUR HAIR?
When I was younger I hated having red hair.
It was one of those things you know, when you get called names.
I love it now and apparently it's quite fashionable to have red hair.
Some of the super models like Linda Whatsername have actually dyed their hair red, so I guess I must have set a trend!.
NEXT MONTH: SARAH LANCASHIRE Raquel from Coronation Street
HAIR FLAIR
AT THE CLOTHES SHOW LIVE!
A great big THANK YOU to all of the Clothes Show Live visitors that popped along to see us at the N.E.C.
in Birmingham.
The Hairflair stand attracted thousands of hair enthusiasts, all eager to see the January issue which we'd printed especially early for the show.
We met lots of loyal Hairflair fans plus some new readers who we're sure will be tuning in every month from now on!
SETTING UP
Friday 6th December: When we arrived, our ‘stand’ looked little bare, to say the least!
The Hairflair team set to work straight away.
Assistant Editor, Hellena Barnes cut a dash with her scissors; Art Editor Sarah Vernot got going with her trusty scalpel and Editor Sue Rouse added the finishing touches.
The result was a superb stand which really attracted the crowd during the week!
An enthusiastic crowd awaits the next photographic shoot sponsored by Kodak.
Jeff Banks discusses the commentary while photographer Will White sets the scene with a selection of beautiful models.
The Soul II Soul stand was jampacked  every day.
Energetic visitors were invited to take to the dance floor and strut their stuff, quenching their thirst with a bottle of the new, macho mineral water, Thirsty Camel, afterwards!
Saturday 7th December: We have lift off!
After a countdown from Jeff Banks, thousands of visitors rushed into the hall — it felt as though they were ALL at our stand!
There were queues for tattoos at this year's show.
This visitor opted for a mermaid.
MORE visitors to the Hairflair stand!
Kerry and Joanne took time out to pop across from their busy stand to see us.
London hairdresser, Alan Hyuman, visits the stand with freelance journalist and Public Relations manager, Judie Burton.
YOUR HAIR AT THE CLOTHES SHOW LIVE
While we were at the Clothes Show, we noticed some fabulous haircuts and even more exciting styling ideas.
We selected some of our favourites and snapped them for the magazine
These natural flame-red curls belong to Evelyn Donohue, a 19-year old student from Manchester.
Rebecca Nichol from Gloucester, 20, took the plunge and had her head shaved.
We think it's great!
This dramatic style takes 23-year old June Allen five days to style — spending an average four-five hours per day on it!
This red sixties style really suits Clare Meredith, 22, from London.
It's a short blonde crop for pretty 17 year-old Lara Cowley from Blackpool.
Left to right: Perrylin Stanley, Sharon Thomas and Nikki Stewart, all from Bristol, pose with Hairflair's Sarah Vernon.
20 year-ole Alison Hanlon has natural corkscrew curls that most girls would die for!
Alison comes from Southport.
These lovely curls and the pretty floral headband caught our eye.
They belong to 20 year-old Susan Goldswain from Peterborough.
It's a flick-up!
Great style worn by Helen Upton, 20, from Birmingham.
Hairdresser Vicky Moody is 23.
She uses lightener to keep her hair looking so fabulous and natural looking.
Seeing double — identical twins, Georgina and Rachel Spruce 20, from Walsall.
Georgina is a chef and Rachel is a hairdresser!
HAIRFLAIR COMPETITION
EAST, WEST — NORTH IS BEST!
If you live north of the country and are thinking about a change of style then here's your chance to win a fabulous hair cut in a top northern salon!
Regular readers of Hairflair will now doubt recognise the name Ralph Kleeli Hair and some of the superb work they have produced.
Based in Lancashire, Ralph Kleeli Hair and some of the superb work they have produced.
Based in Lancashire, Ralph Kleeli and his team of highly trained stylists and technicians believe in precision cutting for great looking, fuss-free styles.
Their aim is to give busy men and women the freedom, as far as their hair is concerned, to take off at a moment's notice without having to spend hours in front of the mirror — these beliefs have certainly proved successful for Ralph and his team.
We've got together with Ralph Kleeli Hair to give our readers north of the country a real treat — twenty free haircuts by stylists at this top salon!
HOW TO ENTER
Simply look at the four hairstyles pictured below, match them up with the occasion you think most suitable and complete the entry form.
Send your completed coupon to Ralph Kleeli/Hairflair Competition  All entries should be received by Monday 9th March 1992.
All prizes must be taken by the 30th of April 1992.
Please note — prizes cannot be accepted on Saturdays.
SHOPPING TRIP WEDDING GRAND BALL NIGHT-CLUBBING
Rules:
1.
, This competition is open to all readers in the U.K.
2.
, No responsibility can be taken for entries lost, delayed or damaged in the post or otherwise.
3.
, The employees of Hairflair and the companies sponsoring the competition are not eligible to enter.
4.
, Winners will be the first correct entries drawn from the bag on 9th March 1992.
PRACTICAL HAIRCARE
INTENSIVE CARE
Haircare of the 90's means one thing — physical wear and tear through frequent washing and styling plus an onslaught of chemical treatments.
Even though today's colours, perms and styling products are kinder than ever before, hair is still subjected to a daily assault course and more often than not, needs a little more loving care than it actually gets.
HAIR REPAIR TOP TEN
Beautiful hair is not all down to nature — more often than not, it's a result of a regular treatment programme with the right products.
There are several products available which can actually help repair existing damage plus they protect the hair, thus preventing further damage.
Henara Treatment Wax.
This one contains henna and protein which gently penetrate the hair shaft.
The new trial size is just 99p/100g.
Wella Balsam Massaging Hot Oils have been developed as a pre-wash treatment to replace lost moisture to permed/chemically treated hair and dry/damaged hair.
Three trial size tubes will cost you £1.89.
Poly Kur Intensive Hair Repair Treatment (£3.45) has been formulated to revitalise and restructure dry/damaged hair and coloured/permed hair.
It contains Panthenol to help hair regain its bounce and elasticity.
Rayonnance Ends Repair for colour treated hair is a restructuring treatment which surrounds each hair shaft with an ultra-light film, leaving it smooth and tangle-free. £4.49/25ml.
Alberto VO5 Revitalising Treatment Spray is an intensive, salon remedy for dry, frizzy and damaged hair.
Its combination of conditioning and moisturising properties help strengthen and detangle hair.
It costs £2.99/100ml.
Instant Hair Revitaliser is part of the Gliss Corimist Hair Repair Programme.
It's an oil-free, weekly intensive conditioner.
One tube costs just 60p — or buy a triple pack for £1.55.
Vitapoint's new oil treatment needs no heating and takes just two minutes to work.
Designed to help revitalise hair, restoring shine and vitality, it costs £1.79 for three 15ml sized tubes.
Swiss Formula Hair Repair from St. Ives is great for overworked hair.
Now available in a 25ml sachet for 25p.
Cream Silk Hot Oil Therapy is a deep conditioner, developed to add strength and body to fine, flyaway hair.
It costs £1.45 for three applications.
Tisserand Aromatherapy Hot Oil is a pre-wash treatment and contains pure, Essential Oils for a soothing, healing effect to hair and scalp.
£5.60/30ml.
STRUCTURE OF THE HAIR
Hair is 97% protein, 3% moisture Illustration courtesy of Henara
CORTEX Consisting of long, thin cells, the Cortex provides elasticity to the hair.
It contains pigments which give the hair its individual colour.
MEDULA The ‘marrow’ of the hair.
Being soft and spongy, it is easily damaged.
CUTICLE The outer layer consisting of overlapping scales which trap natural oils to give lustre and bounce to the hair.
fine, flyaway hair?
WE HAVE THE ANSWER
This month's beautiful covergirl, Abby has fine hair.
To achieve her cover look, we backcombed her hair into a bob-shaped bouffant.
Here are some alternative ways to add body and volume to fine hair, making it more manageable, less flyaway and stylishly versatile.
1.
, If you feel happy about curling your own hair, heated curlers are ideal for this hair type.
Don't be fooled into thinking you have to have curly styles if you use curlers — you don't.
They'll give your hair instant body and manageability which you can then transform into the style of your choice.
2.
, Use ‘end papers’ with your curlers (we actually used small strips of toilet paper!).
They well help protect the hair by preventing too much heat penetration.
They also keep the ends together, giving you a more uniform curl.
3.
, Hairspray is a versatile styling product — it's not just for adding hold to a finished look.
Before you style your hair, lift sections of hair and spray with hairspray, concentrating on the root area.
This works with any styling or drying method and will give your hair natural-looking controlled body.
4.
, When you remove your curlers or have finished tonging, loosen the curl by massaging your scalp with your fingertips and gently shaking your head, Don't brush your hair.
5.
, Gentle backcombing is the obvious body-builder.
Use a comb or brush, whichever you feel most comfortable with and invest in a ‘tail comb’, using it to plump up the roots after backcombing.
Use fixing spray to hold your style.
TIP: Shampoos and conditioners can make a drastic difference to controlling flyaway hair.
Steer clear of heavy, creamy products which leave hair flat and lifeless.
CHARLES WORTHINGTON, Worthingtons.
TIP: When choosing a hair cut, avoid any thinning or razoring techniques as this only adds to the problem by making the hair lighter in weight and so ever more flyaway.
Use natural bristle brushes to avoid static.
KEVIN MOSS, Creative Director of John Frieda
TIP: Highlights and lowlights are great as they thicken the cortex of the hair.
Even if you don't want a change of colour, lights of the same shade as your natural hair are just as effective.
DENISE McADAM of Temple McAdam.
John Frieda Thickening Lotion, £3.55/125ml
St. Ives Aloe Vera All-In-One, £3.45/500ml
Wella Revival Revitalising Styling lotion, £3.60/150ml
Crimpers Pure Gentle Hairspray Firm Hold, £2.95/200ml
PRODUCTS TO TRY
EVERY PICTURE TELLS A STORY
If you think the world of modelling is all glamour and nothing like hard work, think again.
Early morning, long hours and constant travel all add to the stress of the job but as you can see from this impressive portfolio, some assignments do take models to the top!
THE OBJECTIVE
A new association has been created by L'Oréal Technique Professionnelle and, together with a team of highly talented hairdressers, their aim is to heighten the profile of their industry in general.
To introduce themselves, they have produced Trends — The Portfolio of Artistic Hairdressers.
It features the best in British and Irish hairdressing and to achieve maximum impact with the first of their bi-annual fashion collections, they chose a photographic location that's literally out of this world!
THE LOCATION
Canary Wharf, London Docklands
THE TEAM
EXPERT ADVICE
Q &: A
This month, we've called upon the expertise of Lamaur, manufacturers of professional hair products available through salons only.
Call  for details of stockists.
Q Using a separate conditioner is time consuming.
I have considered using the convenient two-in-one products, but have heard such conflicting views about the possible effects of these shampoo/conditioners.
What is your opinion and are there any particular products you can personally recommend?
A Two-in-one cleansing and conditioning products are specially designed to clean the hair and condition the outer layers (the cuticle scales).
Some are rather heavy and contain a silicone ingredient which could cause problems — a build-up of silicone on the hair may affect the results of perms, tints, bleaches etc.
You can avoid this if you alternate them with your regular shampoo or make sure you find one that doesn't contain silicone such as Lamaur Compleat 2, Mild or Extra variants.
Q I am taking a course of antibiotics and continually take anti-histamine tablets.
I would love a perm as my daughter is getting married very soon.
However, I have been told that the drugs I am on will have an adverse effect.
Is this the case?
A Antibiotics in your system can affect a permanent wave, giving poor or no results at all.
A well-trained hairdresser can remove most of the medication from your hair, leaving it ready for a perm, giving you excellent results without damage.
Q When I am looking at the ingredients in a hair product what should I be looking for to identify it as a quality product?
Also, what are the benefits of a protein-based hair product?
A In this country there is no law that states ingredients must be included on packaging.
It is therefore difficult to compare products by packaging alone.
More and more products are available through professional salons where advice and recommendation is available from experts.
Your stylist can tell you which products are best suited to your hair type and lifestyle.
Protein-based products are used for the maintenance and reconstruction of the inner and outer layers of the hair and are particularly  beneficial on chemically damaged hair.
Q Are moisturising shampoos O.K. for all hair types and do you need to use a conditioner with them?
A They are designed to put moisture into and onto the hair.
They're best for naturally dry, curly and frizzy hair but can be used on chemically damaged hair too.
Conditioners will be necessary if the hair is extremely dry or damaged.
HAIR HELPLINE: If you've got a problem with your hair and you'd like an answer from an expert, write to us at 
thanks Our thanks to the following salons without whose help this issue would not have been possible
BEFORE AND AFTER
le flic
Three magical styles from one basic cut
When angel-faced Alice went to The Look salon in Exeter, she wanted some exciting style ideas.
‘I've grown my layers out and now I'm bored with it ’ she said.
Top stylist at the salon, Jeff Goodwin, had been working on a new idea called Le Flic and together with make-up artist Julie and a new wardrobe of clothes, successfully transformed Alice with these three beautiful styles.
‘Ballet Flic’
‘Chic Flic’
‘Princess Flic’
You'll find branches of The Look in Exeter and Taunton, Devon.
gift box
we have over 500 fabulous free gifts to give away this month!
100 free
If you're having problems with your hairstyle, Silvikrin can fix it!
From their Active Care range of conditioning styling products comes Fixing Spray — a fabulous liquid tool suitable for all hair types.
For natural looking, long-lasting hold with shine, simply spray it onto dry hair or add texture and shape by sculpting hair with your fingers after you've sprayed.
Usually priced at £1.99/200ml, we have 100 sprays to give away.
Send your details to.
150 free
Never have long enough to get ready?
Alberto has come to the rescue with One Step, a great new two-in-one shampoo and conditioner.
And just because you're cutting down on time, you don't have to cut down on performance.
There are three variants to choose from — Level 1 fro Frequent Use, Level 2 for Extra Body and Level 3 for Dry and Treated Hair.
We have 150 200ml bottles to give away, each worth £1.49 Send your details to.
100 free
New Soft Liner Pens from 17 are just the thing for adding definition to eyes.
These exciting eyeliners are easy to control and their soft texture prevents dragging around the delicate eye area PLUS they have a long-lasting formula!
They're perfume-free and available in two shades — Soft Mocha and Soft Charcoal.
We have 100 in shade Soft Charcoal, worth £1.95 write to.
10 free
What on earth can you buy the girl who has everything?
A gold plated curling tong, of course!
New from Morphy Richards comes a fabulous, 24 carat gold tong.
It is dual voltage, so it's easy to use and its large barrel makes it perfect for creating the fuller.
curlier looks of today.
This sophisticated styler is attractively designed in gold and black, and has a matching black plug and usually costs £8.99 but we have 10 to give away free.
Send your details to.
50 free
It's time to lighten up, courtesy of Jerome Russell.
With their Spray-in-Highlights, you can achieve exciting salon effects instantly — at a fraction of the cost!
And because they're temporary, you can go blonde whenever you want.
Like all Jerome Russell products, Spray-in-Highlights have not been tested on animals.
Available at Boots, department stores and large chemists nationwide, they cost £3.25 per can but we've got 50 to give away.
Send your name and address on a postcard to.
50 free
Let your hair shine out from within with TiGi Linea Treatment Shampoo.
Ideal for everyday use, Treatment Shampoo is a vitamin bath for the hair — its special moisture balanced formula will nourish and soften the hair shaft, leaving hair healthy and manageable.
Natural vitamins in the shampoo will help repair damaged hair, too, soothing the cuticle and promoting shine.
Available from professional salons only, it usually costs £3.95/8oz but we have 50 bottles to give away to readers.
Send your details on a postcard to.
10 free
Think big this spring!
Clairol's Big Shot is the ultimate drying machine — it's lightweight, has 1500 watts of power, a concentrator nozzle and diffuser attachment for versatile styling plus extra long lead and fitted plug.
And all this costs just £26.95!
If you're one of our lucky 10, a Big Shot diffuser/dryer will be winging its way to you soon!
Send your details on a postcard to.
50 free
If you suffer from spots and think you've tried just about every remedy there is, think again.
New from Paris comes Formula B by Samuel Par.
Based on the principles of aromatherapy, this is a gently blend of essential aromatic oils and herbs, all chosen for their antibacterial and antiseptic properties.
Thyme, Rosemary and Lavender help combat oiliness; Clove, Cinnamon and Savory have powerful antiseptic qualities while Oregano softens skin and prevents flakiness.
From chemists and health food shops at £4.99, we have to tubes for you to try.
Send your details to.
closing date for offers is Monday 9th march
HOT OFF THE PRESS
THREE CHEERS FOR CHARITY
Well done to everyone who purchased products from the Tesco Nature's Choice rang and helped raise £15,000.
Tesco donated 1p for every purchase to FRAME, Fund for the Replacement of Animals in Medical Experiments.
The Montagne Jeunesse Antarctica appeal raised over £10,000.
‘Every customer who has bought our products over the last year can feel good about helping towards the success of this campaign’ said Jonathan Harper Hill, brand manager for the Montagne Jeunesse range.
GET AHEAD
Jessica Jartley used to terrified of hairdressers.
That's why she set up Images Ahead, a service which enables you to find and try a new hairstyle BEFORE visiting the hairdresser.
Simply choose your style from a selection of wigs — from up to 40 styles in a variety of 25 shades.
Once chose, a 15 minute video is made to record your chosen style and colour plus two photographs of you choice.
Take these to your stylist, safe in the knowledge that your new look is going to suit you!
For more details, contact Jessica at Images Ahead on 
QUICK COLOUR
A unique salon has just opened in London's West End.
Concentrating purely on colouring, The London Hair Colouring Centre ensures a fast, professional service at very competitive prices.
All colouring services are on offer, with prices starting from £10 for semi-permanents to £30 for a full head of foil highlights.
After a consultation, colour is applied and the client is given her own clock to time the development.
She can pop down to the basement, make herself a cup of coffee until the colour is removed when she is then encouraged to style her own hair!
Computerised records ensure that colours are perfectly matched on return visits.
Trims and cuts are available on request but the emphasis her really is on colouring.
Call  for details.
NEW…
After just eight months, Griffin, Rawson Hyman Education (GRH for short!) have purchased the title names of Alan International Schools, Salons and Education Division.
The Company will soon be launching a new video collection — for further info call the GRH Education Press Office on 
J.F. Lazartigue have opened a second Diagnostic and Advisory Hair Centre at .
After hair has been analysed under a unique microviewer system, each customer is given a personalised programme of hair and scalp treatment.
The Naim Hairdressing & Beauty Salon recently opened at .
A full hair styling and treatment service is on offer, with prices for a cut & blow-dry starting £30, PLUS one whole floor has been dedicated to beauty.
Facials, body massage, ear piercing — it's all on offer.
Call them on  for more details.
NEW TECHNIQUES
HERE'S HOW YOU CAN GET THE LOOK OF ‘92
fabulous forties
Internationally acclaimed hairdresser, John Frieda, has just released his look for ‘92.
Frieda has styled hair for celebrities like Jerry Hall, Jane Seymour, Glenn Close, not to mention many Royals.
Now, with the help of his expert advice, you too can achieve the professional touch.
Inspiration for his new 40's-look collection comes from films like Casablanca and actresses like Lauren Bacall.
Aptly named Swing Shift, John Frieda takes looks of the past and transforms them into the sleek, set styles of today — with a little from modern technology of course!
TIPS FROM JOHN FRIEDA
John believes that women of the 90's don't have time to spend hours fussing with their hair.
Here are a few of his original concepts and time-saving techniques taken from his educational book for the trade ‘The Precision Styling System’.
Frieda describes the ‘Conversion Point’ as that moment in time when passes from wet to dry.
It is only at this point that the style gets locked in.
Any styling effort applied to sopping wet hair is usually unnecessary and wastes a lot of time.
Frieda suggests that you can get great results in a minimum amount of time by remembering this fact.
Instead of laboriously blowing hair dry with a round brush or setting it with rollers, simply dry it as quickly as possible to the ‘Conversion Point’.
Then concentrate your styling efforts to get the results you want and you can save time and effort.
The hair that frames your face (hairline) and the top section of the head (crown) are two areas John Frieda designates as Crucial Zones because these form the entire surface area of the style.
The hairling frames the face and the crown forms the basis of your overall look.
If you blow dry hair, concentrate on these Crucial Zones when your hair reaches the Conversion Point.
When setting wavy hair, for example, three rollers on the top and one on each side are generally all that is necessary to create a terrific style.
Four 40's inspired shapes from leading stylist, John Frieda
‘CUT YOUR STYLING TIME IN HALF BY USING THE CONVERSION POINT’
‘USE THE CRUCIAL ZONES TO CREATE AN INCREDIBLE OVERALL EFFECT’