

The ladies of Tollemarche, Alberta, were always wonderfully clever at disposing of their menfolk; so that these gentlemen, if not already in their graves, were encouraged by their wives to depart northwards in search of business, or, to escape from constant nagging, to conferences in Ontario or hunting trips in British Columbia.
And it was surprising how frequently they found it necessary to motor down to Edmonton or Calgary.
The ladies' sighs of relief, as the sound of their partners' cars disappeared with distance, indicated that the gentlemen would certainly not be missed, as long as the flood of money engendered by the discovery of oil in Alberta continued to flow so gratifyingly into their joint bank accounts during the boom years of the 1950s.
Unhampered by demanding males, the ladies were free to control the city's social life, which burgeoned forth as a result of the suddenly acquired wealth of the inhabitants.
The big oil strike near Tollemarche had been responsible for an upheaval in the existing order; and the fight for social status, before a fixed pecking order could be re-established, was a ruthless one, waged in every drawing-room, church hall and charitable institution.
In this war amongst the teacups, the worst sufferers were the children.
The ladies were not quite so successful in disposing of their offspring as they were of their husbands, though they did their best.
It was difficult to do without children, because they were a necessary status symbol and a subject for conversation.
The ladies, therefore, had four or five babies as quickly after marriage as nature would permit, and thus provided themselves with an indefinite number of conversational gambits.
The trouble was that after they were born, children had  to wait for six years before they could be sent to school and forgotten for most of the day.
The ladies had several methods of dealing with this problem, or ‘making them independent and self-reliant’ as they called it.
The easiest and most commonly used method was to ignore them as far as possible.
It is startling how quickly children discover that they are not wanted.
Once a child could walk and had, through dire necessity, learned how to shed a wet pair of training pants and put on his snow suit, he would vanish into the street, not to be seen again until lunch time; once he was tall enough to reach the refrigerator door handle, the problem of lunch was also solved — he could get it himself.
Another method was called ‘having activities’.
This consisted of enrolling one's child in a private playschool, which sent a car to pick him up in the morning and deposit him back on his own doorstep in the late afternoon.
After this, he could be hastily driven to a music lesson, followed by a painting or a dancing lesson.
This type of day was guaranteed to exhaust even the most energetic youngster, and he would thankfully walk home, to watch television, eat his supper and put himself to bed.
Some people had baby-sitters of varying degrees of unreliability, mostly young girls in their teens, who were themselves expecting illegitimate babies and needed a temporary home, or elderly women lacking much strength to deal with children.
All of them seemed to have in common a cold dislike of children and a determination to do as little as possible for their inadequate wages.
In these circumstances, a determined mother could be free to groom herself, hold office in this or that community activity, or find a job, in order to fulfil herself; though none of them seemed to be able to explain why acting as a bank teller or the secretary of a charity, for example, was more fulfilling than looking after their own children.
The perfectly kept living-rooms of Tollemarche homes were for visitors; the basements, despite their fire hazards, were good enough for the children; there they often slept  and there, if the temperature went much below zero, they also played.
Conscientious parents, and there were some, viewed the situation with dismay.
Public pressure was against them, and they often fought a bitter battle to maintain the kind of home life in which they believed.
It was into this world that Captain Peter Dawson, a Canadian army officer, brought his young Welsh wife, Isobel.
She was the daughter of an old friend of his, who had married a Welsh lady and settled in Caernarvon.
Both Isobel's parents had been killed in a motor accident, and Peter Dawson had obtained leave from his unit in France to attend their funeral in Wales.
There he had met a distraught Isobel and her broken-hearted schoolgirl sister, Dorothy.
He had helped Isobel sort out her father's tangled financial affairs and had fallen in love with her quiet, fragile beauty.
He had pressed her to  marry him, though he was considerably older than she was, and she had accepted him at a time of great emotional exhaustion.
Leaving Dorothy in the care of a great-aunt to finish her education, Peter had, at the first opportunity, brought Isobel back to his native city of Tollemarche.
Isobel soon realized that she had not made, from her point of view, the wisest of marriages, but Peter was very kind to her and she did her best to make him happy.
She had been married only four years when her husband was murdered while serving as a member of the Canadian peacekeeping mission in Cyprus.
He had had only one more year to serve before he could have retired into civilian life, and both he and Isobel had been looking forward to this.
Her grief at his death was deep and sincere.
She had, as yet, no child to console her, and she had cabled her sister Dorothy to come from Wales to spend the winter with her.
Captain Dawson's parents, themselves stricken, had no idea how to deal with their weeping daughter-in-law, and were thankful to leave her to Dorothy.
Sociable Dorothy, although only seventeen years old, managed to infuse some sort of order into Isobel's shattered life, hoping that soon Isobel would decide what she would do in the future, so that she herself could go back home to Wales, which, from the vantage point of Tollemarche, seemed infinitely cosy and desirable.
One cool September Saturday, as the first snowflakes drifted quietly across the picture window, a white-faced, rather exhausted Isobel sat sewing in her living-room.
On the following Monday she proposed to go back to the job she had taken to make it financially possible for Peter and her to buy their little home.
She had told Dorothy that she felt that the steady routine of her secretarial work would, for the moment, be most helpful to her.
She found it impossible to admit, even to herself, the relief which flooded her whole being at the idea that she was no longer bound to live out her life in Tollemarche.
She put her needle and thread neatly away in her sewing box, brushed stray cotton threads from her skirt and went to the window to draw the curtains, before preparing supper.
Across the road, two little girls who frequently came in to visit Isobel, eat toffees and gossip, were teetering uncertainly on the edge of the sidewalk.
They had apparently exhausted all the games that a four-year-old could invent, and they were shivering in the wind as they considered exploring the world on the other side of the road.
‘Sheila and Penny's parents must still be out,’ Isobel remarked.
‘I can't see Mrs Brent's car yet — I suppose she is still at the Lady Queen Bees' tea, and Mr Brent must be still at his curling club.’
Dorothy stopped laying the table for supper and stared at her sister, her blue eyes wide with disbelief.
‘You mean those kids have been by themselves all the afternoon — just for the sake of a tea — or curling?’
‘Certainly.
Probably they couldn't get a baby sitter.
Anyway, Sheila always has a latchkey tied round her neck, so they can get into the house.’
‘There ought to be a law against it,’ replied Dorothy emphatically, as she banged knives and forks down on to the table.
‘There is — but it doesn't seem to be enforced.’
Isobel sighed, remembering many an argument on child care which she had lost, being invariably defeated by the rejoinder that she had no children and, therefore, knew nothing about them.
Her tone changed, and she said decisively: ‘I'm going to come home with you, as soon as Pete's affairs are cleared up.
Tollemarche was livable with Pete, but without him it will be intolerable.
These empty women make me sick and their neglected kids break my heart.’
Dorothy tossed her head to clear her long black hair from her eyes, and grinned elfishly at Isobel.
‘We could live together and paint London pale pink,’ she said hopefully.
‘Or Wales!’
Isobel smiled at the tall, rangy girl.
‘Pink it shall be,’ she said.
Dorothy went on with her work for a minute and then asked: ‘Isobel, what happens to these kids, supposing they don't drop themselves over the railway bridge in sheer despair?’
‘Well, some of them are chronically in and out of courts — they become pretty unscrupulous.
Some, as you know, seek revenge — they riot, they take drugs and generally make damned nuisances of themselves.
Some nothing can spoil, and they grow up into the nicest young people you can imagine.’
‘Like Hank Stych, who rents your garage?’ asked Dorothy, a hint of mischief in her eyes.
She had already met this young man, when he had last come to pay his rent, and found him startlingly different from the Welsh boys of her acquaintance — a big, silent boy with disillusioned, almond-shaped eyes sunk above high cheek bones, a boy who had stared unblinkingly at her until she had begun to blush with embarrassment, so that she had felt stripped, not only physically but mentally as well.
Finally, he had  held out a bunch of one-dollar bills to her, said ‘Rent,’ and without another word had vaulted over the veranda balustrade and loped down the path to the garage.
Very odd, she had decided, and yet nice.
‘Does he wear a latchkey round his neck?’ she inquired.
‘Hank?’
Isobel looked thoughtful.
‘Yes, Hank's all right— brought himself up like Sheila and Penny are doing.’
She laughed.
‘He's probably been promoted to a key ring by this time.’
‘I like him,’ said Dorothy, determined to show she could like the unusual.
Isobel's eyes were still merry.
‘Better watch your step with him.
Nobody ever told him where to draw the line, and he's not as innocent as he looks — he's got quite a reputation for wildness.‘
Dorothy opened the oven to see how the dinner was coming along, and her voice was muffled as she tried to avoid the steam from the casserole she was peeking at.
‘You were saying that he has written a wonderful book — and that it's going to be published?’
‘Yes,’ Isobel sounded anxious, ‘and I am really worried about it.
You know, Pete and I encouraged him like anything in his writing.
What we didn't know for a long time was that this book is his revenge on his parents.
‘Doll, you know that this province is known as the Bible Belt?’
Dorothy nodded as she closed the oven door.
‘Well, by Bible Belt standards it's the filthiest book imaginable.
What this town is going to say when it reaches here isn't hard to imagine.
Olga and Boyd Stych are going to be blamed, because everyone will think they were agreeable to its publication.
It will ruin Olga socially.’
Mrs Stych and her arch-rival Mrs Frizzell had both called to express their condolences to Tollemarche's most interesting widow.
Dorothy had dealt with both of them, aided by Isobel's giddy young sister-in-law, who had explained the social nuances of it all by saying: ‘That pair of grasping alley cats would tear the eyes out of anyone who managed  to make the social pages of the Tollemarche Advent on a day when they should have been featured.
They just want to be seen calling at the house.’
‘I don't think Hank realizes how devastating it may be to his mother when his book comes out,’ Isobel went on.
‘Do her good,’ said Dorothy laconically.
‘Well, I feel guilty,’ Isobel responded.
‘Maybe people will be more careful of their children after they've read it,’ suggested Dorothy hopefully, and then added: ‘She's nothing but a social climber, anyway.’
‘She's a coming lady in Tollemarche.’
‘That ghastly, fat Humpty Dumpty of a woman?’ exclaimed Dorothy scornfully.
Isobel nodded, her lips compressed, and then said: ‘Yes, that ghastly, fat Humpty Dumpty is heading for a great fall, poor thing.
And it is partly my fault.’
Mrs Theresa Murphy, the Mayor's wife, had, by dint of playing first violin in the local amateur orchestra, established herself as one of the cultural leaders of Tollemarche.
On four Thursday evenings during the winter she could be seen, dressed in spotty black and glittering with rhinestones, sawing happily away on her violin through four public concerts, under the baton of Mr Dixon, the elderly English master from Tollemarche public school, who tried gamely to keep the rest of the orchestra in time with her, since he had long ago given up trying to keep her in time with the orchestra.
As the wife of the civic leader, Mrs Murphy had to do considerable entertaining in generous western style, but in this field she made no attempt to keep pace with Olga Stych or Donna Frizzell; she knew when she was beaten.
Since culture did not hammer quite so hard on Mrs Frizzell's door, she had more time to plan parties.
Her annual garden party, for buyers of fleets of cars and trucks who dealt with her husband, was always a memorable occasion, reported upon in detail by the queen of the social columns of the Tollemarche Advent , a lady who could make or break a local hostess.
Mrs Frizzell found it impossible to forgive Mrs Dawson's becoming a widow the same week as her party; a history of Mrs Dawson one night, and the remarks the following night of the lady secretary of the United Nations' Society on the role of the Canadian peacekeeping force in Cyprus, had meant that for the first time in years no report of Mrs Frizzell's party appeared, though room had been found for a report on one of Mrs Murphy's receptions.
Mr Frizzell's business did not seem to suffer from the omission.
He did an ever expanding trade in cars and trucks under his big red neon sign, which proclaimed on one side  FRIZZELL'S GARAGE — YOU CAN TRUST MAXIE, and on the other FRIZZELL'S GARAGE — I GREW WITH ALBERTA.
His critics agreed that he had sure grown with Alberta — just fatter and fatter!
Mrs Frizzell was the ruthless driving force behind his business.
She nagged him northwards to the Peace River district, to establish garages there, and even as far as Fort McMurray, with instructions to buy land for future service stations.
Then she went on with the lovely task of making herself the most important lady in Tollemarche.
Mrs Olga Stych, the wife of a consulting geologist, her next-door neighbour, dared to challenge her on this; and their homes, which had, until the commencement of building in Vanier Heights, been two of the nicer houses in the best district of Tollemarche, echoed their ambitions.
They were filled with wall-to-wall broadloom and the finest imitation French Provincial furniture.
Their L-shaped living rooms were graced by open fireplaces, with the latest shapes in petrified wood adorning the mantelpieces.
Each owned a weird splotch of colour in a white and silver frame, painted and framed by a local artist.
One had only to buy a  Wedgwood coffee service or a piece of Bohemian crystal and the other would have the same the following week.
Through the six months of Alberta's bitter winter each lady tried to outdo the other in the number of coffee parties given and the number of charitable offices each managed to obtain.
Through the summer, as the skyscrapers grew on Tollemarche Avenue, they boasted of the glories of their country cottages and the important people from Edmonton or Calgary who had spent a weekend with them at these summer homes.
Theresa Murphy persuaded her husband to buy an entire lake and news of this purchase spoiled both Mrs Frizzell's and Mrs Stych's summer.
Each week the ladies spent anxious hours in Andrew's Beauty Salon having their hair tinted and set, still more anxious hours in Dawn's Dresse Shoppe or the Hudson's Bay Company store, adding more dresses and hats to their already over-extended charge accounts.
Olga Stych's  generous figure would be a nightmare to any dress shop, and her dresses were consequently always more expensive than Donna Frizzell's were.
In despair, one day, of finding a well-fitting winter coat, she hastily counted up the amount of land around Tollemarche which her husband had bought up and decided he was worth at least a Persian lamb coat.
This error proved to be nearly the last straw needed to break his credit, since he had raised every cent he could in order to invest in land for building.
He protested to her hotly about this extravagance, but was quickly sent back to his rocks, cowering from her wrath.
The third fall after the oil strike in Alberta came slowly in, while Isobel mourned her husband, quite unaware that she had mortally offended Mrs Frizzell by crowding her August garden party off the social page of the Tollemarche Advent .
The glory of the Indian summer crept across the land with pale sunshine, golden leaves, deep-blue skies and treacherously cold winds.
The publication day of Hank Stych's book went unremarked in Tollemarche, mainly because the only bookseller in the town had not had time to unpack his new stock, and book reviews were featured only once a month in the Tollemarche Advent and then only in an obscure corner of an inner page.
The leaves fell thickly in the more established portions of the city, to the envy of residents in the bare new suburbs who were still awaiting paved roads and street lights, never mind trees.
Mrs Donna Frizzell looked despondently out of her picture window.
The unfenced oblong of grass in front of the house and the narrow path to the sidewalk were full of leaves twirling in the wind.
Mr Stych, during his last visit home, had already cleared the adjoining garden, and the Frizzells' leaves were gaily invading his once tidy lawn.
Mrs Frizzell's lips tightened as she guessed what Olga Stych's remarks would be when she saw them.
That intolerable woman, she thought bitterly, had managed to become president of the Tollemarche Downtown Community Centre by a majority of a single vote, and Mrs Frizzell had had to be content with the vice-presidency, which office she declared gave her all the work and none of the authority.
(She gave no credit to Olga Stych for her undoubted talents as an organizer.)
To make matters worse, Olga was also the secretary of the Noble Order of Lady Queen Bees — a pack of overdressed snobs, groaned Mrs Frizzell, whose members set the standard for every social event in the city.
Maybe, if she could squeeze a mink coat out of Maxie, it would help her towards the membership which always seemed to elude her by a vote or two, a vote strongly influenced, she feared, by Olga Stych.
One day, she promised herself, if ever she got the chance, she would give Olga Stych her comeuppance.
In the meantime, since no amount of nagging would persuade Maxie to rake up the leaves or to allow her to employ a man to do it, she would have to do the job herself.
Mixed with the need to tidy up the garden was a desire to show her neighbours her new purple, slim pants and striped purple and yellow jacket.
She therefore eased her thin shanks into these all too revealing pants, put a pair of gilt oriental sandals on her feet and hastily touched up the mauve polish on her toenails and fingernails.
She peered anxiously into her six-foot-wide dressing-table mirror to see if any white hair showed after her last auburn tint, and found to her satisfaction that all her hair was the same improbable shade.
She went through the house door leading into the garage, seized a rake and plunged into the cold wind.
She began to rake from the front of the house towards the road, then realized she had nothing in which to put the leaves.
With an irritability caused as much by her slimming diet as by the lack of a box, she almost stamped down the stairs into the basement, which was comfortingly warm, and found a couple of cardboard boxes.
Working with feverish haste, for the wind was piercing through her elegant jacket and Gentle Curve bra underneath, she filled the boxes, staggered with them to a row of garbage cans in the back lane and dumped their contents into the bins.
Her feet were icy cold in their open sandals  when, on the fifth trip back to the front lawn, her patience was rewarded.
Mrs Stych drew up at the kerb in her new European car, bought, needless to say, from Maxie's arch-rival down in Edmonton.
She heaved herself out and opened the trunk to display several large paper bags full of groceries.
Mrs Frizzell hastily drew in her stomach, tucked in her tail, and posed with her rake, just as she had seen the Hudson's Bay Company model do when showing pants.
A pair of University students passing by hastily averted their faces to hide their giggles.
Mrs Stych, however, did not avert her gaze.
She peered over the bag of groceries clasped to her bosom and was almost consumed by envy.
Five feet high and weighing one hundred and seventy pounds, a veritable Humpty Dumpty of a woman, Mrs Stych had no hope of ever being able to wear pants gracefully.
Mrs Stych ate with all the avidity of one who has known starvation.
Her father, an immigrant from the Ukraine, had carved his pig farm out of raw bush.
Her pregnant mother had pulled the plough when they broke a part of their holding for wheat and vegetables, and Olga's first memories were of carrying away stones from the furrows.
They had known such hunger that even now Olga could not bring herself to throw away a single crumb and always ate whatever was left after a meal.
Looking now at her plump, well-kept hands, two heavy diamond rings worn above her unexpectedly old-fashioned wedding band it was hard to believe that her mother was a work-bent Ukrainian peasant who still wore a black kerchief over her hair and spoke little English.
Mrs Stych fixed her button eyes upon the elegant figure of Mrs Frizzell and bowled purposefully across the lawn.
Her high, grating voice was caught by the wind and carried half a block, as she asked: ‘Aren't Maxie able to do the leaves?’
‘He's up at Grande Prairie, seeing to his new garage and car lot.’
She smiled, showing an excellent set of artificial  teeth, as she rallied her forces.
‘Enterprising, that's Maxie,’ she added, her eyes agleam with malice.
While she spoke, she remembered Maxie's grumble from behind his newspaper, the last time he had been home, when she had told him to do the leaves.
‘Do 'em yourself,’ he had said.
‘You ain't got nuttin' to do while I'm away up the Peace, not now Joanne and Betty is married.’
His pursed-up, babylike lips had quivered.
‘I got no time, you know that.’
In the tirade which immediately followed, Mrs Frizzell had reminded him that she was a pillar of the community, all for the sake of his business.
She was secretary of the Tollemarche United Church Willing Workers' Group, vice-president (not president!) of the Tollemarche Downtown Community Centre, a driver for Cripples' Transport, a member of the Car Dealers' Wives Society and, she would remind him, a member of the Committee for the Preservation of Morals.
And, she would like him to know the Morals Committee had just succeeded in having D.H.
Lawrence's books banned from the cigar stores.
Mr Maxmilian Frizzell had never read a book since leaving school and did not know who Lawrence was, so he put down the newspaper and took up the Car Dealer and Garageman with what dignity he could muster.
The next morning he departed, thankfully, for the North, to see his new garage and a silent, obliging Métis woman of his acquaintance.
The leaves remained on the lawn.
The high heels of Mrs Stych's new, mink-trimmed bootees were now sinking into the Frizzell lawn and threatening to snap at any moment, so she knew she must be quick.
She therefore ignored Maxie's undoubted enterprise, and asked: ‘Any news from Betty yet?’
Mrs Frizzell brightened.
She fell right into the trap, as she said: ‘Yeah, she got a daughter in Vancouver General yesterday.
Don't want me to go over yet.
Her husband Barry's taking care of the other two kids — he's a real capable boy.’
‘It must make yer feel old, being a grandmother for the sixth time,’ promptly replied Mrs Stych, her face carefully arranged to indicate that it was a disaster.
Mrs Frizzell was not, however, so easily crushed.
Scottish ancestors, one of whom had married a Cree,(who was, of course, never mentioned by any member of the family), had given her a physical and mental toughness which enabled her to fight methodically for anything she wanted badly.
Now she wanted to squelch Olga.
It had to be done, however, without giving too much offence — Mrs Stych was, after all, a Lady Queen Bee.
Old at fifty, indeed!
She smiled sweetly.
‘At forty-five, I don't mind.
I married young and so did Joanne and Betty.’
She lifted her lance.
‘I'm just so glad they're settled with good, respectable boys for husbands.’
Mrs Stych winced.
Mrs Frizzell had no need to remind her that her neat, conforming sons-in-law were far more popular in their home town of Tollemarche than Mrs Stych's own son, Hank.
Hank, when Mrs Stych thought of him at all, always gave her a headache.
Consequently, she had done her best to ignore his existence.
But Donna Frizzell never failed to remind her of his dragging progress through school, compared to Betty and Joanne's smart performances.
Now, at nearly twenty, he was still struggling to pass his Grade 12 examinations in high school, having been assured by his father, the school, and society at large that the world held no place for a boy without his Grade 12.
Mrs Stych could many times have wept with humiliation when Donna hastened to tell her of yet another minor car accident in which his ancient jalopy had been involved, yet another girl with whom he had once been seen who was ‘in trouble’.
For a boy who only worked part-time in a supermarket he had too much money, and this was another source of innuendo from Mrs Frizzell.
Olga herself was far too busy to worry about what Hank was doing, but she wished Donna would mind her own business.
And now she had pierced her again in this sore spot.
Mrs Stych clutched her groceries more tightly to her bosom and tried to heave her high heels out of the roots of the Frizzell grass.
One day she would get even with Donna for this.
Hank might be wild, but nobody had pinned anything serious on him yet.
The Frizzell sons-in-law might wear halos, but when it came to financial success they were nowhere.
‘Yeah,’ agreed Mrs Stych, at the same time disinterring her high heels.
‘They sure need to be good boys, being so hard up.
Betty and Joanne must have a hard time managing.’
Mrs Frizzell had been feeling that victory in this verbal exchange was hers and had been preparing to leave the garden.
Now, bent over a box, she nearly choked at this reference to her daughters' poverty.
She jerked herself upright, just in time to intercept a charming smile from Mrs Stych, as she looked back over her shoulder on her way to her own front door.
Mrs Frizzell, in a red glare of rage, for a moment imagined Mrs Stych as a neatly wrapped bundle of well minced beef.
Mrs Stych had just set down the last of her bags of groceries on the kitchen counter and begun to unpack them, when there was the sound of a heavy truck drawing up outside her house.
‘Mother!’ almost wailed Mrs Stych.
‘And the girls coming for bridge!’
She trotted into the living-room, where three bridge tables had already been set out, and peeped through the picture window.
Her mother was already clambering laboriously down from the seat beside the driver, displaying a lumpy mass of grey woollen stocking and woollen knickers in the process.
Her brother was already changing gear, and as soon as the old lady was safely on the sidewalk the vehicle ground noisily forward, with its protesting load of smelly pigs, towards the market.
Mrs Stych felt a little relieved.
At least that humiliating old truck would not be parked outside her door when the girls arrived.
She could just imagine the scathing looks with which Mrs Josephine MacDonald, the president of the Noble Order of Lady Queen Bees, would have regarded it.
Perhaps, she hoped guiltily, Joe would return to pick up her mother and take her home before any of the guests arrived.
The old lady's footsteps could be heard, ponderous and threatening, on the front steps.
Mrs Stych vanished immediately into the kitchen and continued to put away groceries, as if unaware of her mother's arrival.
The porch door clicked as her mother slowly entered.
There was the sound of feet being carefully wiped on the doormat, as once sharply requested by Mrs Stych soon after her marriage had taken her into polite circles.
Two heavy farm boots were then heaved off.
The door into the living-room was opened.
‘Olga, where are you?’ called her mother in Ruthenian, her brown, wrinkled face beaming.
‘I have come for three hours while Joe is selling the pigs.’
Mrs Stych, untying her apron, bustled out of the kitchen and tried not to show her despair.
‘Why, Mother!’ she exclaimed, embracing the stout shoulders and implanting a kiss on her mother's cheek.
Is it really necessary for Mother to smell eternally of hens? she wondered, and ushered her into the kitchen so that the unmistakable odour should not permeate her carefully prepared living-room.
Mrs Palichuk sank onto a scarlet kitchen chair and eased off her drab grey winter coat so that it draped over the back, retaining, however, the black kerchief which modestly veiled her hair.
She was dressed in a clumsy black skirt and a heavy grey cardigan, and, in honour of the occasion, had put on her best apron, which was white and had been exquisitely embroidered by herself.
It always astonished Olga Stych that her mother's horribly distorted hands, with their thick, horny nails, could produce such delicate embroidery and could paint with such skill the traditional patterns on eggshells at Eastertide.
Mrs Palichuk planted her stockinged feet squarely on the white and beige tiles of the kitchen floor, and looked around her.
She enjoyed exploring the intricacies of her daughter's kitchen.
The electric toaster which turned itself off when the toast was done and the electric beater enthralled her.
She was happy enough, however, to return to her own frame house, built by her husband after their first five bitter years spent living in a sod hut.
It was heated by a Quebec stove in the kitchen and she cooked with wood on another iron stove, and no cajoling by her widowed son, Joe, was going to make her alter her ways now.
‘Expecting visitors?’
Mrs Palichuk asked, speaking again in Ruthenian.
As usual, Olga answered her in English.
‘Yeah,’ she said, setting the coffee pot on the stove.
She took out the  electric beater and arranged it to beat cream, while Mrs Palichuk watched, fascinated.
‘Eleven for lunch and bridge.’
In her heart Olga Stych hoped her mother would take the hint and depart.
Then she realized that the older woman could not go without Joe to transport her, and she wondered what in earth she was to do.
Dimly, Mrs Palichuk perceived that she was in the way, and it hurt her.
‘I won't disturb you,’ she said.
‘I've brought my embroidery — I'll sit quiet while you play.’
Mrs Stych rallied herself.
‘It's all right, Mother.
You're very welcome.
It's just you don't play bridge.’
‘Oh,’ said her mother with a sniff, ‘I'll be entertained enough, watching your fine friends.’
Mrs Stych cringed at this remark.
It was bad enough to have to produce a mother who smelled of hens, worse to have all one's guests disconcerted by the beady eyes of an old countrywoman.
She said nothing, however, but continued her rapid preparations for her guests.
The back screen door slammed and a second later her son Hank padded silently into the kitchen.
He was a tall youth with very broad shoulders and deep chest, a trifle plump like most North American boys, but giving an impression of great physical strength.
His skin had a yellowy tinge and he had the same deepset black eyes as his mother and grandmother.
He unzipped his black jacket and flung it on a chair.
‘Hi, Ma,’ he said mechanically and then realized that his grandmother was also present.
His face lit up.
‘Hi, Gran,’ he said with more enthusiasm, went across to her and embraced her with a bearlike hug.
Laughing and fighting him ineffectually, his grandmother roared pleasantries at him in a mixture of Ruthenian and broken English.
At last he let her go, and, puffing happily, she straightened her kerchief and skirt.
‘How's school?’ she asked in Ruthenian.
Hank spoke no Ruthenian but he could understand the  simple sentences his grandmother used — more easily, in fact, than her garbled attempts at English.
He made a wry face and shook his head, his eyes holding, at that moment, the same merry twinkle as his grandmother's, a gaiety missing from his mother's expression.
‘He don't work,’ said his mother disapprovingly.
‘Always out somewhere.
Did you do your homework last night, Hank?’ she asked in a voice devoid of real inquiry.
He was very hungry and answered her query absently.
‘Yeah, I did.’
Then he asked: ‘What's cooking, Ma?’
‘Got the girls coming for lunch and bridge.
Make yourself a sandwich.’
Obediently Hank got a plate, took two slices of bread from the breadbox, and, after rummaging about in the refrigerator, found some luncheon meat, a glass of milk and a cardboard cup of ice cream.
His grandmother watched, her toothless mouth agape.
In all the desperate, toiling years she had been in Canada, neither her husband nor her son had ever made themselves a meal, except on one or two occasions when illness had confined her to bed.
Yet here was her grandson fending for himself, leaning amiably against a kitchen cupboard and eating a self-made sandwich, while his mother gave infinite attention to food for women who should have been at home attending to their own children.
It was with difficulty that she refrained from making a sharp remark.
After a moment, she managed to say through tight lips: ‘Come out and visit us on Sunday.’
Hank looked uneasily at her.
‘I can't,’ he said.
‘Got a date.’
Then, feeling that the reply was too abrupt, he added: ‘I'll sure come out and help with any work Uncle Joe wants doing on the next weekend.’
Mrs Palichuk smiled.
‘I know you will.
Come then, work or no work.’
He agreed, and lounged away to his room, from whence the sound of his portable typewriter could soon be heard.
‘He don't really work,’ said his mother crossly.
‘That  typewriter used to go half the night.
Now he don't bring it home from school half the time.’
Mrs Palichuk came to Hank's defence.
‘He seems to be keeping up his piano playing,’ she said.
‘He was trying out the new one that Joe bought for his little Beth to learn on, and even I knew he was playing well.’
Olga grunted, and then admitted grudgingly: ‘Yeah, he practises on our old piano in the basement.
Does some at school, too, I suppose.
But he won't try competing in the Festival — he's too lazy.’
‘You don't give him enough time, you and Boyd,’ said Mrs Palichuk.
‘You never did encourage him.
Always out gallivanting, and him home with a sitter or maybe nobody at all, for all I know.’
She sniffed and wiped her nose with the back of her hand.
‘You didn't even give him one of those fancy cookies just now,’ she added in an aggrieved tone.
Mrs Stych glared at the exquisite collection of cookies she was arranging on a tray.
‘He's too fat,’ she snapped.
Her voice became defiant: ‘And what time did you and Dad ever spare for us?’
Indignation welled up in Mrs Palichuk.
She closed her tired, bloodshot eyes and saw herself again as a young woman, buxom and pregnant, set down in wild bush country, her only asset a husband as young and as strong as herself.
She remembered how, side by side, they had hacked and burned the underbrush, borrowed a plough and pulled it themselves, working feverishly to get a little harvest to last them through the first arctic-cold winter.
In those hungry, freezing years she had borne and lost two children in the small sod hut in which they lived, before Olga, coming in slightly easier times, had survived.
She had fed the precious child herself and carried it with her into the fields, watching it as she wielded a hoe or sickle, tears of weakness and fatigue often coursing down her dusty cheeks.
A year later Joe had arrived, and the first doctor in the district had attended her in the first room of what was now a complete frame house.
She remembered the doctor  telling her, as gently as he could, that it was unlikely that she would have more children, and the shocked look on her husband's face when he heard the news.
They would need children to work the land when they became old.
Her husband had been kind, however, had kissed her and said the Lord would provide.
And the Lord had provided, reflected Mrs Palichuk.
The farm was well equipped with machinery and did not need the hand labour of earlier years.
Olga and Joe had been able to go to school, though they had plenty of farm chores as well.
Olga, the brighter of the two, had clamoured to be allowed to go to college in Tollemarche, and both parents had encouraged her in this, hoping she would become a school-teacher; but she had met Boyd Stych and got married instead.
It was not fair to say that he– parents had had no time for her or for Joe; all four of the family had worked together, and, as the settlement grew, they had enjoyed churchgoing and Easters and  Christmases with their neighbours.
Her exasperation, added to her feeling of being unwanted, burst out of her, and she almost shouted at her daughter: ‘Your father and I were-always with you, teaching you to be decent and to work.
Joe always makes time to play with his kids — he's got to be both mother and father to them — in spite of having-to run the farm alone since your father died.
You're just too big for your shoes!’
Mrs Stych was unloading savoury rolls and a bowl of chicken salad from the refrigerator and she kicked the door savagely, so that it slammed shut with a protesting boom.
When she turned on her mother, her face was scarlet and her double chin wobbled as she sought for words.
When the words came, they arrived as a spurt of Ruthenian, the language of her childhood.
‘I'm not too big for my shoes!’ she cried.
‘You just don't know what it's like living in a town — it's different.’
Mrs Palichuk wagged an accusing finger at Olga.
‘Excuses!
Excuses!’ her voice rose.
‘You were always good at them.
Anything to avoid staying home and looking  after Hank.
How he ever grew up as decent as he is, I don't know.’
Arms akimbo, Olga swayed towards her mother.
‘Let me tell you,’ she yelled, ‘Boyd and I are somebodies in this town, and mostly because I was smart enough to set to and cultivate the right people.’
‘Rubbish!’
‘It's not rubbish — it's true.’
Mrs Palichuk heaved her formidable bulk off the frail chair and thrust her face close to Olga's.
‘And what good will it do for Hank, if it is true?’
Olga drew herself up proudly.
‘His name will be in the Social Register,’ she announced.
Mrs Palichuk was reduced to stunned silence for a moment.
Then she roared, like a Montreal trucker stuck in a lane: ‘You'll be lucky if his name's not on a tombstone — like his friend who killed himself.’
Olga's voice was as tremendous as her mother's as she screamed: ‘Don't be ridiculous!’
Hank materialized silently at the kitchen door, some school books under his arm.
He surveyed the two women, who were oblivious of his presence as they tore verbally at each other.
With a shrug, he retrieved his black jacket, pinched a couple of cookies from the carefully arranged plate and drifted quietly away through the front door.
When he stopped to look back along the road, he saw two cars draw up in front of his home, one after the other.
A sleepy grin spread over his face.
The bridge-playing girls had arrived, a collection of overdressed, overpainted forty-year-olds.
As the sound of their giggling chatter reached him on the wind, his amusement faded and gave way to loathing.
There was Mrs Moore, the dentist's wife, mother of his friend who had committed suicide because life did not seem worth living; and there was Mary Johnson's mother looking as prim as a prune, not knowing that her daughter was no better than a streetwalker.
Hank made a vulgar sound of distaste, shoved his hands in his pockets and continued on his way.
He remembered how, as a child, by dozens of small acts of perversity, he had brought his mother's wrath down upon himself, so that she did at least notice his existence.
His father, being a geologist, was away from home most of the time, so that Hank could, to a degree,.
forgive his neglect.
But his mother had nothing to do except care for him, and this she had blatantly failed to do.
Instead, she had toadied to these ghastly, grasping women in glittering hats, women who themselves seemed to have forgotten that they had husbands and families.
As he had grown older, his anger had turned to cold bitterness, and creeping into his mind had come the idea of revenge, something subtle enough to humble his mother, make her realize that he lived, without killing her.
After long consideration, he had decided that he would try to write a book so outrageous that the Presbyterian élite of Tollemarche would ostracize the whole Stych family and thus put an end to his mother's inane social life.
He had worked at the idea with all the intensity of youth, and now it was about to bear fruit.
The book was, apparently, the kind of tale for which all young people had been waiting and its heavy sales in the United States had amazed him; the first hardcover edition had sold fast enough to surprise even his capable publisher.
He tried now to think with savage pleasure of the dismay likely to afflict his mother, once her female companions heard of it.
He found, however, as he loped along, ostensibly to school, that he could not feel the same bitterness that he had done when he first started to write.
Instead, he was glowing with hope of a future which, until recently, had seemed to him to consist solely of repeating Grade 12 over and over again in a remorseless, inescapable cycle of misery.
Hank Stych, he told himself smugly, was a success.
Mr Maxmilian Frizzell owned the biggest garage and car salesroom in Tollemarche.
It took up half a block of Tollemarche Avenue and was gaily painted in red and white.
Above its well-polished showroom windows an electric sign proclaimed to the world his slogan, YOU CAN TRUST MAXIE.
At the back of his premises he owned a used-car lot which faced on a less fashionable avenue, and here he sold second-hand cars, trucks and motorboats.
His salesmen in the front showroom were sleek as well-fed cats, immaculately dressed in dark suits and ties, while the ones on the back car lot were chosen deliberately for their comfortably seedy looks; they leaned more towards coloured shirts and zippered jackets, and their haircuts were longer.
One Saturday morning, some two weeks after Mrs Frizzell's encounter with Mrs Stych, Mr Frizzell was seated at his office desk in a glassed-in area above the garage proper, from whence he could see all that was going on at both back and front of his property.
He was going over his books and noting complacently that he was doing remarkably well.
He got up slowly from his chair to stretch himself and went to the window, overlooking the back car lot.
It was busy, and all the salesmen were occupied.
The autumn sun glinted softly on the pastel-coloured vehicles, most of which Mr Frizzell expected to sell before winter  paralysed the second-hand car business for four months.
To one side of the lot was a collection of European cars and leaning over a snow-white Triumph was Hank Stych, talking to one of the salesmen.
The salesman was just closing the hood, and Hank walked round to the back of the car and bounced it firmly up and down with his hands.
‘Why does Van want to waste his time showing a car as expensive as that to a kid like Hank?’ wondered Mr Frizzell irritably.
Surely the man had enough sense to take him over to the other corner, where aged Chevrolets lay wearily beside battered Valiants, motorbikes and scooters.
The salesman and Hank, however, seemed to have reached some agreement and strolled towards the office, where fat old Josh presided over the financing section with the careful rapacity of a born moneylender.
Mr Frizzell shrugged his shoulders.
Josh would soon cut Hank down to size.
He dismissed the subject from his mind and decided to go down to the tiny lunchroom he ran for his employees, to get a cup of coffee.
His appearance caused a rapid scattering of employees who had outstayed their coffee break, and he sat down contentedly to munch a doughnut with his coffee.
A few minutes later, Van entered, looking very pleased with himself.
‘Sold that Triumph,’ he called to Mr Frizzell.
Mr Frizzell stopped munching.
‘Who to?’
‘Hank Stych.’
‘You're crazy!’
‘Nope.
He bought it all right.’
Mr Frizzell swallowed a piece of doughnut whole.
‘How's he going to pay for it?’ he asked, trying not to appear over-anxious.
‘Traded in his jalopy, put a thousand down and the rest over six months.’
‘Now I know you're crazy,’ exploded Mr Frizzell.
‘What the hell —‘
‘It's O.K., Boss.
It's O.K., I tell yer.
He wrote a cheque and Josh okayed it with the bank — phoned Hnatiuk, the manager, at home.’
Mr Frizzell slowly dunked the remains of his doughnut into his coffee.
‘You're kidding?’ he said without much conviction.
‘No, I'm not.
Ask Josh.
Hnatiuk at the bank said he's  always had quite a good balance in his savings account — for a kid — and he's deposited quite a bit of money recently.
He's got the money, all right.’
‘Well, I'll be damned,’ said Mr Frizzell, forgetting for a moment his Presbyterian upbringing.
‘Where's he get it from?’
‘Dunno.
Ain't our headache.’
Van swallowed down a scalding coffee and got up.
‘It's my lucky day,’ he said cheerfully.
‘Go see what else is cooking.’
‘Sure,’ said Mr Frizzell bewilderedly, ‘sure.’
Hank drove the gleaming little Triumph out of the lot.
She was a peach, he thought lovingly, a perfect peach, and all his, provided he was satisfied after giving her a run on the highway.
He drove her carefully in and out of the busy Saturday morning traffic and wondered idly how he was going to explain about her to his mother, without saying where he got the money from.
She was going to learn the hard way about the book, he was determined about that.
His father wouldn't even notice the car, he thought, without much bitterness — too busy with his oil hunting.
Probably wouldn't be home for weeks anyway.
Well, his book, his beautiful, shocking book, was published at last, and being bought by every kid in the States, so the balloon was bound to go up one of these days.
Judging by the latest letter he had received from New York, care of Isobel Dawson, it was going to go up with a bang — there had been sufficient talk of banning it to make sure that everybody bought it, without any real danger that it would be banned from the bookstores.
Maybe it might just make his mother realize he was alive.
At any rate, everybody would think she had condoned his writing it and that should raise a fine storm for her.
He clenched the steering wheel so hard that the car wobbled, and he hastily righted it.
It would serve her right.
He had given up his Saturday job in the supermarket some time back, so today he would just drive and drive, drifting along the miles of highway toward Edmonton.
He stopped for a red light, prepared to make a right-hand turn as soon as the arrow flicked green.
He knew the change would be slow, so he took out and lit a cigarette while he waited.
He whistled mechanically at the back view of a girl waiting to cross the intersection, though of late girls seemed to have lacked their usual charm for him.
The girl turned her head and half smiled at him behind her glasses.
He knew her.
Her name was Gail Danski, a prim-looking chick, but not so prim when you got her into a dark corner, as he had once discovered when taking her home after a school dance.
‘Hi,’ he shouted.
‘Like a ride?’
She hesitated, and was lost.
She cuddled in close to him as they tore along the highway.
Hank was fun, even if it did look as if he would never make Grade 12 and never earn much.
He knew how to give a girl a good time.
‘Where we going?
Mother will be looking for me.’
‘Let her look.’
She rubbed her leg against his.
Since it was obviously expected of him, he took his right hand off the wheel and put his arm around her shoulders.
She laughed and took off her glasses, then gently slid her hand into his pocket.
‘I haven't had any lunch,’ she complained.
‘We'll stop at a drive-in, and then what say about a nice, quiet park?’
He might as well make hay while the sun shone, he told himself.
She giggled and looked sly.
‘O.K.’
It was just too easy, he ruminated, as he bit into a huge hamburger at the drive-in.
All you had to do was write about it afterwards, and you could make a real fast buck.
Then he remembered the long, toilsome months when he had worked to perfect a style of writing, giving hours to his literature and language assignments, more hours to dissecting other people's novels.
No, it was not that easy, he decided, smiling a little ruefully to himself, and there was a lot more hard work ahead.
His friend regarded him curiously over her hamburger.
It was strange how Hank had a way of withdrawing from one's company at times, just as if he had forgotten one was there.
Still, he looked fine when he smiled like that, almost handsome, with his wide mouth and perfect teeth.
‘Wotcha laughin' at, Hank?’ she asked.
‘It wouldn't interest you, hon.’
It was midnight when he finally eased the Triumph to a stop in front of his parents' house and swayed gently up the steps.
He could not, at first, unlock the door, though the porch light was on; the keyhole kept moving.
He should not have had that last drink or that last kiss.
That girl was unbelievable.
Who would imagine that a thin, stuck-up-looking type like that could know so much?
And yet, unaccountably, he had not been happy with her.
Finally, he had felt sick at his behaviour and had dropped her off at her home with a feeling of relief that she was not the clinging type and perhaps he could avoid her in future.
Girls like that were toys, and he was fed up with toys.
He found the keyhole, opened the door quietly, and crept into the living-room.
His mother must have gone to bed.
He went along the passage as silently as he could, and, safely in his room, flung himself on his bed without undressing.
He felt dirty and his head ached.
He hauled a pillow out from under the bedspread and arranged it to ease his throbbing temples.
He had had enough of this kind of game, he decided.
Maybe he could settle down a bit now, quit high school, travel — and write.
It would be good to get out of Tollemarche, out of Alberta, and see the world a bit.
Suddenly, he was asleep.
He woke up only when his mother slammed the front door as she went out to church.
He lay quietly, with a comfortable feeling of pleasant anticipation of the day before him, imagining his mother in her pale blue Sunday outfit getting her European car out of the garage and manoeuvring it down to the United church.
Time was, he remembered, when she had attended the Greek Orthodox  Church, where he also had gone when small, but its splendour had palled when she had realized that more fashionable people belonged to the United Church.
Hank chuckled, and then winced when he moved his head suddenly.
Even God could be fashionable.
He got up, took a shower, combed his hair with care and put on a new black T-shirt.
He ate a dish of cornflakes while wandering around the kitchen and then went out to look at the Triumph, still parked in front of the house.
His mother would imagine some stranger had parked his car there.
But the car was his and it was beautiful.
He loved her like a woman and he ran his hands lightly over her as if she would respond to his touch.
She was silent and acquiescent, however, so he climbed in and drove her round several blocks, just for the joy of it, taking the sharp corners so fast that her tyres shrieked in protest.
Then he went slowly back to within two blocks of home, drove up the back lane and stopped before the old wooden garage which he had rented for so many years from Isobel Dawson.
As he entered the garden through the back.gate, Isobel got up from in front of a flower bed where she had been planting bulbs.
He was pleased to see her looking less pale than when he had last seen her, and she grinned at him with something of her old cheerfulness.
She wore a shabby, tweed skirt and a turtleneck sweater which had shrunk slightly, making her look even smaller than usual.
She had no makeup on and her long fair hair was twisted into a knot on top of her head.
Hank could not imagine how she managed to look so elegant in such an outfit; the concepts of breeding and natural grace were unknown to him, and the quiet air of command she had scared him slightly.
All he knew was that compared with the trollop he had been with the day before, she was like a princess, a very untouchable snow princess seven years older than he, who had recently lost her husband.
Fear of hurting her in any way made him abrupt.
‘Got something to show you,’ he announced without preamble.
‘Oh?’ she queried in her soft, clipped English voice.
Dorothy's voice held a distinct Welsh singsong, but years in London had worn away any trace of it from Isobel's speech.
‘Yeah, come on outside.’
Still holding a trowel in one dirty hand, she followed his huge, droopy figure into the lane.
‘My goodness!’ she exclaimed.
‘What a lovely car!’
She walked all round his precious beauty and admired its finer points.
Finally, she came to stop beside him and looked up at him with a serious, troubled air.
‘You know, Hank, the car is very nice indeed, but is it wise to buy it just at present?’
He was immediately defiant, his black eyes narrowed and his mouth hard.
‘Why not?
It's my money, isn't it?
I can do what I like.’
She answered him gently, pushing a loose lock back into her bun as she did so.
‘Yes, my dear, it is your money, and you really earned it.
The car is lovely — but do you think you should flash money around yet — I mean, before the town knows how you came by it?’
She stopped, then said: ‘Look, come and have some tea with me before you start work.
Have you seen any American papers?’
The endearment caught him by surprise and his face softened.
He did not know of the English habit of using such affectionate epithets rather haphazardly, and he was impressed that she should consider him her dear.
‘O.K.,’ he said, considerably mollified, and followed her obediently up the garden path and into the kitchen.
The two women students who rented rooms from her had gone to church, and the remains of their breakfast lay on the table in the breakfast nook.
Isobel looked at the muddle with distaste, then quickly washed her hands, put a kettle of water on the gas stove and assembled cups and saucers on a tray, while Hank ambled curiously around the old-fashioned kitchen.
It had none of the clinical efficiency of his mother's, but it did remind him of his grandmother's kitchen out on the farm, with its prosaic line of battered saucepans which shared a shelf with a large bowl for  making bread and a hopeful looking collection of cake tins.
There was cake, satisfying and fruity, and he sat on the edge of the chesterfield in Isobel's sitting-room and ate it appreciatively between gulps of strong, sweet tea from one of her best bone china teacups.
He liked this room, he decided.
A man could put his feet up here without fear of being rebuked, and maybe he could even leave things about.
Her desk looked untidy and a basket by the fireplace was filled with old magazines and newspapers.
On a little table by the piano was a pile of much thumbed music.
He got up and went to the piano, sat on the stool and found that it revolved.
He did a slow twist on it, laughing at her as he did so, then played a chord.
She did not object, so he broke into a piece by Debussy and she listened attentively.
After a few minutes, he became aware of Peter Dawson's portrait staring down at him from the top of the piano, and he stopped.
‘I didn't know you could play,’ she said.
‘You are quite good.’
‘Always got an A in music,’ he replied, still contemplating the portrait.
‘Paid for lessons out of my newspaper money.’
He nodded towards the photograph.
‘Sorry about Peter.’
She was suddenly tense and her voice came stiffly: ‘Thank you.’
Seeing her quivering lips, he wished he had not mentioned Peter.
What a clumsy lout he was!
Desperately he wanted to comfort her, but how does a man comfort a girl crying for someone else, he wondered anxiously.
‘You'll feel better later on,’ he floundered.
‘Lousy job — the army.’
She controlled herself with an effort.
‘Yes, but I think he felt the peacekeeping mission was very worthwhile.’
He tried to change the subject.
‘Funny to think you're a Canadian.’
She realized he was trying to lead the conversation away from her husband, to be kind and make up for his blunder.
‘I suppose I am,’ she said.
She picked up a New York paper  from the pile on the coffee table.
‘I wanted to show you this.’
He felt a little snubbed and was angry with himself.
He took the paper from her, however, and after a quick glance at her set face, read the column she indicated which was headed ‘Book Reviews’.
He whistled under his breath.
'’The Cheaper Sex …a disgusting book…vulgar pornography…shocking,’'he read in a mutter, and looked at her sheepishly.
She had recovered herself and tiny humorous lines were gathering round her eyes.
‘Now read this one,’ she commanded.
He read aloud: '’ Delicate delineation of a boy's sensations on discovering physical love…powerful and evocative description of adolescent suffering in an unsympathetic society…the best to come out of Canada for years….’
Aw, hell!’
He slammed the paper down, his face going pink in spite of his efforts to appear blasé.
‘Do you think it was a sick book?’
Isobel smiled and said: ‘No, I told you it was a good book, and I was right.
A lot of things which are thought rather wicked in North America are regarded as normal in Europe.
The thing is that, in a day or two, the Tollemarche Advent will wake up to the fact that you wrote it.
There will be headlines — and I don't think your parents are going to like them much.’
Hank's voice was sulky as he replied: ‘What do I care?
I started to write it so as to shake them.
They never cared about me, did they?’
‘They are going to care now.’
‘They're about twenty years too late.
Anyway, I did finally send it under a pen name — Ben MacLean — mostly to please you,’ he said defensively.
Then he added, with a sudden burst of frankness, ‘I reckoned the news would seep out anyway in time and cause them to lose plenty of sleep.’
‘I think in a place as small as Tollemarche it will come out,’ she agreed.
‘Waal,’ he drawled defiantly, ‘let it come out.
That's  what I originally intended.
Now, I don't care either way, Isobel.’
The use of her first name did not imply familiarity, as it would have done in England– though she had never really got used to being on first-name basis with everyone; she was invariably disconcerted by this custom.
She leaned forward to pick up a cigarette box.
When she opened the lid, it commenced to play a tinkling version of ‘The Bluebells of Scotland’.
She offered him a cigarette from it.
He was charmed by the tune and took the whole box from her while he listened; his face reflected an almost childlike absorption.
This was the first time that he had been past the big covered back porch of her house, and everything was new and interesting.
‘Say, where did you get that?’
‘It belonged to my Welsh grandmother — she bought it in Edinburgh while she was on her honeymoon.’
She enjoyed his obvious fascination with it and it reminded her of another suggestion she wanted to make to him.
‘You know, Hank, if you really want to write for a living you should go to London and Edinburgh, go to Europe, too — perhaps try working for a newspaper or magazine.
See something of life.’
‘I've seen plenty already,’ he snapped, his face suddenly hardening, though basically he appreciated the personal interest which prompted her suggestion.
She ignored his tone of voice and agreed with him.
‘You have in a way — but you know, there are other places than the Prairies and Jasper and Banff — and, by and large, the world isn't very interested in books about Canada.
You will need to branch out and —‘
She stopped, anxious not to offend him.
His presence kept at bay the pictures that danced through her mind, of Peter lying in the dust, her Peter who had, she realized suddenly, always had the same slightly defensive outlook that Hank had, of trying to forestall criticism.
‘The Bluebells of Scotland’ had also stopped, and he put  the box down slowly, his eyes turned thoughtfully towards her.
‘Branch out and…?’ he asked.
‘Acquire a veneer of civilization,’ she said unexpectedly, with a brutal honesty possible only with someone she regarded as an old friend.
Impulsively she put her hand over his and said with passion: ‘You are going to have to deal with a smart, slick world, quick to ridicule those who do not understand its manners — a world where you want friends, not enemies.
You can't defy the world as you can your parents; you have to work with it a little— and be polite to it.’
The hand under hers clenched on the settee cushion, his face went red, and his eyes flashed such vindictive rage for a moment that she thought he would hit her, then he controlled himself, sitting silently by her on the settee, until she felt his hand gradually relax.
‘Hank,’ she said rather hopelessly, ‘I didn't mean to hurt you.’
He slowly lifted the hand which had been clutching his, opened it and very gently implanted a kiss on its palm, and laughed when she gasped at the caress.
She was too innocent, he thought.
‘I kiss the hand which beats me,’ he said melodramatically, and put it down firmly in her lap before he had any further ideas.
‘Yeah, I know I'm a savage compared to your itsy-bitsy English world.’
She was still shaken that anyone should calmly kiss her when she had not been long widowed, but his remark stung her into retort.
‘It's a very tough world,’ she said defensively.
‘English people are generally very well qualified and if you are not good at your work you'll soon go under, there.’
He had quite recovered his good humour, and said: ‘O.K., O.K., what do I do now, ma'am?’
‘It depends on whether you have any money left.’
' 'Bout five hundred bucks — from working in the store and from the articles you helped me to place.’
He paused, and then said, ‘I used the advance payment for the book to get the car.’
His eyes twinkled when she told him he was rich.
‘When does High School finish?’ she asked.
‘In June next — but I'm quitting right now — I've had enough.’
She was still telling herself she should not be put out by a kiss from a youngster who did not realize what he was doing, and she tried to nod her golden head with an appropriate display of adult wisdom, as she said: ‘Yes, you're wasting your time.
Has your publisher asked you to go to New York?’
‘Yeah, he has.
Next week.
Mostly about the film — and they want to talk about another book.’
He pulled a crumpled letter out of his shirt pocket, opened it and handed it to her to read.
‘Sent me a cheque for expenses, too.’
She was immediately businesslike and succeeded in putting some suggestions to him in her crisp English way, which banished from her mind again any other thoughts.
‘What about asking Albert's to set you up with a really quiet-looking business outfit for New York?
Take the clothes you have on with you, so that if he wants you dressed up as a teenager you have the proper clothes for that, too.’
She paused, looking at him reflectively, and then asked: ‘Don't you think you had better speak to your father about all this?’
Hank chuckled.
‘I'd have a job.
He's away up the Mackenzie in a canoe — with a prospecting party.’
‘Oh, dear.
Well, what about your mother?’
She looked imploring, and he realized that her eyelashes were golden, too.
She was a true blonde.
‘Hank, you really ought to tell her.’
He withdrew his mind from contemplation of her eyelashes, and asked heavily: ‘You kidding?’
‘No.’
‘I just hope the shock rocks her to her Playtex foundations.’
He sounded malicious, and then, as Isobel made  mild noises of protest, he went on in more conciliatory tones: ‘Aw, I'll just tell her I'm going on a trip right now — an’ don't you tell her.’
‘I don't really know her.
I've met her twice on formal occasions, but I am at work all day, so I don't often see my neighbours.
And I don't intend to meddle in your family life — if you can't talk to each other, it's none of my business.’
She smiled at him.
‘You have always been a careful tenant in the garage.
If you have a table and a typewriter in there, I don't mind.
I've known you for years.
I know you write under the pseudonym of Ben MacLean and wish to keep your literary activities secret, so I have never seen anything wrong in taking in your mail.’
She leaned back against the settee, her eyes regarding him quizzically, and said: ‘There.
I've done my best to square my conscience for your sake.
How's that?’
‘And what about all the times I've asked your advice while you were doing your yard work?’ he teased.
‘Well — um — the students who live with me sometimes ask advice, too.’
‘Oh, brother!’ he exclaimed, looking suddenly troubled.
‘They'll be coming back from church soon — and Dorothy, too — and I don't want you embarrassed.’
‘Embarrassed?’
She was surprised.
‘Yeah.
You know.
Neighbours talkin' and that kinda thing.’
‘Good heavens!
One can be friends with men without that sort of gossip.
What do they think I am — a baby snatcher?’
He was hurt to the quick.
‘Not here you can't,’ he almost snarled.
‘And I'm no baby.’
She looked up at the six solid feet of him, at the huge, deep chest under his black shirt, at his bulging arm muscles.
Then she raised her eyes to his cross, slightly plump face, its high Ukrainian cheekbones and sallow skin, now flushed with anger, and finally at the intelligent, black eyes, almost pleading to be told that he was a man.
She pitied him, and said, smiling gently: ‘No, you have grown up in the years you've had my old garage, and you are very much a young man.’
She hesitated, and then said very sweetly to comfort him: ‘And it was nice of you to think of my reputation.’
He did not tell her that hers was the only female reputation he had ever given any thought to and that he did not know why he bothered.
He just stood looking down at her for a moment, his eyes still pleading, and then abruptly he turned and picked up the tray and carried it into the kitchen for her.
‘I guess I'll go and do some work,’ he said heavily.
‘I got the rough outline of another novel in my head.’
She forced herself to be cheerful.
‘That's the spirit.
You'll go from strength to strength, I know it.’
He felt happier.
She could surely be real sweet when she tried, he ruminated.
He saluted her, went through the screen door, vaulted the balustrade protecting the steps, and swaggered down the garden.
The Triumph was soon garaged, with its-nose almost touching the back of his chair.
He sat down at the old table by the window and put a new sheet of paper into the typewriter.
‘Mother and Son ’, he typed, ‘By Ben MacLean’.
On Sundays Maxie Frizzell caught up with the various jobs his wife Donna required him to do.
He sometimes thought it would be pleasant to lie in bed with his wife on Sunday mornings, now that there were no children to interrupt them, but Donna reckoned they should be through with all that kind of stupidity, so he was resigned to the sporadic consolation of his Métis up north.
Donna's latest demand was that he should extend the patio and then roof it over.
‘I helped you by clearing all the leaves in the yard,’ she told him half a dozen times, ‘and I got a cold while I was doing it.
Now just you get busy on that patio.’
Maxie made himself some coffee and took it out to the patio, where he surveyed the work to be done.
He had already prepared the ground for the extension of the concrete flooring, and, since this was likely to be the last Sunday of the year when it would not freeze, the next job was to prepare the concrete mixture, which lay against the wall in a large bag.
He worked slowly but efficiently for nearly two hours, fearing that, if he did not finish the work quickly, frost would make it impossible for him to continue; then, tired and sweating, he went and sat on the front doorstep to rest.
Next door but one, new neighbours had recently moved in and a man was at work in the garden, slowly digging a flower bed, while a small boy pottered about trying to help him.
They were both very fair complexioned, and they chatted sporadically to each other in a language foreign to Mr Frizzell, who imagined that they must be Dutch or German.
He remembered his wife mentioning to him that some immigrants had moved into the street, and, because he knew that neither Donna nor Mrs Stych would bother to call on immigrants, he felt vaguely sorry for the newcomers'  isolation.
When the man looked up from his digging Frizzell lifted a tired hand in salute and the man gravely acknowledged it.
Closer to hand, the white Triumph was standing outside the Styches' house, and Mr Frizzell gazed at it uneasily.
Though he did not like Stych much — too stuck up by far with his university degree and his oilmen friends — he hoped that Hank had not stolen the money for the car.
He saw Olga Stych go off to church an hour early and deduced that she must be helping with some small church chore before the service.
Then Hank came out and drove off, and he cursed him quietly.
That young so-and-so might easily have got his Betty into trouble, if he had not caught them in time.
Children, he muttered fervently, were just a curse sent by God.
This reminded him that it was nearly time for church, so he heaved himself to his feet and went to make some more coffee, this time for Mrs Frizzell as well.
She was sitting up in bed, her glasses already adorning her gaunt face and her hair curled up tightly on rollers.
She accepted the coffee with a grunt and told Maxie not to sit on the bed, because he had cement on his jeans.
He lowered himself gingerly to a gilt chair and stirred his coffee, the spoon circulating slowly until it finally stopped and he sat staring at it.
Mrs Frizzell drank her coffee quickly, then scrambled out of bed and proceeded a little unsteadily to the kitchen, her cotton nightgown drooping despondent–y round her.
She took a roast from the refrigerator, put it into a baking tin, wrapped two potatoes in tinfoil and put both meat and vegetables into the gas oven.
Having adjusted the heat and thus satisfactorily disposed of the problem of lunch she went to the bathroom for a shower and then returned to the bedroom.
Maxie was still staring at a half cup of coffee.
‘You sick?’ she asked, as she struggled into her best foundation garment.
Her body was still damp and the garment was too tight, so she was pink with exertion by  the time she had managed to zip it up.
‘No.’
‘You'd better shower or we'll be late.’
‘Yeah.’
He got up reluctantly, put the cup down on the dressing table and walked slowly towards the bathroom.
At the bedroom door he stopped.
His wife was painting her eyelids green.
‘You know Hank next door.’
He made it a statement rather than a question.
Mrs Frizzell turned.
She looked weird with one green eyelid and one veined pink.
‘Sure,’ she said.
‘Has he been left any money by somebody?’
‘Not as far as I know.
She'd surely have told me if a rich relative had left him somethin' — I'm sure she would.
Why?’ she inquired, as, tongue clenched between teeth, she carefully finished her second eyelid.
‘Nothin'.
I just wondered.’
Mrs Frizzell stopped half-way into a bone-coloured skirt — bone had been last year's fashionable colour, according to the Tollemarche Advent .
‘Maxie Frizzell!
What do you know that I don't?’
He was sorry that he had brought up the subject and hastily departed for his shower, shouting that he would tell her while he was dressing.
By the time he came back she was ready, looking like a spangled Christmas doll, her bone suit augmented by a scintillating green, three-tier necklace and bracelet, a startlingly flowered green hat, tight, incredibly high-heeled shoes of shiny green, and her fox stole.
She was sitting tensely on the gilt chair.
‘Well?’ she demanded.
‘Say, you do look nice.’
He went over to her, holding a towel round his middle, and gave her a smacking kiss on the cheek.
She pushed him off irritably.
‘What's this about Hank?’
He let the towel drop and dug around in a drawer for some underwear.
‘Maxie, cover yourself!
You're not decent!’
He ignored this and leisurely got into his undershirt.
‘Hank,’ she reminded him, her anxiety to know apparent in her rapt attention.
‘Well, he bought a Triumph off us yesterday.’
‘So what?’
She was disappointed.
‘You don't get a Triumph one year old for cents.’
Mrs Frizzell digested this truth, and the import of it slowly became clear to her.
‘That's right,’ she said thoughtfully.
‘Mebbe his father got worried about him driving that old jalopy — it weren't safe.
He might have helped Hank buy a new one — he's making enough money.’
‘His father don't hardly know he's born yet,’ said Maxie scornfully.
‘How's he payin' for it?’
‘A thousand down and the rest over six months — plus his old wreck, of course.’
‘Cash?’
‘No, cheque — but it's good — Josh checked with the bank, called Hnatiuk at his home.
Hnatiuk says his savings account has been in good shape for a boy this past two years.
Mrs Frizzell licked her finger and smoothed down her eyebrows with it.
This was truly a mystery.
She pondered silently and then was suddenly alert.
Hank must have done a robbery to have so much money — he must have — there had been one or two bad ones recently — a Chinese grocer had been shot to death, in one instance.
She was filled with excitement.
She would get hold of Mrs Hnatiuk after church and see if she knew anything about it.
No good asking Olga Stych; she'd just stick her nose in the air and say that Boyd was doing very well.
‘Hurry up,’ she said, as if the church service would be over all the quicker if Maxie got a move on.
And then she  said: ‘Mebbe he's one of that gang that has been holding up grocery stores.’
‘Mebbe,’ said her husband.
‘I don't care what he's done.
None of my business.
The finance company will pay us and they'll soon squeeze the balance out of him.’
‘For heaven's sake!’
Such a scandalous-sounding mystery, and he didn't care.
He didn't care about anything, except cars and trucks.
A fat lot he even cared about being late for church and she trying to keep up a good style.
‘For goodness’ sakes, hurry up,’she exclaimed, standing up and folding her stole around her.
‘I'll go get the car out.’
The Reverend Bruce Mackay, the patient and acquiescent minister, went on to ‘fifthly’ in his sermon, and Mrs Frizzell was sure he would never end.
Mrs Hnatiuk, who was wearing a fast-looking white jockey cap, was only two rows in front of her and Mrs Frizzell did not know how to bear the suspense.
The final hymn had eight verses, not to speak of a chorus of Hallelujahs at the end of each one; Mr Frizzell enjoyed this and sang in a pleasant tenor voice.
Across the aisle, Mrs Stych expanded her tremendous bosom to shout to the Lord in a wobbly soprano.
Borne along by the music and the comforting sermon, she was happy.
It was over at last.
The minister stood at the door and shook the hand of each member of his congregation, with a kindly word for each boy and girl.
The children viewed him with wary respect, since, in spite of his air of benignity, he frequently exploded when faced with old chewing-gum stuck under the pews, the choir guardedly shooting craps during the sermon, and similar juvenile straying from the path of righteousness.
Mrs Frizzell eased herself — it could not be said that she exactly pushed — through the crowd so that she was next to Mrs Hnatiuk, while Maxie stopped to talk to clients.
Out on the pathway, Mrs Hnatiuk was surprised to find her hand gripped enthusiastically by Mrs Frizzell, who was normally so condescending, and her health solicitously inquired after.
Mr Hnatiuk had taken one look at the  approaching Mrs Frizzell and had dived for cover into a knot of other businessmen.
Mrs Hnatiuk was cornered.
Mrs Frizzell circulated painstakingly through all the usual conversational openings, the weather, the forthcoming Edwardian Days Carnival Week, the coming winter and what winter did to the car trade, wondering how to get round to Hank's Triumph.
She was unexpectedly helped along by Mrs Hnatiuk, who said: ‘Ah, there's Mrs Stych.
I just love her little car.’
‘Yeah,’ said Mrs Frizzell, with satisfaction.
‘Maxie just sold her Hank another nice one, a Triumph.’
‘My!
They must be doing well,’ said Mrs Hnatiuk.
‘Three good cars in the family, counting Boyd's Dodge.’
‘Maxie said Hank paid for it himself,’ dangled Mrs Frizzell hopefully.
The fish failed to rise.
‘Did he?’ exclaimed Mrs Hnatiuk.
‘He must be working at something good.’
‘He's still in high school.
Doing Grade 12 again.’
Mrs Hnatiuk's five little girls were still in elementary school and, consequently, she did not come into frequent contact with high school students.
She was, therefore, unaware of Hank's reputation for being rather irresponsible.
She said maddeningly: ‘Say, that's a nice stole you've got.
Mrs MacDonald's got a blue mink, but that one of yours is nice, too.’
Mrs Frizzell nearly screamed.
Either Mrs Hnatiuk really did not know much about Hank or she was just being perverse.
‘Where do you think he got the money from?’ she queried.
‘Who?’
‘Hank Stych.’
Mrs Hnatiuk's pale blue eyes opened wide.
‘From his father, I suppose.
Where else?’
‘He might have stolen it.’
Mrs Hnatiuk's eyes nearly popped out of her head.
‘Do you think so?’
It was obvious that Mrs Hnatiuk was not telling.
Mrs Frizzell mentally crossed her off her list of guests — she'd never really be anybody anyway — and abruptly made her farewells.
She moved down to the kerbside, smiling graciously as she elbowed her way through the crowd.
Mrs Stych was having difficulty starting her little car, so Mrs Frizzell bobbed her flower-decked head down until her hawklike nose was level with the half-open window.
‘How does Hank like his new Triumph?’ she asked.
Mrs Stych ceased her frantic turning of the ignition key for a moment, and looked perplexed.
‘Triumph?’
‘Yeah.
His new car.’
Mrs Stych pursed her heavily painted lips and looked at Mrs Frizzell as if she feared for Mrs Frizzell's mental health.
‘He hasn't got a new one.
You know he's not working yet.’
She gave the ignition key another desperate turn and the engine burst into song.
‘But,’ Mrs Frizzell began, ‘he —‘
Her words were lost in the sound of grinding gears, and the car leaped away from the sidewalk, knocking Mrs Frizzell's hat askew and leaving her mouthing furiously at nobody.
Hank was not in when Mrs Stych returned home from church.
She made a cold lunch for herself and then left to visit her mother-in-law.
Every Sunday afternoon she meticulously visited either her mother or her mother-in-law, these indications of filial affection being indispensable to anyone of her aspirations, with a public image to maintain.
She never bothered to write to her husband while he was away, husbands being regarded as of very little importance, except as sources of money.
While Hank was, in his grandparents’ opinion, too small to be left alone, the two grandmothers had insisted that he accompany his mother, and he had enjoyed wandering round the Palichuk pig farm with his grandfather or playing in a corner of the lounge of his Grandmother Stych's more fashionable home.
He was the youngest grandchild, however, and as he grew to be a hulking, noisy ten-year-old, his aging relatives found him very tiring.
After the death of Grandfather Palichuk, the custom arose of frequently leaving him at home.
Even now, he remembered with a shudder the appalling loneliness of Sunday afternoon, spent trailing noisily around the streets with a group of equally neglected youths, returning to the empty home to eat his supper while the television set bawled commercials at him to fill the silence, until he heard the scrape of his mother's key in the lock.
Occasionally, his father was at home during the weekend.
But he also felt that he should visit his mother.
He had, too, a lot of paper work to deal with while in Tollemarche, and only rarely shared his Sunday supper with his son.
He was a taciturn man who found it difficult to talk to a boy; but he did sometimes spare time to tell him of his travels in the wilder parts of Alberta, of encounters with grizzly bears, white water rushing through narrow gorges, being lost in unexpected snowstorms, in an unconquered wilderness totally alien to his suburb-bred son.
When Hank was fifteen, his best friend, Tommy Moore, committed suicide by quietly dropping himself off the railway bridge into the icy waters of the North Saskatchewan.
He had threatened to do it for some time, but only Hank had taken him seriously and tried to dissuade him.
Hank felt stripped of the only person in whom he could confide, and, for a while, considered following his example.
Perhaps it was fortunate that at that time he discovered girls, and a year later met the Dawsons, who always seemed to have time to stop and gossip with him.
He had by now forgotten the faces of many of the girls he had run around with, and Peter Dawson was dead, but there was still Isobel, the one steadying influence in his life.
From watching Isobel and her husband he had discovered that there was much more to sex than just taking a girl to bed or being uneasily married to a frigid, grasping woman.
Peter Dawson had been considerably older than Isobel and since he had only a few more years to serve in the army, had decided to establish a permanent home in his native town.
It had taken their combined savings to make the down payment on a house in overcrowded Tollemarche and Isobel had declared that she could manage without a car.
She therefore advertised the garage as being for rent, and at the same time got herself a job as a secretary to an insurance broker, to fill in the time until Peter should be at home permanently or a family should arrive.
When a younger and less sophisticated Hank had come quietly through the back gate in search of the garage, the couple had been busy planting a lilac tree.
He had watched them silently as they lowered the little bush into the prepared hole, with considerable argument as to how the roots should be spread.
It was a different kind of argument from any he had heard before; it was friendly and joking.
When the earth had been finally pressed down round the tree roots, Peter Dawson had put his arm round his wife's  tiny waist and they had surveyed their handiwork with obvious satisfaction.
He had kissed her on the nose, and they had strolled around their small domain, debating what else they should do to the garden.
Hank had hastily retreated round the side of the garage, while they decided where to put a sand box for the child as yet unconceived, and then he had re-entered the gate, giving it a diplomatic slam behind him.
He had not had much hope that they would rent the garage to a teenager, since teenagers were regarded generally as being as reliable as something out of the zoo.
Peter Dawson had, however, asked who his father was, and had then inquired if the family was any relation to Mr Heinrich Stych, who used to teach in Tollemarche Public School.
‘Yeah — sure,’ replied Hank.
‘He was my grandfather.’
Captain Dawson was immediately more friendly.
‘Well, that's great!
He taught me when I was a boy.
Of course you can have the garage.
I don't think we will be needing it for a while.’
He asked what kind of a car Hank had and was very encouraging when Hank told him that he and his friend Ian were going to rebuild one.
Hank paid five dollars from his paper money as the first month's rent, and, later that day, he and several of his friends pushed a dowager of a car round from his back lane, where it had been dumped by a tow truck, into the Dawsons' garage.
The Dawsons themselves had enthusiastically helped to heave it over a rut and up the slope to the garage.
Ian MacDonald and he had stripped down the old wreck and searched junk yards for spare parts.
Mr Frizzell, before the unfortunate episode with Betty, had been prevailed upon to donate four old, though still serviceable, tyres; and finally the great day arrived when he backed it slowly out of the garage and drove it round to his own home in the vague hope that his mother might like to see it.
‘I won't have that thing standing in front of the house,’ she had said forcibly.
‘Take it away.’
Crestfallen, he and Ian had driven to Ian's house, but Mrs MacDonald had gone to an art exhibition and Mr MacDonald to a service club meeting.
Ian's kid sister, who was playing mothers and fathers with her friends in the crawl space under the porch, said it was marvellous, so they had to be content with this infant praise and with taking her and her mud-covered friends for a ride round the block.
Wrathfully indignant at his mother's lack of appreciation of his efforts as a mechanic, an idea which had long been in his mind, that of writing a novel, had crystallized.
He would write a book which would cause a sufficient furore to upset both his parents thoroughly and make them realize that he was a person to be reckoned with.
To do it, he had to have more privacy than his room allowed, and he had tentatively approached Captain Dawson, who was home on leave and was painting the porch, for permission to put a table and chair in the garage, so that he could work there.
Captain Dawson sensed that there was more behind the request than was readily apparent.
He was used to handling a great variety of young men, and his piercing stare, as he considered the request, made Hank quail; he had a suspicion that Peter Dawson could make his wife quail at times, and in this he was right.
‘Why can't you work at home?’
Hank decided that, in this instance, honesty was the only policy possible and had said frankly that he wanted to try to write a book.
He did not feel he could write freely if the typescript was readily accessible to his mother.
The Captain wiped the paint off his hands and carefully avoided showing his amusement.
He agreed that a mother's censorship would be very limiting, and, after consulting Isobel, who was enchanted with the idea, he said that the furniture could be brought in.
‘You had better change the lock on the door,’ she had teased, ‘because I might be tempted to peep at the manuscript.’
He had gravely changed the lock and kept both keys.
She had, however, through the months of work, taken a real  interest in what he was doing, and he found himself confiding in her more and more.
It was she who, when the manuscript was ready, had given him an introduction to Alistair MacFee, a professor of English at the university.
Professor MacFee had read it had been startled by its undoubted merit, and had carefully discussed it chapter by chapter with him, suggesting how to improve it.
Glowing with hope, Hank had gone back to the garage and pruned and polished.
Then the professor and Isobel, both young and enthusiastic, had helped him to choose a likely publisher to whom to send it.
The English firm which they first suggested returned the typescript.
Undaunted, Hank sent it to a New York firm and they accepted it.
He was so excited that he forgot about the revenge the book was supposed to wreak on his parents.
Now,The Cheaper Sex had been out in the States for some weeks, and it seemed as if everyone under the age of twenty-one wanted a copy.
On the day of its publication, Hank had gone jubilantly to Isobel's back door, armed with an autographed copy for her and her husband.
He had found an ashen-faced Isobel, showing none of her usual gaiety or cordiality.
She had written a receipt for the month's rent for the garage, which he had proffered at the same time, and had received the book with a watery smile.
She had then wished him good luck with the sale of his book and had quietly shut the door in his face.
Bewildered and hurt at her lack of interest, too shy to ask what the trouble was, he had gone back to the garage completely mystified, and had spent the rest of the evening painting his jalopy electric blue.
When he finally went home, he saw the Tollemarche Advent .
It informed him in letters an inch high that Captain Peter Dawson had been murdered in Cyprus.
His first instinct was to rush back to Isobel.
Then he told himself that he was a nut who had written a book in her garage, and that he had no right to intrude.
As a way of showing sympathy, however, he had the following Saturday morning put on his best suit, which was  far too tight for him, and gone to the memorial service for Captain Dawson in the nearby Anglican church.
In total misery, he watched, from the back of the church, the stony-faced widow, flanked by her husband's mother, a surprisingly elegant woman in smart black, and his father, a retired Royal Canadian Mounted Police officer looking tired and grey, as they went through the formalities of the service.
Absorbed as he was by the sight of a family in grief, a new phenomenon for him, he could not help observing, with some awe, the large number of military men present to testify to their friendship with the dead man.
They sure looked smart, he thought, and from that moment he began to cultivate the straight, dignified bearing which was to be his hallmark in later life; only occasionally did he forget and relapse into his old North American droop.
His quick eye also registered with some interest that not one of the ladies present, as far as he could judge, belonged to his mother's circle.
This quiet group of people looked so simple and unassuming that at first he could not think what made them interesting to him, and then he realized that they gave every appearance of complete sincerity.
Like Isobel, they were what they looked, quiet people doing very necessary jobs and a that moment grieving for one of their number who had left them.
He thought that he left the church unnoticed, but Isobel saw him as she stepped out of her pew, and, as far as anything could penetrate to her at such a time, she was touched by his solicitude.
It had been apparent to Hank for some time that, in spite of repeating Grade 12 at school, he was likely to fail his exams again.
French and Ukrainian, mathematics and chemistry bored him to the point of insanity; only in music and English could he hope to get decent marks.
On December 28 he would be twenty years old, and he wondered bitterly when he might be allowed to grow up.
He decided to consult Mr Dixon, his English teacher, who was also his counsellor and, therefore, knew more about him than did the other teachers.
Mr Dixon, friend of Mrs Murphy and conductor, in his spare time, of the amateur orchestra, had accidentally launched Hank on his writing career a few years earlier by encouraging him to enter an essay competition sponsored by a service club.
The essay, on ‘The Dangers of Smoking’, had cost Hank a number of Sundays of hard work, and he estimated that he must have smoked at least eight packs of cigarettes while writing it, but to his astonishment it had won him a hundred dollars.
He looked at Mr Dixon with new respect and, to that gentleman's delight, really began to work hard.
On the Monday morning after Isobel had advised him to accept his publisher's invitation to go to New York, he went to see Mr Dixon.
Mr Dixon could hardly believe his ears as Hank poured into them the story of the book and its apparent success.
He immediately insisted that Hank should tell his parents, and warned him of the evils of leaving school without succeeding in obtaining the magical Grade 12, without which there was no hope, he insisted, of leading a normal life.
Hank already had the feeling that his life was going to be anything but normal and was adamant about leaving school, but agreed reluctantly to tell his father when next he came home.
The clinching argument that Mr Dixon made about informing his father of his literary success was that probably Hank would need help in investing discreetly the earnings of the book, and it was well known that Mr Stych was an astute businessman.
Hank was the product of a boom town and knew that money earned money extremely fast; with luck, he could double and treble his capital by investment in Tollemarche.
Mr Dixon heaved a sigh of relief at having gained at least one point, and decided that the question of leaving school could be left to the parents and the Principal– Hank was grateful to him for his promise not to discuss either matter with anybody.
Hank went home to lunch.
His mother was in, seated at her kitchen desk and  gloomily going over the month's bills — her Persian lamb coat made the Hudson's Bay bill look enormous, and, at the rate she was paying it off, it would take until next Easter to clear it.
‘Like a bologna sandwich?’ he asked her, as he made one for himself.
She grunted assent, and he filled the coffee percolator, set it on the stove and then rooted around in the refrigerator for the ketchup, while he wondered how to approach the subject of his going to New York.
‘Ma,’ he said in a tentative tone of voice, his face going slowly pink with the strain of trying to communicate with his despondent parent.
‘Yeah?’ she queried absently.
She would wear the Persian lamb to the meeting of the Symphony Orchestra Club tonight, even if it was a bit warm.
He thrust a sandwich on a plate in front of her.
‘Ma, I'm going on a trip for a week.’
Mrs Stych swivelled round on her stool and forced herself to attend to her son.
‘Y'are?’
She sounded puzzled.
‘Yeah.
I'm going to New York for a week.’
He told himself that it was ridiculous for him to be nearly trembling with fear, wondering what form her explosion would take.
She frowned at him for a moment; then her brow cleared.
‘With the United Nations Debating Club?’
Hank accepted the temporary reprieve thankfully.
Darn it, why hadn't he thought of that himself?
Undermining his mother's social prestige was-one thing, having to tell her about the book himself was another.
Her face darkened again.
‘Who's payin'?’
‘I'm going to pay some.
You know I got a bit saved.
The rest they're paying.’
He hoped she would not ask who ‘they’ were.
‘Well, I guess that's O.K. When you goin'?’
It was typical  of her that, although she regarded Hank as a child, she did not ask who would be supervising the group she imagined would be travelling to New York.
‘Thursday.
Be back next Wednesday.’
‘O.K. Y’ father will be coming by then.’
His legs began to feel weak and he sat down hard on a red plastic and chrome chair, while he held his sandwich suspended half-way to his mouth.
He remembered Mr Dixon's persuasive arguments regarding telling his father about The Cheaper Sex , but he doubted if Mr Dixon knew what kind of father he had.
‘That's good,’ he said dully, putting down his half-eaten sandwich.
The book should have been in Tollemarche's only bookstore for several weeks; however, when Hank casually sauntered in and asked for a copy, old Mr Pascall said it had not arrived.
It would probably come in the next shipment from Toronto.
Hank had no doubt that, sooner or later, old tabby-cats like the MacDonald woman would get wind of it and would give his mother hell about it.
His mother would never get round to reading it and he hoped fervently that his father would not either.
Anyway, he consoled himself, nobody in Tollemarche over the age of forty ever really read a book, though they talked about them.
He swallowed the last of his coffee and went to his room to inspect his wardrobe.
He decided to put his two drip-dry shirts through the washer that night.
His one decent pair of dark pants and his formal suit were too small for him.
The rest consisted largely of T-shirts and jeans.
Mind made up, he returned to the kitchen, picked up his zipper jacket and departed, officially for school, but in fact for the town to do some shopping.
His mother, busy checking the T. Eaton Company's report on the state of her account there, did not bother to reply to his monosyllabic ‘Bye.’
Albert Tailors, in the shape of old Mr Albert himself, took one look at him and channelled him to the Teens Room, which was festooned with guitars and pictures of pop singers.
But Hank protested firmly that he wanted a dark business suit, three white drip-dry shirts, dark socks and tie, black shoes, a light overcoat and an appropriate hat.
The clerk inquired delicately if it would be cash or charge.
‘Cash,’ snapped Hank irritably, and was hastily rechannelled into the men's ready-tailored department.
The clerk stopped for a moment and whispered to Mr Albert, who, realizing that instead of selling a pair of jeans he really had a customer with money to spend, hurried towards Hank.
‘I want a good suit.
It must look real good.
But I gotta have it now.’
Mr Albert humphed and measured.
The first suit was too loud, even Hank knew that.
‘No.
I want the kind of thing — the kind of thing these big oil executives wear.’
Mr Albert laughed, a trifle scornfully.
‘It would cost about a hundred and twenty dollars at least.’
‘So what?’ replied Hank belligerently.
‘That's what I want.
I gotta go to New York.
I wanna look right.’
Mr Albert's superior smile waned.
He sent the clerk hurrying into the back room to get a dark grey suit which had just come in and then said: ‘Going to New York?
You're a lucky fellow.’
‘Yeah,’ said Hank noncommittally, as he examined himself critically in Mr Albert's big triple mirror.
He was not pleased with what he saw.
He tried drawing in his stomach and straightening his shoulders, as instructed by the physical education teacher.
The result was better, but not his idea of a distinguished author.
He was soon eased, pinned and patted into the grey suit, the cuffs hastily turned up by the clerk, the back smoothed by Mr Albert.
It looked weird over a T-shirt, but it undoubtedly fitted quite well, except for the length of the pants.
He gyrated carefully so that he could see himself at all angles.
My, he did look different.
The good cut made his shoulders look their proper width and reduced his generally  plump look.
He grinned at himself.
He looked a man at last, not a school student.
Fascinated by this new vision of himself, he continued to stare.
He would like Isobel and Dorothy to see him like this.
Mr Albert's voice came from a distance: ‘You'll need a good white shirt with it, and a tie….
’ Mr Albert considered ties.
‘One in a quiet red, I think.
And plain black shoes.’
Hank did not hear.
He was still staring at himself in the mirror, seeing himself for the first time as a man, not a boy.
In that moment, his uncertain struggle towards manhood was over.
He had always been taught by women, with the exception of Mr Dixon, and ignored by his parents.
Unthreatened by war service, he found, like his friends, that the only way to prove to himself that he was grown up was to chase and lie with innumerable young women.
Some of his friends had married-while still in high school, and all of them, married or single, were agreed that sex was a dissatisfying pastime.
None of them had as yet discovered a deep, rewarding love.
Now Mr Albert, with more ability than Hank thought such an old fogey could exhibit, had shown him that he could look quite as dignified as Captain Dawson, not a bent peasant like Grandfather Palichuk or a rugged, outdoor type like his father, but a very respectable townsman called Hank Stych.
Hank was suddenly deeply grateful to old Mr Albert for taking him seriously.
He glowed, as he came out of his trance, and said: ‘I'll take it.
Do you think you could find me a dinner suit as well?’
In the eyes of most Albertans, Tollemarche was a tourist centre second only to Calgary and Edmonton.
In order to encourage the winter tourist industry, it had a winter fair featuring exhibitions of interest to farmers, and many winter sport events.
Of recent years, the fair had been lengthened into a fortnight-long frolic called Edwardian Days, finishing two weeks before Christmas.
The city dressed up in Edwardian clothes, shop windows showed displays of Edwardian families enjoying Christmas, the restaurants served such Edwardian delicacies as Oxford sausages and English beef-and-kidney pie, and the bars offered large glasses of white wine cup.
The Tollemarche ladies, in bonnets and cartwheel hats, gave teas at which they coyly sipped at China tea flavoured with lemon and mint.
In the evenings, skating parties were held under coloured lights and skates flashed under long skirts to tunes like ‘The Blue Danube’.
The climax of the fortnight was the Grand Edwardian-Ball, which was the most important occasion of the whole winter, and thinking up suitable costumes for this event kept the ladies occupied for weeks beforehand.
The greatest complication about any ball is that one requires menfolk with whom to attend it.
Most of the year, the matrons of Tollemarche regarded their husbands as nuisances better out of the house, but the ball was an occasion for which husbands, sweethearts, even brothers, were in great demand.
Young women married to salesmen, for once, took an interest in where their husbands would be on the great day; the older men, who ricocheted between various business interests, were lectured steadily, any time they put in an appearance at home, on the necessity of being in Tollemarche at this time; and those males who were doomed to spend their lives in Tollemarche found  themselves with intolerable lists of jobs to be done, from laying out backyard skating rinks to pinning up the hems on their female relatives' costumes.
While Mr Stych was canoeing back down a tributary of the Mackenzie– already dangerous with chunks of ice, to an appointment with a helicopter, Mr Frizzell was trying on his last year's brocade waistcoat and finding it too small; Mr MacDonald, Ian's father, was winding up a trying compensation case for his insurance company at Vermilion; and Mr MacDonald (oil) was trying to explain to his superiors in Sarnia, Ontario, why he must be back in a place like Tollemarche by the middle of December.
In the ornate new council chamber, Mayor Murphy was trying to convince the city council that to be a real Edwardian Mayor he ought to wear mayoral robes, as they did in England; the newly extended hospital was bracing itself for additional accident cases; and Hank Stych stood in the airport at Calgary waiting for a local plane to take him north to Tollemarche.
Though he had found New York impressive, the people did not seem to him very different from those of Tollemarche.
His publishers had been smoothly charming and undoubtedly a little surprised to find their backwoods author a careful, quite business-like man in a town suit, who would not sign anything until he had read the small print several times and understood it thoroughly.
Full marks to Isobel, Hank thought grimly; she had done a lot of homework trying to check what his rights were regarding serialization, filming and translation, and had primed him well.
He had met the press at a cocktail party and had stood there answering impertinent questions with disconcerting honesty, a glass of ginger ale in one hand and a canapé in the other; when he could not immediately think of an answer he nibbled the canapé and viewed the questioner with cold button eyes.
His childhood exposure to life in the streets of a western town, still so new that most of the people who had founded it were still alive, had left him with no illusions about people or their motives, and it was always for the motive behind the question that he looked.
Now, as he waited for his flight, he felt exhausted, as if he had been playing an enormously difficult game of poker for high stakes.
And yet, in spite of the fatigue, he felt, good, as if for the first time in his life he had really stretched himself and grown up.
He knew that basically he had enjoyed the careful battle of wits.
In his bag was a tiny music box in the shape of a windmill, bought specially from Macy's for Isobel, and a stuffed monkey for Dorothy to sit on her bed.
He had also rather reluctantly bought a box of chocolates for his mother and a box of cigars for his father.
On the aircraft the stewardess brought him a copy of the Tollemarche Advent .
The preparations for Edwardian Days were not yet featured on the front page, but an inner page had a half column on the redecorating of the main hotel's ballroom for the Edwardian Ball.
He let the paper fall into his lap.
Up to now, he had always competed in the skating events and had escorted one of his classmates to the Teens' Square Dance, held well away from the elegant ball.
Now he had a sudden ambition to go to the ball.
Like Cinderella, he told himself with a grin.
But there was more to it than that.
Attendance at the ball indicated considerable standing in the adult world and he had a sudden savage desire to show his parents, who would be there, that he had made it on his own, without any help from them.
The tickets alone were so expensive, not to speak of the need for a good costume, that they would realize that inexplicably he had had some financial success.
He considered taking Dorothy, but she was only seventeen, too young to hold her own in a possibly difficult encounter with the élite of Tollemarche.
He wondered if he dared ask Isobel.
She had been widowed for five months, very nearly.
Did she go out now and, if so, with whom?
He felt a pang of jealousy, which was intensified when he remembered the smart army officers who had been at her husband's memorial service.
Had any of them made any approaches to her?
He brushed the newspaper angrily off his lap and told himself not to be a fool.
She was seven years older than he was.
She'd never look at him.
He arrived home at one in the morning.
His mother was not yet in; presumably she had gone to a party.
He made himself a cup of coffee and then, feeling deflated and not a little depressed, went to bed.
Isobel and Dorothy were battling their way against the wind down to the bus stop, the following morning, when they met Hank hunched up in his old black zipper jacket and a pair of earmuffs, which gave him a quaintly catlike appearance.
He had his hands in the pockets of his jeans, which were, as usual, at least two inches too short, and tucked under one arm were one or two schoolbooks.
His face was pinched with cold and he looked rather dejected, but he greeted them heartily.
‘Hiyer, babe?’ he said to Dorothy, and: ‘Hi, Isobel.’
‘Hello, Hank,’ they said in chorus from the depths of the fur collars of their coats.
They were burning to know how he had got on in New York, and Isobel asked him.
‘I'm rich, ma'am.
I'm rich.
Book's doing fine — going into paperbacks next year, and they confirmed about the film.’
‘Oh, Hank, how exciting!’ exclaimed Isobel, her face going even pinker than the wind had made it.
‘Congratulations!’
Then she noticed the books.
‘Are you going to school?’ she asked.
Hank looked guilty.
‘No, but I haven't told Ma yet, so I came out as if I were going too school.’
‘Hank, you are naughty,’ Dorothy chided.
‘It's going to be all over town — in fact, I can't think why it isn't already — and your mother will be the last to know.’
He turned up his inadequate collar and executed a dance step or two to keep his circulation going.
‘So what?’
Isobel looked at Dorothy reprovingly.
‘It's Hank's business, Dorothy.’
‘Aw, don't be hard on her, Isobel.
She just don't understand.
Mind if I work in the garage today?’
‘Not at all, Hank.
Go ahead.’
‘Thanks a lot.
Seeya tonight, mebbe.’
He must have worked for a long time in the garage.
When Dorothy came home from town, however, he was digging over the vegetable patch, despite its half-frozen state and the gently falling snow.
‘You don't have to do that, Hank,’ she said, as she came through the back gate.
‘Isobel will get a man to do it in the spring.’
‘And what do you think I am, honey?’
He had stopped digging and was leaning against the spade, waiting, as if the answer was important to him.
Dorothy laughed.
‘Oh, Hank, you are an ass.’
‘Thanks,’ he said dryly, his face taking on the blank expression it usually had when he was annoyed.
Dorothy was puzzled and did not know what to say, so she smiled and then started up the path to the back door, when he called her back.
‘Say, Doll, I want to ask you something.’
She walked uneasily back to him, her legs in their tight pants looking like those of a young colt.
‘Yes, Hank?’
He weighed her up for a moment, his wide mouth compressed and then asked: ‘D'ye think Isobel would come to a ball with me?’
Dorothy decided she had better not laugh this time, though she wanted to, so she said cautiously: ‘I don't know, Hank.’
She wondered a little resentfully why he did not ask her to go, though she would have been scared if he actually had done so; she lacked a North American youngster's experience with the opposite sex.
‘I mean, is she still in mourning?
It's over four months now, and it'll be five before the ball comes up.’
Dorothy was thoughtful.
‘No,’ she said at last.
‘She seems to be getting over it pretty well.
She goes about a bit  — English women are a bit different from Canadians, you know, Hank.’
Then she added in a confiding tone: ‘Of course, she was not much with her husband really — and I think that helps — she isn't reminded of him at every turn, like an ordinary widow would be.’
‘You're right.’
He rubbed the end of his nose with one grubby hand in a puzzled kind of way.
‘Why don't you ask one of your girlfriends?’
Dorothy inquired, far too intrigued at this unexpected interest in Isobel to remember that she was supposed to be indoors starting to prepare supper.
‘Not suitable,’ said Hank flatly.
Then, feeling that perhaps he was being rather uncomplimentary to Dorothy, he added untruthfully: I'd ask you, honey, only you're too young for this one.’
‘Is it the Edwardian Ball?’
‘Yeah.’
‘Oh, Hank, I'd love to go,’ she implored.
‘Sorry, babe.
You really are too young.’
Dorothy felt crushed, and said bitterly: ‘Well, if I'm too young to go with you, I'm sure Isobel is too old.’
This sensitive point made Hank feel as if he had been returned sharply to the schoolroom, but he said unrepentantly: ‘Nuts!
She's just old enough to have dignity.’
‘Well, no doubt she'd feel safe with you,’ Dorothy said pointedly.
‘You'd better ask her.’
And she flounced up to the house, her long black hair swinging rebelliously down her back from under her red woollen cap.
Though rather demoralized by his conversation with Dorothy, he did ask Isobel.
He came up to the house that evening, armed with the music box and the monkey.
He had changed into a clean white shirt and tie, and his dark pants just fitted him, though Dorothy wondered if they would stand the strain of his sitting down.
Dorothy had already told Isobel of the conversation that afternoon, so she was prepared; but he found it difficult to get round to the real object of the visit.
He presented the music box, which was received with every expression of  pleasure by Isobel, and the monkey to Dorothy, who could not help laughing when she saw it, because it was so typical of a craze for stuffed animals amongst the girls she had met in Tollemarche.
When finally he did broach the subject of the ball, Isobel refused to take his invitation seriously and said he should take someone his own age.
Anyway, Tollemarche would be shocked if she went, she added wistfully.
He caught the hint of wistfulness in her voice and made the most of it quickly.
‘For heaven's sakes!’ he exclaimed.
‘Why should you care what a lot of old tabbies think?
Ma and Pop will be going.
And for sure you can come — if you feel up to it?’
He wondered suddenly if she had got any fun out of her marriage to Peter Dawson.
He remembered him as a kindly man but not a very lively one.
‘Perhaps you ought to make up a party with your parents,’ Isobel said dutifully.
‘Come off it,’ he said, grinning suddenly.
‘You know I want to shake ‘em.
And I'd sure see you had a lovely time,’ he went on with almost too much intensity in his voice, so that he feared he might have frightened her off.
Dorothy looked at Hank with sudden interest.
His eyes were on Isobel, who was staring at her hands, and Dorothy felt a wave of jealousy at Isobel's Dresden china beauty and her look of compliant gentleness.
She had taken it for granted that if Isobel accompanied Hank to the ball, it would be a kind of aunt and nephew relationship, but now she wondered.
Isobel looked up and laughed herself, her nose wrinkling up like a child's.
She obviously had not noticed anything out of the ordinary, and Dorothy told herself not to be a fool imagining things.
Maybe it would do Isobel good to be dragged out by someone she would feel at home with, and a man of her own age would cause much more of a stir in the neighbourhood.
‘You should go, Isobel,’ she said generously, swallowing her own disappointment at not being asked.
‘Dress up in  ostrich feathers, or whatever Edwardians wore, and have some fun.
It would help Hank out — and probably nobody would recognize you anyway.’
Hank was not slow in taking his cue.
‘Sure.
You can be disguised,’ he said  hopefully .
‘Lots of people go as well-known Edwardian characters — everybody wears Edwardian dress.’
It took them an hour to convince her that it would be all right to go, that she would not be disloyal to Peter; but, finally she agreed that she might as well indulge the boy.
Dorothy had an inspiration as to who they could go as, and for the rest of the evening they amused themselves digging through an old encyclopedia to find pictures from which to copy costumes.
The Ladies of Scotland League was holding its fall tea in the auditorium of a large store on Tollemarche Avenue.
The decorations committee had spent the morning spreading tables with brown, yellow and green linen cloths and pinning gold-sprayed autumn leaves to each corner of them.
Branches of fir, complete with cones also sprayed with gold, had been laboriously pinned to the walls.
Brown and white bunting swathed the edges of the small stage.
A small table by the door had been spread with a green cloth embroidered with the insignia of the League, two thistles crossed above the initials L.S.L., and here, armed with white name cards and a bristling collection of pins, sat Mrs MacPhail, a determined young newcomer from Hamilton, Ontario, who had managed to obtain the post of secretary because none of the older members felt like undertaking so much work.
Her hat was an aggressively red felt and she peered out from under its big brim like a shrew ready to attack.
Beside her sat the treasurer, a formidable figure of some sixty years of age, in a pink gauze turban which did little to soften her high, bald forehead or her arrogant expression.
She wore a matching crepe dress, which draped across her large bosom and red neck, and a mink stole was hung negligently over the back of her chair.
Anybody who had hoped to get past these two ladies without paying her dues would have been squelched by a look; and the pile of dollars in front of the treasurer grew as the number of white name cards in front of Mrs MacPhail diminished.
At one end of the hall, a long table, embellished with a lace tablecloth, had been laid with silver coffee-pots at one end and silver teapots at the other, a mass of flowered cups and saucers round each.
In the middle of the table was a formal arrangement of chrysanthemums, flanked by white  candles in silver holders.
Two very old ladies presided over the tea and coffee pots; they were the oldest members of the League, having travelled out to Tollemarche district with their parents in covered wagons before the town itself existed.
They therefore received the doubtful honour of pouring out for some two hundred ladies, regardless of the fact that it was a very arduous and tiring task.
Mrs Josephine MacDonald, president of the Noble Order of Lady Queen Bees, was also vice-president of the League and stood with the president in the receiving line, just beyond the treasurer's table.
Mrs MacDonald was a Calgarian by birth, and her husband had been moved north by his firm to run the huge refinery that was now the pride of Tollemarche.
She regarded the Tollemarche ladies as being outside the pale, and had treated them with such blatant condescension that they had quailed, and had sought her goodwill by voting her hastily into offices in those organizations in which she had deigned to take an interest.
Today the president, Mrs Macpherson, in between gracefully shaking hands with each new arrival and presenting her to Mrs MacDonald, decided that she was nothing but a vulgar upstart, and she trembled with suppressed irritation at having to stand in the same receiving line with her.
Why, there had been Macphersons grinding flour in the Tollemarche district sixty years ago, and it had taken her years of hard infighting to reach her present exalted rank; now this woman was, after only twelve months of residence, her vice-president.
Mrs Macpherson bit her blue lips with her artificial teeth and looked down her beaky nose at the bland, well-powdered face beside her.
Hmm!
Nothing but paint on a piece of lard.
The piece of lard opened its lipsticked mouth in a thin smile at the next arrival, and Mrs Macpherson hastily recollected her duties, her black, old-fashioned hat bobbing in unison with her white bun, as she spoke to Mrs Frizzell.
A nice girl, Donna Frizzell, real nice.
‘May I present Mrs Frizzell,’ said Mrs Macpherson to Mrs MacDonald.
Mrs Frizzell flashed a dazzling smile at Mrs MacDonald, showing no sign of the resentment against the lady, which she shared with Mrs Macpherson, while Mrs MacDonald inclined her head slightly in acknowledgment.
‘We've already met,’ they said in chorus, as they shook hands demurely.
‘Well, now, isn't that just fine,’ said Mrs Macpherson, a note of acerbity in her voice.
No other arrivals were awaiting attention, so Mrs Frizzell paused to speak with Mrs MacDonald, while Mrs Macpherson checked with the treasurer that all was well in the finance department.
‘I didn't know you were Scottish,’ said Mrs MacDonald, her bright smile looking rather fixed.
‘Not me,’ said Mrs Frizzell.
‘It's Maxie that's Scotch.
His mother came from Glasgow.’
She enjoyed the opportunity of impressing the president of the Lady Queen Bees.
‘He belongs to the Bonnie Scots Men's Association.
He did a real funny Address to the Pudding last Robbie Burns Night.’
‘Indeed,’ said Mrs Mac Donald, delicately checking with one finger that her hat was still on straight.
‘He must be a charming person.’
Mrs Frizzell looked a bit doubtful, and then said yes, he was, especially when he got going.
She became aware that her beige Sunday suit was looking a trifle out of fashion, compared with Mrs MacDonald's burnt-orange outfit, and this confused her still more.
Everybody seemed to have bought a new dress for the occasion, and she had hardly finished paying for her suit.
She searched for a new subject of conversation.
‘Will you be going to the Edwardian Ball?’ she asked.
‘Naturally.
Bobby expects to make up a party from the works and we shall come along for an hour or two.’
Mrs Frizzell wished mightily that she could infuse into her own voice just that inflection by which Mrs MacDonald conveyed that she was doing Tollemarche a special favour by coming to the ball.
She was dying to ask Mrs MacDonald  what she would be wearing, and then thought better of it.
Probably the party would come in plain dinner dresses, just to show how far above such things they were.
She shifted the rather heavy, though small, paper bag which she was carrying, and said: ‘I guess I'd better get some tea before all the cookies go.
See you at the ball, if not before.’
‘Right-ho,’ said Mrs MacDonald unexpectedly.
She had picked the word up from an English film shown on television and thought it charming.
Mrs Frizzell looked a little startled, and retired to the tea table with what she hoped was a stylish bow.
‘Afternoon, Donna,’ said a small ancient voice behind her.
‘Coffee's at the other end o’ the table.’
Mrs Frizzell, engrossed in thoughts of buying a new dress, as well as her costume for the ball, which was being made by a dressmaker and was as yet unpaid for, jumped and turned round.
The old tea pourer, Donna's one-time school-teacher, peered up at her through rimless glasses.
‘Yer getting nervy, Donna.
Should go to bed earlier.
Always told yer mother you never went to bed early enough.’
Donna felt again like the girl who had been made to spit her gum into the wastepaper basket.
Her depression deepened.
Somehow this tea was not turning out to be the delightful social event she had hoped for, full of contented tittle-tattle and scornful criticism of all who were not Scottish and United Church.
These Scotch women were tough and sure could make a person feel small.
Mrs Frizzell giggled nervously.
‘I'm too busy these days, Miss Angus.
Can I have a cup of tea please?’
‘Yer can,’ said Miss Angus, lifting the heavy silver pot with a shaky hand and slopping some into a cup.
‘Sugar and cream's there.
Help yerself.’
Mrs Frizzell fumbled with handbag, parcel and gloves, and finally managed to pick up the teacup as well, and to serve herself with sugar.
‘Wottya got there?’ asked the indomitable old voice.
Donna's face blenched a little under her makeup.
She  knew Miss Angus had never liked her much; in fact, it was doubtful if Miss Angus liked anyone very much.
Donna remembered with sorrow the number of humiliations she had endured from her in school, and the thought of exposing the contents of the parcel she was carrying to such a merciless judge unnerved her.
‘Some books,’ she finally murmured into her teacup, while she tried quietly to increase the distance between her and the tea pourer.
‘Books?
Never knew you to read a book yer didna hafta?’
Miss Angus sniffed.
‘Has Maxie taken to reading?
Wottya bought?’
Her voice rose commandingly.
‘Lemme see.’
Other ladies standing nearby were beginning to take an amused interest in this interchange between the domineering retired school-teacher, who had ruled many of them when they were young, and Donna Frizzell, who could tear a character to pieces in three minutes with her sharp tongue.
‘You're busy pouring now,’ said Donna desperately.
‘I'll show you after and explain about them.’
‘Explain?’
The old busybody from the back streets of nineteenth-century Glasgow was immediately alert.
‘I got time now.
Most people have had their first and aren't ready for their second.
Come on.
Let's have a look.’
It was an order.
Mrs Frizzell dung to the paper bag.
‘Not now,’ she protested.
‘I'll explain to you about them later on.’
She would never be allowed by Miss Angus to explain in front of the other women, she felt angrily.
Miss Angus would have a field day, happy to emphasize her own high moral principles at the expense of an unloved member of a younger generation.
The old devil!
No wonder she had never got further than teaching in a one-roomed schoolhouse.
She bent forward to return her teacup to the table.
The paper bag slipped, she grabbed it and it tore open at the  bottom, spilling its contents onto the empty teacups near Miss Angus and turning some of them over with an attention-drawing rattle.
Several more ladies looked round sharply at the tea table, as Mrs Frizzell tried to snatch her purchases back.
But Miss Angus slapped her wrist sharply with a teaspoon, as she picked up a paperback with her other hand and examined it closely.
She looked  paralysed for a moment.
The female depicted on the cover was stark naked.
‘Butterfield 8 ’ she read out in a clear, schoolmarm voice.
She picked up another, while Donna watched like a terrified rabbit.
‘Striptease!she exclaimed.
‘Love of an Ape Man!
She clawed for the one hardback in the collection and picked it up.
’The Cheaper Sex by Ben MacLean.
'Her face paled at the sight of the dust jacket on this one.
‘Donna Frizzell, I thought better of you!’ she thundered.
‘But Miss Angus, the Society for….‘
‘I want no explanations.
Take this pornography off my tea table!’
‘Miss Angus, I….’ began Mrs  Frizzell in anguish.
Miss Angus bellowed like a slightly cracked version of Gabriel's trumpet: ‘I said take them away, woman!’
Some of the ladies looked appalled, and others giggled.
Mrs Frizzell snatched up her property, tried wildly to wrap the books in the remains of the paper bag, dropped one of them, picked it up and fled to the cloak-room at the back of the hall, followed by the titters and sniggers of not a few ladies who, knowing the reason for her purchase of the books, could well have rescued her from her predicament, but saw no reason to do so.
There may be honour among thieves, but there did not appear to be anything similar among social climbers.
In the cloak-room Mrs Frizzell stood in a whirl of used paper towels, like a panting snowshoe hare in a snowdrift.
A slow tear ran down her cheek, smudging her green eye shadow.
Added to her humiliation was the knowledge that some of her friends, who had seen the incident, could have helped her but did not do so.
She put the books down on the  vanity table and with trembling fingers opened her handbag to find her face powder.
Hastily she dabbed around her eyes, trying to stop the green rivulets running down her face.
Her car was parked at the side of the store, and she would have to walk through three or four departments before she could reach the outside door.
She thought she heard someone coming down the passage, so she grabbed two paper towels and wrapped them round the offending literature.
The footsteps continued past the cloakroom door, and she relaxed.
When all was silent, except for the distant buzz of conversation from the tea, she crept out and almost ran down the back passage, as fast as her high-heeled shoes would permit.
Her mind in turmoil, her thoughts entirely on escape, she hardly drew breath until she reached the sanctuary of the tall displays in the bedding and linen department on the ground floor and saw the safety of the store's side door beckoning to her.
Thankfully, she allowed the revolving door to take her in its firm embrace and deposit her in the hall.
She stood for a moment, her eyes closed, trying to collect her thoughts, while she struggled to put on her gloves.
Those cats and that old tabby, Angus; she could murder them.
The door of a car banged outside.
Her eyelids flew up like window blinds wound too tightly.
Swaying gracefully up the steps on heels even higher than Mrs Frizzell's came Mrs Stych.
She was dressed entirely in black except for white gloves, and her tall hat, together with the high-heeled shoes, gave her the height she otherwise lacked.
Her dress, cunningly draped around her plump figure, made her look almost voluptuous; and over her shoulders was carelessly thrown her Persian lamb coat, which made Mrs Frizzell's eyes glisten with envy.
Even her pearls looked real, thought Mrs Frizzell grimly, her thoughts for the moment diverted from her own nightmare frame of mind.
There was no way of escaping Mrs Stych, so Mrs Frizzell  waited while her neighbour pushed through the swing door.
' 'Lo, Olga,’ she said mechanically and moved to pass out of the same door; but Mrs Stych wanted to show off her outfit.
‘Hello, Donna,’ she greeted her with enthusiasm.
‘You been to the tea?’
Donna nodded assent.
‘Wotcha going so early for?’
Mrs Frizzell made an effort to sound normal.
‘Got a meeting of the Committee for the Preservation of Morals tomorrow night,’ she said.
‘Got to make a report to them — and I haven't prepared it yet.’
‘Oh,’ said Mrs Stych, moving slightly towards the inner revolving door so that the Persian lamb swung out in all its glory.
She paused, however, before going through the door.
‘What's that you've got wrapped up in lavatory paper?
One o’ the clerks'd give you a paper bag.’
Mrs Frizzell was just beginning to feel like someone recovering from near drowning, when this remark sent her under again.
She shut her eyes tight for a second behind her spectacles, got a grip on herself, and said firmly: ‘Some books for tomorrow.’
‘Ah-ha,’ responded Mrs Stych, a sly look dawning on her face.
‘Betcha have fun reading them before you make a report.’
This was too much for Mrs Frizzell.
She had been mortified enough.
She could bear no more.
She put her hand to her mouth, uttered a mourning cry and ran through the swing door to her car.
There was a parking ticket neatly tucked under the windshield wiper.
Boyd Stych unlocked the front door and slung his knapsack into the corner reserved for the coats and hats of his wife's visitors; clumped through the lounge in his heavy, laced boots and shouted not very hopefully: ‘Hi, Olga, I'm back!’
Since Mrs Stych was at the Ladies of Scotland's Tea, there was no reply.
Boyd unzipped his sheepskin jacket and flung it on a kitchen chair, opened the plaid shirt he was wearing and scratched his chest wearily.
He was a tall, thin man with knotty muscles and a thin, high-cheek-boned face, his chin at the moment covered with ten weeks' growth of beard.
From under fierce black brows a pair of hazel eyes looked out calculatingly at the impersonal kitchen, made spotless by the ministrations of a Dutch cleaning lady.
Although he had hardly expected anything else, he was annoyed that his wife was out.
She was always out.
He was tired after the long drive home, preceded by an even longer, freezing-cold canoe and helicopter journey.
Thank God, that was the last time he would have to do it; after this he would go as an executive, by aircraft and helicopter only.
He wondered how Olga would–take the news he had for her, and decided grimly that she would not like it.
He wanted to have a shower and to change his clothes, before unloading the car; so he plodded slowly upstairs to his bedroom, leaving a trail of greasy, sweaty garments wherever he went.
He remembered, just in time, not to shave — the beard was needed for the Edwardian Ball.
Mrs Stych was singing as she came up the garden path.
As far as she was concerned, the tea had been a success.
Her Persian lamb coat had overshadowed the treasurer's three-year-old mink, and her hat had caused a sensation.
She had heard about Donna Frizzell's frightful taste in literature, and, though she was herself a member of the  Society for the Preservation of Morals and knew why the books had been purchased, she saw no reason to save her neighbour any humiliation, and had expressed suitably shocked surprise.
It was gratifying to her to see that woman taken down a peg.
Her song was cut short when she saw the filthy knapsack sitting on the new, pink broadloom and making a smudge against the blush pink wall.
Her eyes followed muddy boot tracks across the lounge, through the dining alcove and into the kitchen.
‘Boyd,’ she shouted.
‘Wotcha want to make a mess like that for?’
But only the sound of the shower in the distance answered her.
Sniffing crossly, she went upstairs herself and lovingly hung up the Persian lamb in the clothes closet.
Then she sat down on the bed, took off her hat and eased her patent leather pumps off her rapidly swelling feet.
The relief was great, and she sat massaging her toes for a minute while she looked at the collection of dirty underwear strewn over her genuine-colonial bedroom, and shuddered.
Men were horrid, dirty creatures.
The horrid, dirty creature in her life, still bearded, but feeling much better after his shower, came striding into the room, tying a bathrobe as he came.
‘Hi, Olga,’ he said.
She looked up at him and said sulkily: ‘Wotcha wanna make such a mess for?’
‘Aw, shut up,’ he replied.
‘What about a kiss for your long-lost husband?’
She looked mutinous, then lifted a pouting mouth to his and squeaked protestingly as he pushed her backwards onto the bed and on top of her new hat.
But Boyd did not care about new hats or new frocks.
He had been ten weeks in the bush, a womanless bush, and Olga Stych had to put up with the fact.
She was far too quick-witted to complain and endured silently, but she managed to extract a promise of a new hat and a new dress from him, before getting up an hour later to  tidy herself and prepare supper.
Neither of them had mentioned Hank.
Hank, school-books under arm, arrived, however, in time for supper.
He said ‘Hi’ slightly nervously to his father, who grunted acknowledgment from behind the Tollemarche Advent .
Hank relaxed.
Everything seemed as usual.
Evidently the school had not communicated with his parents.
He was unaware that a harassed Mr Dixon, caught  between Hank, his parents and the school authorities, had disclaimed any knowledge of Hank's whereabouts, except to say, when asked by the school secretary, that probably Hank had the flu — there was a lot of it about.
As he tackled his cold meat loaf and salad, Hank thought he had better show some interest in his father, so he asked the back page of the newspaper if it had had a good trip.
‘Yeah,’ Boyd said listlessly, and then, with more animation, as he realized that this might be a good moment to break his news to his family, he added: ‘Yeah, I did.’
He dropped the newspaper onto the kitchen floor, looked with distaste at his plate, and began to eat.
Mrs Stych brought her plate to the table, picked up her fork and toyed with her food.
She had eaten too many cookies at the tea and was feeling nauseated in consequence, but told herself wrathfully that it was Boyd's disgusting ways that had done it.
Tomorrow, she promised herself, she would go down to Dawne's Dresse Shoppe — she'd make him pay.
Wrapped in her own thoughts, she did not at first hear what her husband was saying and only became aware of his monologue when Hank said: ‘Say, Dad, that'll be good.’
‘What'll be good?’ she asked suspiciously.
‘Dad isn't going to have to go away any more — he's been made vice-president — gonna sit in an office all day right here in Tollemarche.’
Mrs Stych went pale as the full implication of this burst upon her.
‘Not go away?’ she stuttered.
‘No,’ said her husband cheerfully, ‘and am I glad!
Had enough of going on trips.
Big business — collar and tie — that's me now.’
Mrs Stych's mouth dropped open.
A husband always under her feet!
A man who came home every night — and slept with her!
Why, it was almost indecent — she might even have a kid.
She would never be free.
This had never happened to her before, and she was dumbfounded that, in the course of a few seconds, her life could change so much.
‘Well?’ he asked huffily, ‘aren't you pleased?’
She said hastily: ‘Oh, yeah.
Yeah, I'm pleased.’
But she looked like a Protestant faced with the Spanish Inquisition.
She went slowly to the refrigerator, took out a block of ice cream, cut three slices off it and put them into glass dishes, then plonked the dishes on the table, during which time a new idea came to her.
‘What sorta salary?’
‘Pretty good,’ he said.
‘We'll be able to leave here and buy in Vanier Heights.’
She sat down and stared at her ice cream.
Vanier Heights — that would be something.
That was where Mrs MacDonald (oil) lived and she knew two wealthy doctors there already.
She looked at her husband with renewed interest.
Maybe she would manage after all.
Maybe she could manage him, if he was the price of a house in Vanier Heights.
Although Hank was obsessed with his own problems, he was well aware of what was going on in his mother's head.
He knew her too well, and he flushed, embarrassed by his own thoughts, and dug into his ice cream.
He felt suddenly sorry for his father.
His mother licked her spoon reflectively, and said: ‘Vanier Heights would be real good.
We could sure entertain up there.’
Hank was just about to say, in order to irritate his mother, that it was in another school district and he would, therefore, have to change schools, when he remembered that he was no longer at school, and shut his mouth.
Being  out of school gave him a wonderful feeling.
For two days now he had sat in Isobel's garage during most of school hours and planned his new book.
Twice, when he had run out of ideas, he had driven the little Triumph out of the district to a coffee shop where he was not known, and had sat drinking coffee and talking to the men next to him at the counter, surprised to find himself accepted as a member of the grown-up world.
One man had asked him what his job was and he said that he was an author.
This had caused such abnormal interest that the next time he was asked he said that he worked in a garage.
One afternoon he had shared a pot of coffee with Dorothy, at her invitation.
She was to stay with her sister until Isobel decided definitely whether to remain in Tollemarche or return to England, and occasionally she became a little bored and was glad of Hank's lively company, though to her annoyance, he treated her as if she were a ten-year-old.
The day before his father's return, he had driven out to a lake some ten miles from the town; it was deserted and half frozen, and he had walked round it, finding that the fresh air cleared his head and that ideas came fast in the silence of the woods.
The characters for his book began to emerge as persons and to walk beside him.
Now, all he wanted was to get back to his typewriter and put them on paper before they faded.
First, however, he had to ask Isobel if he could alter the lighting in the garage, so that he could see better at night.
The meal was finished, his father had returned to the newspaper, rather deflated at his family's lack of appreciation of his vice-presidency, and his mother had finished her ice cream and was rising from the table.
‘Hank, now you can just do these dishes for me tonight.
There's a meeting of the Queen Bees in an hour, and I've got to get into my robes.’
Hank made a face at her plump back disappearing through the kitchen door and reluctantly began to transfer the dishes to the sink.
His father had put down his  newspaper and was looking at her, too.
He looked old and forlorn, in spite of the ferocious beard, as if he had hoped for something and been disappointed.
Hank was so used to being deserted by his mother that he did not think it odd that she should go out on the first evening in ten weeks that his father had been able to spend at home.
But he did see that his usually tough, self-sufficient male parent was, for once, looking as if he needed bolstering up.
As he turned on the hot-water tap and got out the dish detergent, Hank abandoned the idea of going back to his garage.
‘Looks as if we're going to have a bull session, Dad.’
His father looked almost grateful.
‘I guess so,’ he said, and then roused himself.
‘Here, I'll dry for you.’
He took up the dish towel.
And when Mrs Stych returned, looking like a fat Christmas fairy and complaining that she could not fix her wings, he was able to pin them onto her dress without rancour and to tell a thoroughly bawdy joke, which made Hank explode with laughter and his wife look outraged.
‘Boyd Stych,’ she shouted, ‘you're disgusting!’
He smacked her gold-black-striped bottom, and sent her, fuming, out to her little car.
‘Any beer in the house?’ asked Boyd, as soon as the car engine had started up and it could be assumed that Mrs Stych was on her way.
‘Sure, there's some in the cold room downstairs.’
Boyd's face brightened.
‘Say, let's have some.
You go down and get it, while I make a fire in the living-room.
This place is like a morgue.’
Hank was delighted, though at the same time a little suspicious of his father's prompt response to his friendly overture.
The old man had never suggested before that they have a drink together; maybe it was all part of that new world he had entered when he stood in front of Mr Albert's mirror in his new suit.
He loped down into the basement, dusted off half a dozen bottles of beer and brought them up, found glasses and an opener and took them into the living-room on a tray.
His father, an expert woodsman, had already got a fire going, and the room had lost some of its pristine newness and was looking much more cosy.
The wood crackled and hissed, and Boyd drew the brass firescreen across it to stop the sparks from flying out at them.
Together, they heaved the oversize coffee table, with its burden of unread art books, out of the way, and pulled up chairs.
Mr Stych opened two bottles and handed a glass and a bottle to Hank.
‘Ever drunk beer before?’ he asked.
Hank did not know how to reply.
The Alberta liquor laws laid down that no minors might drink, but it was not difficult to obtain beer or liquor, and he had often drunk himself silly.
His silence made his father laugh.
‘O.K., O.K.,’ he said, ‘I won't ask.’
Hank grinned sheepishly.
Now, he knew, was the time to tell his father about The Cheaper Sex , while he was in such an extraordinarily amiable mood.
He would have to be told; any day now it would dawn on Tollemarche that it had spawned its first successful author, and he could guess the kind of jokes his father's colleagues were going to make when they found out what kind of book he had written.
He could not, however, think how to start, and the silence deepened.
‘How's school?’ asked his father, in a sudden valiant attempt to re-establish the frail line of communication.
‘I've quit,’ said Hank absently, and realized a second too late what he had said.
‘You've what?’
He was committed and could only stumble on.
‘I've dropped out — I couldn't stand it any more.’
Mr Stych sat up in his chair and glowered at his son.
What, he wondered indignantly, had Olga been thinking of to countenance this?
‘Are you crazy?’ he demanded in horrified tones.
‘Where you going to be without Grade 12?
You have to go to university.’
He looked his offending offspring up and down  with angry eyes.
‘Just what do you think you're going to do?’
Hank's face went blank.
‘I'm gonna write,’ he said stubbornly.
His father put down his glass with a bang, so that the beer slopped over on the side table.
‘You'll do no such thing,’ he shouted.
‘You'll go right back to school on Monday morning and finish Grade 12.
I'll have no dropouts in my family — we got enough hippie types hanging around.
Never heard of such a thing.’
He paused to take breath before continuing his tirade, and Hank said hastily: ‘Listen, Dad, you don't understand.’
‘Understand?
I understand all right, and if you think you're going to live off me for the rest of your life you're mistaken.
You get your Grade 12, and then you work your own way through university, same as I did.’
With a painful effort, Hank swallowed his own anger.
He had either to get his father to listen or otherwise he would have to just walk out.
He itched to do the latter, but common sense prevailed; he had seen how uncomfortable were the lives of other guys who had done that, either to marry too young or go it alone.
A home was a sensible base for operations.
He held up one hand in a conciliatory gesture to try and calm his parent, who by this time was striding up and down the room behind him.
He did his best to infuse good humour into his voice as he said: ‘Hold it, Dad.
I got fifty or maybe seventy thousand dollars earned, and I need advice about investing it.
Believe me, I really need advice.’
Mr Stych stopped in his tracks at the mention of such a sum of money, as Hank had hoped he would, and looked at the boy as if he might have gone dangerously mad.
‘Now what are you trying to tell me?’ he asked, his mouth twisted in bitterness.
He'd always known Hank was no good.
Always bottom in phys. ed. and always hated baseball.
What could you expect? he asked himself.
Just trouble, nothing but trouble.
Now the kid was sick in his head.
Seventy thousand bucks — that was a good one!
‘Now listen, Dad, just sit down and listen.
I've got a real long story to tell you.’
Mr Stych stopped his perambulation and regarded his son with a puzzled frown.
What was the kid getting at?
He looked all right; in fact, he had improved.
He was definitely tidier, and he had an oddly adult air of authority for a kid still at school.
Of course, he was growing up a bit .
Mr Stych sat down again and drained his glass.
‘All right,’ he said with an air of resigned patience.
‘What is it?’
He nearly fainted when Hank began: ‘You know I rent a garage from a young widow lady.’
Not a young widow at his age, for heaven's sake.
Why hadn't he stuck to Grade 12 girls?
Hastily, he reached for another bottle of beer and opened it, while Hank droned on: ‘So I entered an essay for the No Smoking essay competition….‘
With agitated fingers, his father felt in his shirt pocket for a cigarette, but he had forgotten to bring them from the kitchen.
Hank tossed a packet over to him, and he had lit one before he realized that he had not known that his son smoked.
‘…
Isobel read it and sent me to Professor MacFee — an English Professor — with it, and they both helped me to send it to a publisher in London.
I did — and it came back.
So I sent it to another in New York, and he took it.’
‘Who's Isobel?’ asked Mr Stych, trying to catch up with the tale.
‘The widow,’ replied Hank, with more than a trace of impatience in his voice, and then continued: ‘And it's selling so fast that I don't know what to do with the money.
We're getting forty thousand dollars for the movie rights, and the serial rights — the first ones — are already sold in the States.’
Mr Stych looked as if someone had struck him.
Forty thousand dollars!
His no-good slob of a kid was talking of having forty thousand dollars.
His heavy black eyebrows made him look fearsome as he glared unbelievingly at  Hank.
‘You're kidding?’ he said finally.
‘I'm not, Dad.
Ask Mr Hnatiuk at the bank if I haven't got real money.
He's been real good.
Dealt with me himself, and never told anybody so far as I know.’
He took a nervous sip from his glass.
‘You can see the letters from New York, if you come over to Isobel's.
I been to New York only a short while back.’
Boyd ground out his cigarette.
‘Christ!’ he said, some of the anger evaporating.
For the first time in his life, he really looked at his son, weighing up this product of the first six months of marriage before disillusionment set in.
Hank said earnestly: ‘So you see, I sure need advice.
I mean, I want to spend some, but I want to invest some, too.
And you know about these things, that's for sure.’
His father was looking at him keenly now.
Mellowed by two bottles of beer, he was convinced that Hank was telling the truth; his mind was already going to work considering how to double that forty thousand.
Money fascinated him.
Like a great many others in Tollemarche, he had made it his goal and his God.
People who made money demanded respect; people who had none were just trash to be trampled underfoot, no matter what other gifts they had.
He licked his lips.
‘Sure, Son, you do need advice.
You can lose money pretty fast by bad investment.’
Though his face showed nothing of his amusement, Hank laughed inwardly.
Money and talk of money got you attention.
He sighed with relief.
Boyd was silent for a moment.
Then he asked: ‘Have you told your mother?’
Hank went cold right down his back and into his feet.
‘No,’ he said.
‘She don't even know I quit school.’
Boyd approved of this, and nodded his head in agreement.
‘You're right not to tell her,’ he said dryly.
A log in the fire broke and fell, sending out a shower of sparks.
Hank silently drank down his beer, and hoped he had made the right move in telling his father.
Anyway, Isobel had been keen for him to tell both his parents, and her advice had been sound all through.
He knew his father had a fair reputation as an astute businessman as well as an able geologist, and he hoped uneasily that they could deal honestly together over the money.
‘If I had that much money and it was the first real money I had ever made,’ said the businessman at last, ‘I'd put a quarter of it in government savings bonds, and with the rest of it I'd buy as much land or property in and around Tollemarche and Edmonton as I could lay my hands on.’
He looked at his son's face illuminated by the firelight.
The boy was watching him anxiously.
‘Do you expect to make any more like this?’
‘Sure,’ said Hank, with all the confidence of youth.
‘I'm writing another.’
‘Well, if you do, you could buy a business, or you could buy growth shares on the stock market.
Myself, I'd buy a business.’
‘Not me,’ said Hank firmly.
‘I'm gonna write.
And I want to travel a bit.
Maybe get a job on a newspaper or a magazine for a while.
Feel my way around.
Get some experience.’
Boyd leaned back in his chair and lit another cigarette.
He had much to think about.
In a place like Alberta, with that much capital and a good deal of know-how, which he himself had, the boy could be quite wealthy before he was forty.
And amazingly enough, he expected to earn more.
For years, he and Hank had exchanged only a few words, but now they began to talk, drawn together by the magic of money; and Hank was surprised and flattered to find that the elder man was entranced by his sudden success.
To Hank's intense relief, at no point did it occur to Boyd to inquire what the book was about.
He did not even ask its name.
Mrs Stych came in at half past one, her wings bedraggled from the weight of her coat.
She had gone on from the Noble Order of Lady Queen Bees' meeting to a party given  by one of the members, and was by now tired, cross and a little tipsy.
On the way home, the car had had a tendency to wander from one lane to another on the road.
And now Mrs Stych stood rather dazedly inside the front door and wondered if she was in the right house.
The lounge was a mess.
The coffee table had taken flight to one side of the room, and two chairs had been drawn up close to the fireplace with their backs to the chesterfield.
The fireplace itself was filled with grey ash and cigarette butts.
On every side table were empty beer bottles sitting sadly in rings of beer; two empty glasses decorated the mantelpiece, and the piece of petrified driftwood which usually graced it had been shoved to the back, to make way for some empty plates which looked as if they had held meat and cheese.
Mrs Stych's senses reeled.
This was what happened when a man was loose in the house.
He must have had some friends in.
Her nose wrinkled at the smell of beer, and she kicked off her mink-trimmed bootees as if she were kicking Boyd.
She trailed around the room picking up beer bottles, looking oddly like a bee with broken wings.
She removed eleven bottles, and then felt sick.
The Ladies of Scotland's cookies, followed by meat loaf, succeeded by the Lady Queen Bees' angel cake buried under cheese dips and rye on the rocks at the party, would daunt the strongest stomach.
She fled up stairs to the bathroom.
Her Dutch cleaning lady would be coming round in the morning — let her do it, thought an exhausted Olga a few minutes later, as she shakily bathed her face under the cold tap; Boyd could darn well pay her more housekeeping to cover the extra hours of work.
With some difficulty, she unzipped her gold and black dress in the bathroom and then trailed into the bedroom, self-pity and too much to drink tending to make her weep.
Boyd, with most of the bedding rolled tightly round him, was snoring contentedly.
Rather than wake him by pulling the clothes off him and having to face the likely consequences, Mrs Stych put her housecoat over her nightgown, got a spare blanket out of her old hope chest, and eased herself down beside the chrysalis which was her husband.
She slept immediately.
In his dreams, Boyd Stych made a million for his son out of forty-storey apartment blocks, and was chased by a flying book the name of which he could not see.
When Mrs Frizzell arrived home from the tea, Maxie Frizzell was already in, since it was early-closing day.
He was sitting in the breakfast nook, a copy of the Tollemarche Advent , open at a page of advertisements dealing with cars, spread out in front of him, a cup of instant coffee in his hand.
His overcoat and fur hat were neatly hung up in the hall and his overboots reposed on the boot tray in the back sunroom.
Maxie was no believer in courting trouble — his wife nagged enough without adding to it.
He looked up when Donna Frizzell came in through the back door, and was startled to see that her hat was awry and her makeup smudged beyond repair.
Unbelievable as it seemed to him, she almost looked as if she had been crying.
He got up as quickly as the tight fit of the table in the breakfast nook would allow.
He'd bet twenty.dollars she'd had a fender bender and that the car looked like a concertina.
‘Had an accident, Donna?’
‘No.
Only another parking ticket.’
She sniffed as she put down the parcel of books and took off her gloves, and sniffed again as Maxie sank back on his bench, relieved that his beautiful black Cadillac was intact.
He looked at her uneasily, however.
Something had happened.
Donna was far too tough to cry, he reckoned, and yet it looked suspiciously as if that was what she was about to do.
He turned the page of the newspaper and then asked carefully: ‘Anything wrong?’
She sat down on the bench opposite to him and looked at his fat baby face, which was now showing some concern.
Then she put her head down on the table and wept unrestrainedly, the feathers of her hat dipping unnoticed into his coffee.
He was bewildered and did not know what to do.
‘For  heaven's sakes!’ he exclaimed, shocked to find that his wife, usually acidly in command of herself and of anyone else who came near her, could possibly be reduced to tears.
‘What happened?’ he asked warily.
He was answered by another loud sob and a gesture towards the untidy parcel which she had brought in.
He again eased himself out of the narrow space of the breakfast nook and went over to the kitchen counter, looked at the parcel and looked at his wife, who was now almost hysterical: He decided that he must be courageous and investigate, so he unwound the paper towels, picked up the books one by one and read their titles.
He guessed they were for the morals group, since neither he nor Mrs Frizzell ever really read a book, and he put them down again, still mystified.
He was fond of his wife in an absent-minded way, especially when she was not nagging at him, so he took a Kleenex out of the kitchen box and went back to her, saying rather hopelessly: ‘Here, have a Kleenex.’
The sobs lessened and a hand was extended, into which he pressed the tissue.
She sat up with a gasp and blew her nose hard; then, since he was close, she rested her aching head against his ample stomach.
He put his arm around her shoulders, as he had not done for many years.
‘Oh, Maxie,’ she said, ‘it was real bad.’
For once her voice was faint.
She took off her hat and laid it on the table, and he saw with a sense of shock that her hair was white down the line of the parting where the tinting had grown out.
She lifted a lined face to him, and he reached over for another Kleenex and smoothed the wetness away, so that she was almost without makeup.
He could not remember how long it was since-his wife had leaned on him, and he found it pleasant to be the one in charge of the situation.
In a rallying tone of voice, usually reserved for meetings with his salesmen, he said: ‘Here, I'll make you some coffee and you tell me what happened.’
He busied himself with the electric kettle and a jar of  instant coffee, and in a moment or two put the hot drink in front of her.
She was grateful to him for his solicitude and the tale came slowly out.
He listened anxiously because, in such an isolated community, any slur on his wife's character could have its effect on his business.
The eleventh Commandment, ‘Thou shalt not be found out,’ was all-important.
When she had finished and was stirring a saccharine tablet into her coffee, he sat silent for a while, his little eyes half closed, his pursed lips showing that he was thinking hard.
The refrigerator hummed its usual little tune to break the silence and Donna drank her coffee.
Finally, he said: ‘What you need is publicity.’
Donna looked at him, aghast.
‘Publicity!
My goodness!
Publicity!
I've had enough of that !
I've never been so ashamed in my life.
’ Her voice was hoarse with indignation.
‘Yeah, I mean it.
Listen, why don't you ring up the social editor of the Advent , and tell her about your meeting tomorrow.
Complain that the Committee is not getting the coverage it ought to have for the work it's doing.
Just tell her the names of those books and I tell you she'll be right over.’
He glanced at the offending literature.
‘Seems to me you've got a man-sized job on, judging by that lot.’
Mrs Frizzell immediately saw the relevance of his advice and began to look more like her normal self.
‘Yeah,’ she said thoughtfully, ‘we do work hard.’
Maxie went on: ‘Y’ see, everyone who was at the tea will keep reading the social pages for the next day or two to see that their names are in the report of it; and, with luck, inside that time, on the same pages there'll be a report about your Morals Committee — then they'll know why you had the books, and old Miss Angus will be put in her place.
‘He, too, had suffered under Miss Angus's overbearing rule when he was at school, and he did not mind trying to make her look foolish.
Mrs Frizzell's face brightened.
‘I'll have to ask Margaret first,’ she said.
‘She's the secretary and does the publicity.’
‘Let her ask the Advent .
It'll sound more official.’
He  said this in his firm business voice, not his usually listless home voice, and she accepted his direction as readily as one of his mechanics would have done.
Mrs Frizzell felt a reluctant admiration for her husband swelling up in her.
He was not quite such a dumbhead as one would think.
Her name would probably appear in the newspaper twice within two days, since she was to deliver the main report to the Morals Committee; and that should really impress both friends and enemies.
The feathers of her hat were again sitting in the dregs of Maxie's coffee, so she hastily retrieved it and looked mournfully at the damaged plumage.
‘I sure need a new outfit,’ she said absently and without hope.
‘Well, go and buy one,’ Maxie said expansively.
‘We're going to hafta give a big coffee party for the auto buyer from Henderson and Company, so make it a nice one.’
Mrs Frizzell swivelled round to face him.
‘How much?’ she asked distrustfully.
‘What about a hundred dollars?’
Mrs Frizzell was immediately suspicious To get so much sympathy and then to get a handout as soon as she asked for it, was unnerving.
What had he been doing?
She regarded him steadily for a minute with eyes still bloodshot from crying.
But he was beaming at her innocently, glad to see that she was feeling better.
‘O.K.,’ she said, a note of doubt in her voice.
‘Is the garage doing all right?’
‘Sure.
That's why you can have a hundred dollars.’
She breathed a little more easily.
He needn't think he was going to be allowed to wander.
He had married her and he was going to stay married, and no nonsense about other women and buying her off with unexpected handouts.
She clicked her false teeth together, and announced with something of the normal snap in her voice that she was going to call Margaret right now.
Then she would glance through the books she had bought, because she had to make a report on them.
And would she ever roast that bookseller, old Mr Pascall!
The telephone call was made, and Margaret, heard amid the distant screams of children quarrelling, gushed that it was a darling-idea and she would telephone the Advent herself, since she knew the women's editor well.
Mrs Frizzell had carefully cultivated her, too, but she let it pass, while Margaret complained that all four children had the measles and that she was going to have to leave them alone if the babysitter did not come soon; she was not going to miss the dance at the Pinetree Club for worlds, and was dear Donna coming?
Dear Donna said virtuously that she had to write her report, and disentangled herself from the conversation before she was asked to babysit.
She disinterred two frozen TV dinners from the big freezer in the basement and put them into the oven to heat.
Then she settled down at the dining-room table with her book purchases, which she had picked at random from the shelves of Tollemarche's only book store and from the racks of one of the cigar stores.
She had also a sheet of paper and a ball pen, ready for action.
Before looking at the books, she wrote: ‘The teenagers of Tollemarche must be protected from obscenity and smut.’
That should shake the audience to attention, she thought, as she picked up the first book.
She ran through the first few pages of each of the paperbacks, her mouth falling open as she read.
Really, the ideas that some people had!
Sex and sin were, to her, synonymous, and she wondered how on earth she was going to convey tastefully to her audience how much sin was in these volumes.
She pushed her glasses back up her nose, clamped her mouth shut firmly, and picked up the hard-backed novel, which had cost six dollars and fifty cents of the Committee's small funds.
On the front of the jacket a naked young girl was spread languidly on her stomach on a seashore– nothing of her anatomy being left to the imagination.
Embarrassed, Mrs Frizzell turned hastily to the back, where rave notices from  several New York papers greeted her.
She opened the back of the book, and found a heading on the fold-in part of the jacket which announced that this section was ‘About the Author’.
This time her mouth fell open so fast that she nearly lost her top dentures.
It was unbelievable, yet there it was, clearly printed: ‘The author, aged nineteen, was born in Tollemarche, Alberta, where he still resides….’
This was followed by four or five lines about the book being a miraculous first novel, etc., most of which Mrs Frizzell failed to take in.
She leaned back in her chair whistling softly under her breath, then remembered that it was vulgar for a woman to whistle.
She drummed her fingers on the Canadian maple table instead.
It surprised her that Mr Pascall had not used for publicity purposes the fact that the author was from Tollemarche.
Then she realized that books were really only a sideline to his stationery business; he sold more birthday cards than books.
Even the advent of the university had not done much to increase his sales, she considered shrewdly, since she could not recall seeing a single bookshelf in any of the homes of university staff which she had visited.
Probably the old man would announce in his window the book's importance to Tollemarche, next time he changed the display.
Or perhaps he wouldn't, she amended, since the exhibition of the jacket itself would be enough to send Tollemarche into an uproar of complaints.
As far as Mrs Frizzell knew, apart from a book on local fish written by an ardent fly fisherman on the university staff, this was the first book to come out of Tollemarche.
And it had been written, apparently, by some boy just out of high school, for heaven's sakes.
‘Oh, Maxie,’ she called.
She knew that Maxie was acquainted with the bulk of the male population of Tollemarche, because anyone looking for a car sooner or later strolled through his car lot.
Maxie withdrew himself reluctantly from the excitement of the football game he was watching on  television .
‘Yeah?’ he queried.
‘Do you know anybody in town called Ben MacLean?
A boy?’
‘Nope.
Lotsa MacLeans.
Nobody called Ben.
Why?’
Mrs Frizzell did not answer.
She went to the telephone table, took out the directory and looked up the name MacLean.
There were indeed lots of MacLeans — nearly the whole Clan MacLean, as far as she could judge.
Irritably, she slammed it down and went to wash and change, while she considered how she could trace this mysterious boy, this disgusting boy, this juvenile delinquent.
Her Committee would teach him a lesson, she promised herself venomously, as she powdered her face.
Of course, all the Committee would want to read the book.
Well, they could wait; she must go through it thoroughly first.
It was surely part of her duty to find out what finally happened to the seductive female spread out on the front cover.
The Committee for the Preservation of Morals was to meet at the house of Mrs Murphy, the wife of the Mayor.
It was a large split-level home, with unexpected staircases going, it seemed, in all directions, their wrought-iron banisters standing out against the pale-yellow broadloom which covered both stairs and floors throughout the house.
The picture windows, thought Mrs Stych, were larger than any other picture windows in Tollemarche, and the huge brick fireplace in the living-room was festooned with real antique brass ornaments, ranging from a warming pan, top left, to a set of horse brasses, bottom right.
The two square yards of broadloom devoted to the open hallway were almost blocked by a large bamboo plant, made of plastic, which waved majestically over a little fountain cascading water over two plastic shell-shaped basins which miraculously never overflowed.
Mrs Stych noted carefully all the ‘day core’, as she called it, while she removed her coat and gave it to Mrs Murphy to hang up.
Soon she would herself be in the market for a new home, and, though she and Boyd could not hope to outdo a contractor like the Mayor building for himself, she could pick up a few ideas and have them incorporated into their new house in Vanier Heights.
She knew that in a couple of days' time Boyd's promotion would be announced by his company in the newspaper, underneath a studio portrait of him, and she held her head high as she swayed gracefully into the living-room.
Since a few ladies who had been at the tea would also be at the committee meeting, and, anyway, Boyd had messed up her best black afternoon dress, she wore now a pretty gown in green wool which she had picked up in the last sale at Eaton's.
As it was after six o'clock, and, according to her much thumbed book of etiquette, a lady might glitter after that hour, she wore  long diamanté earrings.
The result was, in the eyes of the ladies present, very glamorous indeed, and they were nice enough to tell her so.
She simpered, and took her place on one of the enormous chesterfields flanking the fireplace, sitting next to Mrs Moore, the dentist's wife, mother of Hank's dead friend Tony.
Mr Moore had recently discovered how lucrative preventive dentistry could be, and Mrs Moore was dressed accordingly.
Mrs Murphy had moved a coffee table to the centre of the room and grouped four chairs round it, for the use of the officials of the committee.
She was a large woman, flushed with the exertion of constantly having to answer the door, and she still showed in her black hair, grey eyes and lovely skin, traces of her Irish forebears.
She found the responsibility of being the Mayor's wife almost too much for her, and was in a constant flutter for fear she forgot something in connection with the entertainment of the steady procession of guests, important to Tollemarche, who filed through her home.
She need not have worried, however, for her good nature and naturally hospitable manner covered up any small deficiencies in deportment.
Tonight she was to chair the meeting, so she left the front door unlocked for any late-comers, and, having seated the nervous little reporter from the Advent in a position where she could see and hear all the ladies present, giving her at the same time a hastily written list of the names of those expected to attend, she called the meeting to order.
As she raised her little hammer to tap on the table, she wondered suddenly why the Advent had actually sent a reporter — they usually depended on the publicity secretary to supply them with a report.
However, the recording secretary was waiting with the minutes of the last meeting, and Mrs Murphy announced her.
Donna  Frizzell , angular in dark brown, sat as secretary of the committee, with the president, chairman and treasurer, while the lesser fry made their reports.
She had a thin, satisfied smile on her face, which not even a few smirks and elbow nudgings among those ladies who had been at the tea  could banish.
She wished that the Advent had sent a more experienced reporter.
This girl looked as if she was on her first assignment, as she sat with pencil poised over her shorthand notebook.
However, she would probably be very careful over names, and that was what Mrs Frizzell wanted.
Mrs Stych's mind wandered as the voices droned on and the current film at the local drive-in cinema was condemned.
She was thinking about a telephone call which she had answered just as she was about to leave the house.
The call had been for Hank, and had been from one of his classmates, who said that he just wanted to inquire how Hank was.
Mrs Stych, in a frantic hurry, had said that he was out but that he was fine, just fine.
The caller had sounded a little bewildered, but had said that he was glad to hear it and would telephone again sometime.
Now Mrs Stych was puzzled.
Why hadn't the stupid boy said he would see Hank in school in the morning?
The treasurer, in sharp, clipped tones, was listing the committee's various expenditures and was bringing to the attention of the members the fact that there was only twenty dollars in hand.
Mrs Stych forced herself to attend, and the little reporter's pencil sped across the page.
Finally, Mrs Frizzell rose to make her report.
She hitched her skirt down surreptitiously, cleared her throat, arranged her sample books in a neat pile in front of her, and then, fixing her audience with an angry glare, she began.
‘The teenagers of Tollemarche must be protected from obscenity and smut!’ she announced dramatically.
There was an immediate murmur of approval, though some of the ladies looked longingly at the lavishly laid tea table just visible in the dining alcove.
‘They must be defended, it appears, from their own neighbours!’
It was as if an electric shock had gone through the gathering.
Heads snapped round towards Mrs Frizzell.
From their neighbours?
Mrs Frizzell's voice sank.
‘Yes,’ she hissed, ‘from their own neighbours.’
She picked up The Cheaper Sex with the tips of her bony, scarlet-nailed fingers.
‘This!’
She paused for effect.
‘This shameless piece of pornography was written in Tollemarche by one of our own teenagers.
Undoubtedly his parents must have known about it, and that makes it doubly shameful.’
Twenty-four pairs of painted lips let out long-drawn gasps and then broke into speech.
Questions poured towards the chair, and Mrs Murphy banged her gavel so hard on the coffee table that it left a mark, which distressed her so much that she forgot for a moment why she was hammering and stared sadly at the dent in the wood.
She recovered herself quickly, however, and cried: ‘Order!
Order, please!
Ladies!
One at a time.
Mrs Davis.’
She gestured with her gavel towards a doctor's wife, whose elaborately casual tweed suit proclaimed her husband's earning power.
Mrs Davis had been a nurse and her cold, crisp voice rose above the clamour.
‘We should like to know who wrote the book and who published it.’
The voice had the effect for which Mrs Murphy had hoped.
There was immediate silence and eager attention.
Mrs Frizzell surveyed the gathering exultantly.
She wished passionately that she knew who Ben MacLean was.
But this was her moment, she felt.
She would never again have so much rapt attention focused upon her, and she stood silent, until one lady, younger than most of those present, started to rummage in her handbag for a cigarette.
‘The name of the author is…
Ben MacLean, the publisher a firm in New York.’
Conversation immediately broke out again, while each lady tried to recollect all the MacLeans that she knew.
Mrs Murphy banged with her gavel, rather more cautiously this time.
‘Ladies, please!’
A thin streak of a woman bobbed up at the back.
‘What are we going to do about it?’
The voice of the doctor's wife rose above the hubbub.
‘Have you read the book?’
Silence again.
Everyone looked expectantly at Mrs Frizzell.
Mrs Frizzell went a little pink.
She hesitated, and then said: ‘Not all of it.
I — er — um….‘
Several ladies turned sharply on Mrs Davis, who was far too efficient in everything she did.
‘Be reasonable, Hester.
She wouldn't like to read a thing like that.’
‘How else would she know it's a thing like that?’ retorted Hester, unabashed.
‘The first chapter was enough,’ snapped Mrs Frizzell indignantly, glad that she did not have to explain that she did not give much time to reading.
Mrs Murphy snatched the opportunity to ask Mrs Frizzell to proceed with her report, which she did, outlining the story as far as she knew it and using as many euphemisms as she could.
The name of the author was evidently a pseudonym, but it was hoped that the committee would take steps to find out who he was, would decide what should be done to clean this canker out of Tollemarche, and would take more steps to curb their local bookseller's and cigar stores' choice of books.
She omitted to mention that, when they last made representations to the bookseller, Mr Pascall, he had said that he stocked the books he could sell; and if the ladies wanted him to sell better books they should take to buying them and reading them, instead of watching  television all day.
Then he might be able to improve the quality of his stock.
Mrs Frizzell, having run out of steps, sat down.
‘What are we going to do about it?’ asked Hester Davis again, through a haze of cigarette smoke.
Handbags were snapped shut, legs were crossed and uncrossed, ladies leaned forward confidentially to their neighbours, ostensibly to confer, though a number got fits of giggles and had to hide their faces behind their hands.
Mrs Frizzell gazed into space and Mrs Murphy smoothed back errant curls from her damp forehead.
Almost all the  ladies silently decided to go downtown the next morning and buy a copy of The Cheaper Sex .
Each justified her interest in such a vulgar book by telling herself that in these matters one must be able to judge for oneself.
The little reporter realized suddenly that she had a real story for her editor and went pale with fear as she remembered that lady's ruthless slashing up of her last offering, the report of an insignificant wedding.
She shivered and watched Mrs Frizzell apprehensively as the buzz of conversation continued.
Mrs Murphy threw the meeting open for discussion since discussion was already in full flood and refused to be dammed, and wondered if the coffee, left on a low gas in the kitchen, had started to perk yet.
A blonde lady, with bouffant hair above a heavily lined, over-powdered face, addressed the chair.
Why, she asked, didn't they form a small subcommittee to inquire into the identity of this young author, and, when they had discovered it, they could report back to the rest of the members, and they could then discuss what action should be taken.
This suggestion met with immediate approval.
The ladies were thirsty and wanted something to drink.
Agreement on this suggestion would bring the meeting to a close, and most of those present would not have to do anything at all about the wretched book.
The motion was formally put to the meeting and seconded.
The blonde lady, Mrs Johnson, whose daughter Hank regarded as little better than a.streetwalker, found herself appointed chairman of the subcommittee, and she asked if Mrs Stych and the president, the hawk-faced wife of a real estate man, would serve with her.
Mrs Stych protested coyly that she did not know enough about books to be of any use, while she wondered privately how she was going to fit this new commitment into her already overcrowded schedule of social events.
What about Mrs Frizzell? she suggested hopefully.
Mrs Davis pointed out tartly that Mrs Stych was not at present serving on any  of their other subcommittees, and that she must do something to help.
Mrs Stych snapped back that all the ladies present must be well aware of the multitude of offices she held in the charitable organizations of Tollemarche.
The ladies murmured reluctant agreement, since most of them had at one time or another tried to oust her from at least one of the appointments which they themselves coveted.
With a delicate sniff in the direction of a slightly cowed Hester Davis, Mrs Stych enrolled herself as a sleuth in search of an author.
The date of the next meeting was agreed upon, as a delicious odour of coffee began to permeate the room, and the ladies rose expectantly and looked towards the dining alcove.
Mrs Murphy had made brownies again, and the faces of some of the ladies fell.
Mrs Stych, however, nibbled appreciatively at one of the chocolate morsels, while Mrs Johnson, who had no real idea how to trace an author, outlined a plan of campaign so huge that it would have confused an entire army staff, never mind Mrs Stych.
Did Mrs Johnson spell her name with a t ? asked the little reporter.
Mrs Johnson said ‘No!’ indignantly, and Mrs Stych woke up and checked that the girl had her name down correctly, too.
She began to take an interest in the Sleuthing Committee.
She felt that having her name mentioned more frequently than ever in the social columns was highly desirable for the wife of a company director.
She smiled dazzlingly at the little reporter and hoped that she would be referred to as ‘charming’.
The women's editor of the Tollemarche Advent , having found nothing about Ben MacLean in the office files, decided that the quickest source of information regarding Tollemarche's first author would probably be Mr Pascall, the bookseller.
She therefore telephoned him.
Old Mr Pascall saw no reason why he should make life easy for a gossiping female and made her hold on, while he sold two ballpoint pens and a packet of rubber bands.
‘It's some high school kid called Henry Stych,’ he finally wheezed down the telephone.
‘Salesman did tell me sumpin' about a kid from here writing it but I forgot.
‘Professor MacFee was in the other day — asked me to order him a copy.
Told me the kid's name was Henry Stych.
I asked him why the kid didn't use his own name, and he said maybe he thought Ben MacLean sorta sounded better.
‘Want me to order you a copy?
I sold the two I had.’
The editor ground her teeth.
‘No, thanks.
Which high school?’
A small girl was messing about with the birthday cards in Mr Pascall's shop.
He felt he had wasted enough time on the editor, and replied with asperity: ‘How should I know?
There're only two high schools, aren't there — public and separate.
Ring 'em up, can't you?’
He slammed down the receiver and fled to the rescue of his birthday cards.
The editor put the receiver slowly back on to its rest.
Stych!
That was interesting.
She wondered if the boy was any relation to Mrs Olga Stych.
Very thoughtfully, she turned to the telephone directory and looked up the name.
Seven Styches were listed.
She checked her file again and found that Olga's husband's first name was Boyd.
There was no mention of any children.
Olga Stych had a vicious tongue and would not hesitate to use it, if she was mistaken in thinking there was a  relationship.
It would undoubtedly be wiser to establish the young author's identity and then, if he proved to be Mrs Stych's son, perhaps have a quiet word with the boy first.
Since the book seemed to be one that would cause some controversy, she had better proceed with caution.
Her mind made up, she picked up the receiver and dialled the number of the separate school.
The separate school had no Henry Stych on its roll, and the school secretary was left in a state of agonized curiosity at the Advent 's interest in such a person.
The principal of the public high school happened to pick up the telephone himself.
Yes, he knew Henry Stych, and, yes, he knew of The Cheaper Sex ; he had confiscated a copy of it from a Grade 10 child only this morning.
Henry Stych had what ?
Written it?
Ridiculous!
The editor said she felt sure her information was correct, and could she have Henry's address and telephone number?
The principal was immediately cautious and warned her that the boy was under age.
He suggested she should contact the father, Boyd Stych, and he gave the parents' home telephone number, feeling that she would soon trace it anyway.
Deeply concerned, he pressed the intercom buzzer and asked Mr Dixon, Hank's home-room teacher, to report to him without delay.
Mrs Stych had just got up and was still in her dressing-gown when she answered the telephone call from the Advent .
Hank and Boyd had found their own cornflakes and coffee and had long since departed.
The editor asked for Mr Henry Stych.
Mrs Stych faltered for a moment and then realized that she meant Hank.
She said gaily: ‘The story isn't about Hank — it's about my husband, Boyd.’
The editor knew nothing of the story of Boyd's promotion, about to be featured in the financial section, and  she said firmly that it was Henry she wanted.
Mrs Stych did not want to offend the queen of the social columns by arguing with her, so when that lady went on to inquire when the newspaper could send a photographer, Mrs Stych said in her most gracious tone of voice that the whole family would be at home that evening any time after six.
She rang off, happy that the Advent was taking such an interest in Boyd's directorship, finished her coffee and went to take her morning shower.
It was only then, with the water trickling down her plump back, that an uncomfortably cold premonition seemed to trickle down, too.
Had the Editor really meant Hank, and, if so, what had Hank been up to?
She pulled herself up firmly.
If Hank had done something particularly dreadful, either Donna Frizzell or some other nosey parker would have been on her doorstep by now to tell her about it.
It must be about Boyd.
As requested by Mrs Johnson of the Committee for the Preservation of Morals, she drove out to the library, with the intention of asking the chief librarian for information about Ben MacLean, but when she arrived he had gone out for morning coffee.
His languid part-time assistant could not have cared less about books or authors, local or other; she supposed that there was a copy of the book in the new-fiction section.
Mrs Stych sailed majestically to the bookcase indicated, and found the offending volume almost immediately.
She had not looked at Mrs Frizzell's copy, so this was her first glimpse of it.
Before picking it out, she looked over her shoulder to make sure that no one was looking at her.
There was only one person nearby, an elderly gentleman immersed in back copies of the Edmonton Journal , so she slipped the book out.
The sultry female depicted on the front shocked her.
What a position to lie in — it was indecent!
No wonder Donna had been upset.
She read the summary of the story and the gushing praise of the New York critics, quoted on  the jacket.
Finally she turned the book over and read the brief notes about the author; and her deep unease of earlier that morning returned, but she crushed it down.
She read the first two pages and felt a blush rise from her palpitating bosom up her neck to suffuse her face.
For heaven's sakes, did girls really do such things?
Fancy the library allowing such a book on their shelves!
She hastily returned it to its place, and in a state of some agitation went back to her car and sat there until she felt calm again.
She started the car with a jerk and hit the bumper of the car in front.
Flustered, she reversed, and the groceries she had bought en route fell off the back seat and flopped to the floor.
Damn that book!
With painful care she eased the car out of its parking place and into the flow of traffic.
The cover said a high school boy.
But what could a kid know about such goings-on as were chronicled in the pages she had read?
What did a present-day high school boy know?
It came to her as a shock that, although she had an excellent opportunity to be acquainted with high school children through her son, she did not know any of his friends.
With a burst of self-pity, she mentally reviled Hank for never talking to her or telling her what he was going to do.
He never brought his friends to the house and she had never known where he spent his spare time.
What did he do, other than ride around in his jalopy and sometimes help out in the supermarket?
As she manoeuvred the car through the traffic, the cold feeling which had menaced her earlier returned to plague her.
She tried to brush aside memories of the eager, tiny child that Hank had been, a child who had adored his ugly, heavy-footed Ukrainian grandfather, a child who had screamed with rage at her when she had thrust him into the arms of an unknown babysitter or had forced him to play alone in the basement, until he became a silent, morose schoolboy.
Meanwhile, she had pursued personal aggrandizement at his expense, a whisper of conscience hinted, until he had learned that he was nothing but a nuisance to her.
The memories persisted, until she had worked herself into a peevish bout of self-pity, which was not improved by her discovery when she reached home that Hank had not shovelled the snow off the front walk before leaving for school.
The snow would certainly invade the tops of her boots when she stepped out of the car, and she swore softly in Ruthenian as she retrieved the groceries from the floor of the car and turned to carry them into the house.
She had just slammed the car door by hooking it with one foot, when Mrs Frizzell, with a similar brown-paper bag of groceries, came round the nearest corner on foot, having been to the local store.
‘Mornin', Olga,’ she shouted as she scuttled towards her, a pair of rollers in the front of her hair sticking out like devil's horns from under her woollen hat.
‘Where've you been?’
‘Library,’ said Mrs Stych shortly as she staggered through the snow towards her house.
Mrs Frizzell's face brightened ‘About the book?’
‘Yeah,’ replied Mrs Stych with an involuntary shudder.
She suddenly recollected that she was now the wife of the director of a large company, and drew herself up with what she hoped was some dignity; but she only succeeded in looking more than ever like a pouter pigeon.
‘Librarian had gone to coffee.’
‘I'd like to know who wrote it,’ said Mrs Frizzell wistfully.
Mrs Stych put her nose in the air, and said: ‘We shall have the name in a day or two.’
Mrs Frizzell surveyed her neighbour speculatively.
Olga seemed to be more patronizing than ever today.
She was now looking round at both their houses distastefully, though the houses looked the same as usual, snow on the roofs, snow a foot deep over the yards, snow poised on every twig and leaf, a cloud from the central-heating chimney hovering calmly over each residence.
Mrs Stych had temporarily forgotten about Hank.
‘I'll be glad to leave this house,’ she said carefully.
Mrs Frizzell's nose quivered as she caught the scent of change.
‘Leave it?’
‘Yeah.
Probably next fall.
We're going to build in Vanier Heights.’
The effect of this announcement on Mrs Frizzell was all that Mrs Stych could have desired.
The bounce went out of her as if she had burst.
Envy sprang into her hard little eyes and gleamed maliciously.
She stood rooted to the sidewalk, her mind a whirl of dislike.
Vanier Heights?
She could have cried.
Why hadn't Maxie thought of building a new house there, the old stick in the mud?
She took two or three large breaths over the top of her bag of groceries, while Mrs Stych watched her stupefaction with complacency.
She had, however, underestimated Donna Frizzell's powers of recovery.
Between gritted teeth, Donna asked innocently: ‘Isn't that a bit old-fashioned?
We are thinking of buying a small estate outside the city, three or four acres, so that we could have a real nice ranch-type bungalow — and keep some riding horses.’
The last was an inspired idea, a riding horse with an acreage to keep it on being quite a status symbol.
Mrs Stych licked her lips.
‘Oh, no!’ she drawled, determined not to be outdone, as she moved towards her front door.
‘We wouldn't like to be far from town — we like culture — and horses smell so.’
Mrs Frizzell reminded herself that murder was not civilized.
Not trusting herself to speak, she right-wheeled and made for her own front door, which now looked hopelessly out of date and shabby.
She would get to work on Maxie just as soon as his presence at home should coincide with hers; she had not seen him since returning from the tea, except when crawling wearily into bed.
‘Let him just show his face,’ she muttered darkly.
While his mother and Donna Frizzell sparred in front of their respective homes, Hank laboured in Isobel Dawson's garage.
The day was overcast and it was becoming difficult to see what he was typing, so, about noon, when imagination began to fail him, he walked up to the house to inquire from Dorothy whether Isobel would mind if he had better lighting installed in the garage, provided he paid far it.
The door was opened unexpectedly by Isobel herself.
She was in a housedress and held a duster in her hand.
She greeted Hank cheerily.
Hank looked nonplussed, and then asked, rather foolishly: ‘Aren't you at work?’
‘No.
The boss went to Calgary and gave me the day off.’
Hospitably, she opened the door wider.
‘You'd better come in, it's cold out there.’
He entered gratefully.
A strong smell of floor polish pervaded the house and the kitchen was in chaos, its furniture piled in the middle and a vacuum cleaner cord snaking round it to a hidden plug.
She apologized for the muddle and ushered him into the living-room.
She gestured towards the chesterfield.
‘Sit down.
What can I do for you?’
He sat down, feeling somewhat shy in the midst of so much domestic activity, while she knelt and lit the gas fire.
‘Canadians are always cold in this house,’ she remarked in explanation.
‘I don't keep it so hot as they keep theirs.
‘Well?’ she asked, as she got up off her knees.
Pretty legs, thought Hank, as he explained about the lighting in the garage.
Instead of giving the immediate agreement which he had expected, she said: ‘Let's have some coffee.
We'd better talk the whole thing over.’
Though he was a little surprised, he smiled and said with  alacrity that he could just use a cup of coffee, and he lounged after her as she bustled around the kitchen.
She was unlike anybody else he had ever met and secretly he found her intriguing.
Today, dressed like a housewife, she looked more human than usual, less distantly dignified.
He wondered how he had found sufficient courage to ask her to the Edwardian Ball, and then remembered that it was her air of calm dignity which had made him anxious to take her to impress his parents.
‘Where's Dorothy?’ he asked.
‘She's gone for a skiing lesson — she wants to learn before going home.’
She wondered idly if Hank was interested in Dorothy, and the idea made her feel a little forlorn.
She lifted a cup and saucer in each hand, and he took one from her.
His fingers touched hers and his heart gave a jolt, but she seemed perfectly in command of herself and had apparently felt nothing, so he told himself not to be a dope, and carried his coffee back to the chesterfield.
He stirred it silently, as she settled herself in a rocking-chair opposite to him.
When he looked up at her, he found her regarding him with a troubled frown over the rim of her coffee cup.
It seemed to him that in her gentle gaze there was more than a hint of despair, and it grieved him.
‘The thing is,’ she said, after a moment's hesitation, ‘that I am going to sell this house.’
Hank nearly dropped his cup, as his brand-new writing world splintered into pieces around him.
‘S-sell?’ he stuttered.
‘Yes,’ she replied, her voice trembling a little.
‘I'm going home.’
Hank was thoroughly disquieted.
He was still young enough to feel that the present was permanent.
Shut up in her garage, his work approved of and praised by her, comforted by Captain Dawson's and her advice, which had in all respects proved reliable, he had felt a safety and confidence unknown to him before.
Even now that his father was aware of his activities, it would not be the same; only she knew the appalling effort he had made, only she had read the manuscript through and appreciated the clarity of his prose and the honesty of his outlook.
He had expected that any change in his routine would have been of his own making, not hers.
She was waiting for him to make some reply, and he said slowly: ‘I guess you must be homesick, now Captain Dawson isn't here.’
‘Well, yes.
He wasn't here very much, as you know, but we were looking forward to the end of his army service and then we would have settled here.’
She looked sober, and then added: ‘I might as well go home — there's nothing to keep me here.
My in-laws have other children, and it's always easier in one's own country.’
‘I guess your parents will be glad to see you,’ he remarked.
‘They're dead.
They were killed in an accident just before I was married — Peter was my father's friend.’
‘Peter must have been a lot older than you?’ ventured Hank.
She was not offended at the personal question, but her voice held a trace of surprise in it as she said: ‘Yes, he was.
He was at school with my father.
You see, Father was actually born in Alberta — his parents came here from Wales — but when he was a young man he went back to visit, and fell in love with my mother and with Wales as well, and stayed there.’
She smiled and ran her finger around the top of her coffee cup.
‘Father always kept in touch with Peter and he planned to come and see us when he got leave from France, where he was stationed.
As it turned out, he only came for the funeral.’
Hank was interested.
He had heard of girls marrying a father substitute, but he had not met one before.
He did not wish to make her unhappy by any further probing after such a flow of confidences, so he just asked her which city in England she came from, this being a question all immigrants were accustomed to.
‘I don't come from England — I'm Welsh, from Caernarvon.’
He failed to realize the difference and his blank expression made her smile.
‘Wales and the Welsh are quite different from England and the English,’ she said.
‘Being Welsh is a bit like — well, like being a French Canadian.
I'm going back to my old employers in London, though.’
‘I suppose I'd better find another garage,’ he said rather hopelessly.
Without asking if he could smoke, he quickly took out a cigarette and lit it, and then belatedly offered her one.
She was amused at his blunder, but took one from him.
He remembered to offer her a light.
He put his coffee cup down on a pile of English magazines, got up and stretched himself.
His T-shirt was too small for him and came out of the waist of his pants.
The pants themselves were too tight and too short, exhibiting a generous stretch of hairy legs.
Isobel stifled a strong desire to laugh.
‘I presume you're dressed for school,’ she said.
He looked down at himself.
‘Yep.’
‘Does your mother know about the book yet?’
‘No!’ he snapped.
‘Dad does.’
Isobel asked cautiously: ‘Has he read it?’
‘Jeepers, no.
He don't even know what it's called.
Never even asked me.’
He wandered towards the piano and very gently turned the picture of Captain Dawson face down on the top of the instrument.
‘Goodbye, fella,’ he muttered, but Isobel fortunately did not hear him.
‘Do you think he'll mind that it is a rather controversial book?’
Hank sat down on the piano stool and struck a chord.
‘It's too late to mind,’ he said.
‘He should have done a bit of minding years ago.’
‘I think you ought to tell your mother.’
Isobel's voice was almost imploring.
‘She has a right to know, before anybody else tells her.’
Hank broke into the ‘Cornish Rhapsody’, playing with  such savagery that the little room was flooded with the storm of it.
For the first time, Isobel felt a little afraid of him, as all the suppressed fury of a rejected child came pouring out in the music.
She sat quietly, however, until the music found its way into calmer waters and then came to an end.
He spun round on the stool so that he could face her.
‘Not bad, eh?’ he asked, some of the tension gone from his face.
‘You are very good,’ she said, some of the nervousness receding from her.
‘Do you practise much?’
‘Most days.
Used to practise in the school.’
He grinned.
‘That left the evenings free to go out, except near exam times.’
It dawned on him that he had not had a date for weeks, and his first one would be with her at the Edwardian Ball.
Must be going senile, he decided.
‘Say,’ he said, ‘you'd better tell me more precisely about what I am to wear to this ball.
We gotta make a hit — let 'em know we've arrived.’
Isobel's face looked suddenly young and animated.
‘I'll get the book with the picture in it.
I think it'll be fun.
I haven't been to a ball since I came to Canada.’
Hank looked at her aghast.
‘Honey,’ he said, without thinking, ‘it's time you started to live it up a bit.’
Boyd Stych, looking strangely civilized in a dark business suit and neatly clipped beard, was informed by his wife, when he came home, that the Advent was sending a photographer and a reporter to see him this evening and he was not to litter up the lounge — she'd just tidied it.
He grunted guardedly, as he heaved off his overshoes.
Though he knew the press would be sending a photographer to take a picture of him for the financial pages of the newspaper, he suspected that their main interest was in Hank.
It was not going to be possible to keep from Olga the information that her son had suddenly become quite a well-to-do youngster, though he had warned Hank on no account to tell her how much he had made out of his book.
Boyd believed firmly that all women were incurably avaricious and was certain that, once Olga knew about the book, she would try to squeeze most of the proceeds of it out of Hank; and, to his credit, he was determined that this should not happen.
He dropped his briefcase on the chesterfield, and Mrs Stych snatched it up crossly and took it into his den, while he went to the refrigerator in search of ice cubes for a drink.
Should he talk to her now, he wondered, or let Hank do it?
‘Where's the rye?’ he shouted.
‘In the bar in the basement — where else?’ came the sharp reply.
He went downstairs to the rumpus room and rummaged behind the tiny bar, and, after digging through a seemingly endless collection of empty pop bottles, came up with half a bottle of rye and some ginger ale.
He felt he needed a drink — this could be quite a trying evening.
Perhaps it was fortunate that he had no inkling of how trying it was going to be.
As he took an eager gulp from his glass, he decided that  Hank ought to tell his mother what he had been doing.
He rationalized his cowardice by telling himself that, after all, it was Hank's headache, not his.
He wondered idly what sort of tripe Hank had written.
Some sort of adventure story, he supposed, which would film well.
He must ask him.
Hank drifted silently in through the back door and deposited a pile of school books on the kitchen table and a fair amount of snow on the kitchen floor from his moccasins.
He quickly got a corn broom, went out to the back porch again and brushed his footwear clean; then he used the same broom to sweep the snow from the kitchen floor into a safe hiding-place under a scatter rug.
No point in drawing fire, he argued, as he put the broom back into the closet.
As he took up his school books again and moved them into his bedroom, he wondered if his father had told his mother about his leaving school.
Boyd had not promised to do this, though he had said he would go to see the principal to straighten out the question of his leaving.
This promised visit to the school, mused Hank, would be his father's first since he had graduated from it twenty-five years earlier.
He had had to ask Hank the name of the principal and what courses he had been taking, since he had never bothered to inquire about these before.
So much for parental interest in education, Hank muttered.
He went to the hall table, where the postman usually  deposited any mail, in the hope that there might be a letter for him, though most of his mail came via Isobel.
He was agreeably surprised to find one from a friend who had joined the Mounties a couple of years previously.
It was full of amusing anecdotes about his life as a policeman.
For the first time, Hank did not feel a pang of envy at his friend's being already at work; he felt he was doing better than any young policeman could hope to do.
Olga heard him singing in the bathroom and shouted that supper would be ready in a few minutes.
‘Put a clean shirt on and comb your hair,’ she called.
‘Somebody's coming this evening from the Advent to see your father.’
Hank stopped singing in mid-bar.
Almost certainly, they'd be coming to see him, too.
Jeeze, the balloon was about to go up!
‘D'yer hear me, Hank?’
‘Yeah, Ma.’
And he began to hum a funeral march.
The terrible bitterness against his parents that had led to his writing a book meant to shock them had faded into indifference; yet there lingered in him an understandable vindictiveness.
He knew he would be happy if, in some way, it taught his mother a salutary lesson, but he could still quail, like a little boy, in anticipation of the violence of her wrath.
At dinner, the hastily prepared steak was tough and Boyd complained about it.
Next time Olga bought steak, he said, he would cook it.
Olga Stych was immediately biting about men who dressed up in aprons and fancy hats, and thought they could cook over a smelly barbecue.
‘I suppose all the months I was up North you reckoned I had a chef along with me,’ snarled Boyd.
Hank hastily finished the store-bought cake which followed the steak, and went to his room.
He thought he might as well look over his skiing equipment, instead of listening to his parents snapping at each other.
If his mother was already as irritated as she sounded, he decided that the evening would be full of squalls.
He sat down on his bed while he threaded new laces into his boots, and then paused, one lace suspended in his hand, as he wondered suddenly why the wire service had not given the Advent any news about him.
Then he realized that any such news would be about ‘Ben MacLean’ and that they would not connect it with him.
He chuckled to himself.
Probably the paper didn't even have wire service, and if it did, he'd bet a dime that anything which had come in about the book's author had simply been buried in the chaos then reigning in the newspaper office.
The Advent had survived for years with a staff of four, plus occasional help from the owner's wife with the reporting of weddings and similar social occasions.
Its circulation had grown enormously as immigrants flooded into Tollemarche, and it had expanded into the shops which flanked it on either side.
Now, new offices were being built for it on the other side of the road, but they were not quite ready, and meantime, the new publisher from the East and his editors functioned in an atmosphere of such utter confusion that it is doubtful if an efficiency expert could even have fought his way in through the door.
Donny O'Brien, the ancient typesetter inherited from the original Advent , swore each day that it was only by the grace of God that the paper ever got launched in the taxi which delivered it to the newspaper boys.
Only the queen of the social columns, recruited a couple of years previously from Calgary, sat calmly at her desk, her silver-tipped fingers delicately feeling the pulse of the city's social life.
Other editors might make a slip, but let her so much as spell a name wrong and her telephone would blare, and some outraged lady would correct her with withering sarcasm.
She was delighted when the story of Hank fell into her lap; an interview with his mother would fill half a column nicely.
Her pleasure was, however, short lived.
Like all good stories unearthed by such lady editors, it was snatched away from her, and, barring wars and acts of God, as Donny O'Brien reported to Mr Pascall, the bookseller, it would be a front-page headline on Monday.
It was, therefore, no quiet lady columnist to whom Mrs Stych opened the door that evening, but an eager male reporter keen on a front-page story.
He shot through the door almost as soon as it was opened, closely followed by a small, bald-headed individual carrying what looked like a suitcase.
‘Hank Stych!’ he hailed a startled Boyd, who had half risen from an easy chair, scattering the papers on which he had been working.
He wrung Boyd's hand.
‘Say, this is  great for Tollemarche — really put us on the map.’
Then, turning to his companion, he said: ‘Pose him against these drapes, Tom.’
Tom hastily opened his case, took out a tripod and set his camera up in the middle of the lounge, while Mrs Stych watched, open-mouthed.
Neither visitor had taken the slightest notice of her.
The reporter was saying to Boyd: ‘Say, let's have a picture with you reading the manuscript.’
Mrs Stych felt a sudden constriction in her stomach.
The reporter consulted his notes.
‘We hafta have a picture of a Mr Boyd Stych as well.’
Tom nodded agreement, and went on rapidly assembling his camera.
Boyd found his voice.
‘I'm Boyd Stych.’
The reporter looked up quickly, took in the fact that Boyd's Edwardian Days beard was streaked with grey, and said: ‘Say, I am sorry.
I sure thought there was a writer hidden behind that beard of yours.’
Boyd hastily bent down to rescue his papers from being trampled.
‘The beard is for Edwardian Days,’ he said primly.
‘Oh, sure, it's a beaut.
All ready for tomorrow, eh?
You just might win the prize for the best one, at that,’ the reporter replied, fingering his own scanty side whiskers.
Mrs Stych listened to this conversation with slowly growing horror.
The cold feeling she had experienced that morning crept over her; she remembered the library book, and, with a feeling of panic, recollected Hank's trip to New York.
Behind them, she envisaged the faces of the Committee for the Preservation of Morals, as she had last seen them, glistening with almost sadistic anticipation of the crushing of the young author and of giving Mr Pascall and the cigar-store merchants their proper comeuppances.
‘I think I'm going to vomit,’ she muttered to no one in particular, and sat down with a plop on a new imitation Italian chair, which received her with a reedy groan.
Boyd was calling up the stairs for Hank to come down, and she watched silently, as if at the movies, while he emerged from his ground-floor bedroom, walked past her without looking at her, and held out his hand to the reporter, who winced as he felt its grip.
‘Hi,’ said the reporter, wondering if his hand would ever recover.
‘Hi,’ said Hank.
He stared with some scorn at his would-be interviewers, who were some inches shorter than he was.
He seemed to fill the room with his contempt for the people present.
‘Say, that sure was some book you wrote,’ remarked the reporter, to fill the silence.
‘Haven't read it myself yet, but I'll get around to it — I sure will.’
Hank's expression was cynical, as he gestured to the man to be seated.
Mrs Stych was thankful for the chair under her, as she felt the colour drain from her face.
The lounge rocked in front of her.
How could he write such things? she wondered dumbly; how could he know so much about sex, so much about sin?
Sin was sex; pride, avarice, gluttony had no place as far as her life was concerned.
Only s–ex was really wrong, only fallen women really burned.
Out of the corner of his eye, Hank could see her stricken face.
He felt no pity.
When had she ever shown him pity?
This was really going to rock her and it would do her good.
‘Yes,’ he told the reporter, it's called The Cheaper Sex .’
In response to a further query, he added irritably: ‘Sure it's about sex — what else would it be about with a title like that?’
The reporter said soothingly that their reviewer, Professor Shrimp, had given it a lotta praise, and the review would probably be in the arts section, next to the film shows, on Monday.
Mrs Stych whimpered softly and the reporter glanced at her curiously.
Queer old bag.
What did she think of it?
Mentally, Mrs Stych felt as if she were writhing in her death agonies.
The Subcommittee appointed by the Morals girls!
How could she face it?
And worse, how was she going to face the whole organization when it met?
Some of the  Morals group were also Queen Bees, some were Daughters of Scotland and strict Presbyterians; the United Church itself — how could she attend it now?
It would be all over town that her son wrote pornography.
She would never, never, she cried inwardly, as she clutched her handkerchief to her mouth, be able to face the girls again.
Boyd was surprised at the name of his son's book, but, unlike his wife, he had not read any of it, and he supposed that Hank had deliberately chosen a titillating title to help sales.
He, therefore, continued a subdued conversation with the photographer, not feeling it in the least necessary to introduce his wife to either visitor.
The reporter snapped a rubber band over his notebook, told Hank he would have rung him about the details of the book but he had not been able to get through.
Hank said that was O.K., and the photographer surged forward.
The photographs were taken, while Mrs Stych leaned back in her chair, her eyes closed, and chewed her handkerchief savagely; and the camera was quickly returned to its case.
‘Must be proud of Hank and Boyd,’ said the reporter pausing on his way to the front door to speak to Mrs Stych for the first time.
Mrs Stych opened her eyes slowly and looked at him as if he had gone mad.
Then, with a great effort, she managed to nod her head in vague agreement.
Proud?
Mrs Stych wrung her hands behind the reporter's back, and wished passionately she could run home to Mother on the pig farm; she longed suddenly for the smell of hens and milk, for a place where nobody had to keep up appearances or be other than what they were.
Why had she ever come to town to get herself an education?
Why had she married a dirty type like Boyd, to spawn a boy like Hank, who had never been anything but a damned nuisance to her?
She glared at Hank as he stood by the front door ready to open it for the paper's representatives, and tried not to scream while these gentlemen put on their boots again.
In twenty seconds more they were gone, to the sound of  spinning wheels on the ice and grinding gears.
And she was left with the shattered remains of all that she had found dear in her life, and two extraordinarily sheepish-looking men.
She suddenly regained the initiative of which shock had left her temporarily bereft, and shot from her chair like a well-punted football.
Arms akimbo, her face still white under her heavy makeup, she snarled: ‘Will one of you please explain what's been going on behind my back?’
The silence was painful.
She rounded on Hank and screamed: ‘You great, dirty slob — wotcha done?’
When Boyd was a child of eight, he and his father had had to sit out a tornado while visiting a German friend who had settled in Kansas.
Boyd was reminded of the howling noise of that fearful storm by his wife's tantrum.
He and Hank were upbraided, reviled and screamed at, until, without uttering a word in retaliation, Hank took his jacket out of the hall alcove and strode silently out of the front door, followed by a shriek from his mother that he was as disgusting as his father; like father, like son.
Gone to his widow, ruminated Boyd enviously, and wished he had a friendly widow, too.
It had taken him only a few moments to discover, from his wife's tirade, that Hank's book was not quite so innocent as he had imagined; however, any book that made so much money was a good book, in his opinion, and he had defended Hank hotly.
Hank had made no attempt to defend himself.
He had stood quietly swaying himself on his heels, an almost derisive expression in the curl of his lips as he smoked a cigarette, his very silence provoking her to further abuse.
He used to do that when he was small, remembered Boyd; it had been unnerving, wondering what he was thinking about while you shouted at him.
He had never cried when he was struck, and Boyd felt with a desolate pang that probably the boy was wiser and braver than he was.
It was only too apparent, as Olga tore into him about the disgrace she would suffer, that, like a hippie, he cared nothing for the kind of life his parents led; he did not share their values or ambitions.
His quiet retreat through the front door had somehow emphasized his scorn.
The crack about his being disgusting like his father, had hurt Boyd.
It was apparent from his wife's continuing rampage that much pent-up animosity against her husband  was coming out, and the crash of a glass ornament warned him that there was probably more to come.
He knew that she had not enjoyed his homecoming or the renewal of a sexual life; throughout their married life he had been at home for only a few weeks at a time, and she had been free to make her life as she chose.
She had chosen, he reflected aggrievedly, to ignore him as far as possible.
The directorship, for which he had struggled for years, represented to her only a house in Vanier Heights.
Didn't he or Hank matter to her at all?
He stroked his beard and then scratched irritably through it.
He knew the answers to his questions very well; all too many men were relegated to the position of drone — and they resented it; they showed their resentment all too often by despising women and taking the attitude that such inept creatures should be allowed to play while men ran the world and did anything in it which was worth doing.
He had taken this attitude himself, but was finding it very uncomfortable to maintain, after his long years of quiet in the bush, untroubled by anything worse than wind or weather.
He laughed ruefully and his wife whipped round at him.
‘You laughing at me?’ she demanded belligerently.
He looked up at her, as she swooped towards him like a sparrow hawk.
Her face was distorted with rage, a horrible clown's face painted red and white, her body a red tub supported by nyloned legs.
He jumped up and shouted at her sharply: ‘Oh, shut up!’
‘I won't!’ she yelled.
He slapped her soundly across the face twice.
She shrieked at the sting of the blows, which left a red mark down one side of her face.
Then she was silent, staring at him with horrified eyes.
He had never struck her before.
The horror gave way slowly to self-pity, the blue eyes filled with tears and she began to weep, the tears making runnels down her heavy makeup.
‘For Pete's sake!’ he muttered moodily, and shoved his hands in his pockets and went to stare into the empty fireplace.
‘You don't understand,’ she sobbed.
‘You never did understand anything.’
She fumbled feverishly in a fancy box on the table for a paper handkerchief.
‘How I am going to face the girls at the ball tomorrow?
It's all right for a man; men are used to smutty books and vulgar jokes — women don't go for things like that.’
She collapsed on the chesterfield and tried to bury her face in one of the stony little cushions that decorated it.
Boyd frowned down on her.
‘Don't you tell me that!
Bet that Pascall sells more of Hank's book to women than he ever will to men.’
He hoped that he was right in this belief.
For the first time, he considered seriously his own situation with regard to his son's career, both present and future, and he felt uneasy.
He could visualize the sniggers of his subordinates.
A new director, responsible for a large section of the company's business for the first time, was not in a particularly enviable position; there were men equally as bright and considerably younger, poised ready to pull the mat from under him as soon as they saw an opportunity; Hank could be their chance.
He picked up the piece of ornamental driftwood from the mantelpiece and tried to stand it upside down, while he considered this, and his wife's sobs slowly diminished.
He felt miserably lonely.
He became aware that Olga was quiet at last, exhausted beyond words.
He turned and looked down at her.
Her face was still turned into the cushion, her dress twisted tightly round her generous curves, the skirt hitched up and exposing her plump, well-shaped legs.
He smiled suddenly at her tiny feet encased in shiny, high-heeled pumps.
Olga had always loved clothes, and he wondered for whose benefit she dressed; probably for that godforsaken bunch of old hags, the girls.
His face clouded again at the thought.
This was not the way he had hoped life would be when he had married her.
He had believed that a country girl like her would find him  wonderful, a college man with great ambitions.
Their life was going to be different from those of the married couples around them, he had promised himself.
He wanted badly to creep into her arms and be told he had done marvellously well, that she had put on her red dress and her new pumps specially for him, for his seduction.
His loneliness, far worse than anything suffered in the empty north country, overwhelmed him and became intolerable.
He took a hesitant step towards the chesterfield.
She did not move, though she must have heard him, so he sat down tentatively beside her.
She whimpered and wriggled further into the chesterfield's cushiony depths.
If he was to get anywhere, he told himself reluctantly, he would have to do the comforting.
‘What are you going to wear tomorrow night?’ he asked, with a burst of sheer genius.
She slowly looked round at him, her eyes wide with surprise and doubt, the wretched book forgotten.
‘Oh, Boyd,’ she breathed, ‘just wait till you see it!’
He half turned and put his arm round her recumbent form.
‘Is it real pretty?’
‘Yeah,’ she sighed, still eyeing him distrustfully, ‘it's real nice.’
Boyd began to feel better and not a little smug.
It was just like the books said — all a man needed was a good technique.
He let his hand wander a little, and got it petulantly pushed away as she heaved herself out of the clutches of the chesterfield's upholstery, and sat up on the edge of it.
Her face was still sulky and she still sniffed occasionally as she put her feet to the ground.
Patiently, he tried another tack: ‘Like a snack?’ he asked.
Something of the sulkiness vanished and she wiggled her feet down more firmly into her shoes.
There was a suggestion of enthusiasm in her voice when she replied: ‘Yeah.
I would.’
She rose and tottered, like a child still uncertain of its balance, to the refrigerator and swung open its massive door.
Merely viewing its contents made her feel better.
A barbecued chicken and a ham, both provided ready to serve by the local supermarket, made her mouth water.
She opened the small freezer at the top, and four different types of ice cream, some frozen cream cakes and some ready-to-bake cookie mixes promised further consolation.
Boyd followed her out and, without being told, put some coffee on to percolate.
He also got out rye bread and mustard.
She always wanted the same things after a fight — ham on rye with mustard, followed by vanilla ice cream with walnut topping, a large slab of cake and coffee.
Well topped up with these, thought Boyd as he hunted for the bread knife, she would be in a much more amicable mood, and then he might get somewhere with her.